Permians, Zyrians, and other Finnic tribes were long in exclusive possession of this important trade. But the mighty trading republic of Novgorod is not likely to have failed to encroach upon them in this possession. At least the Novgorodians are said already at the beginning of the eleventh century to have made an attempt to bring Bjarmia, so favourable for their trade, under their rule. The Russian chronicles namely relate of a campaign which a certain Gleb of Novgorod in the year 1032 is said to have made into this region (to the iron gates). [Footnote: Lehrberg, Investigations, p. 68.] It is assumed as certain that Permia at least at the beginning of the 12th century was subject to Novgorod. The Savolochans had already earlier, in all probability, paid tribute to the Novgorodians; later, however, they seem again to have made themselves independent, namely at the time when the Novgorodians were at feud with Kiev. Thus the actual conquest of the Savolochie land by the Novgorodians seems to have taken place at the beginning of the 12th century. Karamzin is, however, of the opinion that this dependence was very slight and that at least the Permian peoples continually were ruled by their own tribal princes until Novgorod fell and the Russian grand princes consolidated their rule in Moscow. [Footnote: Karamzin, History of the Russian Empire. Translation. Sixth volume. Riga 1824. Pp. 38 ff.] As regards the Votyaks in particular, they were entirely independent of the Novgorod republic, but came, on the other hand, into dependence on the republic of Khlynov. This republic was founded by a band of colonists who emigrated from Novgorod in the year 1174. It is related of these colonists that they sailed down the Volga and first pitched their dwellings at the outflow of the Kama into the Volga. When, however, they learned that on the Vyatka there were fruitful regions possessed by Votyaks, they resolved to conquer their land, which also succeeded to them, although they met resistance on the part of the Votyaks, who courageously defended themselves from their fortress surrounded with earth walls. Hereupon the Novgorodians built on the Vyatka river the well-known town Khlynov, to which they gave the same republican constitution which the mother town Novgorod had. These colonists are known in Russian history under the name Vyatchans, and their rule lasted until the year 1459, when they were subjected by the princes of Moscow. As long, however, as the rule of the Vyatchans lasted, the Votyaks were tributary to them, just as also their northern tribal relatives (the Permians, Pechorans, and Savolochans) paid tribute to Novgorod. After the fall of Khlynov and Novgorod both the Permian peoples and the Votyaks came under the rule of Moscow. In the year 1472 Cherdyn and almost the whole Permian land were conquered, but still long thereafter, or until the middle of the 16th century, the Permians still had their own princes, who were vassals of the Russian tsars. Of the heathen Votyaks it is related that they also retained a kind of independence until the year 1589, whereupon in the time of Tsar Feodor Ivanovich they voluntarily submitted to the Russian sceptre. [Footnote: Müller, The Ugric Tribal Stock. Second Division. Pp. 395–400.]

Very celebrated in the annals of the Permians is their apostle, Bishop Stephen of Perm: "This blessed Bishop Stephen," says the chronicler, "was a new apostle, instructed the Permians and led them from darkness to light, translated Holy Scripture from Russian into their language, confirmed the faith among them and taught them to read. This blessed Bishop Stephen was a true man of God, who lived among unbelieving men, who knew neither God nor His law and worshipped as idols: the sun, the fire, the water, stones, trees, oxen, goats, sorcerers, magicians, and the golden old woman (zolotaya baba)." [Footnote: Suomi, 8th annual volume, p. 121.] [Footnote: Ibid., p. 122.] And at another place it is again said: "He was born in Ust-Yug (a town in the present Zyrian land) and after finishing his studies became a clergyman, in which capacity he converted about 1000 heathens to the Christian teaching. After he had learned both the Greek and the Permian language he became bishop in Perm and invented a new alphabet for the Permian language." In the year 1380 Bishop Stephen began to preach Christianity to the Permians, but already in 1396 he died and in this short space of time seems not to have brought his work of conversion to an end. As regards his translation of Holy Scripture, it has never existed; Bishop Stephen did, however, invent his own alphabet and translate some prayers into Permian. The conversion of the Permians was continued also in the 15th century, for it is related that a Bishop Jonas in the year 1463 baptized Permian princes and built churches in their land. [Footnote: Müller, op. cit. Second Division. Pp. 398 and 399.] Of the time of the conversion of the Votyaks to Christianity one has no reliable reports.



The Finnic Peoples Proper

The name of the Finns occurs for the first time in Tacitus, who describes them as a wild nomad people and places their dwellings in the region of present Lithuania. Whether this people were the ancestors of the present Finns or perhaps belonged to the Lapp branch is a question much disputed among scholars. Perhaps, however, greater importance has been laid upon it than it in fact deserves. The comparison of the Lapp and Finnic languages with one another teaches that even to this day a very intimate relationship exists between these peoples, and if one thinks oneself back two thousand years, it is probable that Lapps and Finns were then one and the same people. Moreover, I find in Tacitus's description of the Finns nothing that does not fit the Finns according to the idea I have formed of their early period. That they were poor, nourished themselves by hunting, lived in tents, clothed themselves in skins, etc. — all these are qualities which in the times of Tacitus in all probability fitted our ancestors also. But even if at that time a difference between Finns and Lapps obtained, it is nevertheless undoubted that the Finns must have been near neighbours of the Lapps, for if these tribes already in so remote an early period lived separated from one another, one cannot possibly explain the close relationship which obtains between their languages. This relationship cannot rest on a later contact either, for as far back as history spreads a clear light, Finns and Lapps have lived separated from one another, or at least not in so intimate a connexion that the similarity of language could have arisen from it, although this view also has had its adherents. For the assumption that the Finns at least already about the time before Christ's birth had moved from their older dwellings at the southern Ural into more northern regions, there is also a negative, but nevertheless very telling, reason, namely that the Finns are not named during the period of the Migration of Peoples. It was only the south-eastern, the Ugric and the Bulgarian branch of the Finnic stock, that during this time played a, though certainly subordinate, part; as regards, however, the other branches, namely the Permian and Finnic, one has at least hitherto been unable to uncover a single trace of them in the history of the Migration of Peoples, and the most natural cause of this must probably be sought in the circumstance that these branches had already before this time withdrawn from the boundaries of the theatre of the Migration of Peoples.

I have once before expressed the conjecture that the Finnic stock already in the times of Tacitus extended from the Ural to the region of the Baltic Sea and occupied the whole of present northern and central Russia. As a ground for this conjecture I adduced (p. 97 ff.) the numerous place-names of Finnic origin which are met with in these regions. It is also known that even in Nestor's time there were in the interior of Russia Finnic tribal peoples which have now disappeared. Furthermore, one may assume with certainty that the still existing tribes were earlier far larger than now, for in the same measure as Christianity has spread among them they have been more and more assimilated by the Russian population. And even if their number in early times was not all too significant, they nevertheless, as nomads, unconditionally needed a larger territory than they now need as agriculturists. I find it, in a word, very probable that a great part of Russia before the Migration of Peoples was inhabited by Finnic tribes. And as regards the Russian north in particular, before the immigration of the Slavs it was the exclusive property of the Finnic stock. North of the Bulgarian peoples, which may have been partly Tatars, partly Finns, dwelt the Permians. These extended from the Ural westward to the rivers Kama and Vyatka and in later time to the Vychegda and Dvina. West of this stock there presumably dwelt the Vesses and Chuds, of whom now only weak remnants occur. The peoples named Merja and Muroma seem to have stayed somewhat more to the south or west of the Cheremis and Mordvins. North of the Permians, still in very late time, according to Sjögren's view, dwelt the Yem, or the Häme people, i.e. the ancestors of the present Tavastians, and extended from the Ural to Lake Ladoga. [Footnote: On the older dwellings of the Yem (in the Mémoires de l'Académie Impériale des Sciences de St.-Pétersbourg. VI. Series. Sciences politiques, histoire et philologie, Vol. I). St. Petersburg 1832. P. 291 ff.] Still more to the north than the Yem lived the Karelian stock on the Dvina and along the coasts of the White Sea. Farthest north stayed the Pechorans, who were perhaps a branch of the Karelians.

The Finnic stock properly so called falls into various branches, of which the foremost are: 1) Karjalaiset (Karelians) and 2) Hämäläiset (Tavastians), or the Yam, Yem of the Russian chronicles. As a branch of the Karelians are regarded, besides the Savolaks, the so-called Kvens or Kainulaiset, and closely related to the Hämäläiset are: the Vesses or Chuds, the Votes or Vatjalaiset, the Estonians or Virolaiset, together with the Livs. Although closely related to one another and in possession of the same language, these peoples have nevertheless during their sojourn in the north never formed a whole, a single people, but have always been separated from one another and have even often lived in hostile relation to one another. Thus we read in the Russian chronicles how the Yem and Karelians frequently warred with one another, and even our Kalevala epic gives an evident proof that the behaviour of the individual tribes was anything but friendly. I have already often earlier, in the representation of the high- and north-Asiatic peoples, had opportunity to set forth the importance and significance of tribal relationship. I have thereby mentioned that among the named peoples there is no other bond holding the individuals together than that which is founded on relationship. There are in Asia tribes which consist of thousands of individuals and nevertheless assume so near a relationship that they do not even enter into matrimonial unions among one another. On the other hand, it not seldom happens that two tribes speak one and the same language, have the same religion, the same customs, and consequently also the same origin; if, however, this origin has already fallen into oblivion, if the individual tribes have adopted different names and chosen different dwellings, they ordinarily regard one another as mortal enemies. In such a relation without doubt the Finnic tribes also stood to one another until the time when Christianity spread among them and they under the influence of Sweden began to form small states. Before that they had not even a common designation, but every particular tribe was designated with a particular name. If one wishes, therefore, to obtain any knowledge about the early period of our ancestors, it is necessary to investigate the fates of the individual tribes. For unfortunately these are, up to the time of the Swedish invasion, almost entirely unknown, and the little that history reports of them consists either of obscure sagas or scanty chronicle entries.

One of the earliest reports we have about our ancestors goes back to the Bjarmians already named above (p. 137), who dwelt on the banks of the Dvina and on the coasts of the White Sea. This report comes from the Norwegian viking Ohthere, who lived in the ninth century and is regarded as the first Bjarmaland voyager. [Footnote: Iduna. Fourth issue. Stockholm 1818. P. 118 ff. — Kajaani, Suomen Historia. First Part. Helsinki 1846. P. 13 ff.] I will not dwell on the description which he after his return gave to King Alfred of his journey. I also pass over a later journey undertaken together in the year 1026 by Karl of Halogaland, his brother Gunnstein, and Thorer Hund to the praised Bjarmaland. On the other hand, I cannot leave unremarked that the same Ohthere who visited Bjarmaland also gives a report about the Kvens, saying among other things: "On the side of southern Norway lies Sweden, and by northern Norway is situated Kvenland." [Footnote: Schlözer, General Northern History. Halle 1771. P. 485.] Thus the Kvens had already in Ohthere's time advanced into the northern part of Sweden. Another part of the Kvens dwelt, as later data state, east of the Gulf of Bothnia, and extended without doubt to the boundaries of Bjarmia or the Karelians.

The conjecture has been expressed that the Kven stock was a branch of the Karelian and that the Kvens from the coasts of the White Sea came over the ridge into the region of Kajaani and from there spread round the whole northern part of the Gulf of Bothnia. [Footnote: Kajaani, Suomen Historia. I. Pp. 21–26.] This conjecture is in fact very probable, for both the Swedish and the Finnish Kvens still to this day speak a Karelian dialect. As near neighbours the Kvens and Karelians often lay in feud with one another. According to the travel report of the above-named Ohthere the Kvens sometimes undertook predatory expeditions into Norway, just as the Northmen on their part devastated Kvenland. One of the most detailed reports one has from old times about the Kvens is of the following content: "The northern king Harald Fairhair had given Lappland, taken by him into possession, in fief to Thorolf Kveldulfsson. When the latter in the year 877 found himself in Lappland, where he presumably collected taxes, there came to him envoys from the king of the Kvens, Faravid, who related that the Karelians were laying waste in their land and demanded help from Thorolf against them, on condition of ceding to the named Thorolf and his men a good part of the booty. Thorolf accepted the offer and in union with the Kvens won a brilliant victory over the Karelians." The Kvens of whom this saga speaks dwelt west of the Gulf of Bothnia and are said to have extended to Hälsingland. The circumstances which afterwards moved the Kvens to give up these regions are unknown; it is, however, conjectured that the causes of this must be sought in the circumstance that the Northmen and Swedes began to colonise here. The Swedish king Edmund the Old, who began his reign about 1052, is said to have sent out his son Anund for the conquest of Kvenland, but this attempt at conquest turned out so unhappily that both Anund and his army perished. Soon thereafter, however, they seem to have become tributary to Sweden, and already in the eleventh century Christianity is said to have been preached to them by Bishop Stenphi (Stephen) or Simon, as he is later said to have called himself. [Footnote: Kajaani, Suomen Historia. I. P. 101.]

Of the so-called Karelians we already know earlier (see pp. 144 ff.) that their first historically known dwellings were situated in the famous Bjarmaland. [Footnote: Ibid., pp. 27–30.] From here they seem, however, at least in the 8th century to have spread over the ridge as far as round the Gulf of Bothnia and to have become known under the name Kvens or Kainulaiset (from kainu, lowland), a name which is still now in the region of Tornio applied to the West Bothnian Finns and Swedes. Probably in early times the whole stretch of land from the northern part of the White Sea to the Gulf of Bothnia was more or less strongly peopled by Finns of Karelian stock, although at the same time Lapps here and there also seem to have been settled. It is assumed that the Karelians extended even from the White Sea over Kandalaksha and present Russian Lappland to the coasts of the Arctic Ocean — a view which, however, is not yet sufficiently proved. That the Karelians in earlier times lay in feud with their neighbours and tribal relatives, the Kvens, I have already remarked above, as also that the Northmen partly undertook viking voyages, partly also arranged devastating expeditions within the territory of the Karelians. More important than these, however, were the campaigns which the Swedish king Erik Edmundsson, with the byname Vederhatt (died 833), is said to have undertaken against Karelia and other neighbouring lands inhabited by Finnic tribes. On this the Saga of Olaf the Holy communicates a very important report. This saga makes the lawspeaker Torgny say the following words to Olof: "The mind of the Svea kings is now otherwise than it was before. Torgny, my father's father, remembered the Uppsala king Erik Edmundsson and said of him that, while he was in his best years, it drove him out every summer; he moved against various lands and subjected to himself Finland, Karelia, Estonia, Courland, and many other lands in the east; and one can still see the earth-forts and other great works that he made; yet he was not so haughty that he would not hear those men who had something necessary to speak with him." "I remember," Torgny continues, "Erik the Victorious, and was with him on many expeditions. He enlarged the Svea realm and protected it manfully; yet it was easy to come into counsel with him. The king, however, whom we now have, does not allow that anyone should dare to speak with him otherwise than only what pleases him, and this he pursues with all diligence. But his tributary lands he lets slip from his hands through his carelessness and powerlessness, in that he strives to get Norway under his power, for which no Swedish king before him has striven; and this makes unrest for many men. Now we peasants wish that you, King Olof, should make peace with Olaf the Stout, Norway's king, and give him your daughter Ingegerd in marriage; but if you will regain the realms in the east which your relatives and parents have possessed, we will all follow you." [Footnote: Peringskiöld, Heims Kringla or Snorre Sturlason's Northern Kings' Histories. I. Stockholm 1697. P. 484 ff.] From this report one must draw the conclusion that both the Karelians and various other Finnic tribes were tributary to Erik and his successor. As, however, others before me have already remarked, this subjection consisted only in this, that one accommodated oneself to pay a tribute as soon as one did not see oneself a match for the enemy. If, on the other hand, one was well armed, the tribute-collectors were driven away, often also plundered and killed. In such a relation stood at least the Finnic tribes to the Russians. It is quite frequently related in the Russian chronicles that the Novgorodians marched out with armed force to collect their tribute, but that they sometimes met resistance and had to assert their supposed rights with the sword in hand. In the tributary lands there was no Russian administration, but they lived in complete independence and paid their tribute only as often as they were forced to it by a superior hostile power. In all probability the Novgorodians had at least already at the beginning of the twelfth century the custom of collecting tribute from the Karelians dwelling in Bjarmaland; it is, however, related in a chronicle that the inhabitants of Savolochie in the year 1187 murdered all the Novgorodians who collected tribute. [Footnote: Lehrberg, Investigations, p. 60.]

Notwithstanding these and other struggles which the Novgorodian Russians had to endure with the Karelians, one finds nevertheless that these two peoples often make common cause with one another. Thus there is in a Russian chronicle the following entry: "In the year 1149 the Grand Prince in Kiev, Izyaslav Mstislavich, marched to the help of the Novgorodians against his paternal uncle, the Grand Prince in Suzdal, Yuri Vladimirovich Monomakh, on account of injury to the Novgorodians, and with him his brother, the Grand Prince in Smolensk, Rostislav Mstislavich, the Smolensk men, Novgorodians, Pskovians, Karelians, etc." [Footnote: Suomi, 8th annual volume, p. 31.] Some years before, or in 1143, the Karelians are said to have undertaken a predatory expedition against the Yem, and on this occasion the Karelians are for the first time named under this name in Russian history. [Footnote: Suomi, op. cit., p. 31.] With respect to the common undertakings of the Karelians and Novgorodians a Russian chronicle mentions the following event: "In the year 1141 Prince Alexander marched with Novgorodians, Ladogans, Karelians, and Ingrians to the town Koporye and took the town, but led the Germans to Novgorod and let the others go where they wished." [Footnote: Suomi, op. cit., p. 60.] It is conjectured that the Karelians also helped the Novgorodians to drive the Yem from the region on Lake Ladoga, which they afterwards themselves began to take into possession. Besides, they also fought in the ranks of the Novgorodians against the Swedes; in the year 1323, however, the well-known Peace of Nöteborg was concluded, in which the Russians ceded a great part of Karelia to Sweden.

I shall in the following soon take up again the question about the emigration of the Karelians from Bjarmaland to Ladoga and the surrounding regions. Hereby I will, however, remark that these Karelians still here continued such a trade as they had formerly carried on on the banks of the Dvina in the well-known Kholmogory. It is namely known that besides the trade route which led from the Caspian Sea along the Volga and Dvina to the White Sea, there was also another, which, according to Nestor, led from Greece along the Dnieper and Lovat to Lake Ilmen, on which Novgorod was situated, and from there down the Volkhov, Ladoga, and Neva into the Gulf of Finland (the Varangian Sea). But as inhabitants of the region of Ladoga, the Neva, and the coasts of the Gulf of Finland, the Karelians naturally had also to take part in this trade. In the Gulf of Finland Björkö was the staple place of this trade, and there are papal bulls which show that the trade on this island was carried on by Karelians, Ingrians, and Russians on the one side and by Gotlandic and German merchants on the other. Arvidsson also mentions a treaty between the foreign merchants and the Novgorodians, in which the latter bind themselves: "to leave the trade with Karelians and Ingrians free, to answer for all violence which the former might suffer within their territory, on which account all offences should be judged by elders in Ingria." [Footnote: Sjögren, Finland and its Inhabitants, described and [illegible] by Arvidsson. Second Part. Stockholm 1827. Pp. 201 and 202.]

With respect to the conversion of the Karelians the Russian chronicles communicate the following report: "In the year 1227 Prince Yaroslav Vsevolodovich sent out priests to baptize a quantity of Karelians, and it lacked little that all men were baptized." [Footnote: Suomi, op. cit., p. 46.] Before that, however, according to a bull issued by Clement VI on 14 March 1351, they had adopted the Catholic teaching, which, according to the same bull, they were forced by the Russians to give up. [Footnote: [illegible], op. cit., p. 202. — Suomi, op. cit., p. 19.]

The first historical notice about the Tavastians is found in a Russian chronicle and runs as follows: "In the year 1042 Vladimir, Yaroslav's son, marched against the Yem and defeated them, and before Vladimir's armies the horses fell and while they still breathed the skin was stripped from them." [Footnote: Ibid., p. 22.] Thereupon the same Yem or Tavastians are named in the year 1078 or 1079. "In this year," it is said, "Svyatoslav's son, Gleb, was killed in Savolochie (by the Yem)." [Footnote: Tatishchev, History of Russia. Vol. II. P. 132.] [Footnote: Sjögren, op. cit., p. 263.] On these two, and especially on the last-named, chronicle entries scholars, and before others our countryman Sjögren, have founded extensive investigations. [Footnote: On the Finnic population of the St. Petersburg government and on the origin of the name Ingermannland (in the Mémoires de l'Académie Impériale des Sciences de St.-Pétersbourg. VI. Series. Sciences politiques, histoire et philologie. Vol. II. Pp. 26–36.] I will not now enter more closely into the details of this point of dispute, but only adduce as a result of Sjögren's investigations that a part of the Yem at that time still stayed in Bjarmaland or Savolochie, south of the Karelians, and is said to have extended from the Ural to the region of Ladoga. A branch of them was probably formed by the Vesses and Votes (Vatjalaiset). The Vesses and Votes were, according to Sjögren, one and the same people and were both named Chuds by the Russians. They extended from the region of Beloozero, where the Vesses dwelt, into present Ingria, where the seat of the Votes was.

To return, however, to the Yem proper, they are again named in the chronicle of Novgorod in the year 1142. The words of the chronicle run thus: "In the year 1142 the Yem came and warred against the territory of Novgorod. The Ladoga inhabitants beat 400 men of them and not a single one escaped." [Footnote: Suomi, 8th annual volume, p. 30.] In the following year (1143) the Karelians are said, however, to have undertaken a war expedition against the Yem, presumably with the intention of avenging within the boundaries of the Karelians the expedition undertaken by the Yem in the previous year. [Footnote: Ibid., p. 31.] It is indeed not expressly said in the chronicle that the expedition of the Yem in the year 1142 was aimed at the Karelians, but, as it is said, at the Ladoga inhabitants; one has, however, every reason to hold just these Ladoga inhabitants for Karelians. They had, as already said above (p. 150), driven out the Yem, who together with their tribal relatives the Votes or Chuds had earlier possessed the region on Ladoga, and had themselves taken possession of the land. As regards the driven-out Yem, however, they are said then to have settled in Finland. This is Sjögren's representation. He lets the Tavastians still in the eleventh century live in Russia on Ladoga and from there eastward to southern Savolochie. The reasons, however, on which he supports this conjecture are of a very ambiguous character. I will not here subject them to a refutation and will even concede the possibility that one or another Tavastian horde still in the eleventh century stayed in Russia; I regard it, however, as very probable that branches of this stock already before Rurik's times, perhaps already in a remote early period, took Finland into possession. At the same time when the Finns came to the Baltic Sea, which will have happened not only long after Christ's birth, but probably long before it, the way to the Gulf of Finland and the Gulf of Bothnia also stood open to them. Dwelling more to the south than the Karelians, the Tavastians also reached the sea coast earlier, on which since then they settled on both sides of the Gulf of Finland and on the west coast of the Gulf of Bothnia.



Concluding Word

Much else about the early period of the Tavastians I would still have to add, and besides touch upon some other branches of the Finnic stock, namely Lapps, Estonians, Ingrians, Livs, etc.; I have, however, many causes which determine me to break off my lectures here. It is, however, my intention in the future to return to this subject and thereby also to touch upon various other questions to which, for want of time and from other causes, I have this time been unable to devote the necessary attention, e.g. on the important question about the nationality of the Scythians and Huns. Moreover I would also wish to subject much of what has already been treated to a renewed representation, not in the intention as if I trusted myself in the matter itself to be able to add anything far better, but, as I myself quite well perceive, in these lectures I have not laid the due weight on the outward form of presentation. My whole time was taken up by the care of bringing together the necessary material, partly from my own unordered collections, partly from foreign sources; the presentation itself was only the work of a few moments and therefore more or less faulty. This fault can indeed never be completely remedied in the present subject, for to wish to found a somewhat more entertaining presentation on the scanty chronicles of China and Russia would probably in general belong to the hardest problems; I readily admit, however, that my presentation could have been far better if time had allowed me to devote some attention to the outward form. My endeavour will be in this respect in the future to satisfy to some extent the fair demands of my hearers.



Samoyed Tales



First Tale

In one and the same place stood seven hundred tents. In the seven hundred tents lived seven hundred people. Over them ruled seven masters. The seven masters go visiting again and again; they do nothing, they only go visiting. They are brothers, the seven masters, and all of them have wives, but no children. Only the eldest of them has a son, who is not big. This one does not go visiting; he sleeps on and on; night and day he sleeps. Once the father said to his son: "Get up and go visiting with the rest of us!" The son does not want to go visiting; he has had a bad dream; he had dreamed that all the others were killed and he alone remained alive. He reveals his dream to his father and says: "But you will be able to live if you sacrifice seven and seven (fourteen) reindeer." — "What do you know?" the father replies; "you sleep day and night and know less than a dog." — "As you will, father," says the son, and lies down to sleep again. In the morning he wakes and sees that of the seven hundred people not a single one was alive, that they had all been killed. He goes to look at the reindeer; all the reindeer had fallen. He looks for the dogs; they too lay dead. So he goes to the sleds, takes a sword, and with it cuts through all the tent ropes; the tents all collapse. Then he begins to wander. He goes one day, he goes two days, three days, he goes a full seven days. He looks behind him; he still sees the place where the seven hundred tents lie collapsed. He goes another seven days, looks behind him, still sees two collapsed tents. He goes yet another seven days, looks behind him: now he sees no tent anymore. He begins to go again, goes one month, goes two months, three months, goes a full seven months. Then at last he grows tired of walking; he has gone whole months without food; it was a desolate region through which he went. He sinks down onto the snow. There he lies, lies long, long; he gets up, begins to walk again, walks, walks, comes to a place where a tent had stood before. He searches for food, finds a piece of bone that the dogs had licked. He gnaws at the bone, throws it away, and begins to look for other bones under the snow. There he finds earrings of silver, lays them in his mittens, and begins to wander again. He goes, goes, goes a long time; then one day he sees something in the distance, driving with reindeer. The driver drives toward him, comes nearer and nearer; it is a woman. The woman says: "You come from the tent; did you not find there the earrings that I lost?" — "Yes, I found them and took them with me." — "Then give them to me; they are mine," the woman begs. "I will gladly give you the earrings, but you must drive me with the reindeer to a place where people live." Then the woman took her spear and struck him with the spear so that he fell and remained lying on the spot. The woman took the earrings and drove away.

The one who had been struck lay and slept, slept long; at last he woke, stood up, and began to go on. Again he came to a place where a tent had stood earlier. He began again to search for food and finds a bone that the dogs had licked. He gnaws at the bone, throws it away, and searches under the snow for other pieces of bone. There he finds an iron shovel. He takes the shovel and begins to go. He goes, goes, and again sees someone driving with reindeer; a beautiful, well-dressed woman comes toward him. The woman says: "Where are you going, poor boy?" — "I am following fresh tracks that I found. I am hungry and want to eat; otherwise I will die." — "You surely come from our old campsite; did you not find an iron shovel there?" the woman asks. "I did find a shovel, but I do not know to whom it belongs." — "That is my shovel; I came driving to look for it." — "I will give you the shovel if you promise to drive me with the reindeer to a dwelling of people." — "Gladly will I drive you to our home," said the woman; "why should I not drive him — the man would die otherwise. I will also feed and nourish you." He gave the shovel; the woman took him into the sled; they set out. In the sled the woman asks: "Where are you from, poor boy, since I do not know you?" The boy answers: "Nobody in the world knows me; I am an orphan without father and mother. Once there were seven brothers; they were rich; they had seven hundred tents." — "I have heard of these seven brothers; but where have they gone?" the girl asks. "They died, they all died in a single night, and in the same night their seven hundred reindeer fell." The woman asks: "Do you know whose these two reindeer are, with which you are now riding?" — "How can I know that? I do not know much; I am not yet old; but they look like my father's reindeer." — "How did your father's reindeer come to us?" the girl goes on asking. "I do not know," the boy answers. "You see," says the woman, "your father was once here (with these reindeer) and wooed me for you. Your father gave me these two reindeer and this iron shovel as a bride-gift. He also gave a sword, but that is not with us; it has been stolen." — "I may well find the sword in time," the boy thinks aloud. "Then you are my husband," says the girl. Man and wife came thus to the tent and lived there together.

After they had lived there a while, the camp began to move. Reindeer were harnessed, but before the newcomer's sled they harnessed bad reindeer and let him drive last in the train. With his bad reindeer he soon fell behind the rest. He urges the reindeer on, but they do not obey. Suddenly the whole train halts; he catches up with his companions. Someone says: "What sort of following do you have behind you?" — "Not a single person; I came entirely alone," the stranger answers, but looks behind him; in the same moment the questioner took a spear and stabbed him down. He remained lying there; all traveled on their way. But the wife remained behind and began to weep by the dead man. She sits in her sled and weeps. Suddenly her reindeer shy and hurry after the others. Right after that, a one-legged, one-handed, and one-eyed old man comes to the dead man. In his one hand he carries an iron staff. With this he strikes the dead man and says: "Why are you lying there? It is time to get up! Get up and go back; your father lives, and all your brothers are alive again." The dead man wakes and begins to speak with himself: "I have slept a good while; but what sort of man was that, who told me that my father lives and asked me to turn back?" He looks around him, sees nobody, and believes he has dreamed. He wanders forward, comes to the tent, and lies down to sleep beside his wife. In the morning all get up; they begin again to break up the camp, harness the reindeer to the sleds, give the stranger bad reindeer, and let him drive last. With his bad reindeer he falls behind the rest; but they halt, and he catches up with them. Again the same man as before asks: "What sort of people are moving behind you?" — "Nobody is coming behind me," the stranger answers, but looks behind him, and in the same moment the man pierces him for the second time with his spear. They leave him there; his wife too drives on with the others; she thinks thus: "He did not die; he will come to the tent in his own time." After they had driven off, the one-legged, one-handed, and one-eyed old man comes. He strikes the dead man with his staff and says: "Yesterday I already told you that you should turn back; what are you doing there in the tent? Turn back nicely now, if you want to keep your head. Your father lives, and has lived for a long time." The dead man wakes, looks around, and speaks: "What can that be for a man, who asks me to turn back, who speaks of my father and claims that he is alive? He has been dead a long time!" He sees nobody, believes again that he has dreamed, drives to the tent, and lies down beside his wife to sleep.

The next morning they again begin to break up the camp, harness the reindeer, give the stranger the worst ones, and place him last in the train. He falls behind the rest, as before; they halt; he catches up with them. "See how many reindeer are coming after you there!" says the same man who had killed him twice before. He looks around; in the same moment the man stabs him down with his spear. All moved on. Then came the one-legged, one-handed, one-eyed old man, struck the dead man with the iron staff, and speaks: "For the third time I tell you: turn back! You have been killed twice; both times I woke you to life again, but now I will do it no more." He gets up, but does not turn back; he goes to the tent, but does not go into the tent; instead he sits down on a sled. He begins to suspect that they want to murder him. He takes the bows from the sled, ruins them all, goes to his wife's sled, takes from there that same iron shovel that he had found and given back to her, and with the shovel smashes all the tents. The people run out; he attacks them with the shovel. They run to the bows, but these have been ruined. He keeps on striking, strikes and beats them all down. His wife he does not strike down, nor her father, her mother, and her children. Now he begins to look at the corpses; he does not find the one who had three times taken his life. That man had fled, but his tracks were visible in the snow. He begins to run after the tracks, runs a long time, at last catches up with him.

Now both men begin to fight; they fought the whole winter on the same spot; they fought until both fell down and died. There they now lie the whole summer and rot there. Foxes run, wolves run, devour the corpses, eat everything except the bones. Autumn came on; the one-legged, one-handed, one-eyed old man came too. He speaks to the strange man: "How many times did I not tell you that you should turn back! Now I tell you for the very last time; later my power cannot help you." He takes his bones, gathers them all, even the very smallest pieces; lays them all in a sack, takes the sack on his back, and goes on his way. When he had gone for a while, he came to a great stone. He pushes against the stone; it rolls to the side. Under the stone is a hole; the old man crawls into the hole. There is a dark, gloomy place where there is shouting, whistling, and singing. They try to tear the sack away from the old man. He sees straight before him something bright that looks like a window. In the shine of the light he sees people who are naked, without skin, with nothing but bare bones. Their teeth grin in their mouths. The old man goes toward the light; he sees a tent, steps into the tent; there is nobody there, only a woman. She sits at the hearth. On the other side stand two monsters; they do not move, they do not speak; their eyes are very large and stand upright (vertical) in their heads. The old man throws the sack on the floor and says to the woman: "Here you have firewood; throw it into the fire." — "Good that you brought some," the woman answers; "I was already quite without wood." The old woman makes a fire, throws the bones into the fire; they all burn to ashes. The old woman takes the ashes, strews them over the bed, and lies down on the ashes to sleep. After three days a human being is born from the ashes. He begins to ask himself: "What kind of dark place is this, where I have slept?" He stands up, looks around him. In the tent there is no smoke hole. He wants to go out, finds no door. He searches along the walls: they are of iron. He says to the old woman: "I want to go out, but I find no door." The old woman stands up, strikes with her foot against the wall; it opens. He goes out, comes right back, sees the two monsters, is frightened, and falls on his nose. He stands up and asks the old woman: "What monsters do you have here? Are they people, are they wild animals?" The old woman answers: "They are not wild animals; they are my parents." — "Do they speak, do they eat, and what do they do?" — "They do not speak, they do not eat, they do nothing at all." — "What are they then, and have they always been so?" — "Certainly not always; in their time they were excellent people; then they became stones and to this hour they are stones; they hear nothing, they see nothing, and they know nothing."

The old woman says to the stranger: "What do you wish for most of all?" The stranger answers: "If I knew where my wife now lives, I would most like to go to her." — "Live a while with me; soon my reindeer will come, and they will take you away from here. But you must take me as your wife, or I will turn you into stone." Now the stranger noticed that the old woman had turned the two people who stood at the hearth into stone, and feared that the same could happen to him if he refused to take the old woman as his wife. He therefore said: "Well then, I take you as my second wife." They live thus three days together in the tent. Then the reindeer came. They both sat down in the sled and drove off. At first they drove through the dark places. The lean people run after them and want to stab the stranger with spears, but they cannot reach him, who drives with reindeer. At last they come to the clear (white) light. The old woman speaks to her husband: "Push that stone there away from the hole!" He tries to move the stone, but cannot stir it from its place. The old woman pushes it with her foot away over the hole. They drove off, drove long, long, see a tent, drive to the tent. Here the stranger finds his first wife, her mother, and her father. He took both wives and the parents of his first wife with him; so he travels to his first home. As he comes near his home, he sees all seven hundred tents, many people, and many reindeer. All were alive again. A stretch from the road he sees the one-legged, one-handed, one-eyed old man. The old man runs toward him, and with the old man runs another person — it is the same one who had killed him three times. He begins to fight with his murderer and strikes him down. In doing so he loses his senses and in his frenzy kills the one-handed old man. Then he drives to the tents; here all were dead; the people had died and the reindeer lay dead. Now the two wives died too. So they all died, and he was alone again, after he had killed the one-legged, one-handed, one-eyed old man.



Second Tale

In one and the same tent live two women, one young, the other old. The young one has two children, both girls; the old one is childless. The young one sews clothes for her children; the old one lies there without occupation. Once the childless woman says to the other: "Let us go and pick shoe-hay." [Footnote: The Finns too have the custom of laying hay in the bottom of their footwear in wintertime, to make it warmer that way. The grass needed for this the tale here calls shoe-hay.] The other answers: "I might not have time; I must sew clothes for my children." Nevertheless she goes. As they are picking grass in the field, the childless woman takes her knife and stabs down the woman who has two children. She makes a fire, roasts the flesh, eats it. The head she does not eat; she wants to eat it another time. She goes inside; the children ask: "Where is Mother?" — "Mother is picking shoe-hay; she will come when she has time," the old woman answers, and lies down crosswise before the door to sleep, so that the children cannot slip out; she intends to eat these too when she wakes. While she sleeps there, the older girl creeps softly out of the balagan. [Footnote: So one calls a kind of canvas tent or curtain that one uses as protection against mosquitoes; in Samoyed a balagan is called "yiter."] The old woman sleeps; the girl goes out through the door. She finds the head of her mother and thinks thus: "The old woman has eaten my mother; when she wakes, she will eat me and my sister too." She catches two living birds, sets them in the balagan, and runs away with her sister. The old woman sleeps seven days, wakes, goes to the balagan and wants to eat the children now; but she finds only the two birds. "You have not escaped me," thinks the old woman, and begins to run after the girls. She runs seven days, catches up with them, and wants to seize the younger girl, who is running behind. The older girl throws a whetstone behind her. At once a river flows along; steep mountains rise on both banks of the river. The old woman remains standing behind the river; the girls escape. The river flows seven days and runs dry. The old woman sets out after the children again; she runs seven days, reaches the girls, wants to seize the younger. The older one threw a firestone behind her, and at once a high mountain rose up. The old woman remained behind the mountain. After seven days the mountain disappears. Again the old woman begins to run. She runs seven days, reaches the girls, and wants to seize the younger. The older one throws a comb behind her. Then a dense forest rises, so dense that the old woman cannot get through. The forest disappears after seven days; then the old woman began to pursue again. When the children had run three days, they came to a place where a tent had stood not long before. There seven crows are now sitting and eating reindeer filth. The oldest girl says to one of the crows: "Little mother, show us the way to a place where people live." The crow answers: "Go always onward and onward, and you will come to the blue sea. There you will find seven gulls, who will show you your way to the people." The girls ran again seven days, came to the blue sea, found the seven gulls. These were eating seal flesh. The older girl said to one of the gulls: "Little mother, where should we go to find people?" The gull answers: "Go along the seacoast; there is an island there between two seas. On the island lives an old woman; she will carry you over the sound." The girls ran seven days, came straight toward the island, saw a tent, began to call for a boat. The old woman comes out of the tent. She begins to ask the girls: "How is my face?" — "It shines like the sun," the older girl answers. "How is my breast?" — "Beautiful like the reindeer spleen." — "My hands and feet (arms and legs), how are they?" — "Thick and fat like the flesh of the sea animals." The old woman let out a cry; a beaver swam to the girls and carried them over the sound.

Scarcely had they reached the island when the dreadful old woman came hurrying after the girls. She stopped at the shore and begged the other old woman to ferry her over the sound. The old woman of the island asks the dreadful old woman: "How is my face?" — "Your face is ugly; it is like the hind part of an animal," the dreadful old woman answers. "How is my breast?" — "Like the breast of a dog." — "My arms and legs, how are they?" — "They are like spoon handles." — "What did you see on the way?" the old woman of the island asks further. "Seven crows," the dreadful old woman answers. "How do they live?" — "Very badly; I believe they are no longer alive; their food was reindeer filth." — "What else did you see?" — "Seven gulls." — "How do these live?" — "Badly; they eat only seal flesh." The old woman of the island cried out; a great sturgeon swam to the dreadful old woman. The old woman of the island says: "Sit on the sturgeon." — "How can I sit here? Its back is sharp and pointed; I cannot sit here." — "Tell me, how did the girls come over the sound?" the dreadful old woman asks. "On that same sturgeon," the island old woman answers. Then the dreadful old woman sits down on its back. The sturgeon swims far away from the island, swims farther and farther, and drowns the old woman.

The girls lived with the old woman on the island; they lived there a long time. The older one begins to feel bored; she speaks to the old woman: "Show us another place, where more people live." The old woman says: "Go along the footpath on the island, and you will come to the shore; at the shore there is a shallow; in the shallow, a copper boat. Sit down in the boat; without oars, without sails it will bring you to people. But in the boat there are many dangerous tools: axes, knives, borers. Do not touch them; and you, older sister, watch over the younger, that she touch none of them with her hands. If you take these things in your hand, they will stab you dead and the boat will stop. So sit quite still, and when you have arrived, speak to the boat: Boat, travel back to the place from which you came; then my boat comes home again." — The girls followed the footpath, came to the shore; at the shore there was a shallow; on the shallow a boat; in the boat axes, knives, borers. The girls pushed the boat into the water and climbed in themselves. The boat runs by itself; it travels over many seas, comes at last to a river, and begins to glide upstream. On the riverbanks grow trees of all kinds, birches, pines, bird cherries. At one place two great larch trees rise up. They stand on both sides of the river; their crowns have grown together. The river runs through between the trees. "Look, what tall bushes!" says the older sister. The younger takes a knife, to cut a branch from the tree. The knife stabs her dead; she dies, and the boat stops at the shore. The older girl lifts the dead sister out of the boat and speaks: "Boat, travel back to where you came from." At once the boat goes back. The older girl now goes to bury the dead sister and carries her into a spruce forest. She asks her sister by means of the magic drum: "Where shall I bury you, sister; here, perhaps?" The sister answers: "Do not bury me in the spruce forest; people walk there and frighten me." She carries her farther, sees a birch forest, asks again by means of the magic drum: "Shall I bury you here?" The sister answers: "Do not bury me in the birch forest; people walk there, chop down birches, and frighten me." She carries her still farther, comes to a fir forest, asks by means of the magic drum: "May I bury you in the fir forest?" The sister answers: "Do not bury me in the fir forest; children walk there, break twigs, and frighten me." Then the sister grows tired of carrying, sees a birch bush, speaks: "There I will bury her; my hands hurt; I cannot carry her any longer." She comes to the bush, finds a wolf's hole there, lays the sister in the hole. She herself goes her way, goes far away, goes for several months.

It becomes winter; still she goes on. She comes to a footpath, follows the footpath, arrives at a river; on the river stand two sleds; reindeer are harnessed, before one a spotted one, before the other a shining white reindeer. There are no people there. The girl thinks: "I will wait here for people; they will surely come; they have gone into the forest." She waits the whole day; she waits until evening. In the evening two men come out of the forest. One man asks the girl: "Will you not ride in the sled home with us?" — "No," the girl answers, "I go on foot; I am ashamed before men." The older man, who had a shining white reindeer, says to the younger: "Take the girl and set her in the sled." — "I want nobody in my sled; take her yourself," this one answers. The older man, who had the shining white reindeer, took the girl into the sled and drove home with her. Here tent stands by tent, and over all these tents only two masters rule. Each of them has a son. The men who came from the forest were their sons. The girl begins to live here; the older of the two men takes her as his wife. They live a long time together.

Once they begin to take down the tents; they travel one day, two days, three days; then they halt. In the night a storm arises and the wolf scatters the reindeer. The next day the two sons drive out to look for the reindeer. They drive in different directions. At one place the reindeer of the older man become shy. He begins to look and see what the reindeer had shied at; he sees a wolf's hole, hears the wolves howl, hears also a weeping; he listens and listens — it is a woman weeping there. He says: "Do not weep, my child; the father brings you meat!" — He drove home again. The father asks: "Did you find reindeer?" The son answers: "Reindeer I did not find," but says nothing of the wonder he had seen. In the night he reveals everything to his wife, tells how the wolf cubs howl and the woman weeps. The wife says: "Could it not be my sister who is weeping there? I buried her there. Let us go there." The next day they all drive to the wolf's hole. They come to the place; the wolf had run away; the cubs and the woman were there. The cubs they struck dead, but the woman they took and led to the tent. She is like a madwoman; she only screams. They make a fire and set her by the fire. She looks into the flame, and after she had looked at it a long time, she wakes and says: "Have I slept long?" — "Long, sister, very long. We traveled with the boat that the old woman on the island gave us; you stabbed yourself and died. I buried you in the wolf's hole, and there my husband heard you weeping yesterday." — The younger sister now begins to live in the tent to which they had brought her; she becomes the wife of the younger son with the spotted reindeer.



Third Tale

There was a village. In the village were seven hundred tents. In the seven-hundredth tent children are quarreling; they play and quarrel. Some say: "Among us there is a better Tadibe." [Footnote: This is what the shaman or sorcerer is called in Samoyed.] The others, though: "Among us there is a better one." As they quarrel, the Tadibes themselves also begin to quarrel in the tent. They quarrel and quarrel; each holds himself to be the better. At last one of the two says: "He is a Tadibe who can set the moon on the flat of his hand." — "Nobody can do that," said the other. "That I can do," says the first. "Show that you can do it," says the other again. The Tadibe sets the moon on the flat of his hand. There the moon now lies on the flat hand; but in the tent it becomes cold, so cold that the people cannot protect themselves. They make one fire after another; they dress in the malitsa and the sovik, yet they still freeze. [Footnote: The malitsa is a shirt-like reindeer fur whose rough side is worn inward; the sovik, however, is drawn over the malitsa and has the rough side outward; it corresponds to the Lappish pesk. Compare Travel Reminiscences, pp. 40 and 231.] The worse Tadibe then begs the better one to set the moon back in the sky. He does so. Again the Tadibes begin to quarrel. The worse sorcerer still wants to hold himself just as good as the one who conjured the moon onto the flat of his hand and set it back in the sky. The better sorcerer speaks: "No one is a Tadibe who cannot set the sun on the flat of his hand." — "And you can do that?" the other asks. "That I can," says the better Tadibe, and at once he sets the sun on the flat of his hand. Then it becomes so hot in the tent that the people are ready to die of the heat. The worse sorcerer begs the better one to set the sun back in the sky. The better Tadibe then sets the sun back in the sky. Thereupon he says to the worse one: "Let us become geese and live so for a time." Said, done. The two Tadibes became geese and flew away, far away to Novaya Zemlya. Here each built his tent; the better one made his tent of cloth, the worse one of reindeer skulls. Spring came. Then the worse sorcerer speaks: "Let us collect females, like other geese." — "That will not do," the better one answers, "for if we collect females, we will get young, and if we have young, we will be caught. No, let us fly on farther, for soon we lose our wings, and this place here is not safe." They did so, flew away, and came to a river that was full of geese. The geese kept watch day and night. Each one had to keep watch when its turn came. The turn came to one of the two Tadibes, to the one who had built himself a tent of reindeer skulls. As he is standing watch, a one-eyed Samoyed comes to hunt. With him he has a dog that runs on three feet. The dog drives the geese, drives and kills many. The Samoyed follows him and gathers up the geese that the dog had killed before. The dog only drives the geese; it wants to seize the worse Tadibe, who had built himself a tent of reindeer skulls. It bites him in the beak. The better Tadibe, who was ahead, turns back and frees his companion. Three times the dog attacks the worse Tadibe; three times the better one frees him. The dog drives the geese ever farther and farther; the river becomes narrower and narrower and at last so shallow that the geese can no longer dive under. "We are lost," says the worse Tadibe; "what is to be done? Here we cannot dive under, and if we go ashore, we cannot run a race with the dog." The better one says: "Let us try it; the land is not large. We will soon come to the sea, and there is an island there; let us direct our course there!" Then they began to run on the land, ran over the land, swam over the sound, and came to the island. Here the worse one began to eat grass, the better one, though, moss. The worse one spoke to the better: "You must eat grass, so that your wings grow and we can get away from here. See how large my wings have already grown, and you are quite without any. Soon I shall fly away and must leave you here." So spoke the worse one; the better one, though, went on eating moss. His wings do not grow; the worse one, though, has full-grown wings and flies away. He flies to another island and there turns into a diving duck. Children come and strike him dead. When the worse one had flown away, the better one began to eat grass, and his wings at once grew a fathom long. Then he flew back to his homeland and began to live there as a man.



Fourth Tale

Two Samoyeds live in a desolate place; they catch foxes, sables, bears. Then it happens that one of them sets out on a journey; the other stays at home. He travels; an old woman is hewing birches; he came to the old woman and speaks: "How you are hewing, old woman! You hew all the way around; that way you will not fell the tree. Hew from two sides! Let me hew!" He took the axe from the sled, began to hew at another place, struck from two sides, and so fells the tree. He set the tree on the sled, drove it to the old woman's tent. The Samoyed laid the tree on the ground; the old woman speaks: "Hide yourself, so that nobody sees you." He hides; the old woman remains standing on the hill. Seven girls come to her. "This tree, who hewed it for you? You yourself do not hew in this way. Who is with you?" The old woman: "Nobody is with me; I felled the tree myself!" The girls went away at once, without even stepping into the tent. The Samoyed comes out of his hiding place, goes to the old woman. The old woman speaks: "In the dark forest there is a lake, a long lake; go there! When you get there, the seven girls begin to swim; they leave their clothes on the shore. Go quietly up, take the clothes of one of the girls, and hide them." The Samoyed drove, came to the lake, took the best clothes, and hid them. The seven girls swim, come to the shore, begin to dress; the clothes of one girl have disappeared. She threw herself back into the lake; the others went away. She weeps in the lake, does not know who took her clothes, speaks: "Whoever has taken my clothes, his wife I shall become if he gives me back the clothes." The Samoyed does not trust the girl; he still holds back. In the lake the girl thinks and speaks with herself: "Our old woman has an older sister besides; she has a son; if he has taken the clothes, I shall become his wife." Now the man comes forward; the girl sees him. "Indeed, you are the son of our old woman's sister! Give me my clothes, and I shall become your wife." — "If I give you the clothes, you will fly up to heaven again; where can I get hold of you!" — "I shall certainly become your wife! Give me the clothes; I am freezing." — "Not far from here there are seven Samoyeds who all live together in a remote place. They go about and roam around a great deal; when they come home, they take out their hearts and hang them on the tent poles. If you get me these seven hearts, I will give you the clothes; otherwise you will not get them, even if you should die at this place." — "I will take these hearts; give me the clothes." — "I will not give them before you tell me how you intend to take the hearts of the seven sons." — "At night I will go and take them." — "That is not how you will take them; many have tried, but no one has yet gotten them. Come closer to me, and I will teach you how you can get them into your power." She swam closer to the shore; the Samoyed says: "These men have stolen a sister from me; her one must take for help. Go you to the sister; she keeps watch over all the hearts, and from her you must demand them." So they came to an agreement, and he gave the clothes to the girl. She dressed, and he began to demand a fixed time within which he should receive the hearts. "Within five days I will come to you with my raidu and my tent," the girl answers. [Footnote: Raidu, the Lappish raido, is a train of pack reindeer.] The Samoyed went back to his tent, to his companion. He asks: "Where have you been, what have you seen?" — "Nowhere have I been; nothing have I seen." The companion says: "You have plainly been with our father's sister! The seven brothers killed our mother, they who have no hearts; they will kill you too if you go there; never go to the old woman."

They live five days; on the fifth day the girl comes from the air with her raidu and her tent and became his wife. "Let us go to the seven brothers," says the wife. "We will see whether we cannot get hold of their hearts." They come to their tent; the brothers had gone out; there were only women in the tent. Man and wife go into the tent; nobody sees the wife. The man is visible; he speaks to the sister: "Where do the seven brothers lay their hearts when they come home?" — "There on the poles they lay them for the night, and they always sleep without a heart." The sister continues: "They trust me, and when they come home in the evening, I take a bowl and go from one brother to another. Each lays his heart on the bowl; I hang the hearts on the poles." — "Take the bowl, take the hearts down from the pole, and lay them on the bowl. In the morning they will demand their hearts from you, but you throw the hearts of the six younger brothers wherever you like — let them die — but with the heart of the elder brother, go to him and speak: 'If my mother comes to life again, I will give you your heart; otherwise not!'"

Toward night the Samoyed goes home with his wife. His wife speaks: "Do not you go to them; let me take the hearts, and I will go alone." In the night she returns there. The seven brothers are still eating their evening meal; nobody sees her. They finished their evening meal, spread out reindeer hides, and lay down to sleep. The sister takes the bowl; they each lay their heart on it. Thereupon she put the hearts in the appointed place. "How," asks one of the brothers, "did you put our hearts away so carelessly?" — "She will surely guard them," says the eldest brother. When they had fallen asleep, the wife went away with the hearts. She came to the man with the hearts.

When morning grayed, the man went with the hearts to the brothers: they are already about to die. All beg for their heart. He throws them on the ground, and as he throws the hearts, the brothers die. So the six younger brothers died. The heart of the eldest brother he does not throw on the ground. As this one begs again and again for his heart, the man says: "You killed my mother; make her alive again, and I will give you the heart." — "Give me the heart first, and then I will wake her to life." — "If you do not first make her alive, you will not get the heart." Then he says to his wife: "Go to the place where the dead woman lies; there is a bag; fetch me this bag; in the bag is her spirit." The wife fetches the bag. "Go to your dead mother, shake the bag, and let the spirit blow over all the bones, and she will become alive again." He came to his mother and did as the Samoyed had commanded; the mother got her life back. He sent the mother into his tent; he himself went to the sister. There the Samoyed still lives. He flung his heart against the ground; this one too died. The brother went home with his sister. Then he goes again to his father's sister; she is again at the same place in the forest. She speaks: "Have the seven not killed you yet?" — "No; rather we have killed them; but how is it with us?" The father's sister: "Your wife's knife is here; I give you the knife; give it to the sister and ask her to do with it what she will; I myself will soon come to you." The Samoyed comes home, gives the knife to his wife, asks her to do with it what she will. The wife takes with it the hearts of all who were in the tent, also her husband's heart and her own, and throws them into the air. The father's sister came, sees that all are without hearts, speaks: "All are without hearts; they do not live, they are not dead; what shall I do? I will go to the long lake; perhaps I will find someone there again." The six sisters are bathing again in the lake; she took the best clothes and hid them. They weep and lament there: "We do not know where the sister has gone." They swam; they came to the shore; one again misses her clothes, throws herself into the lake; the rest go away. The girl weeps: "Whoever has taken my clothes, his wife I would become, and I would make any dead person alive if only I get my clothes. In the air we caught many hearts; with these I can help the dead." The old woman comes forward: "See, here are your clothes!" — "Give me the clothes; everything that I promised I will keep." — "Give me all the hearts that were found, and I will give you the clothes," spoke the woman. "You live in the air; your sister is now on earth; if she asks you for something, can you help her?" — "If she lives, we will do everything she wants." The girl gave the hearts; the old woman, the clothes. The old woman goes to the tent where the people lived without the hearts that had traveled up to heaven; she gave everyone his heart, and all became pure and holy. "Now," spoke the woman, "let us travel to heaven, to our sisters." They caught reindeer, set out on the journey, and traveled through the air. Then they struck upon a thick fog so that they could see nothing. Seven days they traveled through the fog; then they came to a warm, very warm, and good place. There they live still to this day.



Fifth Tale

By a river live an old man and an old woman — only these two; they were Samoyeds. Farther up the river live Ostyaks in yurts. There there were several yurts next to one another, like a village. The old man lives in the utmost poverty; he has no weapons and tools, only an axe. Once in the evening, after the old man had eaten his evening meal, he went out of the tent; ptarmigans are running on the snow. He took a billet of wood and threw it at the ptarmigans, but does not hit them. The ptarmigans begin to speak: "Why do you want to take our lives? Go into the tent and kill your wife. You are poor; if you kill your wife, you will become rich." The old man took his axe, went into the tent, and struck his wife dead. The old man begins to weep: "What have I done? Why did I strike my wife dead? Our whole life long we lived peacefully together, and now I struck her dead!" — He weeps the whole night. It became morning. God gave light. The old man makes ready a small dog sled, laid his wife sitting in the sled as if she were alive. He dragged her down to the river, follows the river; the river flows into a great stream; he begins to go up the stream. So he found a village. There lived an Ostyak prince, [illegible]. He left the corpse by an ice hole. He himself went to the prince; he had two daughters. The prince let the old man eat and drink as much as he desired. "I," spoke the old man, "have eaten and drunk here, but my wife has meanwhile perhaps frozen outside." — "Why did you not tell me, O old man, that you have your wife here? Perhaps she has frozen." The prince says to his two daughters: "Go to the old woman and bring her here, so that she can warm herself." The daughters ran; the younger ran ahead. "Why do you run so? You will hurt the old woman." She ran nevertheless, came to the sled, pulled hard on the strap; the old woman fell into the ice hole. The girls went home, came to the prince, and told that the old woman had drowned. The prince began to search for the old woman with long poles, but he did not find her.

The old man lives with the prince, weeps night and day, and cries aloud over the loss of his wife. The prince says: "My ears suffer from this crying; I will give him my eldest daughter in place of the old woman." The wedding was celebrated. The prince set up a special yurt for the old man. There they live a long time; the wife bore a son. The prince, delighted at this, gave a great feast; they eat and drink. All became drunk. The prince and his son-in-law go on drinking. At last the prince too falls down. The old man begins to shout: "I alone stand on my feet; all of them lie drunk there, although we all drank alike. This people is good for nothing. I killed my wife and am still a better man than all of these. I live now in riches, since I took my wife's life." — "What?" said the younger girl; "did you yourself take your wife's life?" The old man stepped up to the girl, pushed the girl with his hand; she became speechless from it. The guests slept and traveled home. The old man likewise. The younger girl continued to be speechless and can eat nothing. Already she begins to die. The prince speaks: "Where could one find someone who could heal her?" — "Go," he spoke, "to the son-in-law, whether he does not know where such a one is to be found."

The son-in-law came to the prince, but says that he knows no such person. "I," spoke the prince, "have heard that near here live seven Ostyaks; they have a mother who is said to be very knowing. Son-in-law! Drive with good dogs to fetch her." The old man harnessed good dogs and set off. He came to the seven Ostyaks and begs the old woman to follow him to the prince, to heal his sick daughter. The old woman sat down in the sled and went with the old man to the prince. They arrived. The prince asks: "Can you not heal my sick daughter?" — "I do not know. If people have harmed her, there is healing; but if the sickness comes from God, she cannot be helped. Yet it seems to me as if people had harmed her." The old woman takes her magic drum, beats on it, and thus broke off: "By God," she spoke, "I have not found the ground of the sickness, and Death ([illegible]) too has done her no harm." The old man sat beside the old woman; the old woman begins to drum again, drums with much zeal, throws herself to both sides. The old man was carving sharp pegs. When the old woman threw herself to one side, a peg drove into her one ear and came out through the other. The old woman died on the spot. "What is this here? My daughter is about to die, the old woman died, and the seven Ostyaks begin to attack me."

Again the prince asks the old man: "If you bring this old woman to her sons, and can speak in such a way that they do not attack me, I will give you half of my property." The old man again harnessed good dogs before the sled, set the old woman on the sled like a living person, and drove off with her. He drives into dark forests. Two Samoyeds shoot with bows at a squirrel. They shoot, but do not hit. The old man halts, gathers up their arrows, and speaks: "How badly you shoot; let me shoot, and I will bring the squirrel as a gift to the prince." Meanwhile he goes to the woman and sticks an arrow through the old woman's ears. "What!" he says; "you have shot the mother of the seven Ostyaks dead; the arrow went into the one ear and came out of the other." The Samoyeds come and look, fall into distress, go to the prince, and beg for mercy. "Drive," says the prince, "drive the old woman to the Ostyaks, and make your peace with them as you can."

The Samoyeds beg the old man to bring the old woman to the Ostyaks. "We will give you what you want: foxes, sables, fat, clothes, and so on; only bring the old woman to the Ostyaks!" — "I will take everything on my own responsibility; only do not deceive me." So the old man drives off again. He drives and comes to the seven Ostyaks. He stopped with the corpse, pulled the arrow out of the ears, and stuck a twig of a tree in. Thereupon he covered the old woman with snow; he stepped in to the seven Ostyaks; they came to meet him. They go to their mother, look at the mother, see the twig in the ears. "What! You have killed our mother?" — "What are you saying?" — "Do you not see the twig sticking out of the ears?" — "That is what comes of it," says the old man, "that the prince gave me wild dogs; plainly, during the drive through the forest a tree twig pierced into her ears." The Ostyaks speak: "The fault is yours, and it will not go well with you." They lift the mother from the sled and ask the old man to go home. The old man came to the place where the two Samoyeds had shot at the squirrel. Here they were standing again and had brought what they had promised. One sled was full of foxes and sables, another with clothes of many kinds. He took the sleds and drove home with them. So he lives a time with the prince.

The girl lies in her last throes. The prince speaks: "Heal my younger daughter, and take her as your second wife." The old man says: "Bring her to me, and I will try." She was brought to the old man; everyone goes to rest; the girl was laid in a separate room, and everyone was forbidden to go to her. Waked by her crying, the elder sister goes nevertheless; but her husband's command comes to her mind, and she turns back. Right after her came the younger sister, healthy and alive, and with a speaking tongue. The prince was glad; he gave his younger daughter to the old man as well. After the wedding they live a long time in the same place; the younger wife speaks not a word of what had happened. Two sons grow up for the old man, one from the elder, the other from the younger sister. The old man says to the elder sister: "Go to your father and ask from him a boat; I want to look at my former dwelling place." The wife goes and asks for the boat and receives from the prince permission to choose for her husband, among his boats, the one that suits him best. The old man now took a boat and set out alone on the journey. He came happily to the place where he had taken his wife's life. He drew the boat ashore and went into a village near the place where he had formerly lived. All the neighbors know him. "Where," they ask, "have you been so long?" — "In the neighborhood of the Ostyak prince there." — "What does one hear in that region?" the neighbors ask. "Nothing good; that is why I have come here. It is said that the Harjutsi Samoyeds will come to us for plundering; now we must save ourselves from them." [Footnote: A Samoyed tribe within the Obdorsk district.] — "How shall we save ourselves?" — "Make two pits," says the old man, "and hide yourselves in them. Cover the pits with big trees; I myself will cover the trees with earth. "Put your reindeer and all your property into one pit, cover it well with earth, and go yourselves into the other, as many of you as there are." As the old man had said, so the neighbours also did; one pit they covered themselves, and the other was covered by the old man. The old man himself set out on the journey and travelled home again.

He comes home, lives again for a time with the prince, and asks the prince again for boats, to travel home. "There," says the old man, "I have my property at an old place, and there I could live." Then he took his two wives, his sons, and all his goods, and went on three boats to his old dwelling place. He settled in the village where the neighbours had formerly lived, and put his goods into their storehouses. "See," says one daughter, "what a splendid yurt the old man has here." — "But let us," says the old man, "also see my property that I have hidden in the earth." The pit is opened; here there is property of every kind — foxes, sables, ermines, money, clothes, and so on. They carried everything into the storehouses. All the storehouses became full. "That," said the old man, "is property for you. I am old and will soon go into the grave; what I have gathered for you, use after my death as you please."



Tatar Heroic Sagas



1. Alten Arga and Alten Aira

They lived in a corner of the earth and drank water from the white sea beneath the high mountain. In one tent lived two children, a boy with his sister. The boy was three full years old, the girl seven years. Both children were fatherless and motherless orphans; no one cared for them, but they had much cattle. The boy's name was Alten Taktai, and his horse was called Aikar Ai Aken Tü (Moon Swan, the golden-haired horse). The girl was called Alten Arga (Gold Girl). One day Alten Taktai saddles his six-year-old horse, mounts its back, and rides out onto the mountain to hunt game. His sister Alten Arga meanwhile stays behind in the tent. While she sits in the tent, the earth begins to shake violently, for a hero comes riding up on his horse. When the girl heard the hoofbeat of the horse, she believed that a whole tabun (herd of horses) was in motion. She looks out of the tent, and when she catches sight of the riding hero, she is greatly frightened, for in her whole life she had never seen any other human being than her brother. The hero rode to the tent and tied his horse to the golden post, whereupon he entered the tent and sat down on the bed, which nearly collapsed beneath him. "Where has your brother taken his way?" the hero asks the girl, and she answers: "My brother has ridden out hunting." — "Will you become my wife?" the hero continues. Alten Arga replies: "How can I become your wife without my brother's permission?" Then the hero wants the girl to show him the way on which her brother had ridden out hunting. Alten Arga had such great fear of the hero that she dared not refuse to show him the way. She followed him out of the tent, but when she had stepped out of it, she nearly fell down in astonishment when she saw the hero's golden-haired horse, whose saddle, bridle, and strap-work shimmered with gold and silver. The hero boasts before the girl and says: "My name is Alten Aira (Gold Knot), and my horse Alten Tüktü Agai At (the golden-haired whitish-blue horse). There is no hero in the world who could compare with me, and such a horse as mine there is none in the white light." Alten Arga now showed Alten Aira the way on which her brother had ridden out hunting, and Alten Aira rode off on the same way. When he had ridden away, Alten Arga returned into the tent. There she made a hole in the tent wall and followed Alten Aira with her eyes until he vanished in the mountain. Then she sat down on the bed and began to weep, saying: "Alten Taktai is young, and the horse also not yet fully grown. Surely Alten Aira will now take my poor brother's life."

While Alten Arga sits and weeps, the earth begins to shake again. Alten Arga looks out through the hole in the tent wall, and now Alten Aira comes riding again on his horse down from the mountain. He directs his course toward the tent, with bloody mouth and bloody hands. Alten Arga has a gold casket, and she keeps the key to the casket under her bed. The girl took the key that lay under the bed and unlocked the gold casket. In the chest there was a garment with eagle's wings, which the mother had kept for her daughter before her death. Alten Arga now took this garment out of the chest, laid aside her old clothes, put on the garment with eagle's wings, and buttoned its twelve buttons well. So she sits in the front corner of the tent and looks now at the door, now at the blue tree. From the mountain she hears Alten Aira call with raised voice: "I have killed your brother, and you too shall not escape me. It is too high to fly to heaven, and through the earth you cannot flee."

Alten Aira came to the tent, tied Aken Tüktü Agai At to the golden post, opened the door to the tent, and entered, very angry and black in the face. In the same moment Alten Arga flew out through the smoke hole and up to the clouds. Alten Aira returns out of the tent, unties his horse, mounts its back, and goes on boasting with these words: "I am the first hero on earth; you shall not escape me." The girl flies in her garment with eagle's wings; the air whistles, and through the beating of the wings a strong storm arises, so that the trees in the forest break and the roofs are blown off all the tents. When Alten Aira rode off, he struck his horse three times with the whip, so that the loin burst apart to the bones, and pulled the reins so tight that the horse's mouth-corners tore to the jawbone. Thereupon the horse Aken Tüktü Agai At rushed along with such haste that in three leaps it crossed three lands. When the horse leaps, the earth sways beneath it like a cradle. Alten Arga meanwhile flies through the air and sees with fear how Alten Aira pursues her on the earth. Before her she sees on the steppe a lake, and near the shore walks an old man with grey hair. The old man has on a very ragged garment and a very poor appearance. In his hand he carries a very poor staff. Alten Arga calls to the old man: "Save me from death; a hero is at my heels!" The old man answers: "Come to me; I will not give you to him; I will keep you in my bosom." Alten Arga flew to the old man, who opened his poor fur coat and hid the girl in his bosom. The old man now believed he had Alten Arga in good keeping; but when after a while he felt at his bosom, the girl had vanished. She had slipped down out of the bosom without the old man noticing, and flew again through the air. The old man could not wonder enough how Alten Arga could have vanished without his knowledge; but that she was a heroine, that he could notice well enough. While the old man wonders at the girl's disappearance, he sees Alten Aira riding up at some distance. Scarcely had he seen the hero when he begins to quarrel with him and says to him: "You are Alten Aira, who have devoured all your horses and your horned cattle, and on top of that have even eaten your own father and your own mother. Why do you want to come also to Alten Taktai and Alten Arga, who have not come too close to you and are of good descent? It was not Kudai (God) who created you into the world, but you were brought forth by Aina (the Evil One)." When the old man had spoken these words, Alten Aira rode up to him and, as he rode past, struck him with the whip right across the body, so that he fell to the earth in two pieces.

Alten Arga had meanwhile reached a high mountain that formed the boundary between the lands of two khans. On the mountain stood two heroes who were appointed by Kudai to keep watch on the mountain, so that no one could come across it from one land into the other. These heroes were brothers, and the elder was called Alten Teak, the younger Kümüs Teak. When the girl came to the two hero brothers, she begged them most earnestly to save her from death, and said that Alten Aira was pursuing her after having first murdered her young brother. Alten Teak and Kümüs Teak replied: "Do not rely on us, but go on farther to the seacoast; there is a hero there who is called Alten Kus, and he has a sister who is called Alten Burtjük. Alten Burtjük is a very knowing woman. She knows all the heroes there are in the world, and can surely instruct you from where you will receive help." When Alten Arga heard the answer of the hero brothers, she began to weep, for she had believed that they could give her aid. Then she flew away again, and when she had flown a stretch of the way, she turned around to see whether Alten Aira was near her. At just the same moment Alten Aira also came to the two hero brothers, Alten Teak and Kümüs Teak. One heard him call out to the brothers: "Why do you teach my wife to flee from me, when you are supposed to stop those who flee?" The brothers answer: "Alten Arga will never be your wife. She is of good descent; but you — Aina brought you into the world." When Alten Aira heard these words, he became angry and seized the two hero brothers, each with one hand, and dashed them against a gold rock, so that their bodies flew down the mountain, but the skin remained in Alten Aira's own hand. Alten Arga saw all this and thought in her mind: "The same fate awaits me too, poor me!"

Then she flew on as fast as she could and soon came to a high mountain from which she saw the white sea. On the shore of the sea lives Alten Kus, and around his tent much people and much cattle move. No horse is tied at the golden post, and the grass grows ell-high around it. From this Alten Arga sees that Alten Kus is not at home. She sees Alten Burtjük's tent shimmering with silver and gold, and flies straight toward this tent. Before the tent she laid aside her garment with eagle's wings and put on another dress. Then she entered the tent, but nearly fell down in astonishment when she saw the face of Alten Burtjük, which shone like the sun. As soon as Alten Arga entered the tent, Alten Burtjük rose from her couch, set food before her, and entertained the newcomer in the best manner. After Alten Arga had finished her meal, Alten Burtjük began to speak and said: "Who are you, poor girl? Where is your home, and who are your parents?" Alten Arga replied: "I remember neither my father nor my mother; Alten Taktai is my brother, and with him I grew up beneath the high mountain at the white sea. Now my poor brother is no longer alive; Alten Aira killed him while he hunted in the forest. From the forest Alten Aira came to me with bloody mouth and bloody hands. I was frightened and have since flown over seven lands, without finding help anywhere against my enemy." So spoke Alten Arga, and then she began to ask Alten Burtjük whether she might not hope for help from her brother Alten Kus. Alten Burtjük replied that Alten Kus would not be able to offer resistance to Alten Aira. Besides, he was not at home now, for Kudai had made him khan over seventy lands, and he had just gone to collect tribute from his subjects over a period of eight years; before four years he would not return. Alten Burtjük added: "Far, far from this place live two brothers, Kan Töngös and Kum Töngös. They have a sister, Kubasen Arga, who can instruct you better than I how you will find help against Alten Aira." Alten Arga thanked Alten Burtjük for this news, took leave, and flew away again from Alten Burtjük. She had not flown long when she came to a great steppe, filled with animals of every kind there are in the world. The number of birds flying in the air was so great that they darkened the light of the sun. On a cloud's peak sat seven Kudais, and on the steppe seven Ainas, whose bodies stuck out of the earth only up to the breast. From the sky hung an iron hook, and on this hook Alten Arga saw her brother Alten Taktai hanging. Alten Aira had thrown him there over seven lands, and on the iron hook he had written that no hero and no god would be able to take Alten Taktai down from the hook. Out of pity, the animals of the forest and the birds of the air had gathered around him. The gods and even the Ainas had sympathy for him. When Alten Arga saw her brother in this position, she began to weep bitterly and to grieve over her brother, since he suffered so hard a punishment although he had sinned neither against the gods nor against men. After she had wept long, she flew away again, but was already so tired that she did not dare to fly high above the earth.

While Alten Arga had wept at her brother's side, Alten Aira had time to come very close to her, and however much she tried to escape him, Alten Aira caught up with her in the middle of the steppe. He struck her with his whip, so that the gold-feathered garment with eagle's wings burst on her back, whereupon Alten Arga fell down to the ground and lay there. Alten Aira tried to stop his horse in order to treat Alten Arga still worse, but from the horse's hot breath the rein had become so hot that Aken Tüktü would not be steered, but ran on for two whole days in one stretch. Then Alten Aira became very angry and gave the horse Alten Tüktü such a powerful blow on the head with the whip that it sank to the ground.

Meanwhile Alten Arga had regained her senses and begun to fly through the air. She now flew faster than she had ever flown before and soon reached a high mountain at the blue sea. At the foot of the mountain stood three tents, so high that they reached almost to the clouds. All the tents were covered with silver and gold. In them lived Kubasen Arga and her brothers, but the brothers were not at home, for their horses do not stand tied at the golden post. Alten Arga stopped before the tent in which Kubasen Arga lived, took off her garment with eagle's wings, and put on lighter clothing. Then she entered the tent; but at the sight of the sun-beautiful face of Kubasen Arga she stopped in astonishment and was about to fall to the earth. Kubasen Arga rose from her bed, bade the guest welcome, and entertained her with food and drink. When Alten Arga had finished her meal, Kubasen Arga spoke: "You are, as it seems, Alten Taktai's sister?" Then Alten Arga fell on her knees before Kubasen Arga, revealed her distress to her, and asked her for help against Alten Aira. "Where are your brothers now?" Alten Arga added, "and can they not give me aid against my enemies?" Kubasen Arga replies: "Kudai has made my brothers khans and sent them out to collect tribute in all lands. They have already been absent six years, and still three years must pass before they return home. Nor can my brothers do anything against Alten Aira, for he is the greatest hero on earth." Alten Arga continues to beg and says: "Then teach me, you who are the wisest woman on earth, where I can find help against my enemy?" Kubasen Arga replies: "What have I to do with you? You can return there from where you came. Who told you to run away from Alten Aira and not become his wife when he wooed you?" When Alten Arga heard such hard words, she began to weep bitterly and no longer knew where she should take her way. She sank once more on her knees before Kubasen Arga and asked whether she could not defeat Alten Aira through wisdom. Kubasen Arga answered: "I have long since tried my power against Alten Aira; for three years I followed his tracks and wanted to turn him into a stone, for six years I strove to turn him into a tree, but I had no power over him." After these words Alten Arga became only still more grieved and went out of the tent. She put on her garment with eagle's wings and wanted to fly away, but in the same moment Kubasen Arga came out of the tent and asked her to turn back again. Joyfully Alten Arga accepted the invitation, and when both girls had come into the tent again, Kubasen Arga began to read in Alten Arga's hand. She laid twelve strands of silk on Alten Arga's hand, and after she had looked at it a while, she asked Alten Arga to stay in the tent and there await her fate, saying: "If Alten Aira on his arrival ties his horse to the post of larch wood, this happens for your good fortune; but if he ties his horse to the golden post, it happens for his good fortune."

