We pass at last to the fifth main group of the Altaic peoples — to the Finnish or Chud family. This family is at present almost as fragmented and scattered as the Turkic. Next after the Samoyeds, however, it is the weakest in number of people among the groups of the Altaic stock known so far; yet it has an advantage over all related peoples. This advantage consists in this, that the peoples belonging to this stock, with few exceptions, have come into possession of Christianity and in part also of European culture. It has been asserted that of all the peoples of the world only the Indo-Europeans are said to be destined, through their higher endowments, to lead the language of culture, and it must also be admitted that the other races have at least so far not been able to raise themselves to any significant degree of culture, but have remained almost in the state of their original savagery. Only the Finnish peoples have shown themselves receptive to European culture, though most of them form only insignificant stems that live scattered in Russia and will sooner or later merge with the Slavic population. The Hungarians (Magyars) and the Finns are the only ones who, while preserving their nationality, strive to follow on the tracks of the progress of European culture. They are now representatives not only of the Finnish stock but also of a whole great race of mankind — provided, that is, that a difference of race really exists. It is without doubt also in part a consequence of this capacity to take up education and civilization that some scholars have wished to reckon the Finnish stock to the Caucasian or Indo-European race. Comparative linguistic research has meanwhile shown that this stock has a quite different origin; but that it has nevertheless been able to raise itself almost to the same degree of culture as the Indo-European peoples seems to prove that education and humanity do not form the monopoly of any particular race of mankind. That the Finnish peoples have attained a higher degree of culture than their other kinsmen I will not ascribe to their greater capacity for education either, but only to the circumstance that they have long stood in contact with educated nations, whereas the related peoples, by contrast, have lived in the strictest separation from the civilized peoples of the earth.

It is hard to determine the point in time at which the Finns tore themselves loose from their kinsmen in High Asia and gained a firm footing in Europe, but it is certain that this had already happened before the time of the Great Migration. Not improbable is the supposition that there were also Finnish stems among the Scythians, and there is much in favour of the view that the Huns too were of Finnish origin. What is known with certainty, however, is that the Finns were settled in Europe at least by the times of Tacitus, i.e., around the year 100 AD. As is known, Tacitus lets his Fenni live in the region of present-day Lithuania, and Ptolemy, who lived half a century after him, places their dwellings east of the Vistula. Even if these reports about the dwellings of the Finns cannot be regarded as entirely reliable, one may nevertheless assume that the Finns must already at this time have advanced, if not to the Baltic itself, then at least into its neighbourhood. Other branches of the same stock, however, at a far later time, still kept to the Ural mountain chain and beyond it on the Irtysh River. At that time, however, these branches were not yet separated from one another by the Slavic stock; rather, the whole intervening land, or the greater part of present-day Russia, was in all probability inhabited by nothing but Finnish peoples. The oldest history of the Slavs is wrapped in darkness, but that before the Migration they had not yet taken possession of the northern parts of Russia seems to be regarded as a settled matter. The traditions, the remains of antiquity, and the numerous multitude of Finnish place-names that occur in northern and central Russia also prove that the Finns (I mean the Finnish peoples) were the aborigines of this land. Some scholars would give the Finnish stock a still far greater extent. Rask holds them also to be the original inhabitants of Scandinavia and Denmark, and Nilsson's antiquarian researches have really yielded the almost incontestable result that at least the oldest burial mounds of Scandinavia are a work of the Finnish stock. In Mecklenburg, quite recently, a skull has been found in an old burial mound to which Finnish origin is ascribed. Similar finds are said, according to Retzius, to have been made in England as well. [Footnote: Rask, Undersögelse om det gamle Nordiske, eller Islandske Sprogs Oprindelse, Copenhagen, 1818, pp. 112 ff. — Nilsson, Skandinaviska Nordens Ur-invånare, Lund, 1838–1843, first chapter § 85, second chapter pp. 11 ff. — Retzius, Öfversigt af Kongl. Vetenskaps-Akademiens Förhandlingar, sixth year, Stockholm, 1849, pp. 118 ff.]

Indeed, even in France and Spain traces of the Finnish stock are believed to have been discovered, but nowhere are they so easy to recognize as in Russia. Here there is still today a large number of small peoples that are irrefutably of Finnish origin. In Nestor's time their number was greater, for he mentions several Finnish stems, e.g. Muroma, Merya, Pechshori, which have already been assimilated by the Slavic population. Still other stems dwelling in Russia have without doubt perished during the Great Migration, just as it, according to what has already been said in the foregoing, also prepared destruction for many a Turkic people.

The Finnish peoples that have been able to preserve themselves and their nationality up to the present time are divided by the ethnographers into four groups or families, namely: (1) the Ugric peoples, to which are reckoned the Ugric Ostyaks, the Voguls, and the Magyars or Hungarians; (2) the Bulgarian or Volga peoples, which now consist of Cheremis and Mordvins — to them some scholars also reckon the Chuvash, who now, however, are entirely Tatarized; (3) the Permian peoples: the Permians, Syryans, and Votyaks; (4) the Finnish peoples, which consist of Finns, Estonians, Lapps, Ingrians, Livs, and Chuds. In addition, the Bashkirs, Meshcheryaks, and Teptyars are held by some to be Turkic-Tatar, by others to be Finnish stems.

The Bashkirs (from bash, head, and kurt, bee) formerly lived in southern Siberia, whence they later spread in the Orenburg government as far as the Volga. Their language is now related to the language of the Kazan Tatars. They themselves derive their origin from the Nogai Tatars, whom they also resemble in appearance according to Pallas. Strahlenberg found some resemblance between the Bashkirs and the Finnish stems, and by the Kirghiz they are called Istyaki (Ostyaks), and by the Tatars Sari Tshtek, i.e., red-haired Ostyaks, though one must recall in this connection that the Tatars regard almost all foreign nations as Ostyaks. In any case, it is very probable that the Bashkirs form a mixture of Ostyaks and Tatars, with whom, as regards their dwellings, they necessarily had to come into close contact. They are said to amount in all to about 150,000 persons. [Footnote: Müller, Der Ugrische Volksstamm, First Division, Berlin, 1837, pp. 141 ff.]

The Meshcheryaks, who are already mentioned by Nestor, lived in the 15th century on the lower Oka, among Cheremis and Mordvins. From here they moved to Ufa, into the land of the Bashkirs. Their language is said to be even more Tatar than that of the Bashkirs, but nevertheless they have often been reckoned to the Chud stock and are also placed by Nestor together with the other Finnish peoples, a view for which their earlier dwellings on the Volga also seem to speak. Their number amounts to 15–16 thousand souls. [Footnote: Müller, Der Ugrische Volksstamm, Part I, p. 160.]

The Teptyars arose in the time of Ivan Vasilyevich through the union of Cheremis, Chuvash, Votyaks, and Tatars, who at the destruction of the Kazan realm sought a refuge in the southern parts of the Ural Mountains. Like the Permians, the Teptyars also fled principally from fear that they might be forced to accept Christianity (for, like the Bashkirs and Meshcheryaks, they too are Muhammadans) and were also received with goodwill by the Bashkirs, to whom they paid a certain tribute. Since the middle of the previous century they have increased from 34,000 to 110,000 heads, which demonstrates their continued mixture with foreign peoples also in later times. Now the Finnish element in them seems in general to be very weak. [Footnote: Ibid., pp. 161 and 162.]



The Ugric Finns

The name Ugria, Yugria, or Yugoria denotes, according to Lehrberg, Klaproth, and other more recent historians, the far-reaching land that extends on both sides of the rivers Ob and Irtysh in their lower course, to the borders of the Samoyeds in the north, the Tatars in the south, the Ural in the west, and the rivers Nadym, Agan, and Vakh in the east. Within these borders live the Ostyaks and Voguls — two peoples that are called in the Russian chronicles, tsars' letters, and old documents by a common name: Ugrians or Yugrians, also Yugrich. South of them, in ancient times, lived the kinsmen of the Ugrians, the so-called Onogurs, Saragurs, and Urogs, among whom the Onogurs were, according to Klaproth, the mightiest and afterwards bore the name Ugurs, Uigurs, and Hungarians. Klaproth repeatedly warns historians not to let themselves be misled by similarity of name into confusing the peoples just named, which without contradiction all belong to the Finnish stock, with the well-known people that among the Muhammadan writers bears the name Utgur (Ighur, Oghur) and, according to Rashid al-Din and Abu'l-Ghazi, falls into two main stems: On-Uigur (Ten-Uigur) and Tokus-Uigur (Nine-Uigur). These were, as Klaproth has proved in detail, of Turkic origin and lived originally (see page 66) northeast of the Gobi Desert, in the region of the upper Selenga and Karakorum. Individual branches of this stem, however, had already in the most ancient times settled farther west in the land between Lake Lop and the Ili River, whither their eastern kinsmen also later transferred their seats, as they gradually spread as far as the Irtysh and Lake Balkhash, i.e., to the borders of the territory of the Finnish Ugrians, Ugurs, or Ungurs. In view of the close neighbourhood of the two stems, however, we cannot resist the temptation, despite Klaproth's warning just mentioned, to hint in what follows at a possible community of all these stems designated by similar names. [Footnote: Lehrberg, Untersuchungen zur Erläuterung der ältern Geschichte Russlands, St. Petersburg, 1816, p. 4. — Klaproth, Asia polyglotte, p. 188. — Klaproth, Reise in den Kaukasus und Georgien, Vol. II, p. 491 and elsewhere. — Histoire généalogique des Tatars, p. 92. — Klaproth, Asia polyglotta, p. 210.]

First we call attention to the general kinship that indisputably obtains between the Finnish and Turkic peoples. Whether this is acknowledged by natural-scientific ethnographers or not, the philologist cannot avoid assuming in the most definite manner a common origin of these two stocks, to which one can moreover also reckon the Samoyed. Without doubt the Mongols, Manchu, or Tungus, together with several peoples of northern or central Asia, also belong to the same class; but of all the languages belonging here, the Finnish, the Samoyed, and the Turkic attach themselves most closely to one another.

It has already been stated by others, with respect to the Finnish and Turkic peoples, that in regard to their physical properties they form a connecting link between the Indo-European and Mongolian peoples, and this opinion seems to me, from the philological standpoint too, not to be unfounded. Between the Finnish and Turkic languages on the one side and the Mongolian on the other, there are indeed many agreements of a general and far-reaching nature; but it is questionable whether these agreements point to a specific kinship of the languages or whether they are not rather a consequence of the stage of development itself that these languages have reached. To make this relationship clear, I will cite here the generally known fact that Chinese knows nothing of sentences, nor of individual parts of speech, still less of an inflection of words, but has only monosyllabic, undeveloped roots. Mongolian, by contrast, does have sentence structure, but this is still very undeveloped, since the language has a great lack of particles and a very incomplete inflection. In the Turkic and Finnish languages the sentence structure is far more developed, the stock of particles richer in the same measure, and inflection further advanced. Yet both Turkic and individual Finnish languages have many endings that hang very loosely on the stem and can easily be separated from it. Among the particles, these languages, like Mongolian, also lack the so-called prepositions, which are replaced partly by a rich stock of cases, partly by certain prepositions formed from the noun.

The presence of prepositions belongs, namely, to the most essential advantages of the Indo-European language stock, both in many other respects and especially in that, through their combination with other words, an infinite multitude of concepts and modifications of concepts can be rendered for which one seeks an expression in vain in other languages. We do not, however, hold these, or other advantages belonging to the Indo-European language stock, to be original, but rather a consequence of the higher development of this language stock, and we believe for good reasons that there was a time when the Indo-European languages stood on the same low stage of formation as is now the case with Chinese, and that they gradually passed through the stages of development in which the Mongolian, Turkic, and Finnish languages presently find themselves. We also see that the last-named languages, the more they advance in their formation, the more definitely they manifest a striving toward forms of formation of the kind that the Indo-European languages now have. Thus, as regards Mongolian, the popular language has already developed a proper inflection in the verbs, although the grammarians have not noticed it. Within the Finnish language stock, too, the formation of prepositions and prepositional compounds has already begun and in individual languages has even advanced to a considerable degree. In what is simplest, moreover, both the Finnish and the Turkic and Mongolian languages manifest a development in the spirit of the Indo-European languages. It would be unjust to ascribe this development to mere imitation and to attribute the capacity for free progress to no other peoples and languages than the Indo-European.

By what has been adduced, we have sought briefly to hint that the general grammatical agreements of different languages are not necessarily a consequence of inner kinship, but can easily have their ground in a like character of the formation for which these languages are an expression. — But when, alongside the equality in the inner structure of the language, an agreement in its material constituents — in the words and their endings — also emerges to a more considerable degree, only then is one justified in assuming a common origin of these languages or at least a close contact between them; and the agreement between the Finnish and Turkic languages, which is the question at issue here above all, is in every respect so considerable that it cannot possibly be regarded as merely accidental and can hardly be explained by an external contact, but rests quite certainly on an original kinship, a common origin. This agreement extends not only to language, but is perceived just as definitely in the manners, customs, religious ideas, and so on, of these peoples. Strongly prominent among neighbouring peoples, this similarity does indeed decrease more and more among more distantly dwelling branches of the Finnish and Turkic stocks, yet nowhere to such a degree that it could not be recognized without difficulty.

Chinese and Muhammadan writers name as the most ancient homeland of the Turkic stock the region of the Tangnu Mountains and the great Altai, and relate that the Turks, after the great Flood, came down from these mountains. Very noteworthy in this regard is the circumstance that the traces of the Samoyeds as well as of the Finns are lost precisely in these mountain regions too. I have already earlier called attention to how, during a journey undertaken in the summer of 1847 to the upper course of the Yenisei, whose source rivers extend to the northern slope of the Tangnu Mountains, I succeeded in finding, both on Russian and on Chinese territory, various now already Tatarized remnants of the Samoyed stock. That the Finnish people too was native here was frequently recalled to me both by the traditions of the aborigines of the land, the light- or white-eyed Chuds, and especially by numerous place-names that are also current among the Finnish stems and in part find their explanation precisely in Finnish. Of these, some of the most important may be cited by way of example. The Yenisei is called Kem by the Tatars, and this river-name occurs also in several parts of Finland, as well as in Russian Karelia, quite unchanged, and in part in the altered form Kemi or Kymi. It means, according to Renvall's dictionary, a larger river, although it is now mostly used only as a proper noun. To my knowledge, the word occurs in no other language besides Finnish as a common noun, and it is consequently acceptable that it was precisely the Finns who gave the Yenisei its original name. Should [illegible]. [Footnote: Klaproth, Asia polyglotta, p. 210. — Reiseberichte und Briefe aus den Jahren 1845–49, pp. 367 ff. — Ibid., p. 342. — Über die Ursitze des finnischen Volkes (in the St. Petersburger Zeitung, 1850, Nos. 7 and 8), p. 10 of the offprint. — Also in the Tatar word Kem the e has a dark sound and stands close to the Russian u.]

[illegible] had formerly lived farther west — a tradition which, according to my investigations, has its ground in the fact that some clans of the Ugric Ostyaks moved into the river system of the Yenisei and there mixed with the Ostyaks who had immigrated from the Sayan Mountains and had been dwelling there since ancient times. Of still less weight is a tradition cited by Strahlenberg about the Tomsk Ostyak Samoyeds, who suspect "they had immigrated from Suomi's Sembla, that is, either Finland or Lapland." That in fact, in Müller's view, Permians and Syryans settled in Ugria was a thought that had arisen in me long before I had learned anything of the tradition communicated by Schönström. For on the lower course of the Ob I frequently met Ostyaks who were blond and had quite the appearance I had earlier observed among the Syryans. Moreover, within this territory there were also many place-names of Syryan origin, e.g. kar, town; Obdor, from Ob and the Syryan word dor, the outermost; and in the language itself there also occurs a great multitude of words and peculiarities of the Permian stock, which in part have not yet been properly assimilated. All this evidently proves the correctness of Müller's hypothesis about an immigration of the Permian stock. If, by contrast, according to Schönström's statement, the Ugrians had immigrated from the west, some traces of them would surely be discoverable within their former dwellings; this is, however, by no means the case, if I except one or another place-name on the western slope of the Ural, whither Ostyaks and Voguls in earlier times extended their raiding expeditions. Later, in consequence of the movements of peoples brought about by the penetration of the Slavs into the original territory of the Permian stock, they were forced to leave almost the whole Ural to the Permians and Voguls and to move first from the Konda to the Irtysh and from the Irtysh to the Ob. [Footnote: Strahlenberg, Das Nord- und Östliche Theil von Europa und Asia, Stockholm, 1730, p. 64.]

These movements that occurred in later times may, however, be left aside here, since the question concerns the oldest dwellings of the Ostyaks. In the foregoing we have sought to support with many reasons the supposition that both the Ugric branch of peoples and the whole Finnish and Samoyed stock had a common original home with the Turks, at the sources of the Yenisei, Ob, and Irtysh. As regards the Ugric Finns in particular, their very name shows that they stood in much contact with the Turkic Uigur stock. This stock is called Jugur by Tibetan writers and Joghur or Uighur by the Muhammadans (Ighur and Aighur are likely corrupted spellings). In Russian writings there occurs at the same time the adjective Ugorskoi or Yagorsky, which indicates that in the word Ugri and Jugri an o has disappeared and that the original stem was Ugor or Jugor, of which Ugri or Jugri is the nominative plural. Such a loss of a vowel is very common in Russian and in the present case has a quite simple ground of explanation. The aspirated g that occurs in the Turkic word shows, namely, that the immediately preceding vowel must be long; but it is known that after a long vowel the short vowel of the next following syllable is in all Turkic languages either pronounced like a schwa or not pronounced at all. It is accordingly clear that the stem of the Russian word Ugri or Jugri must be Ugor or Jugor. If we now analyse the Turkic word, it must be read either Jughor or Jaghor, but by no means Joghur, for according to general laws of language no u can follow upon a long o or u; rather, these two vowels necessarily require a short o in the next following syllable. That the word in Turkic really sounded Jughor is proved by the variant Uighur, in which the ju of the first syllable has become uj or ui. Thus the Ostyak Jughor coincides completely with the Turkic Jughor or Uighur. Now it is possible that the j in the word Jughor is only euphonic, for the Finnish and Tatar languages give innumerable proofs that both j and ü are used at the beginning of words as aspirations, since these languages do not gladly tolerate vowels there. Without insisting on the correctness of this view, we will only hint as a possibility that the designation of the Ostyaks, Ughar, was the most original, and perhaps, as Klaproth has already remarked, derives from the Turkic word ughar or oghar, high, which denotes a high situation of the Ugric land. That the j was added only for euphony's sake is also made probable by the circumstance that the word is pronounced by the Chinese as Ugulol, in which, moreover, l has taken the place of the r lacking in Chinese. Some scholars have placed the word Vogul together with Jughor (or, in their spelling, Joghur), a combination that is quite natural and offers a further support for the euphonic nature of the initial letter. Confirmation is also given by the designation of the Magyars customary among the Slavs and other peoples, Ungar, which name without doubt has the same stem as Ugor, as is also accepted by all scholars as settled, although opinions are divided as regards the etymology. Klaproth hints that the name Ungar arose through a contraction of Onogur (On-oghur) — this was one of the stems that, after the destruction of the Hun realm around the year 462, set out from the land beyond the Volga and became the forefathers of the present Hungarians. According to another, far more probable explanation, the name Ungar is only a corruption of Ugrian. There are indeed scholars who regard the nasal in the word Ungar as the correct and original sound; we cannot, however, share their opinion, since the word in the whole Orient, whence the name incontestably derives its origin, is written and pronounced without a nasal. If, on the assurance of scholars, the Ugri of the Russian chronicles must be read Ungri, we hold this orthography to be a borrowing from Byzantine writers, who write the word with a double g (Ouggroi), and we take the now current Russian pronunciation, as it occurs e.g. in Yugorsky Shard, Yugrina, and so on, to be far more correct. The Syryans too leave out the nasal, for among them the Ostyaks are called Jögra, in the plural Jögrajas. In the Arab geographer Bakui their land is called Jura, and Byzantine writers also know a people Ogor east of the Itil and the Volga, all of which serves as proof that the nasal in the said word was not original. [Footnote: Klaproth, Asia polyglotte, p. 188. — Ritter, Erdkunde, Part Two, p. 343. — Klaproth, Asia polyglotte, p. 188. — Baer and Helmersen, Beiträge zur Kenntniss des Russischen Reichs, Ninth Volume, St. Petersburg, 1845, p. 225. — Müller, op. cit., pp. 110 and 112.]

Since, according to the presentation above, the Turkic and Finnish Ugrians bear the same name, it must on such a basis also be possible to assume that these two stocks in former times stood in close intercourse with each other and were therefore confused with one another. The principal proof of their common dwellings must, however, according to the foregoing, be sought in the fact that the Finnish and Turkic languages are closely related to each other, that the Hungarians still today live in the region of Uiguria, that tradition among the Ostyaks places their older dwellings at the border of Uiguria, and that place-names of Ostyak origin occur in Uiguria.

It is impossible to determine the point in time at which the Ugrians left their High Asian homeland; but it is regarded as probable that they had already moved into the Ural mountain regions before the Migration, and in the 7th century Ugrians (Huguri, Viguri) are often named on the banks of the Volga. The first reliable information about the present Ugrians derives, however, from Nestor, who recorded the following report for the year 1096: "And I will relate what a Novgorodian, Gyuga Togorovich (or Yuiya Torgovich), told me four years ago: He had sent his servant to the Pechora people — this people pays tribute to Novgorod — and after my servant had reached them, he wandered from there to the Yugrians. The Yugrians, however, are a dumb, pagan people and border in the north on the Samoyeds; these (Yugrians) said to my servant: we find a wonder that we have not heard of before these times, and it is now the third year since this wonder first began. There are mountains that go toward Lukomorie and whose height extends almost to heaven, and in these mountains there is a great noise and din, and they blast the mountain, intending to blast through it. And if anyone gives them iron or a knife or an axe, they give furs in return. There is also a road to these mountains that is impassable because of the many precipices, because of the deep snow and the forests, and therefore always inaccessible." By this wonder is to be understood quite simply a trade route, which the Syryans and Permians opened across the Ural into Ugria on the rivers Sosva and Vogulka. As for the reports cited about the Ugrians, nothing more is taken from them than that they were neighbours of the Pechora people and the Samoyeds. In 1187 they are already said, according to Lehrberg, to have been tributary to Novgorod, and although the Ugrians sometimes refused to pay the tribute and even slew the tribute-collectors, their land was nevertheless regarded as a tributary province of Novgorod. In a chronicle for the year 1264, Yugra is listed among the districts of Novgorod, and besides it ZVolok, Kolo (Kola), Tr (Ter), Perem (Perm), and Pechora. [Footnote: Suomi, Tidskrift i fosterländska ämnen, eighth year, Helsingfors, 1849, p. 23. — Lehrberg, Untersuchungen zur Erläuterung der ältern Geschichte Russlands, p. 60. — Suomi, op. cit., p. 67.]

Under Chinggis Khan's successors, Yugria too seems to have experienced the devastations of the Mongols. At least, Plano Carpini, who in 1246 travelled as papal envoy through Russia to the Mongol Great Khan, tells of an expedition that a part of Batu Khan's warrior hordes is said to have undertaken in 1242 through the land of the Mordvins, Bulgars, and Bashkirs against the Parossites and Samoyeds as far as the coasts of the Arctic Ocean. Lehrberg finds it probable that this expedition was in part also directed at Yugria. He assumes, however, that Yugria nevertheless continued to be a Novgorodian province, for when Batu set up his court camp in the land of Kipchak, on the lower Volga, both he himself and his successors exacted tribute from the Novgorodians, who in consequence kept their province untouched. But after the middle of the 14th century the Kipchak realm decayed, and now a Siberian kingdom formed, whose founder is called On or Onsom, who was probably a Nogai Turk of Muhammadan faith. He is said to have stayed in a fortified place named Kyzyl-tura, and this place is said to have been located at the spot where the rivers Irtysh and Ishim unite with each other. According to tradition, his realm comprised both Tatars and also Ostyaks and Voguls. Against him there rose a man named Ching or Chingty, whom Lehrberg takes for a Nogai commander under a khan of the Kipchak realm named Temir. Ching is said to have robbed Onsom not only of his realm but also of his life. Onsom's sons saved themselves by flight, and among them Taibuga is expressly named, who is said to have been pardoned by Ching and to have received a military force with which he made war on the Ob Ostyaks and Tatars and made them tributary. As a reward for his services, Taibuga received permission to set up a court of his own and to found a town, present-day Tyumen, which he is said to have named Chingidin in Ching's honour. He thereupon became khan of southern Yugria, and this realm maintained itself still under his son Khodzha. Under the latter's son Mar Khan it was conquered by a Kazan Tatar prince, who at the same time had Mar Khan treacherously killed and carried his son Obder away into captivity. One of Obder's sons, Machmet or Mamet, had, however, been saved and reconquered the realm of his fathers, but he no longer settled in Tyumen; instead, he laid out a fortress on the east bank of the Irtysh, not far from present-day Tobolsk. Tradition first named this fortress Koichlyk, later Isker, and also Sibir. After Mamet's death, Ivan Vasilyevich in 1499 sent his armies into Yugria, which, according to Lehrberg, made this land into a Russian province. In 1571 the Tatars tried here to form a new realm again, but this was of short duration, for already in 1580 the famous Russian Cossack Yermak appeared, drove out the Tatar khan Kuchum Khan, and conquered both Yugria and the whole of western Siberia. [Footnote: Lehrberg, Untersuchungen zur Erläuterung der ältern Geschichte Russlands, pp. 61–93.]

a) The Ostyaks. Like the Samoyeds, the Ostyaks too fall into a multitude of small clans, each of which forms in itself a small state, or rather a large family. Among the Ostyaks who have accepted Christianity, this separation has already ceased, for these are governed by Russian authorities and according to Russian laws. Only the Obdorsk Ostyaks still maintain the patriarchal institution, which keeps the people in peace and concord, esteems morality, and prevents crimes of many kinds. The power that in such a whole impels to virtue is love for the whole clan. [Footnote: The following ethnographic description of the Obdorsk Ostyaks has indeed already been printed in the Reiseerinnerungen, pp. 280–308, but was also communicated by Castrén at this place in his lectures and is therefore reprinted here as well.]

Each clan consists of a number of families that have a common origin and regard themselves as more or less related to one another. There are among the Ostyaks, and especially among the Samoyeds, such clans that consist of several hundreds, indeed even thousands, of individuals, among whom the majority can no longer prove their original relationship, but they nevertheless regard themselves as kinsmen, enter into no marital unions with one another, and consider it a duty to help one another. Ordinarily all the families belonging to one and the same clan also keep close together on their nomadic journeys, and the general custom commands that in such a clan complex the rich share his possessions with the poor. The Ostyaks are in general a very poor people and live mostly only from what the day brings. The help they can give their neighbour therefore properly consists only in sharing the catch of the day brotherly with one another. The most remarkable thing in this is that no one ever begs another for alms, but regards it as an unconditional right to lay hands, without any ceremony, on his neighbour's property. It is clear that in a society of individuals of such dispositions, discord will seldom appear. Meanwhile, each clan has its elder, whose duty it is to maintain order and concord in the clan. If two individuals of the same clan fall into dispute and cannot settle their matter amicably, it comes before the elder, who gives his decision on the spot without any juridical formalities. With this judgment the parties are ordinarily satisfied; in the opposite case they can also appeal to a higher instance, which is the prince. A multitude of clans that dwell near one another have since most ancient times recognized a common head, who bears the name of a prince — a dignity that was recognized by the Empress Catherine the Second, through a formal diploma, for the Ostyak princes in Obdorsk and Kunovat in the Berezov district. Each prince can decide in his district all lawsuits except those that according to old Russian law are punished with loss of life. The prince's foremost duty, however, is to maintain concord between the different clans and to settle such disputes as arise between individuals of different clans concerning pasture, fishing district, hunting ground, and so on. Subordinate to him are all the elders of the clans; he himself depends only on the Russian authorities, especially on the government administration and the district court. Both the dignity of the prince and that of the clan elder are hereditary and pass from father to son. If the son is a minor, the community appoints an uncle or some other close relative as his guardian. If there is no son, the nearest relative of the deceased is chosen as his successor. Neither the prince nor the other officials are paid any wage, but they are presented with voluntary gifts by their subordinates.

Besides kinship there is another bond of union between individuals of the same clan, and this bond is the common practice of religion. Each clan has since most ancient times had its own idols, which are often kept in a special yurt and honoured by the clan with sacrifices and other religious ceremonies. These "god-yurts" stand under the supervision of a spiritual man who is at the same time seer, priest, and physician and enjoys an almost divine esteem. Since the whole religious system of the Ostyaks consists in magic, their priests are pre-eminently seers or shamans. They are consulted in all doubtful cases both by the clan and by individuals, but the shaman answers no question himself directly; rather, he leaves it to the decision of the gods and thereupon announces their answer to the questioners.

These questions, however, cannot be laid before the highest, heavenly god, called Turm (Turum) by the Ostyaks, for he speaks to men only with the wrath-filled voice of thunder and of the storm wind. It is believed, to be sure, that Turm follows man everywhere on his tracks, that neither good nor evil in the world escapes him, and that he does not fail to allot to each his desert; nevertheless he is a being inaccessible to mortals and very terrible. No prayers reach him; rather, he directs the destinies of the world and of men according to the unalterable laws of justice. His favour cannot be won by any sacrifices, for before him nothing counts but man's own inner merit, and according to this he distributes his gifts, without regard to sacrifices and prayers. If therefore the Ostyak needs a higher assistance in one matter or another, he must turn to other, subordinate deities. These are represented in one way or another and form partly the common property of the clan, partly also they belong to individual families and individuals. The two kinds of idols are often not at all to be distinguished from one another; at least they are for the most part formed of wood, have a human shape, and represent partly male, partly female beings. These idols, however, have in the course of time been adorned more richly than the others. One sees them fitted out with red clothes, necklaces, and other ornaments. Their face is often covered with sheet iron, and the male images sometimes wear a sword at their side and a coat of mail. As I have already remarked, a clan gladly keeps its idols in a yurt, but for want of one, in a tent or in the open air on some remote forest hill. In general, the Ostyaks do not wish to expose their idols to the glances of strange men and have therefore built their holy yurts or temples in unvisited, remote districts — a precaution that is also necessary for the reason that in the temple precious offerings of money and furs are kept, whose theft their non-pagan neighbours, from their religious standpoint, would hardly regard as temple robbery. I do not know how general the yurt or tent temples may be among the Ostyaks, but certain it is that on my journey to Obdorsk I once quite unexpectedly came into the company of Ostyak gods, who stood erected under bushy larch trees. They were one and all naked and differed not in the least from the Sjadaei of the Samoyeds. The Ostyaks called them Jiljan, in distinction from all images of another kind, which were called by a common name Long, which corresponds to the Hohe of the Samoyeds. The Jiljan just mentioned were of very different size; by my eye, however, the largest seemed to be not more than 1½ ells high, while the smallest, by contrast, were scarcely half as high. In the same grove where the gods were set up, I also saw a numerous multitude of reindeer skins and antlers, hung on the tree-tops and arranged so that the gods could have them before their eyes. Not far from this place there stayed a poor Ostyak clan, which used the grove as its common sanctuary. Of the private and family gods of the Ostyaks, exactly the same holds as was earlier said by me about the Samoyeds. They consist partly in unusual stones and other strange objects, which are venerated in their natural shape, partly and pre-eminently in small wooden images with a human face and pointed head. Each family, indeed even individual persons, have one or more such images, which serve the Ostyak as guardian gods and follow him on all his wanderings. Like the Samoyeds, they are kept in a special sledge and are clothed with a stately Ostyak costume adorned with red ribbons and other ornaments. [Footnote: Reiseerinnerungen II, p. 199 ff.]

Often each of these idols has a special function. Some protect the reindeer herd, others procure a good catch, care for health, marital happiness, and so on. They are customarily set up, when need requires, in the tent, on the reindeer pastures, and at the hunting and fishing places. In this they are from time to time presented with sacrifices, which consist in smearing their lips with fish oil or blood and placing a vessel with fish or meat before them as food. Such individual sacrificial ceremonies can be performed by anyone, but when general sacrifices are to be offered to the gods and when their counsel is to be obtained either by the clan or by the individual, on all these occasions the priest or shaman is an indispensable person, for he alone is able to open the heart of the gods and speak with them. For the shaman, however, the magic drum is an extremely necessary article. An ordinary sound does not penetrate to the ears of the gods; rather, the conversation must be conducted by the shaman by means of song and drumbeat. The idol set up before the shaman also sometimes begins to speak, but this speech is of course heard only by the shaman. In order nevertheless to convince the credulous crowd that the god really lets a speech pass over his lips, the shaman customarily fastens a ribbon before him on the tip of an upright-standing stick, and when the ribbon, either by chance or by some contrivance of the shaman, comes into motion, everyone of course understands that the spirit of the god penetrates to the shaman in audible sounds. It goes without saying that such an occasion never passes without a sacrifice, which ordinarily consists in one or more reindeer. After they have been killed by the shaman, the skin and the antlers are hung on holy trees in honour of the gods, but the meat is consumed by the assembled crowd after it has paraded for a while before the face of the god. A part of the sacrificial meat always falls to the shaman.

Invoking the gods and reconciling them through sacrifices is almost the only divine service that occurs among the Ostyaks. Sometimes, however, different clans celebrate certain general festivals in honour of the gods. The most celebrated among these festivals is one that is held in autumn, when the nomadic Ostyaks return home with rich gifts from the tundra to their fishing brothers on the Ob. The festival is said to be celebrated in the individual years by different clans; however, not only the members of the individual clan take part in it, but Ostyaks from other clans also assemble at this festivity and bring some of their oldest idols with them, to greet the neighbouring gods and enjoy their hospitality. All the foreign gods are set up in the same yurt where the clan keeps its own images; but the clans that have no yurt for their gods erect for them on this occasion a spacious tent. The festival is always celebrated at night, and an eyewitness describes its course in the following manner: "The ceremony began at about 8 o'clock in the evening and lasted until 2 o'clock after midnight. At the beginning, children ran before the individual yurts to call the Ostyaks to divine service. They uttered unknown, wild sounds in doing so and behaved as if they had been frightened. Thereupon people gradually assembled in the yurt appointed for divine service. On entering it, each Ostyak turned three times before the idol and then sat down on the right side of the room, either in a side compartment or on the floor. Each conversed with his neighbour and occupied himself with what seemed good to him. The west side was partitioned off by a curtain, behind which some went, after they had, just like all the others, turned three times before the god. After all had assembled, the shaman made a noise with sabres and iron-shod spears, which had previously been brought into the yurt and laid on poles before the idol. Thereupon he gave to each of those present, with the exception of the women, who were likewise behind a curtain, a sabre and a spear, took himself a sabre in each hand, and placed himself with his back against the idol. The other Ostyaks, however, placed themselves with their weapons in rank and file along the room, and some stood arranged in the same way in the side compartments. Then all turned around three times at once, holding the sword stretched straight out before them all the while. The shaman struck his two sabres against each other, and now they all began at once, at his command, to call 'hai' in the most varied tones, while at the same time letting their bodies make a swaying movement from one side to the other. Sometimes this call followed after long pauses, sometimes again very often and rapidly one after another, and at each repetition of the 'hai' they bent alternately right and left; sometimes they lowered their sabres and spears toward the ground, sometimes they raised them up. The calls and the swaying movements of the Ostyaks lasted about an hour; the men thereby fell into an ever more violent ecstasy and finally came to such a point that I could not look upon their faces without horror, however engaging these had at first seemed to me. After they had screamed themselves weary, they all fell silent at once, stopped their swaying movements, turned again, as at the beginning, before the god, and gave their sabres and spears to the shaman, who collected them and laid them again in their former place. Of the Ostyaks, some sat down in the side compartments, others on the floor. Now the curtain that had hidden the women rose, the dombra was played, and both the men and the women began to dance. This dance was alternately wild and comic, often quite indecent, and lasted very long. Then some jugglers or comedians in various comic costumes appeared and performed scenes just like those that had occurred during the dance. Finally the shaman once more, as before, distributed sabres and spears. The Ostyaks moved with clattering for a while, cried out as before, then turned three times round and thrust the spear-points as often against the ground; thereupon they gave the weapons to the shaman and returned to their dwellings. In this description only one idol image occurs, and the festival is described as if it were celebrated by only a single family. In various other details too this account differs from the information I received on this point. Thus I have heard it said that the festival is celebrated one night after another, and that the weapon-dance just described is performed for the gods on the first night by the shaman alone, on the second by two Ostyaks, on the third by three, and so on in the same progression to the last night, when all present, even the women, have the right to show the gods the same honours. At this festival, according to the reports communicated to me, sacrifices also take place. The Ostyaks returning home from the tundra entertain the gods of their homeland with abundant meals. Reindeer are sacrificed, and the shaman brings to each of the gods his dish of the raw flesh, smears his lips and his face with blood, gives him water to drink, and entertains him to the best of his ability. After the gods, in the shaman's view, have eaten enough of the food, the dish is taken away and its contents are consumed by the Ostyaks themselves. What remains of the sacrificial meal falls to the shaman. Such common sacrificial ceremonies are said to be arranged on several other occasions as well: at the beginning of a general undertaking, before impending long journeys and wanderings, etc. If the fishing in the Ob is not productive, the Obdorsk Ostyaks are said sometimes to hang a stone round the neck of a reindeer and sink it as a sacrifice in the river.

Although one cannot fail to recognise in these sacrifices and festivals traces of a beginning religious cult, this cult is nevertheless of very subordinate significance. It is not a deeper religious need, but only self-interest, that constitutes the chief motive for the veneration of the gods. One sacrifices and shows them honour not for their own sake, not from devotion and reverence for their majesty and power, but with the intention of thereby bringing about the fulfilment of one's wishes and the satisfaction of one's needs. For everything one gives them, one always demands a return gift. The sacrifice is either earnest-money with which one takes the gods into one's service, or a wage for services already rendered. Not seldom the gods themselves determine beforehand the payment they demand for their services. The shaman is in this, as in every other respect, the interpreter of the gods. If the demands on the part of the gods are too high, the sorcerer seeks by stern words and threats to move them to moderate demands, which usually happens with good success. It is thus clear that in their idol images the Ostyaks venerate not any absolute powers, but only their own obedient, serviceable spirits. Only Turm, or the heavenly god, enjoys a higher esteem, although he forms no object for any cult. Of lesser significance, on the other hand, is the forest god Metung and the water god Kulj, of whom the latter in particular is described as an evil and pernicious deity. A kind of divine esteem is enjoyed among the Ostyaks, as among all other kindred peoples, by the bear, endowed with superhuman strength. Among the Obdorsk Ostyaks I have even seen some small bear images, cast in copper, which are venerated as divine beings. [Footnote: Travel memories, p. 264.] Tradition relates that such images were in old times brought from the Permians and Zyrians, who were likewise given to the bear cult. Furthermore, the Ostyaks are said also to show veneration to certain trees and holy places. If a cedar stands in the middle of a pine forest, both the cedar and the whole region round about are held holy. With holy reverence are also regarded such places where seven larch trees stand beside one another. At such a place one commonly meets one or more idol images and a quantity of reindeer hides, antlers, etc., hung on the tree tops in their honour.

With respect to the religion of the Ostyaks I must not pass over in silence the custom, usual among them as among the Samoyeds and many other peoples, of honouring the memory of the dead with sacrifices and other ceremonies. This mark of honour is founded on the generally widespread belief that the departed, although duly buried, nevertheless continues to have the same needs and to pursue the same occupations as in life. Therefore one lays partly in, partly beside his grave a sledge, a spear, a hearth, a pot, a knife, an axe, fire-making gear and other implements, with whose help he can procure food and prepare his meal. Both at the funeral itself and some years afterwards, the relatives sacrifice reindeer on his grave. If an older, more highly esteemed person dies, the nearest relatives at once make an image, which is kept in the tent of the deceased and enjoys the same honour that was shown to him in life. At every meal the image is set to the food, every evening it is undressed and put to bed, every morning dressed again, and it always takes the usual place of the deceased. The image is honoured in this way for three years and then lowered into the grave. During this time the body of the deceased seems already to have decayed, and with this immortality also comes to an end.

The Ostyaks, like the Samoyeds, regard the oath as an act of the highest religious significance. If any crime has been secretly committed against an Ostyak and he has some suspicion of the evildoer, he can summon the suspected person to take an oath. Among the Ostyaks too the oath sworn by the bear's snout counts as the most powerful. As among the Samoyeds, the accused cuts the bear's nose with a knife and says: "May the bear devour me if my oath is false." Swearing by the gods is also customary among the Ostyaks and is performed with the same ceremonies as among the Samoyeds. Such an oath is held very holy, and almost every Ostyak is convinced that perjury will inevitably be punished. If, therefore, the accused knows himself guilty of the crime charged, he does not willingly submit to the oath-taking, but prefers to confess his crime. Consequently a person who has taken the oath of purgation is held for all time to be entirely pure and blameless. But if anyone has been devoured by a bear, drowned, perished in the flames, or died by any other accident, one not seldom hears the conjecture expressed that the person in question must in life have sworn a false oath of purgation. No other oath than this is customary among the Ostyaks. Witnesses are never sworn, but one believes them on their word altogether, and all persons, except the insane, are fully valid as witnesses. Children may testify against their parents, sisters against sisters, spouses against one another. This bears witness to a strict sense of justice and to mutual trust.

In connexion with religion I will also say a few words about marriage, which among the Ostyaks is, however, more a social than a religious bond. As among the Samoyeds and other kindred tribal peoples, marriage is concluded on the bride's side by her father or nearest relative. The woman herself has in this, as in most other matters that concern her dearest interests, no voice at all. She is a servant in the strictest sense of the word. Yet that is not enough: she is at the same time regarded as an unclean being. For this reason she is almost separated from the other members of the family, every one of her movements is watched with the most painstaking exactness, every place where she has sat is purified by fumigation. In the feeling of the deepest humiliation the woman never dares to express a will of her own, but is accustomed in all things to submit with resignation to every caprice of the strong man. Thus she must also look on with calm courage as her heart [Footnote: The tax actually consists in two grey foxes for every male person; the whole tax, however, need not be delivered to the Crown in nothing but fox skins, but it is once for all fixed how many skins of each species of animal the individual tribes must deliver. If, then, one or the other skin of a certain species of animal should be lacking, it is the business of the princes and elders to replace the missing ones by other surplus ones.] is sold by the father, brother, or any other relative to the highest bidder. Her own wishes, if she dares to cherish any, never come into speech; one treats her like any other article of trade. One does not, indeed, offer her in the markets, but it is the highest bid that determines the fate of her future. The price for a young girl differs in different regions. In Obdorsk the daughter of a rich man is paid for with 50 to 100 reindeer; a poor man sells his child for 20 to 25 reindeer. That the daughters of the rich stand at a higher price than those of the poor is said to be because the future husband hopes in the future to receive help and assistance from his father-in-law, not to mention the larger outfit that at once falls to the daughter. It is with a dear wife as with every other dear ware: in the long run it brings its owner a greater profit than something bought at a cheap price. Meanwhile the bride-price is not regarded as an advance that one is to get replaced in the future, but as a real payment for a ware received. Nothing, in the Ostyaks' idea, is more just than that the father or guardian of the girl should be considered with such a payment. The daughters are usually given away at the age when they are capable of work, and can only be handed over to an entirely strange hand. But how can an unknown stranger claim that a nurtured girl, who henceforth in his service is a slave and works her whole life long, should be given to him? The father could keep his daughter with him at home, and there she would in riper years repay many times the costs she caused him in childhood. If, however, he willingly gives up his lawful property, it is surely fair that the taker, the future husband, should reward his trouble and costs spent on the daughter by a proper bride-price. The bride-price is, in a word, compensation for the care, maintenance, and upbringing of the daughter during her tender youth. This bride-price can, according to agreement previously made, be paid both before and after the wedding. If the payment has already taken place earlier and the bride or bridegroom dies before they have entered into the union, the bride-money is returned. The bridegroom, however, on the death of the bride, is said to have the right to demand another daughter for his bride-money, if there is such a one.

Among the Ostyaks polygamy is allowed, but on account of the high bride-price it is said now to occur more seldom. During my stay in Obdorsk only one single man was named to me who had three wives, and the number of those provided with two was not much larger. In polygamy the remarkable custom prevails that a man can at the same time marry several sisters; misgivings are, however, entertained against such a union, since experience has shown that sisters ordinarily do not get on together in one and the same marriage. Among the other marriage laws it may be mentioned that two brothers may not marry two sisters, even if these have different mothers. A younger brother is obliged to marry the widow of the elder. If husband or wife has died, the surviving party cannot enter into a new marriage before the lapse of at least one year after the death. Son and daughter are obliged to abstain from [illegible] for two years after the death of father or mother.

The low position which the female sex occupies among the Ostyaks and other savages of Siberia shows itself, among other things, also in this, that a woman never inherits. Consequently the husband also inherits nothing with his wife, and likewise the widow receives no part of the property after the death of her husband. The whole property of the deceased is divided in equal parts among the sons, who are obliged to maintain the mother, sisters, and other female members of the family. If the sons at the father's death are minors, they are taken into care, together with the female individuals of the family, by the nearest relatives, for which these receive just as large a part of the property as each of the sons. If the deceased has left no son behind, the property is divided by voluntary agreement among his nearer or more distant relatives, whose duty it also is to care for the maintenance of the widow and daughters.

According to their manner of life the Obdorsk Ostyaks fall into two classes: fishermen and reindeer owners. The former keep to rivers, especially to the Ob and Narym; the latter nomadise at least a part of the year on the tundras and live there in constant contact with the Samoyeds. The number of Ostyaks who occupy themselves exclusively with reindeer breeding is relatively very small and is said to decrease yearly through assimilation with the powerful Samoyed tribe. This assimilation has already advanced so far that the reindeer Ostyaks have appropriated not only the religion, customs, and manner of life of the Samoyeds, but often know their language even better than their own. If one wishes, therefore, to observe the Ostyaks in their peculiar life, one must direct one's attention to those who occupy themselves with fishing. These too show a difference in their manner of life, since some occupy themselves only with fishing, others, however, at the same time also with reindeer breeding. Among these last-named, they must at least for the summer divide into two households, of which the one stays at its fishery, the other, however, follows the reindeer on their wanderings. It is the nature of the reindeer to draw toward the sea coast in the warmer season, since with its thick pelt it needs a cooler atmosphere and besides is here less tormented by the gnats, which are a murderous plague for the reindeer during the moulting time. While the Ostyak stays with his reindeer on the coast of the Arctic Ocean, he there, like the Russians and Samoyeds, carries on sea-fishing, kills seals, walruses, white bears, etc. Of the Ostyaks, however, only very few betake themselves to the sea itself. Most are said to stay during the hottest time on the northernmost tundras; as soon, however, as the air has cooled and the gnats have disappeared, they betake themselves into the forest region east of the Ural, where they hunt foxes. At the first arrival of winter the Ostyaks and Samoyeds nomadising at the sea also begin to withdraw into the forest region, chiefly to seek there for themselves and their reindeer a protection against the terrible storms. This journey proceeds with the greatest leisureliness; short day's journeys are made, one often rests a day or two at the same place and busily occupies oneself with the chase. Every family keeps close together and travels either with its prince or eldest at the head. Toward the end of December all these nomadising bands meet at the fair in Obdorsk. By official duty especially all princes and elders must be present there, since it is incumbent on them that everyone in his tribe and family at this opportunity collect the tax and see to it that all the kinds of animal skins fixed by the Crown come in in full number. [Footnote: Many Russians carry on fishing themselves in the Ob and with much better success than the Ostyaks, since they can dispose of larger implements and more hands than the poor natives.] From the Obdorsk market all the natives withdraw again into the forest region and there pass the greater part of the cold season. The Samoyeds and Ostyaks who carry on reindeer breeding betake themselves already early in spring to the sea coast, but the Ostyaks who have a part of their family at the fishing places do not hurry with their departure, which is also less necessary for them, since they are not accustomed to visit the most distant coasts of the Arctic Ocean. During their stay in the forest region the last-named encamp with their reindeer at their fixed dwellings or so-called yurts, which are entirely lacking to the Samoyeds and to the perpetually nomadising Ostyaks.

It is clear that the Ostyaks who can every year stay a long time at one and the same place can have only a small number of reindeer, because large herds require widely extended pastures and allow no stationary manner of life. Yet however insignificant these reindeer herds of the Ostyaks may be, their possession is nevertheless regarded as a great wealth, inasmuch as the reindeer gives the Ostyak not only food and clothing, but also renders him great service on his hunting journeys and other travels. Those Ostyaks who are without reindeer must on their journeys make use of dogs, which, instead of giving their owner food, must rather be kept by him at not small cost, without being able to replace the reindeer as a beast of burden. For these Ostyaks fishing is the most important and almost the only means of sustaining existence.

Experience shows almost everywhere in the polar region that such tribes as occupy themselves exclusively with fishing are unable to work themselves up to any prosperity, but ordinarily live in great poverty, which not seldom is connected with drunkenness, drink, and former dissolute life. The causes of this I regard for the most part as accidental. Partly they rest on the circumstance that they do not properly know how to make use of the rich sources which nature has created for the maintenance of man; partly also on the moral weakness of the wild tribes when it is a question of resisting the temptation of the strong drinks offered them by the foreign colonists. In these circumstances lies the principal reason, at least, of the poverty which now prevails among the fishing Ostyaks. Besides, the selfish and dishonest trade of the colonists is also no small obstacle to the rise of prosperity. They have introduced a pernicious credit system and have understood how to force upon the Ostyaks luxury articles of all kinds, which they have taxed, almost without the knowledge of the buyers, at an arbitrary price. Hereby the debt of the Ostyaks has gradually so increased that it can now never be completely extinguished. Rather it is yearly enlarged, since the number of needs continually increases without industry and caution increasing in essential measure. What the Ostyak at least for the present cannot dispense with is bread-meal, which is offered him by the merchants. Unable to pay for the wares at once, since he already stands from earlier times in the debt-book, he is obliged to bind himself to deliver his fish to the creditor in the next year. But if he is in this way entirely in the hands of the merchant, the latter taxes both his own ware and that of the Ostyak as seems good to him. This trade, most pernicious both for the Ostyaks and for the other natives of Siberia, the government has sought to check partly by ordinances, partly by the erection of its own meal magazines; the evil has, however, unfortunately already struck too deep roots to be eradicated so soon. All the fish which the Ostyaks sell to the traders in the manner indicated are caught in summer. During this whole time speculators from Obdorsk, Berezov, and Tobolsk travel with their boats on the Ob, bring the Ostyaks' catch to themselves, and themselves salt the fish received, which they keep till further notice in their magazines built on the banks of the river. At the beginning of autumn they all sail back to their destination and now, after their boats laden with meal have been emptied, take with them their fish stores deposited on the outward journey in the magazine. Meanwhile the Ostyaks still continue their summer fishing. A part of the fish now caught is put into small inland lakes or ponds, from where in autumn they are again fetched out with nets and set out to freeze. At the arrival of winter Russians and Zyrians again present themselves to buy up the frozen fish, a part of which is also brought by the Ostyaks themselves to market at Obdorsk. Fishing continues also in winter, but all fish then caught have little value in trade and are seldom obtained in such quantity that the catch suffices for the daily need. The usual kinds of fish in the Ob are: 1) the pike, the perch, the ruff, the roach, which kinds stay both in summer and winter in the Ob; 2) the sturgeon (Russian Ossetr), the herring, the burbot, and various kinds of salmon, named by the Russians Mukun, Njelma, Syrok, Pydshan — all such fish as at the beginning of June, just after the breaking up of the ice, go up-stream and gradually in the course of winter return into the sea. It is principally the sturgeon and the various kinds of salmon that stand high in price; the other fish the Ostyak uses mostly for his own food and that of the dogs. His summer catch the Ostyak carries on mostly with nets, lying at a sandy shore suitable for the net-draw (Russian Pesok). A common fishing implement in summer is also a kind of weel made of hemp; they are stuck on poles or beams which one lays across small arms of the river. One fishes also with the rod, and when the nights become darker one also spears eels. As a fishing implement one uses in summer also a sack-shaped net, which with the help of a stone laid in it is sunk to the river bottom. The net is tied to a rope, whose other end the fisherman fastens to his boat, with which he travels downstream. When the fisherman draws this sack up, he easily notices whether a prey has strayed into it, which, with regard to the abundance of fish in the river, must happen often enough. In winter the commonest and least troublesome fishing consists in this, that one strikes a beam across a small arm of the river and fastens to it a quantity of small fish-weels, made of fine larch shoots. Winter fishing is also carried on with nets, rods, etc.

The dress of the Obdorsk Ostyaks agrees, if I except the custom borrowed from the neighbouring Tatars of the women veiling themselves, so exactly with the dress of the Samoyeds that in a representation kept so general as this it cannot form the object of a special investigation. As regards the manner of dwelling, the nomadising Ostyaks build their tents in entirely the same way as their Samoyed neighbours. The so-called yurts inhabited by the fishing Ostyaks consist ordinarily in small, very low huts, which are provided with an open hearth made of clay (tschuwal) in one corner of the room. As a substitute for windows serves a hole, either in the wall or in the roof, which hole in winter is covered with a piece of ice. In better yurts the room is along one or more walls covered with plaited rush mats, which form the actual place of sojourn of the family and are especially used as sleeping places. Sometimes there is before the entrance into the yurt a small porch, which is used for keeping articles of clothing and household gear. Of such a nature are the ordinary winter yurts. Besides these, many families have special summer yurts, which are of still more imperfect nature, since they have neither floor nor hearth. The window consists of burbot skin. The fire burns in the middle of the yurt and the smoke goes through a hole in the roof up into the air. Here and there one also finds Ostyak reindeer families in turf-covered yurts, which are partly situated under the surface of the earth.

Of the appearance and character of the Ostyaks the following description occurs in Pallas: "In figure they are for the most part of middle height and small, weak in strength and especially thin and lean in the legs. Their faces are almost throughout unpleasant, pale and smooth, yet without any characteristic formation. The commonly reddish hair falling into the light, which hangs without order round the men's heads, disfigures them still more. Among the grown womenfolk, especially in riper age, one finds few pleasant faces. In character they are timid, superstitious, and simple, otherwise fairly good-hearted; in their laborious and bad manner of life industrious from youth up, but beyond necessity inclined to nothing but idleness, especially the male sex, and in their whole household quite slovenly and uncleanly." At this description I must, as regards appearance first, make the remark that I have indeed seen very many Ostyaks with light complexion and blond hair; in the majority, however, the skin colour was dark and the hair pitch-black, as with the Samoyeds, and this observation has brought me to the thought that the blond Ostyaks are perhaps descendants of the Zyrians who betook themselves to Siberia at the time of the conversion by St. Stephen. Moreover, the Ostyaks certainly do not belong to the most marked peoples of Siberia, for they have not the flat nose, the narrow eyes, and the unnaturally broad cheek-bones which are found among the Mongols and Tunguses, but approach more the Finnic, Samoyed, and Turkish tribes. A sharply developed type they do not, however, seem to have, which is perhaps the consequence of a mixture with foreign tribes that has taken place. Timidity, superstition, simplicity, and good nature are qualities which one finds again in all the wild peoples of Siberia. A quality overlooked by Pallas, which distinguishes the Ostyaks in an advantageous way, is their readiness to serve and their honest disposition. The Ostyak does not leave his friend in need; he does not shut his door to the one who knocks; what he possesses he gladly shares; the rich regards it as his duty to help the poor. Theft almost never occurs; the house always stands unlocked; property is often left in the middle of the tundra. The Ostyaks cherish no suspicion against one another, but live together like brothers. The uncleanliness laid to the Ostyaks' charge by Pallas is a quality common to all fishing peoples and is met with in just as high a degree on the coasts of New [illegible] as on the banks of the Ob. Many of the fisherman's occupations are in and for themselves less cleanly; the dwellings erected at the fishery, ordinarily provisional, are all too narrow to be able to hide all the torn, half-rotten articles of clothing which the fisherman needs in his troublesome trade. The smoke does its part to increase the uncleanliness in smell, and outside there gathers from the gutted fish an uncleanliness which is not only disgusting to look at, but also, after putrefaction has set in, spreads pestilential vapours about it. Often the fisherman is also hindered by his all too busy and pressing work from devoting the necessary care to the care of his person and his house, and uncleanliness gradually becomes habit. That it is among the Ostyaks no characteristic national trait, but a consequence of the manner of life itself, clearly follows from this, that it comes to the fore only in the fisherman, not, however, in the nomad and reindeer owner. It belongs to the advantages of the nomad life, at least in the polar regions, that no especially contaminating occupations occur in it. The incessant wandering from one place to another also brings with it the advantage that uncleanliness can accumulate neither within nor without the tent. What might settle on the clothes from the stove-hearth and the sooty pot is easily blown away by the winds of the tundra and is also in any case little noticeable on the rough reindeer clothes. b) Voguls.

The difference between Ostyaks and Voguls is on the whole insignificant, although the appearance of the Voguls approaches more the appearance of the Mongols, or rather of the Kalmyks. Their face is namely round, the hair long and black, the growth of beard weak, the skin colour dark, etc. In consequence of this, and since Rask also, on philological grounds, regarded them as near relatives of the Mongols, the question obtrudes itself how far the Voguls are mixed with the Mongols, or whether they perhaps form a transitional link between the Mongolian and Finnic family — a point which, however, for want of studies in both languages, we do not at present venture to answer. [Footnote: Rask, Samlede Afhandlinger. First Part. Copenhagen 1834. P. 31.]

As has already been said (p. 99), Colonel Schönström relates with respect to the older dwellings of the Voguls that among them in the year 1741 a tradition lived on, according to which they originally are said to have dwelt on the Dvina and on the Yug — an opinion which, however, by no means seems acceptable, although some historians also have assented to it, for no traces of the Voguls are found on the Dvina, and these migrations of peoples took place in general from east to west. [Footnote: Tatishchev, History of Russia. Vol. II. Moscow 1773. P. 424.] The Voguls themselves regard themselves as one people with the Ostyaks and also name themselves with a common name, Mansi. The Zyrians, however, name both peoples Jögrajas.

At present the Voguls live as hunters on the heights of the northern Ural, while the fishing Ostyaks occupy the plains. From the Ural the Voguls extend eastward to the Irtysh, to the Tavda and Tura, westward, however, to the Kama in the governments of Perm and Tobolsk. In the north they go to the Sosva and in the south to the Kosva and Chusovaya. The greatest part of them is settled on the Konda.

The Voguls are half nomadising, half settled. The winter they pass, like the Lapps, in miserable huts; the summer, autumn, and winter, however, they wander about and give themselves to hunting, namely to sable-catching. Those who confess Christianity have clergy and churches, yet cling partly to their former nature-religion, which is identical with the nature-religion of the Ostyaks. Their number amounts, the Voguls in Perm and Tobolsk included, according to an approximate calculation, to about 100,000 persons, which sum, however, is likely to be estimated too high. [Footnote: Müller, The Ugric Tribal Stock. First Division. P. 165.]



The Hungarians and Their Kin

It has already been remarked above that the Hungarians form a branch of the Ugric stock, to which one reckons besides the Ugric Ostyaks and Voguls. Like their tribal relatives they were formerly dwelling at the Ural. From here they moved at the incursion of the Avars to the Danube and henceforth formed a part of the Bulgarian realm. When this realm was later overthrown by the Khazars, the Hungarians became the vassals of these latter. The Khazar realm was, as is known, destroyed by the Pechenegs and Uzes, whereupon the Hungarians betook themselves to flight. They divided into two hordes. The one moved along the western coast of the Caspian Sea to Persia and has there entirely disappeared. The other fled under the leadership of Lebed to the so-called Atel-Kuzu, which seems to have been a part of present Moldavia and the Ukraine. Here they carried on successful wars against their neighbours and acquired such a name that the Emperor Leo the Wise called them in as allies against the Bulgarians, who were disturbing the Eastern Roman Empire. Under the leadership of the well-known Arpad the Hungarians defeated the Bulgarian prince Simeon in a bloody engagement. Hereby the fame of their bravery grew more and more, and the emperor of the Western realm, Arnulf, also in the year 892 sought their assistance against the Moravian Slavs. The Hungarians accepted this invitation with joy, armed great bands, and moved into distant lands. The Bulgarians, however, had not yet forgotten the defeat inflicted on them by the Hungarians. Desire for revenge now tempted them to use the opportunity and attack the weakly defended land of the Hungarians. They allied themselves with the Pechenegs, fell into Atel-Kuzu, devastated the land, and took a great part of it into possession. The beaten armies fled to the frontier of present Transylvania, and descendants of those Hungarians are said still to stay there under the name of Szeklers. At the news of this misfortune Arpad's bands withdrew from Moravia and tried to reconquer their land. After, however, they had lost several engagements, they found themselves compelled to desist from their former possessions and resolved to settle in Pannonia, of whose character they had presumably during the Moravian campaign obtained nearer knowledge.

The Hungarians at that time formed seven tribes independent of one another, which bound themselves by a solemn oath to be faithful to one another and chose Almos as their leader. The seven tribes consisted in all of 40,000 families, in which there were 250,000 men capable of bearing arms. The whole population was estimated at not more than about a million individuals. On the way, however, their number increased, for when they advanced into the region of Kiev they defeated a kindred tribal people, the Rumanians or Polovtsians, who offered themselves to the Hungarians as companions and swore an oath of fidelity to Almos. Thereupon Almos ascended the mountains unhindered and arrived with his people happily in present Hungary. Enfeebled by age, Almos then handed over his princely dignity to his son Arpad and entrusted to him the important work of the conquest of Hungary. This land was at that time inhabited by various tribes, namely Slavs, Wallachians, Bulgarians, Germans, and Italians, who all had their particular princes. In the course of five years Arpad succeeded in defeating all these peoples and making himself master of the land.

The later fates of the Hungarians are too well known to be mentioned here. With respect to their early period I must, however, adduce a hypothesis which is not without interest. [Footnote: Klaproth, Asia polyglotta, p. 189. — Tableaux historiques de l'Asie, pp. 274 and 275. — Neumann, The Peoples of Southern Russia, p. 120.] [Footnote: Fischer, Siberian History. First Part. Introduction, p. 127 ff.] At the southern Ural there at present stays a Tatar, or rather Turkish, people bearing the name of Bashkirs. This people was by older travellers, e.g. Ruysbroeck and Plano Carpini, named Baschart or Pascatir, and it is expressly said that their language was one with the language of the Hungarians. Therefore the land of the Bashkirs was also by the named travellers called Great Hungary. Fischer even conjectures that the designation of the Hungarians, Madshar, arose from Baschart or Bashkir. It is in fact very probable that the Bashkirs are descendants of the Hungarians, and this hypothesis is still more confirmed by the fact that the other tribal relatives of the Hungarians, the above-mentioned Ugric peoples, inhabit the same regions. Perhaps also the so-called Meshcheryaks, who stay in the Ural regions, are likewise of Hungarian origin.



The Volga Peoples

a) Cheremis (Mari).

The name of the Cheremis occurs, to my knowledge, first in Nestor, but both his reports and those of the other Russian chroniclers about this people are very scanty and unsatisfying. One has also no other sources from which one could gain any knowledge about the earlier fates of the Cheremis. If, however, one takes into consideration that they, as far back as memory goes, have lived in the centre of the Bulgarian realm, it is very probable that they earlier formed a constituent part of this great and famous realm. After the destruction of the Bulgarian realm by the Mongols the Cheremis came under the rule of Tatar khans, who had their seat in Kazan. At this time they are often named in Russian history. As subjects of the Tatars they always made common cause with these, their lords, and fought with great stubbornness against the Russians; indeed, even after the fall of the Khanate of Kazan the Cheremis are said to have persisted in their bitterness against the new conquerors and to have sought to hinder them in every way from consolidating their rule. They were at that time an exceedingly wild, cruel, and rapacious people. They lived as nomads and roamed in the deep forest regions bounded by the Volga and Vyatka. Herberstein describes them as excellent bowmen. According to their own traditions the Cheremis, like the Altaic peoples, in former times have had their own tribal princes and have otherwise led approximately the same manner of life as the Ugric peoples. [Footnote: Müller, The Ugric Tribal Stock. Second Division. Pp. 462–468.] Although subjected for a long time to the rule of the Tatars, they nevertheless did not adopt Islam, but retained their own shaman cult, which even now has not entirely disappeared. Since the middle of the last century the greater part of the Cheremis have indeed adopted Christianity, but many are still to this day heathens. The nomad life they gave up long ago and are now held to be industrious agriculturists. They dwell together in villages, which ordinarily consist of only few, at most of 20 to 30 farms. The number of the Cheremis at present amounts to about 200,000 heads. A great part of them is settled in the Kazan government and stays mostly on the western, or the bank of the Volga named by the Russians lugovaya, i.e. meadow side; on the right, or mountain side, there are relatively only few individuals of this tribe. Northward the territory of the Cheremis extends along the rivers Kama and Vyatka and takes in the southern parts of the governments of Perm and Vyatka. In the south they are met with in the governments of Kazan and Orenburg.

Their usual designation, Cheremis, is said to have been laid upon them by the Mordvins and denotes, according to Shchekatov, in the Mordvin language "the Eastern ones." [Footnote: Shchekatov, Geographical Dictionary of the Russian State. Part VII. Moscow 1809. P. 63.] They themselves call themselves Mari, which means man. I have already remarked earlier that mara is the Persian mard, from which later mar and mara arose. To the same stem one can also trace Merja, a name which Nestor allots to a Finnic people that is said to have dwelt west of the Cheremis, in the region of old Rostow. The same writer also mentions a now vanished Finnic people Muroma, which dwelt west of the Mordvins, in the region of the town still now called Murom. Without doubt Muroma is a compound word, in which mur recalls the Zyrian word mort. From the same origin is also the first part mara in the name Mordvins. As already these designations indicate, all these tribes have stood in a closer relation to one another than is now the case. [Footnote: Travel Reports and Letters, pp. 15–17.] One can besides also from linguistic comparisons draw the conclusion that both the Bulgarian and the Permian peoples join most closely to one another. The general difference of these languages consists in this, that the Bulgarian languages have borrowed foreign elements from Tatar, while the whole Permian language class has been more exposed to a Slavic influence. Such influence also betrays itself in the appearance of the named peoples.

b) Mordvins.

We have also reckoned the Mordvins to the Bulgarian or Volga peoples; it is, however, uncertain how far they have been subject to the Bulgarian realm itself. The Gothic writer Jornandes, who first mentions them under the name Mordens, seems to have reckoned them to the realm of the Gothic leader Hermanaric. In the 10th century the land Mordia is mentioned by the Byzantine emperor Constantine Porphyrogenitus; he knows of it, however, only that it was ten days' journeys distant from Patzinacia and one day's journey from Russia. Nestor likewise mentions Mordva, which he reckons to the Finnic peoples, and in many medieval writers the Mordvins are mentioned; from them, however, only few historical reports are to be gathered. As one of the most important data it deserves to be remarked that a Muscovite prince, Yaroslav Svyatoslavich, in the year 1104 attacked them with armed force but was beaten back with loss. The successors of this prince, however, did not give up their hopes of the fruitful Mordvin land, but seem often to have repeated their attacks on this territory. They are also said to have succeeded in making various Mordvin tribes tributary, as especially under Prince Yuri II Vsevolodovich; but soon thereafter came the Mongols and brought both Russians and Mordvins under their rule. When the rule of the Mongols in Russia was at an end, the Mordvins again appeared in battle against the Russians in alliance with the Tatars and their tribal relatives, the Cheremis, until at last Russian rule on the Volga became established.

The Mordvins divide into two tribes: Mokshans and Erzyans. The Mokshans dwell to the east, chiefly on the Sura and Moksha; the Erzyans stay more to the west, on the Oka. These tribes are met with in the governments of Vyatka, Kazan, Nizhny Novgorod, Penza, Saratov, Tambov, and Simbirsk. These two tribes are already mentioned by Rubruquis under the name Moxel and Merdas or Merduas. Herberstein knows them only under the name Mordva, and he also reports of them that they were good bowmen, but distinguished themselves from the Cheremis in that their dwellings were more stationary. The fruitful land they inhabited early caused them to give up their nomadising manner of life and to lay themselves to agriculture and cattle-breeding. Pallas describes them as especially industrious agriculturists and remarks that in this they almost surpass the Russians. They are also said to occupy themselves with bee-keeping, like their neighbours, the Bashkirs. Of their old customs they have now retained little or nothing. Pallas in his time still found some heathens among the Mordvins; according to newer reports, however, they are said to have adopted Christianity, which has been preached to them since the times of the Empress Anna. The whole number of the Mordvins is given by Schubert as 92,000, by Köppen, however, as 388,111 souls. [Footnote: Müller, The Ugric Tribal Stock. Second Division. Pp. 468–474.] [Footnote: Schubert, Handbook of the General Political Science of Europe. Vol. I, Part I. Königsberg 1835. P. 156.] [Footnote: Köppen, Russia's Total Population 1838. St. Petersburg 1843. P. 214.]



The Permian Peoples

Permians, Zyrians (Komi), and Votyaks (Udmurts).

I have in the preceding often had opportunity to speak of the Bulgarians and their mighty realm, which was founded on the Volga. It has been mentioned by me that at least a part of the Bulgarians were Finns, although the ruling people perhaps consisted of Turks. Almost the same name as the Bulgarians have also their nearest neighbours, the Permians, acquired in history. Their land was in the Scandinavian sagas very celebrated under the name Bjarmaland. A part, however, of Permia or Bjarmaland, which the Scandinavian viking voyagers visited, was not inhabited by the Permian stock, but its inhabitants were Finns, the Savolotsheskaya Chud of the Russian chronicles. The actual tribal seat of the Permians has been both in older and in newer times the river territory of the Kama, and they therefore also commonly call themselves Komy-mort, Kama people. Their northern neighbours are the so-called Zyrians, who are not found specially named in Nestor and other older writers, but are included under the common name Permians. They are, both in language and appearance, not different from the Permians and thus form only a branch of the same people. The Zyrians also call themselves Komy-mort or Komi-jas, Komi woityr, which not only proves their identity with the Permians, but also shows that their earlier dwellings, like those of the Permians, were situated on the Kama river. At present they stay mostly on the upper Vychegda, on the Sysola, Vashka, Izhma, Pishma, Tsylma, Pechora, etc. The number both of the Permians and of the Zyrians is now very small. The former are given at about 13,000 male souls, and the latter at approximately 30,000. In the preceding (p. 134) I remarked that the Slavic influence has made itself felt among them. They are also of all still existing Finnic tribes the most Russified and will probably within a short time be completely assimilated with the Slavic population.

The third branch of the Permian stock is formed, as has already been remarked, by the Votyaks, who call themselves Udy or Udmurt. They dwell for the greater part on the upper Kama and on the river Vyatka in the government of Vyatka. A small number of this people also exists in the governments of Kazan and Orenburg. According to their own traditions their tribal chiefs formerly stayed on the Kazanka, in the region of Arskoi Prigorod, and here possessed a fortress, but were later pressed by the Tatars into their present dwellings. The greatest part of the Votyaks is said at present to stay in the Glazov district of the above-named government of Vyatka. They are, like their tribal relatives, the Permians and Zyrians, industrious agriculturists. Their number is likely to amount to about 200,000 souls, among whom there is still said to be a number of heathens. [Footnote: Müller, op. cit., pp. 393–400.]

The custom of reckoning the three peoples, Permians, Zyrians, and Votyaks, to the Permian stock is founded partly on the intimate agreement which obtains between the languages of these peoples, partly also on the nearness of their dwellings. If the matter is considered from a historical standpoint, the name Permians or Bjarmians has no such definite significance. In the Scandinavian sagas, as I already remarked, there is also reckoned to the inhabitants of Bjarmaland the so-called Savolotsheskaya Chud of the Russian chronicles, which people was of Finnic origin. It was pre-eminently just this people that was named Bjarmians by the Northmen. In the Russian chronicles, on the other hand, the name Permians seems to have been allotted only to the present Permians and to the Zyrians, tribal relatives of theirs, which latter, as already remarked, do not occur under their name in older Russian documents.

Strahlenberg indeed reckons to the inhabitants of Great Permia also Samoyeds, Ugric peoples, Pertasses, Lapp Karelians, etc.; this, however, probably rests on an error, for in the Russian chronicle on which he seems to have relied it is said for the year 1396: "And these are the names of those who dwell within the Permian landscape and in the surrounding regions and places and speak another language: Yugrians, Vissugrians (presumably Zyrians), Vychegdaers (Zyrians of Vychegda), Penegers, Jugers (Zyrians on the Yug), Zyrians, Glians or Ganganers, Vyatkans (inhabitants of the Vyatka, i.e. Votyaks), Lapps, Karelians, Yugrians, Pechorans, Voguls, Samoyeds, Petrases or Pertoses, Purtases, Great Permians, Hamdians, Chusovayans." The chronicler continues: "The first river, Wym, falls into the Vychegda; the second river, Vychegda, which surrounds the whole Permian land, flows northward and falls into the Dvina between Ust-Yug 40 versts, and the third river, Vyatka, flows to another region of Perm and falls into the Kama river; but this Kama river surrounds the whole Permian land, and on this river dwell many heathens, and it flows southward into Tatar land and falls into the Volga 60 versts below Kazan." The Permian land is accordingly at this place in the chronicle in fact placed within the boundaries of the Kama and Vychegda, and I do not believe that the coast of the White Sea was ever reckoned by the Russians to Permia. That, however, the Northmen used the name of the Permians also for the designation of other tribes seems to prove that at that time they were far and wide known. This fame they are likely to have acquired chiefly through the extensive trade which they seem to have carried on in older times. [Footnote: Strahlenberg, The North and Eastern Part of Europe and Asia, p. 182.] [Footnote: Suomi, 8th annual volume, p. 121 ff.]

I have already above (p. 104) mentioned that the Permians in the year 1006 opened a trade route to Yugria. This way went over the Ural, along the Sosva and Vogulka. Besides there were from of old two other trade routes, which the Permians or their tribal relatives, the Zyrians, had laid out and which for just this reason are named by the Ostyaks Zyrian ways. More important than the Ugric trade, however, was another, which was carried on with the Orient. As is known, a trade route formerly went from the Caspian Sea along the Volga, Kama, Dvina, and Pechora to the Arctic Ocean. For this trade there were three special staple places, namely Bolgari on the Volga, Cherdyn on the Kolva, a tributary of the Kama, and Kholmogory on the Dvina. To Bolgari trade goods came also directly from Persia, from Bukhara, Armenia, Arabia, and, in the view of some, even from India. A part of these goods went afterwards, as I already remarked, northward to the Permians, who exchanged them for furs, which they fetched for themselves as far as from [illegible]. I leave it undecided whether the Permians received their goods in Bolgari or Cherdyn; it is, however, probable that they thereupon brought them along the rivers as far as Kholmogory, where the Scandinavian vikings made the acquaintance of the Permians.

