This dependence also continued at the time when Genghis Khan succeeded his father in the government. He subjected, as is well known, both the people of the Khitan and all the other Tatar stocks, but to distinguish them from the rest he called his own stock by the honorific name “Mongol,” or rather “Kökö Mongol,” that is, Blue, Black Mongols. Formerly this people, Sanang Setsen reports, was called Bede, but after a heavenly sign of wonder he resolved to exchange this name and on that occasion expressed, according to the same writer, the following words: “This people Bede, which, brave and defiant, notwithstanding my sufferings and dangers, bravely joined me, which with equanimity offered its brow to joy and sorrow and increased my forces — I will that this people Bede, like a noble crystal, which to the goal of my striving in every danger proved the greatest loyalty, shall bear the name Kökö Mongol, and shall be the most exalted of all that moves upon earth.” In the sense of Genghis Khan this wish has also without doubt been fulfilled, for a more feared name than the Mongolian there has certainly not been in the world. What the hosts of Genghis Khan accomplished both in Europe and Asia is so well known that we do not need to dwell upon it, but note only in passing that the Mongols already in his lifetime subjected the whole of central High Asia (Manchuria, Mongolia, and Tartary), in 1215 destroyed Yenking or the so-called Peking, conquered northern China, and then extended their conquests over Turkestan as far as the banks of the Dnieper. Shortly before his death, which fell in the year 1227, he divided his conquered great empire among his four sons, of whom Oktai was appointed Great Khan. The sons continued the father's work, conquered in Asia all of China, overthrew the Caliphate in Baghdad, and made the Seljuk princes tributary. In Europe the conquests were completed under Mangu and Batu Khan. Moscow and the greater part of Russia were subjected; Poland, Silesia, Moravia, and Hungary were plundered and devastated, and all Europe trembled before these wild hordes, which no power was able to resist. In the year 1243 Oktai at last died, and in consequence internal disputes arose, which caused the Mongol armies to return out of Europe into their own country. From this time the Mongol empire grew no more, but it had already received a greater extent than any empire of the world has had earlier or later. It stretched from the Chinese Sea to the borders of Poland, from India deep into Siberia. It was continually ruled by a Great Khan, who had his seat in China and various subordinate sub-khans, who were descended from Genghis Khan. But already in the thirteenth century, when Kublai was Great Khan in China, several sub-khans made themselves independent and formed a multitude of empires, of which Turkestan, Persia, and eastern and southern Russia were the mightiest. In this way the power of the Mongols was shaken to its foundation, so that China already in 1368 made itself independent, and in the fifteenth century Russia also shook off the Mongol yoke.

Tamerlane, or Timur, indeed sought to build a new Mongol empire on the ruins of the old, and he also succeeded in subjecting Persia, all central Asia, Hindustan, and even Russia, and so on. But when Tamerlane was about to undertake a campaign of conquest against China, he died (1405) in the midst of the preparations for war, and immediately afterward the empire fell apart into several smaller parts. The dynasty formed by Tamerlane maintained itself after his death only in Chagatai. One of Tamerlane's successors, Babur, founded in 1519 yet another empire in Hindustan and established a dynasty which later bore the name of the Great Moguls, and some time after that Bosi Khan also founded an empire in Chahar; since that time, however, the Mongols have sunk down to be vassals of other empires, namely China.

While the Mongols were still masters of China, the ruling dynasty had taken the name Yuan, and this name was commonly also applied to the whole people. After the fall of the dynasty, however, the people gradually lost this name too and began again to be called Tata. After Bosi Khan had in the sixteenth century taken possession of Chahar, this name (Chahar) was applied to all the Mongols subject to this empire. At present the designation Mongol introduced by Genghis Khan applies to all the so-called Eastern Mongols. They divide into Shara or Sharatgol Mongols and Kalka Mongols, of whom the former live south, the latter north, of the Gobi desert. Both stocks divide moreover into a multitude of smaller hordes or so-called Oimaks, which, however, we cannot take into consideration here.

Besides the Eastern Mongols just named, there live under Chinese rule, as has already been remarked, various Kalmyk stocks. They call themselves Olöt (the separated), also Durban Oirad (the Four United). The cause of the latter designation is that the Kalmyks have from of old consisted of four stocks, namely the Dzungars, Turguts, Khoshuds, and Durbets. We have little or no knowledge of their earlier fortunes. In later times they have made themselves known by founding two kingdoms, which, however, were of short duration. One of them was founded in 1671 by Galdan, who became famous in High Asia, who subjected all the Olöt stocks, the Telengut, and the Kyrgyz, drove the Kalka Mongols from their dwellings, and caused great devastation in the eastern parts of High Asia. Against him there soon rose one of his nephews, Tse-Wang-Arabdan, who placed himself at the head of the Dzungar stock and with the help of the Chinese defeated Galdan (1696). Tse-Wang-Arabdan founded the Dzungar empire at Ili, but this too lasted no longer than until 1757, when it was conquered by the Chinese. During the horrible scenes that took place at the same time as these two empires, some branches of the Mongol and Kalmyk stocks saw themselves compelled to leave the border of China and to seek their refuge in Russia. Thus numerous hosts of the Kalka Mongols saved themselves from the persecutions of Galdan to their allies at Lake Baikal, and after the Dzungar empire had been destroyed, 20,000 families of this stock also moved onto Russian territory. But already before this, Kalmyks had settled on the Volga, and the Turgut stock was the first that subjected itself to the Russian sceptre (1630). This stock had fallen into discord with the Dzungars and Khoshuds, and in consciousness of its weakness had been largely compelled to leave Ili, although other Turguts still resolved to remain there; but in the year 1703 these also withdrew before the persecutions of Tse-Wang-Arabdan and settled in Russia between the Yaik and the Ural. Some years later (1712) the Chinese emperor sent to the Turguts an embassy with the invitation to return to China, and in the year 1771 they in fact began their return march and settled again in Ili. Enticed by their example, in the following year (1772) other stocks both of the Kalmyks and of the Buryats also returned to Chinese territory, which was thereby enriched by half a million inhabitants. Since that time one knows little more of them than that they, like the Mongols, have lived as peaceful subjects in the Chinese empire.

As for the Buryats, finally, they have, so far as is known, never played a part in history. They have had their dwellings from ancient times, at least already before the appearance of Genghis Khan, at Lake Baikal. Since the year 1644 they all obey Russian rule. Like the Mongols and Kalmyks they divide into a multitude of stocks and have their own hereditary princes. The total number of the Buryats is estimated at about 150,000 souls. They live for the most part on the steppes south of Lake Baikal, but some stocks still live scattered in the north of this lake as far as the region of Nizhneudinsk. They are of all the natives of Siberia the most cultivated and most prosperous. Like all Mongols they lead a nomadic life. At present the Buryats too are Buddhists as regards their religion, but there are among them also many shamans and Christians, and besides Mohammedans. As is well known, the Mongols and Kalmyks have a written language of their own, but the Buryats make use of the Mongolian script. The literature, however, which the Mongol stocks at present have consists principally only of translations of Indian and Tibetan works.



The History of Genghis Khan in Sanang Setsen's Mythical Account

Since Genghis Khan is the most colossal personality that has come forth from Asia's sandy deserts, it may well not be inappropriate to gain a nearer knowledge of the fate of this extraordinary man. The Mongols held him for a supernatural being, just as all High Asian peoples regard their heroes somewhat like demigods. It was also in fact this belief in their supernatural powers that made up the actual strength of these heroes, and in High Asia it was always a condition for everyone who had become a great man that wonders and signs were sent down from heaven to demonstrate his higher mission before the multitude. But once the conviction of such a mission had taken possession of the people, it rushed onward with its god at its head with the strength of a force of nature. Genghis Khan's history too furnishes a clear proof of this. It runs, according to Sanang Setsen's fabulous and mythical presentation, in extract as follows: [Footnote: Geschichte der Ostmongolen, p. 63 ff.]

In the Shim Horse year (1162) there was born, to Jesugei Baghatur as father and Ögelen Chatun as mother, a boy named Tegrin ögguksen Temudshin (Temudshin bestowed by the gods). Besides him, Temudshin's mother bore Ghasar, Chadshikin, and Üdshöken, in all four sons. From two other wives, named Goa Abaghai and Dagasbi, Jesugei had the sons Bekter and Belgetei, in all six. Now Jesugei wanted to seek out a bride for his son Temudshin among his maternal relatives, the Olchonod. On the way there he called on Dai Setsen of the Chongkirad, who asked him: “My brother-in-law of Kiyot origin and of the Bordshigen lineage, where does your way lead?” To Jesugei Baghatur's answer, “The purpose of my journey is to seek a bride for this son of mine,” Dai Setsen replied: “Last night there appeared to me in a dream a white sparrowhawk and settled on my hand; this is, as I know, the Bordshigen, your sign. From of old it is the custom that we marry our beautiful princely daughters by preference to the Bordshigen; our good-natured maidens are by nature destined to be wives of the Bordshigen. I have only one single daughter, nine years old, named Bürte, whom I will give to this son of yours.” The father thought she was still too young, but the son rejoined: “She will be useful to me in the future; let it happen!” Thereupon they drank the remainder of the drink that was at hand, Jesugei gave a pair of horses as a present, left Temudshin behind, and set out on the way home.

One day the boys Temudshin and Chasar came to their mother and said: “A short time ago the brothers Bekter and Belgetei robbed and ate the fish that we had caught; today Chasar shot a lark with a small arrow, and that too they robbed from us: we will kill them both.” Their mother replied to them: “Why do you speak like the five sons of that Taichigod princess of former times? The body is smaller than its shadow, yet stronger than its tail, says the proverb; therefore live as friends with one another. Will you not in future need one another's help?” Without answering, the two went out and slammed the door behind them, whereupon the four brothers went in hostile intent to Bekter and Belgetei. Bekter called out to them: “If you want to kill, then kill only me; do not kill my Belgetei: he is the man who will stand by you and increase your strength!” Without listening to him, they killed Bekter.

When they then came to their mother, she gave them in anger the following reproof: “How could you do such a thing and kill one another, while I hoped and rejoiced that my sons, brought up in hatred of our enemies and carefully nourished with sweet milk dishes, would become distinguished and famous men! What will come of it if you go on killing one another and annihilating one another! You are like a wolf that bites into its own ribs, or a bird of prey that stoops upon its own shadow, or a great fish that lashes itself with its tail. It is nothing else than that what is thin among you turns into a snake, and what is thick into a toad.”

After this time the armed power of the Taichigod came, suddenly surrounded the region, and had it announced: “We will do no harm to any of you; only give us Temudshin!” Temudshin, who heard this, was on the point of running out with an arrow laid on the string, when his mother still held him back and afterward secretly got him out. He took his place of refuge in a spacious cave on the Onon, where, however, the Taichigod tracked him down and watched the opening. After three days he wanted to make the attempt to go out, but as he drew the saddle-girth tight, the saddle slipped off and the girth tore. Then Temudshin thought: “How could this girth tear! This is certainly a sign of warning from my Tegri-father.” Again after three days he tried once more to go out, but found the mouth of the cave stopped up with a great white stone. Then he thought: “This stone was not lying there before; this too is a warning from my Tegri-father,” and remained three days more in the cave. After he had spent nine days in it, he left it with the words: “Now let come what may.” At once he was seized by the Taichigod guard, still lying in wait, who put iron chains and fetters on him and carried him away with them.

Some time afterward Temudshin found an opportunity to free himself from prison, and after he had wandered here and there, he hid himself in a standing body of water, where Torghan Shara discovered him and thought to himself: “He has in the past shown much friendship to my two sons Tschitaghon and Tschimbai.” Then he called to him: “Child of man! It is good that you are lying here; I will seek help.” With these words he went away. Then Temudshin thought: “The man seems to be well disposed,” slipped out of his hiding-place at night, and came to the dwelling of Shara, where the two sons of the latter received him with the following words: “We will be a rescuing mound of grass to the persecuted lark; we will faithfully protect this Bordshigen who has fled to us with trembling heart, this offspring of Tegri. Notwithstanding the suspicion that will be cast upon us, we will take care of him as best we can.” Thereupon they cut through his chains with an axe and hid him in a wagon under a heap of wool. Here the enemies nearly caught him, but in the opinion that no one could stay under a heap of wool in the heat of the sun, they went away, and Temudshin happily reached his home.

Some time after this event the Taichigod came again and robbed Temudshin of eight yellow riding horses. At once Temudshin set out after the thieves; on the way Bogbordshi joined him, and presently the thieves were caught. Although they were superior in number, Temudshin, together with Bogbordshi, took the stolen horses back from them. When Bogbordshi told the adventure to his father after the return, the old man smiled and then turned to the side in order to hide his tears; then he said to the two youths: “The path of men is only one; never forget this!” Thereupon Temudshin and Bogbordshi became inseparable companions in sorrow and joy.

When Temudshin was twenty years old, he was recognised as Chaghan. From that day, on three successive mornings, a five-coloured bird in the shape of a lark settled on a four-cornered stone before the house and cried “Tschingis, Tschingis!” From this Genghis Khan received the name under which he became famous in all regions. Then the stone suddenly burst apart of itself, and out of its middle came forth the seal called Chas-Boo. Then Genghis Khan took the banner of his guardian spirit and became ruler of the four hundred thousand of the people Bede. And the ruler spoke: “This people Bede, which, brave and defiant, notwithstanding my sufferings and dangers, bravely joined me and increased my forces — I will that this people Bede, like a noble crystal, which to the goal of my striving in every danger proved the greatest loyalty, shall bear the name Kökö Monghol and shall be the most exalted of all that moves upon earth.” From that time this people is called Kökö Monghol.

After this time Chasar, the brother of Genghis Khan, rose in revolt, united himself with the Dologhan Chongchotan, and went away. The ruler entrusted the supreme command of the army appointed for the pursuit to Subegetai Baghatur with the following words: “You, my faithful commanders in war, each like the moon at the head of the army! You, like the ornament of the head-covering! You, the centre of honour! You, unbending like stone! And you, my army, which surrounds me like a wall and is ranged like a field of reeds, hear my words: in times of peaceful jest live together in harmony like the fingers of one hand; in times of attack be like a falcon that stoops upon its prey; in times of play and merriment swarm like gnats, but in times of battle rush upon the enemy like an eagle upon its booty!” Then Subegetai Baghatur answered: “What we can or cannot do, the future will teach; whether we shall carry it out, the guardian spirit of the ruler may know.” Thereupon Subegetai Baghatur advanced after Chasar, overtook him, and sent him the following message: “Whoever separates himself from blood-relatives will become the prey of every single man; when relatives fall out, they become the booty of strangers! A following you can procure for yourself, but no blood-relatives; subjects you can enlist, but no brothers.” These words found entrance with Chasar; he turned back and was reconciled with the ruler, his elder brother.

After this time Chasar and Belgetei allied themselves against their brother and ruler, but when Genghis Khan learned of their bad intentions, he took the form of an old man, went from house to house, and offered a long bow for sale. When he came to his brothers Chasar and Belgetei, they received him with mockery and said: “Oh, old man! Your bow might be quite good to use as a snap-bow for moles.” But Genghis Khan let them try the bow, and they were not able to draw it. Now the old man changed before their eyes into an ice-grey, decrepit man who rode a bluish mule with a blaze, took the bow, and shot an arrow against a piece of rock, which he split apart. Then he left them with the words: “You two youths! From boasting arises stench, says the proverb. Is it not true, the old man understands it better than you?” Then the brothers said to one another: “That was no common man; it was certainly a Chubilghan (a metamorphosis) of the ruler.” From that time they were afraid and remained with the ruler.

Soon afterward the Oirats and Buryats subjected themselves and sent him, as a sign of their submission, an eagle. Several other neighbouring stocks were subjected at the same time by force of arms. After the ruler, Sanang Setsen continues, had in this way trodden his enemies under his feet and tamed their envy with his fist, he returned to his Ordu. While he was sitting there, it happened that suddenly a bowl of Chas (nephrite), filled with a well-tasting drink, lowered itself from above through the smoke-hole into the ruler's hand, without anything being spilled. As the ruler was about to empty the bowl alone, his brothers said: “How can the ruler enjoy the gift of grace of Tegri alone?” The ruler then handed them what was left over, but however much they one after another put it to their lips and wanted to drink, none of them could get a drop down. Then the four brothers said: “That the mighty and perfect Chormusda Tegri, your father, should bestow upon you, the ruler, his Bogda son, heavenly drink in a vessel of precious stone — we did not believe it, and out of envy spoke those words. You alone are our lawful ruler; in future we shall obey all your commands and laws.” The ruler answered them: “On the command of the mighty and perfect Tegri that I received, I sat upon the ancient throne of the Chaghans, and the prince of the lower dragons bestowed upon me the seal called Chas-Boo. Now, since I have defeated my haters and enviers, the exalted King of the Tegri has sent me heavenly drink down. In consideration of these facts you are right to speak thus.” [Footnote: A.a.O., p. 83.]

After this time Genghis Khan gathered a great army, drove out the Chinese Altan Chaghan, and took possession of his empire. Thereupon Tangut (the country west of the Hoangho or Yellow River) submitted of itself and offered to pay a tribute; in the year 1195 Genghis Khan marched to war against Sartaghol, beat the Khan, and subjected the five territories of the Sara Sartaghol (a part of Mongolia south of the Gobi). In the year 1196 he subjected the people of Togmak, and in 1198 the Kerait. In this way he subjected one Tatar stock after another, until in 1206, in his forty-fifth year of life, he marched against Tibet. This country submitted voluntarily, and Genghis Khan now moved with his army against Enedkek (India); but on this way there came running toward him a wild animal provided on its crown with a single horn, which, bending its knees three times before the ruler, showed its reverence. As all wondered at this, the ruler said: “The central realm of that India is, they say, the place where the exalted Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, as well as the mighty and perfect Bogdas and princes of former times, were born. What can it mean that this speechless wild animal bows like a man? Has perhaps Tegri, my father above, wished to warn me?” Having said this, he turned back and returned into his homeland.

Now the ruler began to introduce legal order among his whole people, and to that end also gave to the nine Örlök and to all who had devoted their strength and abilities to him considerable posts and titles, high rank, and gifts of grace, to each according to his merit; he appointed commanders over a hundred, over a thousand, over ten thousand, and over a hundred thousand, and opened his treasure to the whole great people, but of them all Bogbordshi alone remained entirely unconsidered. Then his wife spoke to him thus: “Was it not Bogbordshi who then, when you had to struggle with want and affliction, already in your youth joined you and became your most faithful companion? Who performed the hardest deeds for you? Who in your service never spared his life? Ruler of men! While you thought every lowly person worthy of your attention, have you forgotten the excellent Bogbordshi, who sacrificed all his strength to you?” The ruler replied: “I have not forgotten him; I will distinguish his great merits before all his enviers.” Then he gave one of his slaves the order to go and listen to what Bogbordshi said about him. In accordance with his ruler's command, the slave went and heard the wife of Bogbordshi speak to her husband in the following manner: “Are you not Bogbordshi, who was the ruler's first companion of youth? Who contributed chiefly to the glorification of his might? Who performed every deed for him? Who sacrificed his strength to him more than all? Who for the ruler's sake forgot the father, his begetter, and the mother who bore him? Who left the carefree wife and the growing children with the words: I will serve the ruler and lend him my arm. Who used to say: although there is now toil and labour, in the end we shall have pleasure and joy? But now the ruler has showered lowly people from the folk with marks of grace, has made less capable men commanders over ten thousand and a thousand; but has he thought of you even in a single piece? Are not all who have devoted their strength to the Bordshigen incomparably more significant than you?” To this Bogbordshi answered the following: “I have never been greedy to gather and heap up goods of fortune; and even should I hunger, I shall nevertheless sacrifice my strength to the ruler. Without troubling myself about goods for our children, I shall as before be the companion of the ruler and devote my strength to him. Women's rein is short, their circle of thought narrow! If only the golden house-strap of my ruler is lasting and his noble government firmly founded, then I shall, if not now, yet in a future life be certain of my reward.”

When the slave had reported these speeches to Genghis Khan, the latter called his whole people together, then communicated Bogbordshi's conversation with his wife to the people and left it to their discretion how far he had reason to reward Bogbordshi's merits in a distinguished manner. As all were agreed on this, he made him the mightiest man of his empire. Thereupon the ruler spoke: “In accordance with the command of the supreme King, my father, I have subjected the twelve great kings of the earth to my rule, I have subjected the lawless arbitrariness of princes to my will, I have gathered the countless multitude of people, which wandered about in oppression and want, and united it into a whole, and have now completed the greatest part of my obligations. Now I will give rest to the body as well as to the mind.” Then the ruler rested for nineteen years, introduced order and laws among his great people, supported the empire and its administration on firm pillars, and raised the happiness and welfare of the whole great people to such a degree that nothing could equal the happiness of the Chaghan and his subjects.

Meanwhile he made still other conquests, until he had subjected all central High Asia to himself, destroyed Peking, subjugated northern China, and extended his conquests over Turkestan as far as the Dnieper.

Shortly before his death he comforted his sons, exhorted them to concord, and spoke among other things: "The jewel Chas is covered by no skin, and polished steel by no dross; the born body is not eternal: it passes away without homecoming and return. One thing I ask you always to keep in earnest remembrance. The soul and the core of every deed is to complete it when it has been begun. Firm and unshakable is the mind of the man who keeps his given word."



The Turks

Of Asia's three great peoples, the Turks appeared earliest in world history, just as they also earliest played out their role. The present-day Turks form only weak remnants scattered far and wide; in their flowering time, however, they were a great and mighty people, able to chastise the Roman Empire and to bring terror over all Europe, as well as to erect thrones in China, Persia, India, Syria, Egypt, and Arabia. Many of the Turkic tribes have [illegible].

The last-named begin the history of the Turks with the son of Noah, Japheth, and fill the great gap from the Flood to historical times with genealogies that are composed in a thoroughly Mosaic spirit and clearly bear the character of a forgery. It would be pointless to enter more closely into these genealogies here; I will only adduce a few facts in order to set forth their general character. Among Japheth's eight sons one is named, namely Turk, who was chosen by Japheth as chief of his whole people. Turk is said to have settled in the region of Lake Issyk-Kul and the river Ili, Issyk-Kul according to Abulghazi. [Footnote: Deguignes, Allgemeine Geschichte der Hunnen und Türken, p. 113. Histoire généalogique des Tatars, p. 24.]

One of Turk's descendants, named Alindje-Khan, had two sons who were twins, of whom the one was called Tatar and the other Mongol or Mughal. Alindje-Khan divided his lands between them and thereby laid the foundation for two different realms. From Mongol descends further Oghuz-Khan. He is said from the cradle to have been a warm and faithful servant of the one God and to have sought to convert all idolaters to the old religion. He had many wives, but repudiated those who did not accept the true teaching. When his father, Kara-Khan, received news of this through the repudiated wives, he began to seek his son's life; the son, however, had already succeeded in obtaining a great number of followers. Among these were also Kara-Khan's nephews, whom Oghuz, on account of the assistance granted by them, called Uyghurs, i.e. Helpers, and from these the mighty Uyghur tribe afterwards received its name. Between Oghuz and his father Kara-Khan it now came to a battle, in which Kara-Khan was defeated and struck by an arrow, whereupon he soon died. Oghuz succeeded him and now began violent persecutions against all idolaters; these, however, had the consequence that many of his subjects left the realm and fled to their neighbours. Oghuz did not fail to seek them out wherever they were, and so arose a religious war that lasted 12 years. Thereupon he subjected several realms to himself, namely Khatai or China, Tangut, Kara-Khatai. In Kara-Khatai there ruled at that time a prince named Itborak-Khan, who offered Oghuz such violent resistance in a battle that the latter thereby got into hard straits. During the battle it happened that the wife of one of the fallen commanders bore a son, which happened in a hollow tree named Kipchak. In consequence of this the son received the name Kipchak; he

became the progenitor of the Turkic horde designated by the same name and founded the realm of Kipchak. Itborak-Khan remained this time undefeated, but eighteen years later Oghuz again marched against him into the field and now fought with such success that Itborak fell and Kara-Khatai was conquered. Thereupon he took possession of Samarkand, Bukhara, and several other places, undertook a campaign against Iran, but died soon after his return from there, after he had reigned 116 years. From his death one reckons to Genghis Khan 4000 years, and according to this reckoning Oghuz must have lived about 2800 years before Christ. [Footnote: Deguignes, Allgemeine Geschichte der Hunnen und Türken, pp. 114-119.]

In such fabulous legends is the oldest history of the Turks wrapped by the Muhammadan historians. What the Chinese tell of it is very insignificant. They are, however, already early known in Chinese history under the names of the Chiungnu, Chian-jun and Xiongnu. Hyakinth adduces a tradition according to which the first founder of the Chinese empire, Huangdi, who is said to have lived in the 27th century B.C., drove this people northwards from the borders of his realm. In the year 1764 before our era the last Chinese emperor from the house of Xia died in exile, and his son Chunwei or Chiun-ja is said to have fled with 500 men to the Turks, where he was chosen as Chenju or king. After him the Turks are also said to have received their name Chiungnu. This name they retained, according to Klaproth, under the dynasty Shang until the year 1134. Under the following dynasty Zhou (1134-256 B.C.) they are said to have been named Ghiao-jun; under the Qin and Han, however (256 B.C. - 263 A.D.), they bore the name Xiongnu. Their fates during the greater part of this period are unknown, and the little that the Chinese historians tell of them [Footnote: Hyakinth, Notes on Mongolia, Vol. II, pp. 3-4. Klaproth, Asia polyglotta, p. 210.]

is of insignificant interest. They seem to have nomadised north and north-west of China and principally in the region of the Yinshan mountains. From here they undertook frequent raids upon Chinese territory, for which reason the Chinese saw themselves compelled for their defence to erect the Chinese Wall.

The Xiongnu were according to the statements of the Chinese a people wild and warlike beyond measure. Their whole education was directed to making their children into warriors and hunters. The Chinese relate that they let little children ride on rams and shoot birds and mice with little bows. When the children became larger, they were sent out to hunt hares and foxes, and when they were able to bear larger weapons, war was their trade. They were recognised as men only when they had destroyed a human life or were able to do so. War was then their sole occupation and the only means by which they could win respect among their nation. [Footnote: Deguignes, op. cit., p. 129.] They were a horse people and had accustomed themselves to sit day and night on the horse, where they performed all their labours. Also their fights they always carried out on horseback. If they were a little distant from the enemy, they attacked him with arrows; if, however, they had come nearer to him, they began to fight with the sword. They wielded their weapons with the greatest skill and understood at the same time to deal blows and to entangle the enemy in snares and nets, so that he was hindered in the free use of his horses and his powers. Thereupon they continued the fight with a terrible shouting, pressed close against one another, but disappeared in an instant, for they did not regard it as shameful to flee before the enemy. Yet this flight was often only a stratagem of war; they turned hastily, surrounded the enemy and scattered, like the samum of the desert, death and destruction on all sides.

Youth, bravery, and the art of war alone stood in respect among this warlike people, and therefore young heroes also received the best morsels at the meal; older persons had to content themselves with the crumbs that their sons had left for them. [Footnote: K. F. Neumann, Die Völker des südlichen Russlands, p. 29.]

Otherwise the Chinese relate of the rest of the mode of life of the Xiongnu that they occupied themselves with hunting and cattle-breeding. They pastured their horses, asses, camels, cattle, and sheep on fruitful river banks, roamed hither and thither without settling anywhere, and built nowhere towns or castles. If they settled somewhere for a shorter time, they divided the land among themselves. Their principal nourishment they procured from wild-growing herbs, through hunting and their herds of cattle. They consumed animals and vermin of every kind. The flesh was neither cooked nor roasted, but swallowed half-raw after one had rubbed it between one's legs or sat upon it riding. Their clothes consisted of the hides or hair of wild or tame animals, and since no one had more than one covering, one wore it so long until it fell apart on the body. They never washed themselves, for it was and in part still is a popular belief in High Asia that the gods do not love washing, but punish it with thunder and lightning. [Footnote: Neumann, op. cit., pp. 26-27. Hyakinth, Notes on Mongolia, Vol. II, p. 9 ff. — Neumann, pp. 32-34. — Deguignes, Part I, p. 130 ff. — Klaproth, Tableau historique, p. 103 ff.]

Thus do the Chinese depict the people of the Xiongnu, and one cannot doubt the truthfulness of this depiction, for the same manners and customs in part continue to this day among many wild tribes of High and North Asia. They add that the Xiongnu in the oldest times had no conception of the art of writing, no religion, no laws, and no orderly constitution. In all probability they lived divided into single hordes, each of which was ruled by its chief.

Of their princely dynasties the Chinese annals know nothing to report until Touman or Teuman became their Chenju in the year 214 B.C. To him followed (209) his son Maotun or Modu, who became the actual founder of the Xiongnu realm. Maotun subjected to himself almost all High Asia and also attacked China, which counted itself fortunate to be able to buy peace from the Chenju of the Huns. In the year 177 B.C. he conquered Turkestan and Bukhara and extended his conquests to the Caspian Sea. Maotun died in 174 and his son Laoshan followed him. Under him and his successors the Xiongnu lived in constant war with the Chinese, who applied all the fineness of their politics to protect their realm from the attack of the wild hordes. So feared were the Xiongnu at this time in China that the emperor often presented their Chenjus with rich gifts and had to give them his princesses in marriage. Soon, however, new discords and disaffections broke out in the realm of the Xiongnu, which had the consequence that the realm in the year 48 A.D. fell into two parts: into a northern and a southern realm. The northern realm soon reached its end. It was attacked at once in the south by the Chinese and the southern Xiongnu, who now made common cause with one another, from the east by a High Asiatic people that the Chinese name Xianbei, from the north, however, by the Tingling, a people that stayed in the region of Lake Baikal and formed a branch of the known [illegible]. Attacked from so many sides, the northern Xiongnu saw themselves compelled partly to submit to the Chinese and Xianbei; for the greater part, however, they left their land and moved in a north-westerly direction to the land of Juepan on the Aral Sea into the regions where now the Kyrgyz-Kaisaks nomadise.

Their former dwelling-places are now taken by other eastern peoples, of which the most distinguished calls itself Xianbei. [Footnote: Klaproth, op. cit., pp. 93-100.] This people, which was perhaps of Tungusic origin,

had since olden times inhabited the eastern parts of High Asia (according to Deguignes north of Liaodong), but afterwards got into strife with the Xiongnu, was defeated by Maotun, in part annihilated and in part taken prisoner. The rest saved itself into the Xianbei and Wuhuan mountains (according to Deguignes [illegible]) and divided itself here into two hordes and received its name after the mountain that it inhabited. The new arrivals lived with the southern Xiongnu in good peace and used every opportunity to inflict devastations on Chinese territory with united forces. The weakened China had all trouble to withstand these attacks and could not prevent that the forward-striving Xianbei in the last half of the second century founded a considerable realm in place of the northern Xiongnu realm. Since now the Xianbei, the southern Xiongnu and other allied hordes continually disturbed China, the Chinese emperor Cao Cao conceived the resolution to colonise these hordes within China's borders themselves. After he had in the year 216 taken prisoner the last Chenju of the Huns, he succeeded in inducing the barbarians to immigrate into China and divided them into five principalities. This unwise action afterwards occasioned manifold confusions in and outside China, which lasted a whole century (304-439). [Footnote: Deguignes, op. cit., Part I, p. 133. Neumann, p. 81.]

During this time several small realms formed themselves, of which finally that of the Topo or Wei became the mightiest. This people, whose origin is unknown, previously dwelt in north-eastern Siberia, then moved into the Baikal regions, but later also left these seats and betook itself about 200 A.D. into the regions of High Asia which the Huns had previously occupied, and here soon formed a new realm, which, however, never received the strength and extent of the realm of the Xiongnu. [Footnote: Neumann, p. 81.] In their greatest

flowering the Topo ruled only the eastern and southern part of Mongolia, while Kalka and Tarbagatai formed another realm that bore the name Jeujen (Rouran) and seems to have consisted of a Tungusic people. These two realms were, however, of shorter duration. The Topo realm was actually founded in 267 and lasted until 557 A.D.; the realm of the Rouran, however, had existence from 402-546. With one another they were in constant feud, until finally the realm of the Rouran was defeated.

After these two peoples there again appeared a new tribe in High Asia, the tribe of the Tukiu. [Footnote: Klaproth, op. cit., p. 113 ff. — Ritter, Erdkunde, Part II, pp. 437 and 438.] After the realm of the Xiongnu had found its downfall, the remaining hordes were driven by the Chinese to the shores of the Sihai, i.e. the western sea (Balkhash); but not even here could they settle in peace. The enemies gave them no rest before they had exterminated to the ground the people that had caused them so many sufferings. According to a legend told by the Chinese, of the formerly so mighty people only a single boy is said to have remained, who with mutilated hands and feet had saved himself into a morass. Here he was tended and nourished by a she-wolf, until both through a higher power were transported to the mountains in the north-west of the Uyghurs. Here they went into a cave and came through it into a fruitful valley of 20,000 miles in circumference. The she-wolf now bore ten young, which grew up to warriors, robbed themselves wives, and propagated their race. At the head stood the wolf-son Assena or Tse-na (Wolf), and already in his time the wolf race consisted of five hundred heads, who bore as banner a wolf's head. Their valley soon became too narrow for them; they saw themselves compelled to leave it and scattered themselves in the gorges of the Kin-shan or Gold Mountains, i.e. on the Altai. They settled at the foot of a mountain that looked similar to a helmet, which in their language was called tukiu, and in consequence

of which the people itself also called itself Tukiu, which is a Chinese transcription of Turk. [Footnote: Klaproth, Mémoires relatifs à l'Asie, Vol. II, pp. 352-382. Sanang Setsen, Geschichte der Ostmongolen, p. 57. Histoire généalogique des Tatars, p. 71 ff.] Of this legend, which was also known among the Romans, there are in Asia several variants. Sanang Setsen tells it of Genghis Khan's ancestors, and by Abulghazi it is applied to the son and nephew of Il-Khan. He tells it in the following manner: "From the named Oghuz-Khan descended a multitude of rulers, of whom Il-Khan is said to have been the last. He was defeated by another Tatar ruler named Siuntz-Khan, and his whole people as good as exterminated, with the exception of his son Kayan and his nephew Nagos together with their wives, who all escaped the bloodbath. Provided with horses, camels, and other necessary things, they went to seek for themselves a place of refuge in the mountains and discovered a narrow goat path that was surrounded on both sides by fearfully steep mountains. The fugitives followed this path, which led them into a very pleasant valley traversed by brooks. Here they settled and gave their new dwelling-place the name Irgene-Kun. During the stay in this valley the descendants of the fugitives increased to such a degree that after the lapse of 400 years they found the borders of the valley too narrow and resolved to betake themselves back into the ancestral land of their forefathers. It had, however, great difficulties to come down again out of the mountains, for the old path could no longer be discovered. During the searching for this path a smith had discovered a narrow mountain wall that consisted entirely of iron-bearing materials. On his advice one resolved to make a fire here and with the help of 70 bellows to bring the iron to melting. Thereby one also succeeded in making a hole in the mountain and through it one made a way for oneself out of the valley.

At this time, however, over this people there ruled a prince named Burte-Tschino, who laid the foundation for a Turkic dominion. From him, according to the tradition of the Turks, [illegible] descended. He was at first a vassal of the Rouran, joined himself, however, against them with the Topo and overthrew, as has already been mentioned, in the year 546 the Tungusic dominion. [Footnote: Deguignes, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 443. Neumann, Die Völker des südlichen Russlands, pp. 90 and 87.] To [illegible] followed the known Mokan-Khan, who consolidated the conquests of his father and formed a great realm in High Asia. This prince entered into negotiations with the Byzantine emperor Justin II, and from this time the Turks are also known under this name in Europe.

In Theophanes one finds a detailed description of the embassy which Justin sent to the Turks, in order to accompany the envoys which Mokan had previously sent to him. I will communicate from it in brief the following: [Footnote: Deguignes, Vol. I, p. 310 ff. — Stritter, Memoriae populorum, olim ad Danubium incolentium, Vol. III, Petropoli 1778, pp. 49-58.] "The embassy, whose head was called Zemarch, departed under strong escort from Constantinople and came after a long journey to Sogdiana. As Zemarch dismounted from the horse, some Turks came towards him with a piece of iron, as he suspected, in order thereby to show that their land produced this metal. At the same time, however, there also presented themselves others of the same tribe, who were to be averters of misfortune and adversaries (i.e. shamans). When they had approached Zemarch and his companions, they murmured some words unintelligible to them, made noise with bells and drums, burned fragrant substances, and screamed, possessed by wildness and frenzy, in order to avert misfortune. Zemarch himself, however, they led around the flames."

"Thus prepared, the envoys set themselves again in motion and arrived at the mountain where the Khagan of the Turks stayed — at the Ektag [Ektel] or the golden mountain, i.e. Altai.

Zemarch found the prince in his tent on a chair that rested on two wheels, in order, when it was necessary, to be drawn by a horse. He greeted the Khagan, handed over to him the imperial gifts, and then held the following speech: 'Thou, leader of so many and so great peoples! Our great emperor sends thee through me his greeting and wishes thee all luck and well-being, since thou lovest the Romans and their luck rejoices thee. Mayest thou defeat thy enemies and win rich booty from them. Far from us be deceit and envy, which dissolve friendships, however firmly and sacredly they may have been concluded. The Turks and other nations subject to them we regard as our friends. Conduct thyself therefore so towards us as we will conduct ourselves towards you.'"

"After the Great Khan had received the envoys of the Romans with similar wishes, he kept them the whole first day in the same tent, which was adorned with many-coloured silk tapestries, entertained them extraordinarily well, and let them drink wine of native preparation (presumably kumys), for grapes there were not in their land. On the following day one led them into another tent, which was adorned with coloured silk curtains with beautifully painted figures. The Khan sat on a bed of massive gold, and in the middle of the tent there were golden bowls and other utensils. Thereupon one went into a third tent, which rested on gilded pillars; the bed was also here of gold and was borne by four golden peacocks. Before the tent stood numerous wagons with golden vessels and household utensils and some animal figures made of silver, which in beauty were not inferior to similar art products of the Romans."

This description lets us surmise that the Turks already at that time were in possession of a certain culture, although they persisted in their nomadising mode of life. Of their religion the Chinese relate [Footnote: Neumann, op. cit., pp. 88-99.] that they had worshipped fire, air, water, and earth;

properly, however, they have worshipped one God, whom they regarded as Creator of the world, and to him sacrificed horses, cattle, and sheep. At the beginning of the year all significant men assembled in the residence of the Khan on the Altai, in order to present these sacrifices to the Creator in a valley in which, according to legend, their forefathers had dwelt. In the fifth month of the year they assembled for the second time and then sacrificed to their other gods, to Heaven, to Earth, and to the manes of their fathers, to the air, to the water, and to the fire. In autumn, when the cattle were well-nourished and fat, one assembled in a forest, rode around the forest, and presented sacrifices to the guardian gods of the soil, of the fields, and of the meadows. But we leave the depiction of their ethnographic relations for another time and recall in historical respect only this, that the realm of the Tukiu in the year 745 was destroyed by another people that called itself Chuiche (according to Deguignes Boei-ke) and among the Chinese was called Kaotsche. [Footnote: Klaproth, Asia polyglotta, pp. 212 and 213.] This people formed a branch of the known Uyghur tribe, which to this day has been the most excellent culture-people of High Asia.

About the origin of the Uyghurs different views have prevailed; one can, however, now regard it as completely settled that they were of Turkic origin. Klaproth met in the year 1806 in Siberia a Uyghur from Turfan and recorded from his mouth 84 words that were Turkic. Likewise Father Amiot in Peking received a Uyghur vocabulary that comprises 914 words likewise of Turkic origin. One has besides various letters and petitions composed in Uyghur, which likewise prove the Turkic origin of the Uyghurs. The Uyghurs had already early their own script and literature. In the year 478 the Chinese mention for the first time the script of the Uyghurs, and the circumstance that their king [Footnote: Klaproth, Reise in den Kaukasus, Vol. II, p. 496. Ritter, Erdkunde, Seventh Part, p. 591.]

had appointed chroniclers in order to record the individual events. "His subjects," it is said, "made use of Chinese characters, but had besides a barbarian script. It has been very disputed of what origin this barbarian script might have been. It is known that the Uyghurs made use of the Syriac script, which they received from the Nestorians, who in former times in their zeal for conversion had pressed forward into High Asia, like the Jesuits in later times. It is, however, not very probable that the Nestorians at so early a time could have introduced their alphabet among the Uyghurs, for their sect arose only a few decades earlier, or in the first half of the fifth century. One has on the contrary many grounds to assume that both the Uyghurs and other Turkic tribes have had a script now entirely lost; for in several regions inhabited by Turks there occur inscriptions on rocks and stones that are designated with unknown characters. However it may behave with this, it is quite certain that the Uyghurs already early were in possession of a degree of culture unusual in High Asia. Already in the year 399 B.C. a Chinese pilgrim west of Lop Lake met 4000 strict Buddhists among the Uyghurs, and in the fifth century they had many Chinese writings in Uyghur translation. "The sons of distinguished people went to school and learned the content of these writings; at the same time they also occupied themselves with poetry." Between the years 515-528 they demanded from the Chinese various writings and a scholar who could give them instruction in Chinese, which was granted. Besides Chinese culture, gradually also other elements of education penetrated into Uyghuria. Thus the Chinese relate that in the 10th century the Indian Buddha doctrine and the Persian Zoroaster cult, as also the teachings of Mani and of the Nestorian sect, were ruling among the Uyghurs. [Footnote: Ritter, Erdkunde, Seventh Part, pp. 594-598.]

Moreover the Chinese give for this time a characterisation of the people of the Uyghurs sounding thus: "Their residence Giaotschin had 1840 paces in circumference and was surrounded by a wall. In the audience hall a king was depicted who demands from Kung-fu-tse advice in state administration. The court offices were analogous to the Chinese mandarin offices. One counted in the realm 18 towns and 46 garrisons. The marriage and burial ceremonies were the same as among the Chinese, the manners otherwise as among the Tatars. The men went in barbarian dress, but the women dressed like the Chinese women. In clothing one loved embroidery and golden ornament." "The land," it is further said, "is high, stony, and sandy, bears grain of every kind, is excellently suited for silk cultivation, and has fruits of every kind, even grapes, from which one prepares wine. The Uyghurs have their own script, but make use besides also of the Chinese. Some also speak Arabic."

Under the dynasty of the Genghis Khanids the Uyghurs stood in great esteem on account of their learning and were therefore also used for all high offices. Since this time various peoples (Turks, Mongols, Chinese, etc.) have immigrated into the land of the Uyghurs, through which the original Uyghur population has greatly declined. Through the influence that the Arabs and Muhammadan Tatars have continually exerted upon them, they have also lost their peculiar culture and melted together with the other Eastern Turks, without the name Uyghur being able to maintain itself longer.

According to Schmidt the Uyghur tribe before Christ's birth dwelt north-east of the Gobi desert, on the Selenga and the sources of the Amur; according to Abel Rémusat, however, the actual Uyghurs already in the most ancient times were settled far from Karakoram, in the land between Lop Lake and the river Ili, while another tribe related to the Uyghurs, named Hoi-heu, dwelt on the Selenga. Whichever of these views may be the correct one, it seems nevertheless a settled matter that the Uyghurs already early divided themselves into an eastern and a western branch. Afterwards also the eastern Uyghurs moved westwards and settled in the region on the Ili and Lake Balkhash. [Footnote: Forschungen im Gebiete der älteren Bildungsgeschichte der Völker Mittel-Asiens, St. Petersburg 1824, p. 81. — Ritter, Erdkunde, Second Part, p. 343 ff. — Klaproth, Tableau historique de l'Asie, p. 121 ff.] This branch of the Uyghurs the Chinese named Kaotsche, which word is to signify that the named people made use of high carts. The Kaotsche Uyghurs were long nomads, while the other branch pursued agriculture, inhabited larger towns, and, as was shown above, unfolded a peculiar culture. The western branch further fell into two separate tribes, of which the one among the Chinese was called Kiuschi (Kiu-tsu), the other Kao-tsche-kang. The so-called Kaotsche or nomad Uyghurs, who called themselves Chuiche, formed after the downfall of the Tukiu realm a mighty dynasty, which, however, did not last longer than a century, since it was overthrown by the Chinese. Already earlier the Uyghurs known under the name Kao-tschang had subjected their tribal relatives the Kiuschi and made themselves independent, but were on their side defeated by the Chuiche. When the dominion of the Chuiche had reached its end, the Kaotschang Uyghurs concluded an alliance with the Chinese and became their vassals, retained, however, their own prince, until they voluntarily submitted to the dominion of Genghis Khan. [Footnote: Ritter, op. cit., p. 440. Klaproth, Asia polyglotta, pp. 213 and 214.]

As a branch of the above-named Uyghurs one regards the so-called Uzbeks. They are called by Arabian writers Goi or [illegible], which name Klaproth identifies with Kiuschi (Kiusi), as the Chinese named the Uyghurs. This people pressed in the 16th century from Inner Asia westwards over the Jihun and Jaxartes, and has afterwards set itself in possession of

Balkh, Khiva, Bukhara, Fergana, and some other regions. [Footnote: Klaproth, op. cit., pp. 217 and 218. Deguignes, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 200. Klaproth, Asia polyglotta, pp. 216-238.]

From the Uyghurs Deguignes also derives the so-called Seljuks, who in the 11th and 12th century founded particular dynasties in Mesopotamia, Persia, Syria, and Asia Minor, and from whom the present Ottomans are in part to descend. — Besides those adduced there are many other Turkic tribes whose earlier fates are not very known. To these belong:

1) The Turkomans or Turkmans. Also these some scholars regard as a branch of the named Uyghur tribe [illegible] or Gos. They consist of various hordes that live scattered in Turkestan, Persia, the Ottoman Empire, and Russia. They were in the Middle Ages in possession of Syria, but small in number, they have never had a significant influence in world history. At all times they have distinguished themselves by their wildness and lust for robbery.

2) The Nogais. They stay on the plains west of the Caspian and north of the Black Sea; they are subject to Russian dominion.

3) The [illegible] Turks, in the northern Caucasus.

4) The Kumyks, in the north-western Caucasus; are subject to Russia.

5) The Bashkirs, on the southern Ural; one supposes that they are of Finnish origin. [Footnote: Klaproth, Asia polyglotta, p. 188.]

6) The Meshcheryaks, Chuvash, Teptyars, on the Volga; are likewise to be of Finnish extraction.

7) The Kara-Kalpaks (Black Caps) are said formerly to have lived on the Volga, between Kazan and Astrakhan in the vicinity of the town of Bulgari. Later they have betaken themselves south-east to the Aral Sea

and to the lower course of the rivers Syr Darya and Kuván-Darya. They belong partly to Russia, partly to the princes of Khiva, who are Uzbeks.

8) Various heathen Turkic tribes in southern Siberia, upon which we shall come in the following.

9) The Kyrgyz, who call themselves Kazaks, i.e. riders or warriors, and formerly were called Hakas. This tribe is, like the Nogais, strongly mixed with Mongols, the language nevertheless purely Turkic. The forefathers of the Kyrgyz stayed on the steppes of Siberia, and from them probably originates the greater part of the kurgans found there. From here they moved westwards and now stay in the region of Tashkent and Kokand on the upper Irtysh, Aral Sea, the Caspian Sea, and Yaik. One regards the Circassians as descendants of the Kyrgyz, but this hypothesis rests only on a mere similarity of name.

10) The Usuns together with their tribal relatives Jeti or Yeti and Tingling are vanished peoples who originally dwelt north of China, later, however, moved into north-western Asia and to Europe. Some suppose that they were of Indo-Germanic origin; others, on the contrary, and among these the Sinologist Neumann, hold them for Finns.

Since I am now about to leave High Asia, I hold it not inappropriate to give a short survey of all the dynasties touched upon above that have been founded there by our tribal relatives; in enumerating them I shall now follow, however, not the national order as hitherto, but the chronological. These dynasties are:

1) The Xiongnu, from 218 to 48 B.C., whereupon the Xiongnu divided into two realms: into a northern and a southern. The northern reached its downfall in the year 93 A.D.; the southern, however, lasted until 352.

2) After the expulsion of the northern Huns the country

was taken by the Xianbei, a people of unknown (presumably Tungusic) origin; the actual dominion was founded in the year 150 and lasted until 233 A.D.

3) To the Xianbei followed the dynasty of the Topo or Wei, whose dominion, however, embraced only the eastern and southern part of Mongolia. The Topo have presumably been of Tungusic origin and come from north-eastern Siberia to High Asia. The dominion of the Topo went under in the year 557 A.D.

4) Simultaneously with the realm of the Topo there existed in Kalka and Tarbagatai another realm, Jeujen or Rouran, that lasted from 402 to 546 A.D.

5) This realm was overthrown by the Tukiu or the Turks, who founded a dynasty that had existence until 745.

6) The Tukiu were overthrown by a Turkic people, the Kaotsche Uyghurs, who called themselves Chuiche and ruled from 745 to 843.

7) Their realm was on its part destroyed by the Kaotschang Uyghurs, who concluded an alliance with China and became its vassals, but had their own princes.

8) Then was the dominion of the Turks over High Asia at an end, and in their place other tribes appeared. One of them was called Khitan or Liao, which founded a dynasty that lasted from 907 to 1125. This tribe has presumably been of Tungusic origin.

9) Thereupon followed the Kin dynasty, which had existence from 1141 to 1235. This dynasty was provenly of Tungusic origin and proceeded from the tribe of the Jurchen or Nüzhi.

10) Hereupon began the dynasty of the Mongols, which was founded by Genghis Khan and lasted from 1205 to 1368, but afterwards fell into smaller realms.

11) In the year 1634 the Manchu set themselves in possession of China and all High Asia, and their dominion lasts still to this day.

If we now turn our glance from High Asia to Europe, we find here two peoples settled since olden times: the Scythians and Huns, which by some are reckoned to the Turkic tribes. That they were of High Asiatic origin and belonged to the Altaic race, of that there can be no doubt, for their appearance, their manners and mode of life, as they are depicted by Greek and Roman writers, betray an unmistakable relationship with the other High Asiatic peoples. It is, however, in any case a difficult problem for research to determine which High Asiatic people is expressly to be understood under the name Scythians and Huns. As regards the historical history of these peoples, I presuppose it as generally known, and to enter into details does not belong to my present plan. I have here only wanted to give a list of the peoples with which we shall occupy ourselves in the sequel, and have endeavoured thereby to emphasise the nations that have played a somewhat more significant role in history. True to this my intention, I will in the following still enumerate the tribes that have passed over from High Asia to Europe and seem to have been of Turkic origin, whereby, however, I except the Ottomans. They are:

1) The Alans, [Footnote: Neumann, op. cit., pp. 35-38.] the same people that the Chinese in older times named Gan-tsai or An-tsai, which name seems to have been a Chinese transscription of the Asia of the West. The Gan-tsai are said to have dwelt 120 geographical miles north-west of Bukhara and Samarkand on the Caspian Sea. According to Neumann the Chinese sources are expressly to state that An-tsai and Alan are one and the same people and that this people lived in strife with the Xiongnu, but these killed a king of the Alans. Also in the West the Alans are known, at least since the times of the emperor Augustus. Most fully are they depicted by Ammianus.

He expresses himself about them among other things thus: "Beyond the Ister (the Danube), on the immeasurable steppes of Scythia, dwell the Alans, who formerly were called Massagetae. They have received their name from their mountains (Alani ex montium appellatione cognominati). They have after repeated fights subjected neighbouring peoples, which were named after the ruling nation. In this way the name of the Alans received a not lesser extension than the name of the Parthians and Persians. Indeed, it is said to have extended to the Indian Sea and to the Ganges." One sees from this description that Alans was a collective name for several different peoples. According to Ammianus the name signifies mountain-dwellers, and this has given philologists occasion to assume that the ruling, name-giving tribe received its name from the Turkic word alin or ala, which signifies mountain. As ground for the Turkic origin of the Alans serves also the report found in Ammianus that they completely agreed with the Huns in manners and mode of life. There are, however, several famous scholars who hold another opinion. Thus Klaproth regards the Alans as descendants of the old Medes and asserts with definiteness that the present Ossetes in the Caucasus are an Alan remnant. Hannert, on the contrary, holds the Afghans for the descendants of the Alans. Some, and among these Jacob Grimm, have also reckoned the Alans to the Germanic tribe; this view, however, is the least acceptable. There is a report from the fourth century A.D., according to which the language of the Alans is said to have been identical with the Taurian. [Footnote: Klaproth, Asia polyglotta, pp. 82-88. — Reise in den Kaukasus und nach Georgien, Vol. II, p. 577. Neumann, op. cit., p. 38, note 30. Jacob Grimm, Geschichte der deutschen Sprache, Leipzig 1848, p. 473. Bulletin de la Classe hist.-phil. de l'Académie Impériale des Sciences de St.-Pétersbourg, Vol. VII, p. 316 = Mélanges russes, Vol. I, p. 534.] Of this language one has only a few words preserved, and these are of Iranian origin. It seems accordingly the Hannert

view has much probability for itself; it has, however, been doubted by many distinguished researchers, since they also express strong reservations concerning the nationality of the Taurians and suppose that under this name too different nations were understood.

2) The Roxolani. This people is mentioned first of all by Strabo, who died in the year 24 A.D.; he knows, however, little more than that they were the most distant people among the Scythians. Probably they were of Turkic or High Asiatic origin; one has, however, wanted to make Slavs and Normans out of them and to derive the word Roxolani from Rus. This view, however, has been completely refuted by Kunik, and in a detailed article he has sought to demonstrate their High Asiatic origin. [Footnote: Kritische Bemerkungen zu den Rafn'schen Antiquitates russicae und zu den Kruse'schen Chronicon Normannorum, Zweiter Beitrag, § 11 in Bulletin hist.-phil., Vol. VII, cols. 273 ff. = Mélanges russes, Vol. I, pp. 373 ff. Neumann, op. cit., pp. 90-91.]

3) The Avars. According to Neumann they are one with the Uyghurs, thus Turks. When the Turks in union with the tribe of the Topo in the year 546 A.D. destroyed the realm of the Rouran,

a part of the Turkic subjects of the Rouran submitted to the new Tukiu dynasty, but a still larger part betook itself westwards and called itself Avars, according to Menander also [illegible] Uyghur. These Avars were gradually strengthened by new bands immigrating from the west. In connection with these the Avars subjected the Bulgarian realm and then pressed forward to the Danube. From here in the course of two centuries they made devastating incursions into the Eastern Roman Empire, into the land of the Franks and Slavs, into Bavaria, Swabia, and Galicia, where a part of their hordes settled. Suddenly these hordes disappeared from history. War and diseases put an end to this population, since the few remnants were swallowed and assimilated by other mightier tribes.

Descendants of the former Avars are the [illegible] Morlaks on the Adriatic Sea. They had in the year 595 A.D. set themselves in possession of the coast of Dalmatia and subjected all Dalmatia, but were later subjugated by the Croats. Until Constantine Porphyrogennetos they retained their name and their language, but have afterwards lost both. There are also Avars in the eastern Caucasus; these, however, seem to have nothing in common with the Turkic Avars except the name. They are by their origin Lezghians.

4) The Bulgars. [Footnote: Neumann, op. cit., pp. 91-96.] This name was already early known in the Orient; which people, however, one originally understood under it will hardly be able to be determined. The oldest report about them stems from the time when King Arshag I from the house of the Arsacids ruled over the Parthians, i.e. from 127 to 114 before Christ. It is told that at that time a band of Bulgars pressed forward from the north and settled in the region of Ararat. Their leader is said to have been [illegible] and after him the Bulgars named their new home [illegible], whose chief place was the town of Kars, so famous in the Middle Ages. In the fifth century the Bulgars also left this dwelling-place and moved west to the Don and Dnieper, where they came under the dominion of the Avars. At the invasion of the Avars there broke forth from the region of the southern Ural a multitude of small tribes of Finnish origin, such as Saragurs, Urogs, Onogurs, Kutrigurs, Utigurs, etc. These tribes later a Turkic people subjected, the Khazars or Akatziri, who dwelt between the Black and Caspian Seas. From here they moved forward to the Danube, were thereupon also called Bulgars, and came into dependence on the Avars. In the year 635 the Bulgars shook off this yoke and founded the famous Bulgarian kingdom under their leader Kubrat. Under his son Asparukh they moved (about 670 A.D.) westwards and took a stretch of land

between the Danube and the Transylvanian Alps.

The emperors of the Eastern Roman Empire gave themselves all trouble to expel them; all their efforts remained, however, fruitless. The Bulgars became ever mightier and conquered Moesia, which was for the greatest part inhabited by Slavs. Here the Bulgars gradually adopted the language of the subjected Slavs and lost their nationality. Other branches splintered themselves and moved into different regions. Thereby they became so weakened that a part of the subjected tribes, the [illegible], rose against them. A part of the Bulgars was subjugated by the Khazars; another, however, who would not submit to their dominion, was compelled to move to the Volga, in whose vicinity they had also previously been settled. These Bulgars later founded a dominion that long continued to be celebrated; it is, however, a disputed point in how far they were of Finnish or Turkic origin. The Bulgars, however, who remained back under the dominion of the Khazars, dwelt as before north of the Maeotis or the Sea of Azov, and to them belonged also the Ugri or Hungarians. With exception of these Bulgars the rest live partly under Turkic, partly under Slavic supremacy.

5) The Khazars. [Footnote: Neumann, op. cit., pp. 99-105.] They are considered a Turkic people and regarded as descendants of the old Scythians; they form the same people as the so-called Akatziri, Kat [illegible] by the Roman and Byzantine writers. During the great Migration Period they are said to have moved to the Caucasus, from where they later made frequent incursions into Iberia and Armenia. Under the emperor Julian they moved against the Sassanids, made in connection with their rulers, the above-mentioned Saragurs and another less known people, the Barsilians, frequent incursions into Iberia, Armenia, and Persia, became according to the legendary tales of the Georgians lords of the whole Caucasus, and even took large stretches of land south of the mountains.

In the course of the eighth century the Muslims, when they pressed forward against the Caucasus, got into a long-lasting fight with the Khazars, without, however, overcoming them. Rather was the power of the Khazars so consolidated that they extended their dominion to the north and south-west, conquered Tauria, and subjected the East Goths dwelling on the south coast of the peninsula. In the last half of the ninth century the Khazars stood at the height of their power. Their realm extended from the Yaik to the Dnieper and Bug, from the Caspian Sea, the Pontus, and the southern end of the Caucasus (at Derbent) to the middle Volga and Oka. To them various Finnish and Slavic tribes were subject, perhaps also related Turkic hordes. After the Norman Rus had founded the Russian realm, both the Khazars and the Bulgars stood in friendly relation to Russia; later, however, they succumbed to Mongol dominion.

6) The Pechenegs. [Footnote: Neumann, op. cit.] The Pechenegs are first encountered in Europe on the middle Volga and the Yaik, above the Bulgars and the so-called Bertas, which one holds for peoples of Finnish origin. In the west the Pechenegs bordered on the Khazars, and in the east they had the Uzes or Ghuz, who are also said to have been called Kun, as neighbours. The Ghuz nomadised north-east of the Caspian Sea, in the regions of Bukhara, where now numerous Turkoman tribes wander about. Both the Pechenegs and the Uzes were tributary to the great Turkic realm in High Asia. One ascribes to both these peoples a Turkish origin, although the Uzes are depicted as somewhat different from the Turks, and it is conjectured that they may have been mixed with Mongols. [Footnote: On these Khazars, as also on the Bulgars, there are numerous accounts among the Arabs, collected in Frähn's celebrated work: Ibn Foslan's and Other Arabs' Reports on the Russians of Ancient Times (St. Petersburg, 1823).] [Footnote: Neumann, op. cit., pp. 111, 112, 117, 126–128.]

When the Turkish empire in Asia fell apart, various hordes moved westward in the customary manner, and of these the Uzes and Pechenegs settled on the shores of the Caspian Sea. Here, however, they fell into conflict with the oldest Turkish inhabitants of the land, and a bloody struggle arose in particular between the Khazars and the Pechenegs, which lasted through the course of the eighth and ninth centuries. To protect themselves against the attacks of the Pechenegs, the Khazars had the well-known fortress of Sarkel built on the Don. Toward the end of the ninth century the Khazars and Uzes combined against the restless Pechenegs, attacked them from two sides, and defeated them. Only a small part of their horde remained in the land under the dominion of the Uzes; by far the greater part left its eastern steppes, crossed the middle Don, defeated the Hungarians, who were vassals of the Khazars, and took their land. The Hungarians took to flight, but the Pechenegs followed on their tracks, drove them out of Moldavia and Transylvania into Pannonia, and long remained their enemies. Thereupon the Pechenegs (in the year 900 after Christ) occupied a great part of the steppe north of the Black Sea, between the Don and the mouth of the Danube. Their land was divided by the Dnieper into an eastern and a western Pecheneg land. The Pechenegs were at this time much feared by the neighbouring peoples, the Greeks, Russians, and Bulgars. During their incessant struggles with them, however, they were weakened and soon disappeared from history. After the middle of the twelfth century they are seldom mentioned. It is known, however, that a quantity of Pechenegs settled at various times in Hungary, and one of these colonies is known under the name of the Bess or Bitseni. All these colonies have, however, gradually been assimilated by the Magyar stock.

7) The Uzes, already often touched upon in the preceding, belong beyond doubt to the same Uighur stock which the Chinese call Kui or Kuis and the Arabs Ghuz, and of which I have already spoken above. [Footnote: Neumann, op. cit., pp. 128, 129 and 131.] Their original seat in Europe was the Dnieper land, and for that reason the Dnieper itself is still today called Usu by Turkish tribes. These Uzes were partly annihilated during their struggles with the Pechenegs and Bulgars, partly received by their tribal kinsmen the Cumans, and partly also entered Byzantine service. But when the Byzantines became involved in war with the Seljuks, the Uzes went over to them. As I said above, a part of the Uzes also remained behind in Asia, and from them the present-day Uzbeks descend.

8) The Cumans or Kemans are a people of whom it is believed to be known with certainty that they were Turks, for one possesses a dictionary of their language by which their Turkish origin is to be proved. [Footnote: [illegible in scan], pp. 125 ff.] Since now a report is found that the Cumans spoke the same language as the Uzes and Pechenegs, there can also be no doubt about the Turkish ancestry of the last-named peoples. [Footnote: Klaproth, Mémoires relatifs à l'Asie, vol. III, pp. 113 ff.] The Cumans, however, do not seem to have taken part in the great migration of peoples; rather, they are regarded as descendants of the ancient Scythians. The Cumans and the remains of the Khazars, Uzes, and Pechenegs are now comprehended under the name Mankat or Nogai, the latter of which they received after a famous commander, Nogai. They are said to have been mixed with Mongols.

After the disappearance of the Uzes, the Cumans entered the scene, seized by a wild lust of conquest. [Footnote: Neumann, p. 134.] Both Russia and the Byzantine empire were exposed to their devastations at the end of the eleventh century. Russia had shortly before been divided and its power weakened, so that it could not resist these wild hordes and they could plunder in the land unpunished. Nestor depicts their devastations in the following words: "The towns grow desolate; in the villages churches, houses, huts, and barns are burning. The inhabitants breathe out their lives under the sharp sword or await death trembling. In chains the prisoners pass without clothes and shoes into the distant lands of the barbarians and say to one another with tears in their eyes: 'Ah, I am from this Russian town; I from that village.' No herds, no horses do we see on our pastures; the fields are overgrown with weeds, and wild beasts house where Christians formerly dwelt." After the Dniester and Dnieper regions had been laid waste by the Cumans, they passed through Transylvania and Hungary into the heart of Poland. In league with the Bulgars and Wallachians they devastated the Danube land, and at last the Seljuks also came and fell upon the eastern empire.

In the eleventh and twelfth centuries the Cumans indeed suffered many a defeat and were often beaten by the Russians, Greeks, Magyars, and Bulgars, yet their power could not be broken by them. Their hourglass had run out only when the hosts of the Mongols burst devastatingly into Europe. The Cumans, or the Polovtsy as the Russians call them, now united with the Russians, but were beaten in 1223 on the Kalka, and thereupon a great part of the Cumans moved to Hungary, where they still live to this day. Others remained behind in the subjugated land. Of them, many were sold as slaves in Egypt, where under the name of Mamelukes they fought their way to dominion. Others, however, took refuge with the Greeks, Serbs, and Bulgars.



The Samoyeds

The fourth main branch of the Altaic stock is formed by the so-called Samoyeds, who, despite their small number, occupy an immense territory. They extend from the White Sea in the west to Chatanga Bay (beyond the Yenisei) in the east, and from the Arctic Ocean in the north to the Sayan Mountains in the south. Their principal place of residence is the desolate tundras along the coast of the Arctic Ocean. Since the Samoyeds, like the Lapps, for the most part possess reindeer herds, their way of life has forced them to keep to these tundras, however ill-suited they may seem to support a human population. They are of so barren a nature that no culture can flourish on them; they give the nomad only a meagre subsistence, yet experience shows, and it also lies in the nature of the matter, that a nomadic people can never attain a high degree of culture. I do not mean by this, however, that the Samoyeds are condemned forever to savagery and barbarism; it is rather my conviction that Christianity and culture will take root among them within a short time. The whole so-called tundra country is crossed by great rivers rich in fish, whose banks are quite fertile and very suitable for cattle-raising. The Samoyeds' fate will without doubt be to settle on these rivers and exchange reindeer-breeding for fishing and cattle-raising. The Russians have already set them a good example in this respect, for on all the great rivers there are small Russian colonies, some of which have raised themselves to unusual prosperity. Now and then an impoverished Samoyed has also followed their example, but experience has taught that in such a case he lost his nationality and gradually became a Russian. This, however, has also contributed in a high degree to deterring the Samoyeds from all attempts at colonization, for in all their misery they still set a high value on their nationality and gladly sacrifice the goods of life in order only to remain true to their Samoyed nationality. [Footnote: The word Tundra (Finnish tunturi) is not of Samoyed origin; rather, the Russians are likely to have borrowed it from the Finns, among whom the word has different meanings in different districts. Sometimes it is understood to mean a low, moorland, swampy country, sometimes mountainous, stony districts; in both cases it belongs to the nature of a tundra that it is treeless and produces mosses, especially the so-called reindeer moss.]

They cannot, however, maintain this nationality permanently, for although they live in strict separation from the Russians and withdraw before them into the most remote tundras, they nevertheless become more and more familiar with civilization, and in the same measure their needs also increase. These needs, however, they cannot in the long run satisfy with their present way of life. From day to day they sink into ever greater poverty; the reindeer herds grow smaller and smaller, and when the last reindeer has been eaten, the poor Samoyed has nothing left but either to hire himself out to a Russian colonist or to live on his charity. In both cases he loses his nationality, and even if the Samoyeds have exceptionally formed some small colony, it has not been in their power to preserve their language, their religion, and their customs. [Footnote: This has been the case, for example, with the Samoyeds in Kolts. — The Samoyeds, however, become Syryans (Komi) more readily than Russians, which seems to be brought about by a sense of kinship and by the similar character of both the people and the language.]

The Samoyeds are, in a word, a dying people; posterity will hardly know that such a people ever existed. They have accomplished no deed that would in any way deserve to be recorded in history. Hardly anything is known of their origin, and it has even been subject to doubt to which human race they must be reckoned. Among the physiologists, three different views prevail in this respect. Heusinger, in his work Grundriss der Anthropologie, reckoned both the Lapps and the Samoyeds to the Caucasian race. Bory de St. Vincent assumes a special, so-called Hyperborean race, to which the Samoyeds naturally belong in the first rank. Blumenbach, Baer, and others are of the opinion that the Samoyeds belong to the Mongolian race. From the philological standpoint, only the last view is fully acceptable. It must, however, be remarked that, while among the physiologists Baer assumes no kinship between the Lapps and Finns on the one side and the Samoyeds on the other, the philologist, by contrast, must not only reckon the Finnish and Samoyed stems to the same race, but it even appears that the Samoyed stem has in the whole wide world no other relative so closely related to it as the Finnish stem. Above all, these two language stocks show a great agreement in that the process of agglutination has made far greater progress in them than in Mongolian and Tungusic, as well as in the Turkic languages, and secondly, these languages also show in material respects a far greater kinship with one another than with the other Altaic languages. With regard to the character of agglutination in the Finnish and Samoyed languages, I have already remarked in the foregoing that it differs little from inflection in the Indo-European languages. Of all agglutinative languages, these stand closest to the inflectional languages and form, as it were, a transitional link to them. The languages of the Finnish and Samoyed stocks therefore have no completely definite type, and the same is likely also to be the case with their skull formation, for otherwise it would be hard to understand the difference of opinion prevailing among the physiologists concerning races. Indeed, I have also somewhere found the view expressed that the Finnish and Turkic stocks, in physiological respects, form a transitional link between the Caucasian and Mongolian races.

The Samoyeds fall into three great branches, which I have named as follows: 1) the Yurak Samoyeds, 2) the Tawgy Samoyeds, 3) the Ostyak Samoyeds, to which two smaller branches are further added, the Yenisei Samoyeds and the Kamassins. The first-named, or the Yurak Samoyeds, extend from the White Sea in the west to the Yenisei in the east and lead a nomadic life on the treeless tundras along the coasts of the Arctic Ocean. Eastward there join onto them the so-called Tawgy Samoyeds, who extend to Chatanga Bay, and these too wander as nomads over the tundras. In the midst of these great stems, the Yenisei Samoyeds keep to the lower course of the Yenisei. These too are for the greater part nomads, but at the same time they pursue fishing in the Yenisei River. The Ostyak Samoyeds do not belong to the tundra region but keep within the forest region. Weak branches of this stem are found in the north on the Tas River; by far the greater part of them, however, live scattered on the upper Ob and its numerous tributaries. Of these, only the Tas Samoyeds possess reindeer; all the others support themselves by hunting and fishing. Instead of reindeer they use partly horses, partly dogs, and their dwellings consist not of tents but mostly of small huts or so-called yurts. As for the Kamassins, finally, they have their residence in southern Siberia within the steppe region, on the small rivers Kan and Mana, which belong to the river system of the Yenisei. They are hunters, but they also have a smaller number of reindeer. They form a very insignificant stem, yet their existence is of great importance for ethnography, for it gives a decisive result in the question of the origin of the Samoyeds. It has been asserted that the Samoyed stem, like other related peoples, had its original seat at the Altai in the region of the Sayan Mountains. Pallas even believed he had discovered weak remnants of the Samoyed stock there, and he distinctly names for us Kamassins, Karagass, Koibals, Mators, Arins, Assans, and others, together with several smaller remnants of peoples of this stock, which he had found at the sources of the Yenisei near the Sayan Mountains. [Footnote: Yurak is properly only a single Samoyed stem; I suspect, however, that the word is connected with Yugra and Yugria. — Pallas, Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des Russischen Reichs, Part Three, St. Petersburg, 1776, pp. 304, 373 ff.]

Some decades after him, the civil governor in Yeniseisk, named Stepanov, undertook ethnographic journeys in his government and then published a work in which, with great animosity, he sought to refute Pallas's statements and alleged that the peoples regarded as Samoyeds were Tatars and of Turkic origin. In consequence of this, I received from the Academy of Sciences in St. Petersburg the commission to investigate the true relationship and the nationality of the peoples in question. It emerged from this that one ulus among the Kamassins consisted of pure Samoyeds, while the other stems, in agreement with Stepanov's statements, were true Turks. Meanwhile, among the Koibals, Mators, Karagass, Soyots, and the other peoples mentioned by Pallas, the tradition was generally widespread that their fathers had spoken another language, and some individuals still knew individual words from this language. With their help it became easy for me to decide the disputed question. It turned out that the Sayan mountain country had been the seat of two northern peoples, namely 1) the Samoyeds and 2) the Yenisei Ostyaks. With regard to the Samoyeds, it is a noteworthy circumstance that the southern branches of this stock under discussion here, and especially the still-living Kamassins, have preserved certain clan names that are still found among the northern stems. In consequence of this, no doubt can any longer be entertained about the origin of the Samoyed stock from the Altai. The time of its departure, however, cannot be determined, for the first report of the Samoyeds derives from Nestor, in whose time they were already in possession of their northern seats. [Footnote: Stepanov, Yeniseisk Government, St. Petersburg, 1835, Part II, pp. 37, 45 ff.]

The cause of their emigration can have been none other than the incessant disturbances that took place in High Asia, especially at the time when the Hiongnu and the other Turkic stems were masters of this land. I have already said earlier that during this time various Turkic stems were forced, one after another, to give up this their homeland. One finds in this land today only weak remnants of the Turkic population. Already in a very remote time, as I have likewise said in the foregoing, various Turkic hordes, such as the northern Hiongnu, had left High Asia. The same is also the case with the Kirghiz and perhaps also with several other Turkic stems, which settled in the steppes of southern Siberia north of the Sayan Mountains. It was without doubt the advance of these Turkic colonies that induced the Samoyeds to set out and press forward into more northerly regions. In this, one part followed the course of the Yenisei, another the course of the Ob. That these rivers really served the Samoyeds as guides in their migration of peoples cannot be doubted, for along both rivers one finds, as has already been remarked, a numerous multitude of Samoyed colonies, partly extinct, partly still existing. But wherever in the south one finds either a living or an extinct stem of Samoyed origin, there is always some Turkic stem south of it. And as for the Samoyed stems that have lost their nationality, they have, so far as is known, all become Turks. All this evidently proves that the Turks were the people who drove the Samoyeds from their dwellings on the Altai chain. In the further advance of their migration, the Samoyeds also came into contact with other stems, and especially with the Finnish. In this process, if the current sagas may be trusted, some Samoyed stems were driven out by the Finns, while others, by contrast, subdued the Finnish population and took possession of their dwellings. Particularly reliable seems to me the tradition according to which the Ugric Ostyaks are said to have driven the Samoyeds from their dwellings on the lower Ob to the coast of the Arctic Ocean. This tradition is also widespread among the Ostyaks, and it finds support in the fact that the Ostyak population from ancient times really held more southerly dwellings, which later it was forced to yield to invading stems of Turkic origin. The only region in which the Finns seem to have been obliged to cede their dwellings to the Samoyeds is the region west of the Ural. That Finnish stems have been resident here from ancient times, I have earlier sought to demonstrate in an article on the Trans-Voloka Chuds. As a ground for my supposition, I cited among other things the traditions, current no less among the Samoyeds than among the Russians, about the Chud people, which is called Sirtje by the Samoyeds. The saga reports that this people, at the arrival of the Samoyeds, fled into the bosom of the earth and there still lives on in rich possession of beavers, foxes, and mammoth animals. Further, I sought to confirm my supposition by citing a numerous multitude of Finnish place-names that occur in this region. Thus there is a river here named Ichma from isomaa, which originally seems to have referred to the tundra that the Russians call bolshaya zemlya [great land] and the Samoyeds arka ja, great land. Another river is called Tsylma from the Finnish word kylmä, a third Pyosha, Finnish pesä, a fourth Oya, a fifth Tutot, i.e., Fish River. Perhaps the word Samoyed is also of Finnish origin (Lappish Samejedne), and so on. To this one may further add the numerous accounts in Scandinavian sagas concerning Bjarmaland and its Finnish population, which all, like what has been said above, seem to demonstrate that the Finns must formerly have lived in the tundras west of the Ural, or at least on the rivers that cut through the said tundras. [Footnote: Suomi, Tidskrift i fosterländska ämnen, fourth year, Helsingfors, 1845, pp. 1–23.]



The Yenisei Ostyaks

I mentioned in the foregoing that, like the Samoyeds, the Yenisei Ostyaks also came forth from the region of the Sayan Mountains. Properly, these Ostyaks do not belong in our territory, for their language has a character very different from that of the Altaic languages; but since they live in the midst of the Samoyeds, they may be mentioned here in passing, especially since in ethnographic respects they offer numerous points of contact both with the Samoyeds and with other Altaic peoples, and for this reason must be touched upon here and there in what follows.

The so-called Yenisei Ostyaks perhaps form a remnant of a larger people that formerly stayed in High Asia and was thereafter destroyed during the dangerous wars and devastations to which this land was subjected. At present the number of this stem amounts to scarcely 1,000 tribute-paying persons. They live for the most part on the Yenisei and its tributaries, between the towns of Yeniseisk and Turukhansk. Like the Ostyak Samoyeds neighbouring them, they occupy themselves principally with hunting and fishing. They possess no reindeer; their beast of burden is the dog. In summer and winter they keep in huts, which usually consist of birch bark. Like the rest of Siberia's natives, they are divided into particular clans, which are ruled by their native-born princes. They are Christians in name, but in fact pagans, and they show great reverence especially to the bear.

To the same stem as the Yenisei Ostyaks there originally belonged also the above-named Arins and Assans, who inhabit the Sayan steppes and are now Tatars, or rather Turks. Here belongs further also a stem that older writers called Kotts, which in later times had fallen into oblivion until, on a journey in Siberia, I found five still-living individuals of this people, who lived under the name of the Agul ulus among the so-called Kamassins on the Agul, a tributary of the Kan. These five persons had agreed to lay out a small village on the Agul, where they intend to maintain their nationality, partly out of love for it, partly also for the reason that Siberia's natives pay smaller taxes to the Russian government than the Russians do. To these colonists there have later joined some families descended from the Kotts, who have already forgotten their mother tongue and become Russians. Nevertheless, it is now also very close to their hearts to teach the Kott language both to themselves and to their children, and it is possible that the small colony may long preserve its nationality, which was already regarded as extinct.



The Finns

