My first victory is not great, but it cost me much. A little vase, left by I know not whom behind a window, was found broken. Our Mistress, believing me guilty of having left it lying around, told me to pay more attention another time, that I totally lacked order; in the end she appeared displeased. Saying nothing, I kissed the ground; then I promised to have more order in the future. Because of my little virtue, those little practices, as I have said, cost me much, and I needed to think that on the Day of Judgment everything would be revealed.

Above all I applied myself to well-hidden little acts of virtue: so I liked to fold the mantles forgotten by the sisters, and I sought a thousand occasions to serve them. The attraction for penance was also given to me; but nothing was permitted me to satisfy it. The only mortifications I was granted consisted in mortifying my self-love — which did me more good than corporal penances.

However, the Blessed Virgin helped me prepare my soul's robe; as soon as it was finished, the obstacles vanished, and my profession was set for September 8, 1890. All that I have just said in so few words would require many pages; but those pages will never be read on earth...



Chapter VIII

The divine Wedding. — A retreat of graces. — The last tear of a saint. — Death of her father. — How Our Lord fulfills all her desires. — A victim of Love.

Must I speak to you, Mother, of my profession retreat? Far from being consoled, the most absolute dryness, almost abandonment, was my share. Jesus slept, as always, in my little boat. Ah! I see that souls very rarely let him sleep peacefully in them. That good Master is so tired of continually incurring expenses and making advances, that he hastens to profit from the rest I offer him. He will doubtless not awaken before my great retreat of eternity; but far from grieving me, that gives me extreme pleasure.

Truly I am far from being a saint; that disposition alone is a proof of it. I ought not to rejoice in my dryness, but attribute it to my little fervor and faithfulness; I ought to grieve at sleeping very often during my prayers and my thanksgivings. Well, I do not grieve! I think little children please their parents as much when they sleep as when they are awake; I think that to perform operations, doctors put their patients to sleep; finally I think that the Lord sees our fragility, that he remembers we are only dust.


* * *

My profession retreat was then, like those that followed, a retreat of great dryness. Nevertheless, without my even noticing it, the means of pleasing God and of practicing virtue were then clearly unveiled to me. I have remarked many times that Jesus does not want to give me provisions. He nourishes me at every instant with an entirely new food; I find it in me, without knowing how it is there. I quite simply believe that it is Jesus himself, hidden in the depths of my poor little heart, who acts in me in a mysterious way and inspires everything he wants me to do at the present moment.

Some hours before my profession, I received from Rome, through the venerated Brother Siméon, the Holy Father's blessing — a very precious blessing, which certainly helped me to cross the most furious tempest of my whole life.

During the pious watch, ordinarily so sweet, preceding the dawn of the great day, my vocation suddenly appeared to me like a dream, a chimera; the devil — for it was he — inspired in me the assurance that Carmel life did not suit me at all, that I was deceiving the superiors in advancing on a way to which I was not called. My darkness became so thick that I understood only one single thing: not having the religious vocation, I must return to the world.

Ah! How to depict my anguish! What was to be done in such a perplexity? I decided on the best course: to disclose that temptation to our Mistress without delay. So I had her come out of the choir; and, filled with confusion, I confessed the state of my soul to her. Happily she saw more clearly than I, contented herself with laughing at my confidence, and completely reassured me. Besides, the act of humility I had just made had put the devil to flight, as if by enchantment. What he wanted was to keep me from confessing my trouble, and by that means draw me into his nets. But I caught him in my turn: to make my humiliation more complete, I wanted also to tell you everything, my beloved Mother, and your consoling answer finished dissipating my doubts.


* * *

From the morning of September 8, I was flooded with a river of peace, and in that peace which surpasses all feeling, I pronounced my holy vows. How many graces I asked for! I felt myself truly the "queen," and I profited from my title to obtain all the King's favors for his ungrateful subjects. I forgot no one: I wanted on that day that all the sinners of the earth be converted, that purgatory no longer enclosed a single captive. I also carried on my heart that little note containing what I desired for myself:

"O Jesus, my divine Spouse, may the robe of my baptism never be tarnished! Take me rather than leave me here below to soil my soul by committing the smallest voluntary fault. May I seek and find only you alone! May creatures be nothing to me, and I nothing to them! May none of earth's things trouble my peace.

"O Jesus, I ask you only for peace!... Peace, and above all LOVE without bounds, without limits! Jesus! May I die a martyr for you; give me the martyrdom of the heart or of the body. Ah! Give me both of them rather!

"Make me fulfill my engagements in all their perfection; may no one concern himself with me; may I be trampled underfoot, forgotten like a little grain of sand. I offer myself to you, my Beloved, so that you may perfectly accomplish your holy will in me, without ever letting creatures put an obstacle to it."

At the end of that beautiful day, it was without sadness that I laid, as is the usage, my crown of roses at the Blessed Virgin's feet; I felt that time would not carry away my happiness...

The Nativity of Mary! What a beautiful feast to become Jesus's spouse! It was the little Blessed Virgin of one day who presented her little flower to the little Jesus. That day, everything was little — except the graces I received, except my peace and my joy in seeing, in the evening, the beautiful stars of the firmament, and thinking that soon I would fly away to heaven to unite myself to my divine Spouse, in the bosom of eternal joy.


* * *

The ceremony of my Taking of the Veil took place on the 24th. That feast was entirely veiled with tears. Papa was too ill to come and bless his queen; at the last moment Mgr Hugonin, who was to preside, was himself prevented; finally, because of several other circumstances as well, everything was sadness and bitterness... Nevertheless peace, always peace, was found for me at the bottom of the chalice. That day, Jesus allowed me not to be able to hold back my tears... and my tears were not understood... For I had borne, without weeping, much greater trials; but then I was helped by a powerful grace, whereas on the 24th Jesus left me to my own strength, and I showed how small it was.

Eight days after my Taking of the Veil, my cousin Jeanne Guérin married Dr. La Néele. At the next parlor visit, hearing her speak of the loving attentions with which she surrounded her husband, I felt my heart tremble: "It will not be said," I thought, "that a woman of the world will do more for her husband, a simple mortal, than I for my beloved Jesus." And, filled with a new ardor, I strove more than ever to please in all my actions the heavenly Spouse, the King of kings who had deigned to raise me even to his divine alliance.

Having seen the wedding announcement letter, I amused myself composing the following invitation, which I read to the novices, to make them notice what had struck me so much myself: how little a thing is the glory of earthly unions, compared to the titles of a spouse of Jesus:

GOD ALMIGHTY, Creator of heaven and of earth, supreme Ruler of the world, and THE MOST GLORIOUS VIRGIN MARY, Queen of the celestial court, are pleased to inform you of the spiritual marriage of their august Son, JESUS, King of kings and Lord of lords, with little THÉRÈSE Martin, now Lady and Princess of the kingdoms brought in dowry by her divine Spouse — the Infancy of Jesus and his Passion — from which come her titles of nobility: OF THE CHILD JESUS AND OF THE HOLY FACE.

Not having been able to invite you to the Wedding feast which was celebrated on the Mountain of Carmel on September 8, 1890 — the celestial court alone being admitted to it — you are nevertheless requested to attend the Return of the Wedding, which will take place Tomorrow, the day of Eternity, on which day Jesus, Son of God, will come on the clouds of heaven, in the brightness of his majesty, to judge the living and the dead.

The hour being still uncertain, you are invited to hold yourselves ready and to keep watch.

And now, Mother, what will I tell you? It is into your hands that I gave myself to Jesus; you have known me since my childhood; do I need to write you my secrets? Ah! I pray you, forgive me if I greatly abridge the story of my religious life.

The year that followed my profession, I received great graces during the general retreat. Ordinarily preached retreats are very painful to me; but that time it was otherwise. I had prepared myself for it by a fervent novena; it seemed to me I was going to suffer so much! The Reverend Father, they said, was rather skilled at converting sinners than at making religious souls advance. Well, I am indeed a great sinner, for the good God made use of that holy religious to console me.

I then had interior pains of every kind, which I felt incapable of telling; and behold, my soul expanded perfectly; I was understood in a marvelous way, and even guessed at. The Father launched me with full sails on the waves of confidence and love that attracted me so strongly, but on which I did not dare advance. He told me that my faults did not grieve the good God: "At this moment," he added, "I hold his place beside you; well, I affirm to you on his behalf that he is very happy with your soul."

Oh! How happy I was listening to those consoling words! Never had I heard it said that faults could fail to grieve the good God. That assurance filled me with joy; it made me patiently bear life's exile. Indeed, that was the very echo of my intimate thoughts. Yes, I long believed that the Lord is more tender than a mother, and I know thoroughly more than one mother's heart! I know that a mother is always ready to forgive her child's little involuntary indiscretions. How many times have I not had that sweet experience? No reproach would have touched me as much as a single one of those maternal caresses; I am of a nature such that fear makes me draw back; with love, not only do I advance, but I fly!


* * *

Two months after that blessed retreat, our venerated Foundress, Mother Geneviève of Saint Teresa, left our little Carmel to enter the Carmel of the Heavens.

But before speaking to you of my impressions at the moment of her death, I want, Mother, to tell you my happiness at having lived several years with a saint — not an inimitable one, but sanctified by hidden and ordinary virtues. More than once I received great consolations from her.

One Sunday, entering the infirmary to make her my little visit, I found two older sisters near her; I was withdrawing discreetly when she called me and said to me with an inspired air: "Wait, my little daughter; I have only a word to tell you. You always ask me for a spiritual bouquet; well, today I give you this one: Serve God with peace and with joy; remember, my child, that our God is the God of peace."

After simply thanking her, I went out, moved to tears and convinced that the good God had revealed the state of my soul to her. That day I was extremely tried, almost sad, in such a night that I no longer knew if I was loved by God. But the joy and consolation that replaced that darkness, you can guess them, my dearest Mother...

The following Sunday, I wanted to know what revelation Mother Geneviève had had; she assured me she had received none. Then my admiration was greater still, seeing to what an eminent degree Jesus lived in her soul and made her act and speak. Ah! That sanctity seems to me the truest, the most holy; it is the one I desire, for no illusion is met with in it.

On the day that venerated Mother left exile for the fatherland, I received a very special grace. It was the first time I attended a death; truly that spectacle was ravishing! But during the two hours I spent at the foot of the holy dying woman's bed, a sort of insensibility seized me; I grieved over it, when at the very moment of our Mother's birth to heaven, my interior disposition changed completely. In the twinkling of an eye I felt myself filled with an unspeakable joy and fervor, as if the blessed soul of our holy Mother had given me, at that instant, a part of the felicity she already enjoyed; for I am quite persuaded she went straight to heaven.

During her life I said to her one day: "O Mother, you will not go to purgatory." — "I hope so!" she answered me gently. Certainly the good God could not disappoint a hope so filled with humility; all the favors we received are proof of it.

Each sister made haste to claim some relic of our venerated Mother; and you know, Mother, the one I keep so preciously. During her agony, I noticed a tear that glittered at her eyelid like a beautiful diamond. That tear, the last of all those she shed on earth, did not fall; I saw it still shining when the mortal remains of our Mother were exposed in the choir. Then, taking a little piece of fine linen, I dared to approach in the evening, without being seen by anyone, and I now have the happiness of possessing the last tear of a saint.

I do not attach importance to my dreams — besides, I rarely have symbolic ones — and I even wonder how it happens that, thinking all day about the good God, I do not think of him more during my sleep. Ordinarily I dream of woods, flowers, streams, and the sea. Almost always I see pretty little children, I catch butterflies and birds such as I have never seen. If my dreams have a poetic appearance, you see, Mother, that they are far from being mystical.

One night, after Mother Geneviève's death, I had one that was more consoling. That holy Mother was giving to each of us something that had belonged to her. When my turn came, I thought I would receive nothing, for her hands were empty. Looking at me then with tenderness, she said to me three times: "For you, I leave my heart."


* * *

One month after that death so precious before God — that is, in the last days of the year 1891 — the epidemic of influenza raged in the community; I was only slightly affected and stayed on my feet with two other sisters. It is impossible to imagine the heartbreaking state of our Carmel in those days of mourning. The sickest were cared for by those who could barely drag themselves along; death reigned everywhere; and when one of our sisters had rendered her last sigh, she had to be, alas! Abandoned at once.

My nineteenth birthday was saddened by the death of our venerated Mother Subprioress; I assisted her with the infirmarian during her agony. That death was soon followed by two others. I found myself alone then at the sacristy, and I wonder how I could suffice for everything.

One morning, at the rising signal, I had the presentiment that Sister Madeleine was no more. The dormitory was in complete darkness; no one was leaving the cells. Nevertheless I decided to enter Sister Madeleine's cell, and I saw her indeed, dressed and lying on her pallet, in the immobility of death. I had not the slightest fright; and, running to the sacristy, I quickly brought a candle and placed a crown of roses on her head. In the midst of that abandonment, I felt the good God's hand, his Heart watching over us! It was without effort that our dear sisters passed to a better life; an expression of heavenly joy spread over their faces; they seemed to repose in a sweet sleep.

During those long weeks of trial, I was able to have the ineffable consolation of making holy communion every day. Ah! How sweet that was! Jesus spoiled me for a long time, longer than his faithful spouses. After the influenza, he wanted to come to me for some months more, without the community sharing my happiness. I had not asked for that exception, but I was very happy to unite myself every day to my Beloved.

I was happy as well to be able to touch the sacred vessels, to prepare the little linens destined to receive Jesus. I felt that I had to be very fervent, and I often recalled that word addressed to a holy deacon: "Be holy, you who touch the Lord's vessels."

What shall I tell you, Mother, of my thanksgivings at that time and always? There are no moments when I am less consoled! And is that not quite natural, since I do not desire to receive Our Lord's visit for my satisfaction, but solely for his pleasure?

I picture my soul to myself as a free plot of ground, and I ask the Blessed Virgin to remove the rubble, which are the imperfections; then I beg her to raise herself a vast tent worthy of heaven, and to adorn it with her own ornaments. Then I invite all the Angels and Saints to come sing canticles of love. It seems to me then that Jesus is happy to see himself so magnificently received; and I share his joy. All that does not keep distractions and sleep from coming to bother me; so it is not rare that I take the resolution to continue my thanksgiving the whole day, since I did it so badly in choir.

You see, my revered Mother, I am far from walking by the way of fear; I always know how to find the way to be happy and to profit from my miseries. Our Lord himself encourages me on that road. One time, contrary to my habit, I felt troubled as I went to the holy Table. For several days the number of hosts not being sufficient, I received only a particle; and that morning I made this very ill-founded reflection: "If today I receive only half a host, I shall believe that Jesus comes as it were with regret into my heart!" I approach... O happiness! The priest, stopping, gave me two quite separate hosts! Was that not a sweet answer?

O my Mother, how many subjects I have to be grateful to God! I am going to make you another naive confidence: the Lord has shown me the same mercy as to King Solomon. All my desires have been satisfied — not only my desires for perfection, but also those whose vanity I understood without having experienced it. Having always looked on Mother Agnes of Jesus as my ideal, I wanted to resemble her in everything. Seeing her paint charming miniatures and compose beautiful poems, I thought I would be happy to know how to paint too, and to be able to express my thoughts in verse and do good around me. However, I would not have wanted to ask for those natural gifts, and my desires remained hidden at the bottom of my heart.

Jesus, hidden too in that poor little heart, delighted once again to show him the nothingness of what passes. To the community's great amazement, I succeeded in several painting projects, I composed poems, and it was given to me to do good to some souls. And just as Solomon, turning toward the works of his hands, where he had taken such useless trouble, saw that all is vanity and affliction of spirit under the sun, so I recognized by experience that the only happiness on earth consists in hiding oneself, in remaining in a total ignorance of created things. I understood that without love, all works are only nothing, even the most brilliant. Instead of doing me harm, of wounding my soul, the gifts the Lord has showered upon me bear me toward him; I see that he alone is unchangeable, alone capable of filling my immense desires.

But since I am at the chapter of my desires, there are some of another kind that the divine Master delighted to fulfill again: childish desires, like that of the snow of my taking of the Habit. You know, Mother, how I love flowers. In making myself a prisoner at fifteen, I renounced forever the happiness of running in the countryside enamelled with the treasures of spring. Well, never have I possessed more flowers than since my entrance into Carmel!

It is the usage in the world that fiancés offer pretty bouquets to their fiancées; Jesus did not forget it... I received in plenty for his altar cornflowers, poppies, great daisies, all the flowers that delight me most. A little flower of my friends, the little corncockle, had alone missed the rendezvous; I very much wished to see it again, and behold, lately it came to smile at me and show me that in the least things as in the greatest, the good God gives the hundredfold even in this life to the souls that for his love have left everything.

One single desire, the most intimate of all and the most unrealizable for many reasons, still remained to me. That desire was Céline's entrance into the Carmel of Lisieux. Nevertheless, I had made the entire sacrifice of it, entrusting to God alone my dear sister's future. I accepted that she might leave for the ends of the earth if it must be so, but I wanted to see her, like me, Jesus's spouse. Ah! How I suffered seeing her exposed in the world to dangers that had been unknown to me! I can say that my fraternal affection resembled rather a mother's love; I was filled with devotion and solicitude for her soul. One day, she had to go with my aunt and my cousins to a worldly gathering. I do not know why I felt more grief over it than ever, and I shed a flood of tears, begging Our Lord to keep her from dancing... Which indeed happened! He did not permit his little fiancée to dance that evening — although usually she was not at all embarrassed to do so gracefully. Her partner found himself himself incapable; he could do nothing but walk very religiously with mademoiselle, to the great astonishment of all those present. After which, that poor gentleman slipped away, all shamefaced, without daring to appear again for a single instant of the evening. That adventure, unique of its kind, made me grow in confidence, and showed me clearly that Jesus's sign was also placed on my beloved sister's forehead.

On July 29, 1894, the Lord called my good father to himself, so tried and so holy! During the two years that preceded his death, the paralysis having become general, my uncle kept him near him, showering his painful old age with every kind of consideration. But because of his state of infirmity and powerlessness, we saw him only once at the parlor in all the course of his illness. Ah! What an interview! At the moment of separating, as we said goodbye to him, he raised his eyes and, pointing to the sky with his finger, stayed like that a long time, having, to translate his thought, only that single word pronounced in a voice full of tears: "To heaven!!!"

That beautiful heaven having become his share, the bonds that held in the world his consoling angel found themselves broken. But angels do not stay on earth: when they have accomplished their mission they return at once to God; that is why they have wings! So Céline tried to fly to Carmel. Alas! The difficulties seemed insurmountable. One day, her affairs entangling themselves more and more, I said to Our Lord after holy communion: "You know, my Jesus, how much I desired that my father's trial serve as his purgatory. Oh! How I would like to know if my wishes are answered. I do not ask you to speak to me; I ask you only for a sign: you know Sister *'s opposition to Céline's entrance; well, if henceforth she no longer puts obstacles to it, that will be your answer; you will tell me by that that my father went straight to heaven."

O infinite mercy! Ineffable condescension! The good God, who holds the hearts of creatures in his hand and inclines them as he wills, changed that sister's dispositions. The first person I met right after the thanksgiving, it was she herself who, calling me, her eyes in tears, spoke to me of Céline's entrance, showing me only a keen desire to see her among us! And soon Monseigneur, cutting through the last difficulties, permitted you, Mother, without the least hesitation, to open our doors to the little exiled dove.

Now I have no more desire at all, except to love Jesus to folly! Yes, it is LOVE alone that attracts me. I no longer desire either suffering or death, and yet I cherish them both! For a long time I called them as messengers of joy... I possessed suffering, and I believed I was touching the shore of heaven! I believed, from my tenderest youth, that the little flower would be plucked in her spring; today, abandonment alone guides me; I have no other compass. I no longer know how to ask for anything with ardor, except the perfect accomplishment of God's will on my soul. I can say those words of the canticle of our Father Saint John of the Cross:

In my Beloved's inner cellar I drank... and when I came out, In all that plain I knew nothing any more, And I lost the flock I followed before.

My soul has employed itself With all its resources in his service; I no longer keep a flock, I have no other office, For now all my exercise is to LOVE.

Or again:

Since I have the experience of it, Love is so powerful in works That it knows how to profit from everything, From the good and the evil it finds in me, And to transform my soul into itself.

O my Mother, how sweet is the way of love! No doubt one can fall; one can commit infidelities; but love, knowing how to profit from everything, has very quickly consumed everything that can displease Jesus, leaving at the bottom of the heart only a humble and profound peace.

Ah! How much light have I not drawn from the works of Saint John of the Cross! At the age of seventeen and eighteen I had no other nourishment. But later, spiritual authors all left me in dryness; and I am still in that disposition. If I open a book, even the most beautiful, the most touching, my heart tightens at once and I read without being able to understand; or, if I understand, my spirit stops without being able to meditate.

In that powerlessness, Holy Scripture and the Imitation come to my aid; in them I find a hidden manna, solid and pure. But it is above all the Gospel that sustains me during my prayers; there I draw everything necessary to my poor little soul. I always discover new lights there, hidden and mysterious meanings. I understand and I know by experience that the kingdom of God is within us. Jesus has no need of books or doctors to instruct souls; he, the Doctor of doctors, teaches without the noise of words. Never have I heard him speak; but I know he is in me. At every instant, he guides me and inspires me; I perceive, just at the moment when I need them, brightnesses unknown until then. Most often it is not during the hours of prayer that they shine in my eyes, but in the midst of the day's occupations.

Sometimes however a word like this one — which I drew this evening, at the end of a prayer spent in dryness — comes to console me: "Here is the Master I give you; he will teach you everything you must do. I want to make you read in the Book of life where is contained the science of love." The science of love! Ah! That word resounds sweetly in my soul's ear. I desire only that science! For it, having given all my riches, like the bride of the canticles, I reckon I have given nothing.

O my Mother, after so many graces, may I not sing with the Psalmist that the Lord is good, that his mercy is everlasting! It seems to me that if all creatures received the same favors, God would be feared by no one, but loved to excess; for love, and not trembling, never would any soul commit the smallest voluntary fault.

But lastly, I understand that not all souls can resemble one another; it is necessary for there to be some of different families, so as to honor specially each one of the divine perfections. To me, he has given his INFINITE MERCY, and it is through that ineffable mirror that I contemplate his other attributes. Then all appear to me radiant with LOVE: justice itself, more than the others perhaps, seems to me clothed with love. What a sweet joy to think that the Lord is just — that is, that he takes account of our weaknesses, that he perfectly knows the fragility of our nature! Of what, then, would I be afraid? The infinitely just good God who deigns to forgive with such mercy the faults of the prodigal child, must he not be just also toward me, who am always with him?

In the year 1895, I received the grace to understand more than ever how much Jesus desires to be loved. Thinking one day of the souls who offer themselves as victims to God's justice, so as to turn away, by attracting them to themselves, the chastisements reserved for sinners, I found that offering grand and generous, but I was very far from feeling myself inclined to make it.

"O my divine Master!" I cried out from the bottom of my heart, "will it be only your justice to receive holocaust victims? Does not your merciful love need them too? On every side it is misunderstood, rejected... The hearts to which you desire to lavish it turn toward creatures, asking them for happiness with a miserable affection of an instant, instead of throwing themselves into your arms and accepting the delicious furnace of your infinite love.

"O my God, is your despised love going to remain in your Heart? It seems to me that if you found souls offering themselves as HOLOCAUST VICTIMS TO YOUR LOVE, you would consume them rapidly; that you would be happy not to compress the flames of infinite tenderness enclosed in you.

"If your justice loves to discharge itself, it which extends only over the earth, how much more does your merciful love desire to set souls afire, since your mercy rises even to the heavens! O Jesus, let it be I, this happy victim; consume your little host with the fire of divine love."

Mother, you know the flames, or rather the oceans of graces that came to flood my soul, right after my offering of June 9, 1895. Ah! Since that day, love penetrates me and surrounds me; at every instant that merciful love renews me, purifies me, and leaves in my heart no trace of sin. No, I cannot fear purgatory; I know that I would not even deserve to enter with the holy souls into that place of expiation; but I also know that the fire of love is more sanctifying than that of purgatory; I know that Jesus cannot want useless sufferings for us, and that he would not inspire in me the desires I feel if he did not want to fulfill them.


* * *

Here the First Edition brings Manuscript A to its close in this printing; the 1898 book continues with Chapters IX–XII, which are forthcoming in this series.

