The father, having learned that there is on his son's path a dangerous stone, takes the lead and removes it, unseen by anyone. Certainly that son, the object of his provident tenderness, not knowing the misfortune from which he has been preserved by the paternal hand, will show him no gratitude, and will love him less than if he had cured him of a mortal wound. But if he comes to know everything, will he not love him more? Well then, I am that child, the object of the provident love of a Father "who did not send his Word to redeem the righteous, but sinners." He wants me to love him, because he has forgiven me, not much, but everything. Without waiting for me to love him much, like Saint Mary Magdalene, he made me know how he had loved me with a love of ineffable providence, so that now I would love him to distraction!

I have heard it said many times, during retreats and elsewhere, that a pure soul has never been met loving more than a repentant soul. Ah! How I would like to give the lie to that saying!


* * *

But I am far from my subject; I no longer really know where to take it up...

It was during my retreat for my second communion that I saw myself assailed by the terrible malady of scruples. One must have passed through that martyrdom to understand it well. Telling what I suffered for nearly two years would be impossible for me! All my simplest thoughts and actions became a subject of trouble and anguish to me. I had rest only after confiding everything to Marie, which cost me much; for I believed myself obliged to tell her absolutely all my most extravagant thoughts. As soon as my burden was laid down, I tasted a moment's peace; but that peace passed like lightning, and my martyrdom began again! My God, what acts of patience I made my dear sister perform!


* * *

That year, during vacation, we went to spend two weeks at the seaside. My aunt, always so good and motherly to her little Buissonnets girls, procured for them every imaginable pleasure: donkey rides, sand-eel fishing, etc. She spoiled us even in our dressing. I remember one day she gave me sky-blue ribbons. I was still so much a child, despite my twelve and a half years, that I felt joy putting my hair up with those pretty ribbons. I had so much scruple over it afterward that I confessed, at Trouville itself, that childish pleasure which seemed a sin to me.

There I made a very profitable experience:

My cousin Marie often had migraines; and on those occasions my aunt pampered her, showered her with the most tender names, and never obtained anything else but tears, with the invariable complaint: "My head hurts!" I, who almost every day had a headache too and did not complain about it, wanted one fine evening to imitate Marie. So I set about weeping on an armchair in a corner of the living room. Soon my elder cousin Jeanne, whom I loved very much, bustled about me; my aunt also came and asked me what the cause of my tears was. I answered, like Marie: "My head hurts!"

It seems that complaining did not suit me: I could never make anyone believe that headache made me cry. Instead of caressing me, as she usually did, my aunt spoke to me like a grown person. Jeanne even reproached me — very gently, but with an accent of pain — for lacking confidence and simplicity toward my aunt, for not telling her the true cause of my tears, which she thought was a big scruple.

In the end, I paid the price for my pains, well resolved not to imitate others anymore; and I understood the fable of the ass and the little dog. I was the ass who, witnessing the caresses lavished on the little dog, put his heavy hoof on the table to receive his share of kisses too. If I was not sent away with beatings of a stick, like the poor animal, I nonetheless received the coin of my piece, and that coin cured me forever of the desire to attract attention.


* * *

I come back to my great trial of scruples. In the end it made me ill, and they were obliged to take me out of boarding school at the age of thirteen. To finish my education, my father took me, several times a week, to a respectable lady from whom I received excellent lessons. Those lessons had the double advantage of instructing me and of bringing me closer to the world.

In that room furnished in old style, surrounded by books and notebooks, I often witnessed numerous visits. My teacher's mother did, as much as possible, the honors of the conversation; however, on those days I did not learn much. My nose in my book, I heard everything, even what it would have been better for me not to hear. One lady said I had beautiful hair; another, leaving, asked what that pretty young girl was. And those words, all the more flattering for not being pronounced in front of me, left me an impression of pleasure that clearly showed me how full of self-love I was.

How I pity souls that are lost! It is so easy to go astray on the flowered paths of the world! No doubt, for a somewhat elevated soul, the sweetness it offers is mixed with bitterness, and the immense void of desires cannot be filled by a moment's praises; but I repeat it, if my heart had not been lifted up toward God from its first awakening, if the world had smiled on me from my entrance into life, what would I have become? O my revered Mother, with what gratitude I sing the mercies of the Lord! In the words of Wisdom, did he not "take me away from the world before my spirit was corrupted by its malice, and before deceptive appearances had seduced my soul"?

Meanwhile, I resolved to consecrate myself in a very particular way to the Blessed Virgin, by soliciting my admission among the Children of Mary. To do that, I had to go back to the convent twice a week, which cost me a little, I confess, because of my great timidity. I loved my good teachers very much, no doubt, and I shall always keep a keen gratitude toward them; but I have already said it — unlike the other former pupils, I had no teacher who was a particular friend, with whom I might have spent several hours. So I worked in silence until the end of the work lesson; and as no one paid attention to me, I then went up to the chapel gallery until the hour my father came to fetch me.

In that silent visit I found my only consolation. Was not Jesus my only Friend? I did not know how to speak to anyone but him alone; conversations with creatures, even pious conversations, fatigued my soul. It is true that in those abandonments I had some moments of sadness, and I remember that often then I repeated with consolation this line from a beautiful poem my father used to recite to us:

Time is your ship, and not your dwelling place.

When I was very little, those words gave me back my courage. Even now, despite the years that make so many impressions of childish piety fade, the image of the ship still charms my soul and helps it bear exile. Does not Wisdom also say that "life is like the ship that cleaves the agitated waves and leaves behind it no trace of its swift passage"?

When I think of those things, my gaze plunges into the infinite; it seems to me I already touch the eternal shore! It seems to me I receive Jesus's embraces... I think I see the Virgin Mary coming to meet me with my father, my mother, the little angels my brothers and sisters! I think I at last enjoy, forever, the true, eternal family life!


* * *

But before seeing myself seated at the paternal hearth of the heavens, I had to suffer many more separations on earth. The year I was received as a Child of the Blessed Virgin, she took from me my dear Marie, the sole support of my soul. Since Pauline's departure, she remained my only oracle, and I loved her so much that I could not live without her sweet company.

As soon as I learned of her decision, I resolved to take no pleasure here below; I cannot say how many tears I shed! Besides, it was my habit at that time: I wept not only on great occasions, but on the smallest. Here are a few examples:

I had a great desire to practice virtue; yet I went about it in a singular way: I was not used to serving myself; Céline made our room, and I occupied myself with no housework. It happened sometimes, to please the good God, that I covered the bed, or in the evening, in my sister's absence, brought in her cuttings and her flowerpots. As I have said, it was for the good God alone that I did those things; thus I ought not to have waited for creatures' thanks. Alas! It was quite otherwise; if Céline had the misfortune not to seem happy and surprised at my little services, I was not content, and proved it to her with my tears.

If it happened that I involuntarily caused someone pain, instead of getting over it, I despaired enough to make myself ill over it, which increased my fault rather than repairing it; and when I began to console myself about the fault itself, I wept for having wept.

I really made sorrows for myself out of everything! It is the opposite now; the good God gives me the grace not to be cast down by any passing thing. When I remember the old days, my soul overflows with gratitude; as a result of the favors I have received from heaven, such a change has come about in me that I am not recognizable.


* * *

When Marie entered Carmel, being unable to confide my torments to her any longer, I turned to the side of heaven. I addressed myself to the four little angels who had preceded me up there, thinking that those innocent souls, having never known trouble and fear, ought to have pity on their poor little sister suffering on earth. I spoke to them with a child's simplicity, pointing out to them that, being the last of the family, I had always been the most loved, the most showered with tenderness by my parents and my sisters; that if they had remained on earth, they would no doubt have given me the same proofs of affection. Their entrance into heaven did not seem to me a reason for them to forget me; on the contrary, finding themselves able to draw from the divine treasures, they ought to take peace there for me, and so show me that up there they still know how to love.

The answer was not long in coming; soon peace came to flood my soul with its delicious waves. I was loved, then, not only on earth, but also in heaven! From that moment, my devotion to my little brothers and sisters of paradise grew; I loved to converse with them, to speak to them of the sadnesses of exile and of my desire soon to rejoin them in the eternal homeland.



Chapter V

The grace of Christmas. — Zeal for souls. — First conquest. — Sweet intimacy with her sister Céline. — She obtains her father's permission to enter Carmel at fifteen. — The Superior's refusal. — She refers it to His Lordship Bishop Hugonin, Bishop of Bayeux.

If heaven showered me with graces, I was far from deserving them. I constantly had a keen desire to practice virtue; but what imperfections mingled with my acts! My extreme sensibility made me truly unbearable; all reasonings were useless; I could not correct myself of that ugly fault.

How then did I dare to hope for my near entrance into Carmel? A little miracle was needed to make me grow in a moment; and that so-desired miracle, the good God worked it on the unforgettable day of December 25, 1886. On that feast of Christmas, on that blessed night, Jesus, the sweet Child of an hour, changed the night of my soul into torrents of light. Making himself weak and small for love of me, he made me strong and courageous; he clothed me with his armor, and from then on I marched from victory to victory, beginning, so to speak, a giant's race. The source of my tears was dried up, and opened only rarely and with difficulty.

I will now tell you, Mother, in what circumstance I received that inestimable grace of my complete conversion:

Arriving at Les Buissonnets after Midnight Mass, I knew I would find in the fireplace, as in the days of my little childhood, my shoes filled with treats — which proves that, until then, my sisters treated me like a little baby. My father himself loved to see my happiness, to hear my cries of joy as I drew each new surprise from the enchanted shoes, and his gaiety increased my pleasure still more. But the hour had come when Jesus wanted to deliver me from the faults of childhood and withdraw their innocent joys from me. He allowed my father, against his habit of spoiling me in all circumstances, to feel annoyance this time. Going up to my room, I heard him pronounce these words that pierced my heart: "For a big girl like Thérèse, this is too childish a surprise; I hope it will be the last year."

Céline, knowing my extreme sensibility, said to me under her breath: "Don't go down right away; wait a bit; you would cry too much looking at the surprises in front of Papa." But Thérèse was no longer the same... Jesus had changed her heart!

Repressing my tears, I quickly went down into the dining room; and, pressing down the beatings of my heart, I took my shoes, set them before my father, and drew out all the objects joyfully, looking as happy as a queen. Papa laughed; there no longer appeared on his face any mark of annoyance, and Céline thought she was in the middle of a dream! Happily, it was a sweet reality: little Thérèse had just recovered, forever, the strength of soul she had once lost at the age of four and a half.

On that luminous night there began the third period of my life, the most beautiful of all, the most filled with the graces of heaven. In an instant, the work I had been unable to do for several years, Jesus accomplished, contenting himself with my good will. Like the Apostles, I could say: "Lord, I have toiled all night and taken nothing." More merciful still to me than he was to his disciples, Jesus himself took the net, threw it, and drew it back full of fish; he made me a fisher of souls... Charity entered into my heart with the need to forget myself always, and from then on I was happy.


* * *

One Sunday, as I closed my book at the end of Mass, a photograph representing Our Lord on the cross slipped a little out from the pages, letting me see only one of his divine hands, pierced and bloody. I then experienced a new, ineffable feeling. My heart broke with sorrow at the sight of that precious blood falling to the ground, with no one hurrying to gather it; and I resolved to keep myself continually in spirit at the foot of the cross, to receive the divine dew of salvation and then pour it out upon souls.

From that day, the dying cry of Jesus, "I thirst!" resounded at every instant in my heart, to light in it an unknown and very keen ardor. I wanted to give my Beloved something to drink; I felt myself devoured with thirst for souls, and I wanted at all costs to snatch sinners from the eternal flames.

To excite my zeal, the good Master soon showed me that my desires were pleasing to him. I heard it spoken of that a great criminal — by the name of Pranzini — was condemned to death for appalling murders, and that his impenitence made his eternal damnation to be feared. I wanted to prevent that final and irreparable misfortune. To reach that end, I used every imaginable spiritual means; and knowing that of myself I could do nothing, I offered for his ransom the infinite merits of Our Lord and the treasures of Holy Church.

Must I say it? I felt at the bottom of my heart the certainty of being heard. But to give myself courage to continue running to the conquest of souls, I made this naive prayer: "My God, I am quite sure you will forgive the unfortunate Pranzini; I would believe it even if he did not confess and gave no mark of contrition, so much do I trust in your infinite mercy. But this is my first sinner; for that reason, I only ask you for a sign of repentance, for my simple consolation."

My prayer was answered to the letter! My father never let us read the newspapers; nevertheless I did not think I was disobeying by looking at the passages that concerned Pranzini. The day after his execution, I eagerly opened the newspaper La Croix — and what did I see?... Ah! My tears betrayed my emotion, and I was obliged to run away. Pranzini, without confession, without absolution, had mounted the scaffold; already the executioners were dragging him toward the fatal trap, when, shaken all of a sudden by a sudden inspiration, he turned around, seized a Crucifix the priest held out to him, and kissed its sacred wounds three times!

So I had obtained the sign I asked for; and that sign was so sweet to me! Was it not before the wounds of Jesus, seeing his divine blood flow, that thirst for souls had entered into my heart? I wanted to give them that immaculate blood to drink, so as to purify them of their stains; and the lips "of my first child" went and pressed themselves upon the divine wounds! What an ineffable answer! Ah! From that unique grace, my desire to save souls grew every day; it seemed to me I heard Jesus say to me softly, as to the Samaritan woman: "Give me to drink!" It was a real exchange of love: to souls I poured out the blood of Jesus; to Jesus I offered those same souls, refreshed by the dew of Calvary; so I thought to quench his thirst. But the more I gave him to drink, the more the thirst of my poor little soul increased, and I received that ardent thirst as the most delicious reward.


* * *

In a short time, the good God had led me beyond the narrow circle in which I lived. The great step was thus taken; but alas! A long road remained for me to cover.

Freed of its scruples and its excessive sensibility, my mind developed. I had always loved what is great and beautiful; at that time I was taken with an extreme desire to know. Not contenting myself with my teacher's lessons, I applied myself alone to special sciences; and by that means I acquired more knowledge in just a few months than in all my years of study. Ah! Was that zeal not vanity and affliction of spirit?

With my ardent nature, I found myself at the most dangerous moment of life. But the Lord did toward me what Ezekiel recounts in his prophecies:

"He saw that the time had come for me to be loved; he made a covenant with me, and I became his; he spread his mantle over me; he washed me in precious perfumes; he clothed me in sparkling robes, giving me necklaces and priceless perfumes. He fed me with the purest flour, with honey and oil in abundance. Then I became beautiful in his eyes, and he made me a powerful queen."

Yes, Jesus did all that for me! I could take up each word of that ineffable passage and show that it was realized in my favor; but the graces recounted above are already sufficient proof of it. So I shall only speak of the food the divine Master lavished on me "in abundance."

For a long time I had sustained my spiritual life with "the purest flour" contained in the Imitation. It was the only book that did me good; for I had not yet discovered the treasures hidden in the holy Gospel. That little book never left me. In the family it was much joked about; often my aunt, opening it at random, made me recite the chapter that fell under her eyes.

At fourteen, with my desire to know, the good God found it necessary to add to "the purest flour, honey and oil in abundance." That honey and oil he made me taste in the conferences of M. l'abbé Arminjon on the end of the present world and the mysteries of the future life. Reading that work plunged my soul into a happiness that is not of the earth; I already foresaw what God reserves for those who love him; and seeing those eternal rewards so disproportionate to the light sacrifices of this life, I wanted to love, to love Jesus with passion, to give him a thousand marks of tenderness while I still could.


* * *

Céline had become, especially since Christmas, the intimate confidante of my thoughts. Jesus, who wanted to make us advance together, formed in our hearts bonds stronger than those of blood. He made us become sisters of soul.

In us were realized the words of our Father Saint John of the Cross in his Spiritual Canticle:

> Following your traces, O my Beloved, > The young girls lightly run the road. > The touch of the spark, > The spiced wine, > Make them breathe out divinely perfumed aspirations.

Yes, it was lightly indeed that we followed Jesus's traces! The burning sparks he sowed in our souls, the delicious and strong wine he gave us to drink, made passing earthly things disappear from our eyes; and from our lips came out aspirations all of love.

With what sweetness I remember our conversations then! Every evening, at the belvedere, we together plunged our gazes into the deep azure sown with golden stars. It seems to me we received very great graces there. As the Imitation says: "God sometimes communicates himself in the midst of a bright splendor, or else, gently veiled, under shadows and figures." So he deigned to manifest himself to our hearts; but how transparent and light that veil was! Doubt would not have been possible; faith and hope were already leaving our souls: love made us find on earth Him whom we sought. Having found him alone, he had given us his kiss, so that henceforth no one could despise us.

Those divine impressions were not to remain fruitless; the practice of virtue became sweet and natural to me. At first, my face betrayed the combat; but little by little, sacrifice seemed easy to me, even at the first moment. Jesus said it: "To him who possesses, still more will be given, and he will be in abundance." For one grace faithfully received, he granted me a multitude of others. He gave himself to me in holy communion, more often than I would have dared to hope. I had taken as my rule of conduct to make, very faithfully, all the communions permitted by my confessor, without ever asking him to increase their number. Today I would go about it another way; for I am quite sure that a soul should tell its director the attraction it feels to receive its God. It is not to stay in the golden ciborium that he comes down every day from heaven, but to find another heaven: the heaven of our soul, where he takes his delights.

Jesus, who saw my desire, thus inspired my confessor to permit me several communions a week; and those permissions, coming directly from him, filled me with joy. At that time I dared not say anything about my interior feelings; the way I was walking was so straight, so luminous, that I did not feel the need of any guide other than Jesus. I compared directors to faithful mirrors who reflected Our Lord in souls; and I thought that, for me, the good God used no intermediary, but acted directly.


* * *

When a gardener surrounds with care a fruit he wants to ripen before the season, it is never to leave it hanging on the tree; it is to present it on a richly served table. In a similar intention, Jesus lavished his graces on his little flower. He wanted to make his mercy burst forth in me, he who cried out in a transport of joy, in the days of his mortal life: "My Father, I bless you for having hidden these things from the wise and the prudent, to reveal them to the little ones." Because I was little and weak, he lowered himself to me and gently instructed me in the secrets of his love. As Saint John of the Cross says in his Canticle of the soul:

> I had neither guide nor light, > Except the one that shone in my heart. > That light guided me, > More surely than the midday sun, > To the place where he awaited me, > He who knows me perfectly.

That place was Carmel; but before resting in the shadow of Him whom I desired, I had to pass through many trials. And yet the divine call became so pressing that, had I had to cross through flames, I would have hurled myself into them to answer Our Lord.

Alone, my sister Agnes of Jesus encouraged me in my vocation; Marie found me too young, and you, my beloved Mother, also tried — to test me, no doubt — to slow my ardor. From the start I met only obstacles. On the other hand, I dared not say anything to Céline, and that silence made me suffer much; it was so difficult for me to hide anything from her! Soon, however, that dear sister learned of my determination, and far from trying to turn me from it, she accepted the sacrifice with admirable courage. Since she wanted to be a religious, she ought to have left first; but, as long ago the martyrs joyfully gave the kiss of farewell to their brothers, chosen first to fight in the arena, so she let me go away, taking the same part in my trials as if it were a matter of her own vocation.

On Céline's side, then, I had nothing to fear; but I did not know what means to take to announce my plans to my father. How could I speak to him of leaving his queen, when he had just sacrificed his two eldest daughters? Moreover, that year we had seen him ill with a rather serious attack of paralysis, from which he recovered promptly, it is true, but which nevertheless left us many anxieties for the future.

Ah! How many interior struggles I suffered before speaking! Nevertheless I had to decide: I was about to turn fourteen and a half; only six months still separated us from the beautiful night of Christmas, and I was resolved to enter Carmel at the very hour when, the year before, I had received my grace of conversion.

To make my great confidence, I chose the feast of Pentecost. All day I asked for the lights of the Holy Spirit, begging the Apostles to pray for me, to inspire the words I would have to say. Were they not the ones, indeed, who had to help the timid child whom God destined to become the apostle of the apostles by prayer and sacrifice?

In the afternoon, returning from Vespers, I found the desired occasion. My father had gone to sit in the garden; and there, his hands joined, he contemplated the wonders of nature. The setting sun gilded with its last fires the tops of the tall trees, and the little birds warbled their evening prayer.

His beautiful face had a wholly heavenly expression; I felt that peace flooded his heart. Without saying a single word, I went and sat at his side, my eyes already wet with tears. He looked at me with indefinable tenderness, leaned my head on his heart, and said: "What is it, my little queen? Confide it to me..." Then, rising as if to hide his own emotion, he walked slowly, pressing me always to his heart.

Through my tears I spoke of Carmel, of my desires to enter soon; then he wept himself! Nevertheless, he said nothing that could turn me from my vocation; he simply pointed out to me that I was still very young to take so grave a determination; and as I insisted, defending my cause well, my incomparable father, with his upright and generous nature, was soon convinced. We continued our walk for a long time; my heart was relieved; Papa shed no more tears. He spoke to me as a saint. Coming up to a low wall, he showed me some little white flowers, like lilies in miniature; and taking one of those flowers, he gave it to me, explaining with what care the Lord had made it bloom and preserved it until that day.

I thought I was hearing my story, so striking was the resemblance between the little flower and little Thérèse. I received that little flower as a relic; and I saw that in wanting to pick it, my father had taken out all its roots without breaking them: it seemed destined to live still in another, more fertile soil. That same action, Papa had just done for me, in permitting me to leave, for the mountain of Carmel, the sweet valley witness of my first steps in life.

I glued my little white flower onto a picture of Our Lady of Victory: the Blessed Virgin smiles at it, and the little Jesus seems to hold it in his hand. That is where it still is; only the stem has broken very close to the root. The good God, no doubt, wants to tell me by that that he will soon break the bonds of his little flower and will not let her fade on earth...

After having obtained my father's consent, I thought I could fly away to Carmel without fear. Alas! My uncle, after having heard my confidences in his turn, declared that entering at fifteen into an austere order seemed to him contrary to human prudence; that it would wrong religion to let a child embrace such a life. He added that he would put all possible opposition on his side, and that short of a miracle, he would not change his mind.

I perceived that all reasonings were useless, and I withdrew, my heart plunged in the deepest bitterness. My only consolation was prayer; I begged Jesus to work the miracle demanded, since at that price alone I could answer his call. A rather long time ran by; my uncle no longer seemed to remember our conversation; but I learned later that, on the contrary, I occupied him a great deal.

Before making a ray of hope shine on my soul, the Lord wanted to send me another, very painful martyrdom, which lasted three days. Oh! Never have I understood so well the bitter sorrow of the Blessed Virgin and Saint Joseph, searching through the streets of Jerusalem for the divine Child Jesus. I found myself in a frightful desert; or rather my soul resembled the fragile skiff given over, without a pilot, to the mercy of the stormy waves. I knew it — Jesus was there, sleeping in my little boat; but how could I see him in the midst of so dark a night? If the storm had broken openly, a flash of lightning might perhaps have furrowed my clouds. No doubt lightning is a very sad light; nevertheless, in its brightness, I would have glimpsed for an instant the Beloved of my heart.

But no... it was night! Deep night, complete abandonment, a real death! Like the divine Master in the Garden of Agony, I felt alone, finding consolation neither on the side of earth nor on the side of heaven. Nature seemed to take part in my bitter sadness: during those three days, the sun did not show a single one of its rays and the rain fell in torrents. I always remarked on it: in all the circumstances of my life nature was the image of my soul. When I wept, the sky wept with me; when I rejoiced, the azure of the firmament was not darkened by any cloud.

On the fourth day, which happened to be a Saturday, I went to see my uncle. What was my surprise at finding him entirely changed toward me! First, without my having expressed the desire to him, he had me enter his study; then, beginning by addressing gentle reproaches to me about my manner of being, a little constrained with him, he told me that the demanded miracle was no longer necessary; that having prayed the good God to give him a simple inclination of heart, he had just obtained it. I did not recognize him anymore. He kissed me with a father's tenderness, adding in a deeply moved tone: "Go in peace, my dear child; you are a privileged little flower whom the Lord wants to gather; I shall not oppose it."

With what gladness I took the road back to Les Buissonnets under the beautiful sky, from which the clouds had completely cleared! In my soul too the night had ceased. Jesus, awakening, had given me back my joy; I no longer heard the noise of the waves: instead of the wind of trial, a light breeze swelled my sail, and I thought I was at the port! Alas! More than one storm was still to rise, making me fear, at certain hours, that I had moved away forever from the shore so ardently desired.

After having obtained my uncle's consent, I learned from you, my revered Mother, that the Superior of Carmel did not permit me to enter before the age of twenty-one. No one had thought of that opposition, the gravest, most invincible of all. Nevertheless, without losing courage, I went myself with my father to lay my desires before him. He received me very coldly, and nothing could change his dispositions. At last we left him upon a very decided no: "However," he added, "I am only Monseigneur's delegate; if he permits this entrance, I shall have nothing more to say." On leaving the presbytery, we found ourselves in torrential rain; alas! Heavy clouds also weighed down the firmament of my soul. Papa did not know how to console me. He promised to take me to Bayeux if I wished; I accepted with gratitude.

Many events came to pass before it was possible for us to accomplish that journey. Outwardly, my life seemed the same: I studied, and above all I grew in the love of the good God. I sometimes had impulses, real transports...

One evening, not knowing how to tell Jesus that I loved him and how much I desired that he be everywhere served and glorified, I thought with sorrow that never from the abysses of hell would a single act of love rise up to him. Then I cried out that, with a good heart, I would consent to see myself plunged into that place of torments and blasphemies, so that he would be loved there eternally. That could not glorify him, since he desires only our happiness; but when one loves, one feels the need to say a thousand follies. If I spoke that way, it was not that heaven did not stir my envy; but then, my heaven was none other than love, and I felt, in my ardor, that nothing could detach me from the divine Object who had ravished me...


* * *

Around that time, Our Lord gave me the consolation of seeing children's souls up close. In what circumstance? Here it is: during the illness of a poor mother of a family, I took much care of her two little girls, the eldest of whom was not yet six. It was a real pleasure for me to see with what candor they believed all I told them. Holy baptism must deposit in souls a very deep seed of the theological virtues, since from childhood the hope of future goods suffices to make sacrifices acceptable. When I wanted to see my two little girls very agreeable to each other, instead of promising them toys and candies, I spoke to them of the eternal rewards the little Jesus would give good children. The eldest, whose reason was beginning to develop, looked at me with an expression of keen joy and asked me a thousand charming questions about the little Jesus and his beautiful heaven. Then she enthusiastically promised me always to give in to her sister, adding that never in her life would she forget the lessons of "the big young lady" — that is what she called me.

Considering those innocent souls, I compared them to soft wax on which any imprint can be engraved — that of evil, alas! like that of the good — and I understood the word of Jesus: that it would be better to be thrown into the sea than to scandalize a single one of these little children. Ah! How many souls would arrive at a high sanctity if, from the beginning, they were well directed!

I know it — God needs no one to accomplish his work of sanctification; but as he permits a skillful gardener to raise rare and delicate plants, giving him for that purpose the necessary knowledge while reserving to himself the care of making them fruitful, so he wishes to be helped in his divine cultivation of souls. What would happen if a clumsy horticulturist did not graft his trees well? If he could not recognize the nature of each and wanted to make roses bloom, for example, on a peach tree?

That reminds me that formerly, among my birds, I had a canary that sang divinely; I also had a little linnet to which I lavished particular care, having adopted it right out of the nest. That poor little prisoner, deprived of its parents' music lessons and hearing from morning to night only the canary's joyful trills, wanted to imitate it one fine day — a difficult enterprise for a linnet! It was charming to see the efforts of that poor little one, whose sweet voice had much trouble matching its master's vibrant notes. It managed it, however, to my great surprise, and its song became absolutely the same as the canary's.

O my Mother, you know who taught me to sing from childhood! You know what voices have charmed me! And now I hope one day, despite my weakness, to repeat eternally the canticle of love whose harmonious notes I have so often heard modulated here below.


* * *

But where am I? These reflections have carried me too far... I quickly take up the account of my vocation again.

On October 31, 1887, I set out for Bayeux, alone with my father, my heart filled with hope, but also deeply moved at the thought of presenting myself at the bishop's palace. For the first time in my life, I was to pay a visit unaccompanied by my sisters; and that visit was to a bishop! I, who never needed to speak except to answer the questions asked of me, had to explain and develop the reasons that made me solicit my entrance into Carmel, so as to give proofs of the solidity of my vocation.

How much it cost me to overcome my timidity to that extent! Oh! It is very true that love never finds an impossibility, because it believes everything possible and everything permissible. It was truly the love of Jesus alone that could make me brave those difficulties and those that followed; for I had to buy my happiness with great trials. Today, no doubt, I find I paid very little for it, and I would be ready to bear sorrows a thousand times more bitter to acquire it, if I did not yet have it.

The cataracts of heaven seemed opened when we arrived at the bishop's palace. M. l'abbé Révérony, the Vicar General, who had himself set the date of the journey, showed himself very kind, although a little astonished. Catching sight of tears in my eyes, he said to me: "Ah! I see diamonds — you must not show them to Monseigneur!"

Then we crossed some large salons where I felt like a little ant, and wondered what I was going to dare to say! Monseigneur was at that moment walking in a gallery with two priests; I saw the Grand Vicar exchange a few words with him and come back in his company into the apartment where we waited. There, three enormous armchairs were placed before the fireplace where a bright fire crackled.

Seeing Monseigneur enter, my father knelt beside me to receive his blessing; then His Lordship made us sit down. M. Révérony pointed out the middle armchair to me: I excused myself politely; he insisted, telling me to show whether I was capable of obeying. At once I complied without the least reflection, and I had the confusion of seeing him take a chair, while I found myself buried in a monumental seat in which four like me would have been at their ease — more at ease than I was, for I was far from being so there! I hoped my father would speak; but he told me to explain the purpose of our visit. I did it as eloquently as possible, while understanding very well that a simple word from the Superior would have served me more than my reasons. Alas! His opposition did not plead much in my favor.

Monseigneur asked me whether it was long since I had desired Carmel.

"Oh! Yes, Monseigneur, a very long time."

"Come now," M. Révérony said, laughing, "it can't after all have been fifteen years!"

"That's true," I answered; "but there aren't many years to take away; for I desired to give myself to the good God from the age of three."

Monseigneur, believing he would please my father, tried to make me understand that I should stay a little longer near him. What were His Lordship's surprise and edification, then, to see Papa take my side! Adding, with an air full of kindness, that we were to go to Rome with the diocesan pilgrimage, and that I would not hesitate to speak to the Holy Father if I did not beforehand obtain the permission I solicited.

However, a conversation with the Superior was required as indispensable before giving us any decision. I could hear nothing that hurt me more; for I knew his formal and decided opposition. So, without heeding M. l'abbé Révérony's recommendation, I did more than show diamonds to Monseigneur — I gave him some. I saw well that he was touched; he caressed me as, it seems, no child had ever been caressed by him.

"All is not lost, my dear little one," he said; "but I am very glad you are making the journey to Rome with your good father: you will thus strengthen your vocation. Instead of weeping, you should rejoice! Besides, next week I am going to Lisieux; I shall speak of you to M. le Supérieur, and certainly you will receive my answer in Italy."

His Lordship then led us as far as the garden; my father interested him greatly by telling him that that very morning, in order to appear older, I had put my hair up. That was not lost! Today, I know, Monseigneur speaks to no one of his little daughter without recounting the story of the hair. — I would have preferred, I confess, that that revelation not be made. The Grand Vicar accompanied us as far as the carriage, and we took the train back to Lisieux at five in the afternoon.



Chapter VI

The journey to Rome. — Audience with His Holiness Leo XIII. The answer of Monseigneur the Bishop of Bayeux. Three months of waiting.

Three days after the journey to Bayeux, I was to make a much longer one: that of the eternal City. That last journey showed me the nothingness of all that passes. However, I saw splendid monuments; I contemplated all the marvels of art and of religion; above all, I trod the same earth as the holy Apostles, the earth watered by the blood of the Martyrs, and my soul grew at the contact of holy things.

I am very happy to have gone to Rome; but I understand the people who supposed that journey was undertaken by my father with the aim of changing my ideas of religious life. There was certainly enough to shake a poorly established vocation.

First, my sister and I found ourselves in the midst of the great world that composed the pilgrimage almost exclusively. Ah! Far from dazzling us, all those titles of nobility seemed to us only vain smoke. I understood that word of the Imitation: "Do not pursue that shadow that is called a great name." I understood that true greatness is not found in the name, but in the soul.

The Prophet tells us that the Lord will give ANOTHER NAME to his elect; and we read in Saint John: "The victor will receive a white stone, on which is written a NEW NAME that no one knows, except the one who receives it." So it is in heaven that we shall know our titles of nobility. Then each one will receive from God the praise he deserves, and he who on earth has chosen to be the poorest, the most unknown for love of Our Lord, that one will be the first, the noblest, and the richest.

The second experience I had concerns the priests. Until then, I could not understand the principal goal of the Reform of Carmel. To pray for sinners delighted me, but to pray for priests, whose souls seemed to me purer than crystal, that seemed astonishing to me! Ah! I understood my vocation in Italy. It was not going too far to seek such useful knowledge.

For a month I met many holy priests; and I saw that although their sublime dignity raises them above the Angels, they are nonetheless weak and fragile men. So, if holy priests, whom Jesus calls in the Gospel the salt of the earth, show they have need of prayers, what must one think of those who are lukewarm? Did Jesus not say again: "If the salt loses its savor, with what shall it be salted?"

O my Mother, how beautiful our vocation is! It is for us, for Carmel, to preserve the salt of the earth! We offer our prayers and our sacrifices for the apostles of the Lord; we ourselves must be their apostles, while by their words and their examples they evangelize the souls of our brothers. What a noble mission is ours! But I must stop there; I feel that on this subject my pen would never stop...


* * *

I am going, my dear Mother, to tell you of my journey with a few details:

On November 4, at three o'clock in the morning, we crossed the city of Lisieux, still buried in the shadows of night. Many impressions passed through my soul: I felt I was going toward the unknown; I knew great things awaited me down there!

Arrived in Paris, my father made us visit all its marvels; for me, I found only one: Our Lady of Victory. What I felt in her shrine I could not tell. The graces she granted me resembled those of my first Communion: I was filled with peace and happiness... It was there that my Mother, the Virgin Mary, told me clearly that it was indeed she who had smiled at me and cured me. With what fervor I begged her always to keep me and to realize my dream, by hiding me in the shadow of her virginal mantle! I also asked her to remove from me all occasions of sin.

I was not ignorant that during my journey many things capable of troubling me would be encountered; having no knowledge of evil, I feared discovering it. I had not experienced that all is pure for the pure, that the simple and upright soul sees evil in nothing, since evil exists only in impure hearts, and not in insensible objects. I also prayed Saint Joseph to watch over me; since my childhood, my devotion to him was blended with my love for the Blessed Virgin. Every day I recited the prayer: "O Saint Joseph, father and protector of virgins..." It seemed to me, then, that I was well protected and completely sheltered from danger.

After our consecration to the Sacred Heart, in the basilica of Montmartre, we left Paris on November 7. As it was a matter of placing each train compartment under the invocation of a saint, it was agreed to award that honor to one of the priests occupying the compartment: either by adopting his patron or that of his parish.

And behold, in the presence of all the pilgrims, we heard ours called: Saint Martin. My father, very sensitive to that delicateness, went at once to thank Mgr Legoux, Grand Vicar of Coutances and director of the pilgrimage. Afterward, several people called him nothing but Monsieur Saint Martin.

M. l'abbé Révérony carefully examined all my actions; I caught sight of him from afar, watching me. At table, when I was not opposite him, he found a way to lean over to see and hear me. I think he must have been satisfied with his examination; for at the end of the journey, he appeared well disposed in my favor. I say at the end, because in Rome he was far from serving me as advocate, as I shall soon tell. — Nevertheless, I would not want to make it believed that he wanted to deceive me, by no longer acting according to the good intentions manifested at Bayeux. I am persuaded, on the contrary, that he always remained full of goodwill toward me; if he thwarted my desires, it was solely to test me.


* * *

Before reaching the goal of our pilgrimage, we crossed Switzerland, with its high mountains whose snowy summits lose themselves in the clouds, its waterfalls, its deep valleys filled with gigantic ferns and pink heather.

My beloved Mother, how much those beauties of nature, scattered with such profusion, did for my soul! How they raised her toward Him who delighted to throw such masterpieces onto an earth of exile that is to last only a day!

Sometimes we were carried up to the summits of the mountains: at our feet, precipices whose depths the gaze could not sound seemed to want to swallow us up. Farther on, we crossed a charming village with its chalets and its graceful steeple, above which light clouds swung softly. Here, there was a vast lake with calm, pure waves, whose azure tint mingled with the fires of the sunset.

How to tell my impressions before so poetic and grandiose a spectacle? I foresaw the marvels of heaven... Religious life appeared to me such as it is, with its subjections, its little daily sacrifices accomplished in shadow. I understood how, then, it becomes easy to fold back on oneself, to forget the sublime goal of one's vocation; and I said to myself: "Later, at the hour of trial, when, a prisoner in Carmel, I can see only a little corner of the sky, I shall remember today; this picture will give me courage. I shall no longer make much of my little interests, thinking of the greatness and power of God; I shall love him only, and shall not have the misfortune to attach myself to straws, now that my heart glimpses what he reserves for those who love him."


* * *

After contemplating the works of God, I was able to admire those of his creatures as well. The first city of Italy we visited was Milan. Its white marble cathedral, with its statues numerous enough to form a people, became for us the object of a particular study.

Leaving the timid ladies to hide their faces in their hands after climbing the first steps of the building, Céline and I followed the boldest pilgrims and reached the last pinnacle, having then the pleasure of seeing at our feet the whole city of Milan, whose inhabitants resembled little ants. Having come down from our pedestal, we began our carriage excursions, which were to last a month and satisfy me forever of the desire to roll along without fatigue.

The Campo Santo delighted us. Its white marble statues, which a chisel of genius seems to have animated, are sown upon the vast field of the dead with a kind of negligence that is not without charm. One would almost be tempted to console the allegorical personages around you. Their expression of calm, Christian sorrow is so true! And what masterpieces! Here, a child throws flowers on his father's tomb; one forgets the heaviness of the marble: the delicate petals seem to slip through his fingers. Elsewhere, widows' light veils and the ribbons adorning young girls' hair appear to float at the will of the wind.

We found no words to express our admiration; when an old French gentleman, who followed us everywhere, no doubt regretting that he could not share our sentiments, said ill-humoredly: "Ah! How enthusiastic the French are!" I think that poor gentleman would have done better to stay at home. Far from being happy with his journey, nothing but complaints came out of his mouth: he was discontented with the cities, the hotels, the people — with everything.

Often my father, who was happy anywhere — being of a character diametrically opposed to his unobliging neighbor's — tried to cheer him up, offered him his seat in the carriage and elsewhere, showed him, with his habitual greatness of soul, the good side of things; nothing softened him! How many different personages we saw! What an interesting study the world is, when one is on the eve of leaving it!


* * *

In Venice, the scene changed completely. Instead of the tumult of great cities, one hears, amid the silence, only the cries of the gondoliers and the murmur of the water stirred by the oars. That city certainly has its charms, but it is sad. The doges' palace, with all its splendors, is sad itself. Long ago, the echo of its sonorous vaults ceased to repeat the voice of the governors pronouncing sentences of life or death in the halls we crossed. They have stopped suffering, the unfortunate condemned, buried alive in dark cells.

Visiting those frightful prisons, I thought I was in the time of the martyrs. That dark asylum, I would have joyfully chosen for my dwelling, if it had been a matter of confessing my faith; but soon the guide's voice drew me from my reverie, and I passed over the bridge of sighs, so called because of the sighs of relief of the poor prisoners at seeing themselves delivered from the horror of the underground cells, which they preferred to death.

After saying farewell to Venice, we venerated at Padua the tongue of Saint Anthony; then, at Bologna, the body of Saint Catherine, whose face preserves the imprint of the Child Jesus's kiss.


* * *

I saw myself happily on the road to Loreto. How well the Blessed Virgin chose that place to deposit her blessed House! There, everything is poor, simple, and primitive: the women have kept the graceful Italian costume, and have not, like those of other cities, adopted the fashion of Paris. In short, Loreto charmed me.

What shall I say of the holy House? My emotion was very deep, finding myself under the same roof as the Holy Family, contemplating the walls on which Our Lord fixed his divine eyes, treading the earth Saint Joseph had watered with his sweat, where Mary had carried Jesus in her arms after having carried him in her virginal womb. I saw the little room of the Annunciation. I placed my chaplet in the Child Jesus's little bowl. How ravishing those memories are!

But our greatest consolation was to receive Jesus in his house and so to become his living temple, in the very place he had honored with his divine presence. Following the Roman custom, the holy Eucharist is kept in each church only on one altar; and there alone the priests distribute it to the faithful. In Loreto, that altar is located in the basilica where the holy House is enclosed, like a precious diamond, in a casket of white marble. That did not suit us. It was in the diamond, and not in the casket, that we wanted to receive the Bread of Angels. My father, with his usual gentleness, followed the pilgrims, while his less submissive daughters made their way toward the santa Casa.

By a special privilege, a priest was preparing to celebrate his Mass there; we confided our desire to him. At once that devoted priest asked for two little hosts, which he placed on his paten; and you may guess, Mother, the ineffable happiness of that communion! Words are powerless to translate it. What will it be, then, when we communicate eternally in the dwelling of the King of heaven? Then we shall no longer see our joy come to an end; there will no longer be the sadness of departure to darken it; it will not be necessary to furtively scratch, as we did, the walls sanctified by the divine presence; since his house will be ours for all the ages.

He does not want to give us the one on earth; he is content to show it to us, to make us love poverty and the hidden life. The one he reserves for us is his palace of glory, where we shall no longer see him veiled under the appearance of a child or of a little bread, but as he is, in the brightness of his infinite splendor!


* * *

Now it is of Rome I am going to speak: of Rome, where I thought to meet consolation; where, alas! I found the cross! At our arrival it was night; and having fallen asleep in the train, I was awakened by the cry of the station employees, repeated enthusiastically by the pilgrims: Roma! Roma! It was not a dream — I was in Rome!

Our first day, perhaps the most delicious, passed outside the walls. There, all the monuments have kept their antique stamp; whereas in the center of Rome, before the hotels and the shops, one could think oneself in Paris.

That walk through the Roman countryside left me a particularly perfumed memory. How could I translate the impression that made me thrill before the Colosseum? So I saw it at last, that arena where so many martyrs had shed their blood for Jesus! Already I was preparing to kiss the earth sanctified by their glorious combats. But what a disappointment! The ground having been raised, the true arena is buried some eight meters deep. As a result of the excavations, the center is only a mass of rubble; an impassable barrier defends the entrance to it. Besides, no one dares to penetrate into the midst of those dangerous ruins.

Had I come to Rome without going down into the Colosseum? — No, it was impossible! Already I was no longer listening to the guide's explanations; a single thought occupied me: to get down into the arena!

It is said in the holy Gospel that Magdalene, staying always near the Tomb and bending down several times to look inside, finally saw two angels. Like her, as I continued to bend down, I saw — not two angels, but what I was looking for; and uttering a cry of joy, I said to my sister: "Come! Follow me; we can get through!" At once we darted off, climbing over the ruins that crumbled beneath our steps; while my father, astonished at our audacity, called to us from afar. But we no longer heard anything.

Just as warriors feel their courage increase amid peril, so our joy grew in proportion to our fatigue and to the danger we faced to reach the goal of our desires.

Céline, more foresighted than I, had listened to the guide. Remembering that he had just pointed out a certain little crossed paving stone as being the place where the martyrs fought, she set about looking for it. Having found it soon, and having knelt on that blessed earth, our souls merged into a single prayer... My heart beat very hard when I drew my lips near the dust reddened with the blood of the first Christians. I asked for the grace to be a martyr for Jesus too, and I felt in the depths of my soul that I was heard.

All that lasted very little time. After gathering a few stones, we made our way back toward the walls to begin our perilous enterprise again. My father, seeing us so happy, could not scold us; I even noticed that he was proud of our courage.


* * *

After the Colosseum, we visited the Catacombs. There, Céline and Thérèse found the means to lie down together at the very bottom of the ancient tomb of Saint Cecilia, and took some earth sanctified by her blessed relics.

Before that journey, I had no particular devotion to that saint; but visiting her house, the place of her martyrdom, hearing her proclaimed "queen of harmony" because of the virginal song she made resound in the depths of her heart to her heavenly Spouse, I felt for her more than devotion: a real friend's tenderness. She became my favorite saint, my intimate confidante. What above all ravished me in her was her abandonment, her unlimited confidence, which made her capable of making virgins of souls who had never desired anything but the joys of the present life. Saint Cecilia is like the bride of the Canticles. In her I see a choir in an army camp. Her life was only a melodious song amid even the greatest trials; and that does not astonish me, since the sacred Gospel rested on her heart, and in her heart rested the Spouse of virgins.

The visit to the church of Saint Agnes was also very sweet for me. There, I found again a childhood friend. I tried, without success, to obtain one of her relics to bring back to my little mother Agnes of Jesus. Men refusing me, the good God joined the party: a little stone of red marble, detaching itself from a rich mosaic whose origin goes back to the time of the sweet martyr, fell at my feet. Was that not charming? Saint Agnes herself was giving me a souvenir of her house!


* * *

Six days passed in contemplating the principal marvels of Rome; and on the seventh, I saw the greatest of all: LEO XIII. That day, I both desired and dreaded it; on it my vocation depended; for I had received no answer from Monseigneur, and the Holy Father's permission became my only plank of salvation. But to obtain that permission, I had to ask for it! Before several cardinals, archbishops, and bishops, I had to dare to speak to the Pope! The mere thought made me tremble.

It was on Sunday morning, November 20, that we entered the Vatican, into the Sovereign Pontiff's chapel. At eight o'clock we attended his Mass; and during the holy Sacrifice, he showed us by his ardent piety, worthy of the Vicar of Jesus Christ, that he was truly the holy Father.

The Gospel of that day contained those ravishing words: "Fear nothing, little flock; for it pleased my Father to give you his kingdom." And my heart surrendered itself to the most keen confidence. No, I was not afraid; I hoped the kingdom of Carmel would soon belong to me. I did not think then of those other words of Jesus: "I prepare my kingdom for you as my Father has prepared it for me." — That is, I reserve crosses and trials for you; thus you will become worthy to possess my kingdom. — "It was necessary that the Christ suffer before entering into his glory. If you wish to take your place beside him, drink the chalice he himself drank."

After the Mass of thanksgiving that followed His Holiness's, the audience began.

Leo XIII was seated on a raised armchair, clothed simply in a white cassock and a cape of the same color. Near him stood prelates and other great ecclesiastical dignitaries. Following the ceremonial, each pilgrim knelt in turn, kissed first the foot, then the hand of the august Pontiff, and received his blessing; then two noble guards, touching him with the finger, indicated by that to rise, pass into another room, and give his place to the next.

No one said a word; but I was quite resolved to speak, when all of a sudden M. l'abbé Révérony, who stood at the right of His Holiness, had us told in a loud voice that he absolutely forbade speaking to the Holy Father. I turned to Céline, questioning her with a look; my heart was beating fit to break... — "Speak!" she said to me.

A moment later I was at the Pope's knees. Having kissed his slipper, he presented me his hand. Then, raising my eyes, bathed in tears, toward him, I begged him in these terms:

"Most Holy Father, I have a great grace to ask of you!"

At once, lowering his head down to me, his face almost touched mine; one would have said his black, deep eyes wanted to penetrate me to the inmost part of my soul.

"Most Holy Father," I repeated, "in honor of your Jubilee, permit me to enter Carmel at fifteen!"

M. the Grand Vicar of Bayeux, astonished and displeased, quickly said:

"Most Holy Father, this is a child who desires the life of Carmel; but the superiors are examining the question at the moment."

— "Well then, my child," His Holiness said to me, "do what the superiors will decide."

Then, joining my hands and leaning them on his knees, I tried a last effort:

— "O Most Holy Father, if you said yes, everybody would be willing!"

He looked at me fixedly, and pronounced these words, stressing each syllable in a penetrating tone:

— "Come now... come now... you will enter if the good God wills it."

I was about to speak again, when two noble guards invited me to rise. Seeing that was not enough, they took me by the arms, and M. Révérony helped them lift me up, for I still remained with my hands joined, leaning on the Pope's knees. At the moment I was lifted like that, the good Holy Father gently placed his hand on my lips; then, raising it to bless me, he followed me with his eyes for a long time.

My father felt great pain, finding me all in tears as I came out of the audience: having passed before me, he knew nothing of my approach. For his part, M. the Grand Vicar had shown himself as kind as could be, presenting him to Leo XIII as the father of two Carmelites. The Sovereign Pontiff, as a sign of particular benevolence, placed his hand on his venerable head, seeming to mark him with a mysterious seal in the name of Christ himself.

Ah! Now that he is in heaven, that father of four Carmelites, it is no longer the hand of Jesus's representative that rests on his brow, prophesying martyrdom to him; it is the hand of the Spouse of virgins, of the King of heaven; and never again will that divine hand withdraw from the brow it has glorified.

My trial was great; but having done absolutely everything that depended on me to answer the good God's call, I must confess that despite my tears I felt great peace in the depths of my heart. Nevertheless, that peace resided in the depths, and bitterness filled my soul to the brim... And Jesus was silent... He seemed absent; nothing revealed his presence to me.

That day, too, the sun did not dare to shine; and the beautiful blue sky of Italy, laden with dark clouds, did not cease to weep with me. Ah! It was finished! My journey no longer had any charm in my eyes, since its goal had just been missed. However, the Holy Father's last words should have consoled me like a true prophecy. Indeed, despite all the obstacles, what the good God willed has been accomplished: he did not permit creatures to do what they wanted, but his own will.

For some time I had offered myself to the Child Jesus to be his little plaything. I had told him not to use me as a precious toy that children content themselves with looking at without daring to touch; but as a little ball of no value, which he could throw to the ground, push with his foot, pierce, leave in a corner, or else press to his heart if that pleased him. In a word, I wanted to amuse the little Jesus and to surrender myself to his childish caprices.

He had just answered my prayer! In Rome, Jesus pierced his little plaything... he doubtless wanted to see what was inside it... and then, content with his discovery, he let his little ball fall and went to sleep. What did he do during his sweet sleep, and what became of the abandoned ball? — Jesus dreamed he was still playing with it; that he took it and left it in turn; that he sent it rolling far away, and finally pressed it to his heart, never again allowing it to move away from his little hand.

You understand, Mother, the little ball's sadness at seeing itself on the ground! Nevertheless she did not cease to hope against all hope.


* * *

A few days after November 20, my father, having gone to pay a visit to the venerated Brother Siméon — director and founder of the Collège Saint-Joseph — met M. l'abbé Révérony in the establishment and amiably reproached him with not having helped me in my difficult enterprise; then he told the story to Cher Frère Siméon. The good old man listened to that account with great interest, even took notes on it, and said with emotion: "One doesn't see that in Italy!"

The day after the memorable audience day, we had to leave for Naples and Pompeii. Vesuvius, in our honor, fired many cannon shots, letting a thick column of smoke escape from its crater. Its traces on Pompeii are frightening! They show the power of God "who looks upon the earth and makes it tremble, who touches the mountains and reduces them to ashes." I would have liked to walk alone amid the ruins, meditating on the fragility of human things; but I must not dream of that solitude.

In Naples, we took a magnificent drive to the monastery of San Martino, situated on a high hill dominating the whole city. But on the return, our horses took the bit in their teeth, and I attribute it only to the protection of our guardian angels that we arrived safe and sound at our splendid hotel. That word splendid is not too much; during the whole course of our journey, we stayed in princely hotels. Never had I been surrounded by so much luxury. It is certainly the case for saying: wealth does not make happiness. I would have found myself a thousand times happier under a thatched roof, with the hope of Carmel, than beside gilded paneling, marble staircases, and silk carpets, with bitterness in my heart.

Ah! I felt it well: joy is not found in the objects that surround us; it resides in the inmost part of the soul. One can possess it as well at the bottom of a dark prison as in a royal palace. So I am happier in Carmel, even amid interior and exterior trials, than in the world, where nothing was lacking to me, above all the sweetnesses of my father's home.

Although my soul was plunged in sadness, outwardly I was the same; for I believed my request to the Holy Father hidden. Soon I was convinced of the opposite. One day, left alone in the train with my sister while the pilgrims went down to the buffet, I saw Mgr Legoux appear at the carriage door. After looking at me well, he said to me, smiling: "Well, how is our little Carmelite?" I understood then that the whole pilgrimage knew my secret; moreover I noticed it in certain sympathetic looks; but happily no one spoke to me about it.

In Assisi a little adventure happened to me. After visiting the places perfumed by the virtues of Saint Francis and Saint Clare, I lost the buckle of my belt in the monastery. The time it took to look for it and fasten it to the ribbon made me miss the departure hour. When I presented myself at the door, all the carriages had disappeared, except one: that of M. le Grand Vicaire de Bayeux! Should I run after carriages I could no longer see, expose myself to missing the train, or ask for a seat in M. Révérony's carriage? I decided on the wisest course.

Trying to appear very little embarrassed, despite my extreme embarrassment, I laid my critical situation before him and put him in embarrassment himself; for his carriage was absolutely full. But one of the gentlemen hastened to get down and, having me take his place, went to sit modestly beside the coachman. I resembled a squirrel caught in a trap! I was far from feeling at ease, surrounded by all those great personages, right opposite the most formidable one! He was nonetheless very kind to me, interrupting the conversation from time to time to speak to me of Carmel, and promising to do everything that depended on him to realize my desire to enter at fifteen.

That meeting put balm on my wound, without, however, keeping me from suffering. I had lost confidence in the creature, and could lean only on God alone.

Nevertheless, my sadness did not keep me from taking a keen interest in the holy places we visited. In Florence, I was happy to contemplate Saint Mary Magdalene de' Pazzi in the midst of the choir of the Carmelites. All the pilgrims wanted to touch their chaplets to the saint's tomb; but my hand turned out to be the only one small enough to pass through the holes of the grille. So I found myself charged with that noble office, which lasted a long time and made me very proud.

It was not the first time I obtained privileges. In Rome, in the church of Santa Croce in Gerusalemme, we venerated several fragments of the true Cross, two thorns, and one of the sacred nails. In order to consider them at my ease, I arranged to stay last; and as the religious charged with those precious treasures was preparing to put them back on the altar, I asked him whether I could touch them. He answered affirmatively, seeming to doubt I would succeed; then I passed my little finger through an opening of the reliquary, and so was able to touch the precious nail that was bathed in the blood of Jesus. You see, I acted with him as a child who believes everything is permitted to her and looks on her father's treasures as her own.

After passing through Pisa and Genoa, we returned to France by one of the most splendid routes. Sometimes we ran along the sea; and as a result of a tempest, one day the railway found itself so close to it that the waves seemed to come right up to us. Farther on, we crossed plains covered with orange trees, olive trees, graceful palms. In the evening, the numerous seaports were lit up with brilliant lights, while in the azure firmament the first stars glittered. That fairy-like picture I watched vanish without regret; my heart aspired to other marvels!

However, my father proposed another journey to me, to Jerusalem; but despite the natural attraction that bore me toward visiting the places sanctified by Our Lord's passage, I was weary of the pilgrimages of earth; I desired nothing more but the beauties of heaven; and, to give them to souls, I wanted as soon as possible to become a prisoner.

Alas! Before seeing the doors of my blessed prison open before me, I felt it, I still had to struggle and suffer; nevertheless my confidence did not diminish, and I hoped to enter on December 25, Christmas Day.


* * *

Scarcely back in Lisieux, our first visit was to Carmel. What an interview! You remember it, Mother! I abandoned myself completely to you, having exhausted all resources on my side. You told me to write to Monseigneur and remind him of his promise: I obeyed at once. The letter put in the mail, I thought I would receive without any delay the permission to fly away. Every day, alas! A new disappointment! The beautiful feast of Christmas arrived, and Jesus was still sleeping. He left his little ball on the ground without even casting a glance at her!

That trial was very great; but He whose Heart always watches taught me that for a soul whose faith equals only a little mustard seed, he grants miracles, so as to strengthen that little faith; but that for his intimates, for his Mother, he worked no miracles before having tried their faith. Did he not let Lazarus die, although Martha and Mary had sent word to him that he was ill? At the wedding at Cana, the Blessed Virgin having asked Jesus to help the master of the house, did he not answer her that his hour had not yet come? But after the trial, what a reward! The water changes into wine; Lazarus rises again... So did the Beloved act with his little Thérèse: after having tried her a long time, he granted all her desires.


* * *

For my New Year's gifts on January 1, 1888, Jesus again made me a present of his cross. You told me, my revered Mother, that you had had Monseigneur's answer in hand since December 28, the feast of the Holy Innocents; that that answer authorized my immediate entrance, yet you were determined to open to me only after Lent! I could not hold back my tears at the thought of so long a delay. That trial had a wholly special character for me: I saw my bonds broken on the side of the world, and now the holy Ark in its turn refused to take in the poor little dove!

How did those three months pass, so rich for my soul in sufferings but more still in graces of every kind? First it came into my head not to constrain myself, to lead a less regulated life than usual; then the good God made me understand the benefit of the time offered to me, and I resolved to give myself more than ever to a serious and mortified life.

When I say mortified, I do not mean the penances of the saints. Far from resembling the beautiful souls who, from their childhood, practice every kind of mortification, I made mine consist solely in breaking my will, holding back a word of reply, doing little services about me without making much of them, and a thousand other things of that kind. By the practice of those nothings, I prepared myself to become the fiancée of Jesus, and I cannot say how much that waiting made me grow in abandonment, humility, and the other virtues.



Chapter VII

Thérèse's entrance into the blessed Ark. — First trials. — The divine betrothal. — Of snow. A great sorrow.

Monday, April 9, 1888, was chosen for my entrance. It was the day on which the feast of the Annunciation was celebrated at Carmel, transferred because of Lent. The evening before, we all found ourselves gathered around that family table at which I was to sit for the last time. How heartrending those farewells are! When one would like to be forgotten, the most tender words escape from every lip, as if to make the sacrifice of separation felt all the more.

In the morning, after casting a last look at Les Buissonnets, that graceful nest of my childhood, I left for Carmel. I attended holy Mass, surrounded, as the evening before, by my dear parents. At the moment of communion, when Jesus had come down into their hearts, I heard only sobs. For my part, I did not shed tears; but walking first to go to the cloister door, my heart beat so violently that I wondered if I were not going to die. Ah! What a moment! What agony! One must have experienced it to understand it.

I embraced all my family and knelt before my father to receive his blessing. He knelt himself and blessed me, weeping. It was a spectacle that must have made the angels smile — that of the old man presenting to the Lord his child, still in the springtime of life. At last, the doors of Carmel closed upon me... I fell into your arms, my beloved Mother; and there I received the embraces of a new family, whose devotion and tenderness the world does not suspect.

So my desires were at last realized; my soul felt a peace so sweet and so deep that it would be impossible for me to express it. And for eight and a half years now, that intimate peace has remained my share; it has not abandoned me even amid the greatest trials.

Everything in the monastery seemed ravishing to me; I thought myself transported into a desert; our little cell especially charmed me. However, I repeat it, my happiness was calm; the slightest zephyr did not ripple the tranquil waters on which my little skiff sailed. No cloud darkened my azure sky. Ah! I found myself fully repaid for all my trials! With what profound joy I repeated: "Now I am here forever!"

That happiness was not ephemeral; it was not to fly away with the illusions of the first days. Illusions! The good God preserved me from them in his mercy. I found religious life such as I had pictured it; no sacrifice astonished me; and yet, Mother, you know it — my first steps met more thorns than roses.

First, I had for my soul only the daily bread of a bitter dryness. Then the Lord permitted, my revered Mother, that even without your knowing it, I be treated by you very severely. I could not meet you without receiving some reproach. Once, I remember, having left a cobweb in the cloister, you said to me before the whole community: "One can see plainly that our cloisters are swept by a child of fifteen! It's a pity! Go and take that cobweb away, and be more careful in the future."

In the rare spiritual directions where I stayed near you for an hour, I was still scolded almost the whole time; and what grieved me most was not to understand how to correct myself of my faults — for example, my slowness and my little devotion in the offices — faults which you pointed out to me, Mother, in your solicitude and goodness toward me.

One day, I told myself that no doubt you wanted to see me employ in work the hours of free time ordinarily consecrated to prayer; and I set my little needle going without raising my eyes; but as I wanted to be faithful and act only under the gaze of Jesus, no one ever knew about it.

During that time of my postulancy, our Mistress sent me in the evening, at half past four, to pull weeds in the garden; that cost me much — all the more, Mother, because I was almost sure to meet you on the way. You said on one of those occasions: "But really, that child does absolutely nothing! What is a novice one must send out walking every day?" And in all things you acted so toward me.

O my beloved Mother, how I thank you for having given me so strong and precious an education! What an inestimable grace! What would I have become if, as the people of the world believed, I had been the plaything of the community? Perhaps instead of seeing Our Lord in my superiors, I would have considered only the creature, and my heart — so well guarded in the world — would have become humanly attached in the cloister. Happily, by your maternal wisdom, I was preserved from that true misfortune.

Yes, I can say it — not only for what I have just written, but for other more keenly felt trials still — suffering held out its arms to me from my entrance, and I embraced it with love. What I came to do at Carmel, I declared at the solemn examination that preceded my profession: I came to save souls, and above all to pray for priests. When one wants to reach a goal, one must take the means to it; and Jesus having made me understand that he would give me souls by the cross, the more crosses I met, the more my attraction for suffering increased. For five years that was my way; but I was the only one to know it. That was precisely the unknown flower I wanted to offer Jesus — that flower whose perfume is exhaled only toward heaven.

The Reverend Father Pichon, two months after my entrance, was himself surprised at God's action on my soul; he believed my fervor altogether childish and my way very smooth. My conversation with that good Father would have brought me great consolations, without the extreme difficulty I experienced in opening my heart. Nevertheless I made him a general confession, after which he pronounced these words: "In the presence of God, of the Blessed Virgin, of the Angels and of all the Saints, I declare that you have never committed a single mortal sin; thank the Lord for what he has done for you gratuitously, without any merit on your part."

Without any merit of mine! Ah! I had no trouble believing it! I felt how weak I was, imperfect; gratitude alone filled my heart. The fear of having tarnished the white robe of my baptism had made me suffer greatly, and that assurance, coming from the mouth of a director such as our Mother Saint Teresa desired — that is, "uniting knowledge to virtue" — seemed to me to come from God himself. The good Father also said to me: "My child, may Our Lord always be your Superior and your Novice Master." He was that indeed, and also my Director. By that I do not mean that my soul was closed to my superiors; far from hiding my dispositions from them, I always tried to be an open book for them.

Our Mistress was a real saint, the finished type of the first Carmelites; I did not leave her for an instant, for she taught me to work. Her goodness toward me cannot be told; I loved her very much; I appreciated her; and yet my soul did not expand. I did not know how to express what was happening in me; terms failed me; my directions became a torture, a true martyrdom.

One of our older Mothers seemed to understand one day what I felt. At recreation she said to me: "My little daughter, it seems to me you must not have much to tell your superiors."

— "Why do you think that, Mother?"

— "Because your soul is extremely simple; but when you are perfect, you will become simpler still; the closer one gets to God, the more one is simplified."

The good Mother was right. However, the extreme difficulty I experienced in opening my heart, while coming from my simplicity, was a real trial. Today, without ceasing to be simple, I express my thoughts with very great ease.

I said that Jesus served as my director. Scarcely had the Reverend Father Pichon taken charge of my soul, when his superiors sent him to Canada. Reduced to receiving only one letter a year, the little flower transplanted onto the mountain of Carmel quickly turned toward the Director of directors and bloomed in the shadow of his cross, having for beneficent dew his tears, his divine blood, and, for a radiant sun, his adorable Face.

Until then I had not sounded the depth of the treasures enclosed in the Holy Face; it was my little Mother Agnes of Jesus who taught me to know them. Just as long ago she had preceded her three sisters to Carmel, so she had first penetrated the mysteries of love hidden in our Spouse's countenance; then she discovered them to me, and I understood... I understood better than ever what true glory is. He whose kingdom is not of this world showed me that the only enviable royalty consists in wanting to be ignored and counted for nothing, in putting one's joy in contempt of oneself. Ah! Like Jesus, I wanted my face to be hidden from all eyes, so that no one on earth would recognize me: I thirsted to suffer and to be forgotten.

How merciful is the way by which the divine Master has always led me! Never has he made me desire something without giving it to me; that is why his bitter chalice seemed delicious to me.


* * *

At the end of May 1888, after the beautiful feast of Marie's Profession — our eldest, whom Thérèse, the Benjamin, had the favor of crowning with roses on the day of her mystical wedding — trial once again visited my family. Since his first attack of paralysis, we had noticed that our good father tired very easily. During our Rome journey, I often remarked that his face betrayed exhaustion and suffering. But above all, what struck me was his admirable progress on the way of sanctity; he had succeeded in making himself master of his natural vivacity, and earthly things barely seemed to brush him.

Permit me, Mother, to cite a little example of his virtue in this regard:

During the pilgrimage, the days and nights in the train seemed long to the travelers, and we saw them start card games that sometimes became stormy. One day the players asked for our participation; we refused, alleging our little knowledge of the matter; we did not find time long as they did, but too short to contemplate at leisure the magnificent panoramas offered to our eyes. Discontent soon showed itself; our dear little father, speaking calmly, defended us, letting it be understood that, being on pilgrimage, prayer did not hold a large enough place.

One of the players, then forgetting the respect due to white hair, cried out thoughtlessly: "Happily, Pharisees are rare!" My father did not answer a word; he seemed even holily joyful, and found the means a little later to shake that gentleman's hand, accompanying that beautiful action with a kind word that could make one believe the insult had not been heard, or at least had been forgotten.

Besides, that habit of forgiving did not date from that day. By the testimony of my mother and of all who knew him, he never pronounced a word against charity.

His faith and his generosity were also proof against everything. Here are the terms in which he announced my departure to one of his friends: "Thérèse, my little queen, entered Carmel yesterday. God alone can require such a sacrifice; but he helps me so powerfully that amid my tears my heart overflows with joy."

To that faithful servant a reward worthy of his virtues was needed; and that reward he asked of God himself. O my Mother, do you remember that day, that parlor, when my father said to us: "My children, I have come back from Alençon, where in the church of Notre-Dame I received such great graces, such consolations, that I made this prayer: 'My God, it is too much! Yes, I am too happy; it is not possible to go to heaven like this; I want to suffer something for you! And I offered myself...'" The word victim expired on his lips; he did not dare pronounce it before us, but we had understood!

You know, Mother, all our bitternesses! I have no need to write the details of those heart-rending memories...


* * *

However, the time of my taking of the Habit arrived. Against all expectation, my father having recovered from a second attack, Monseigneur set the ceremony for January 10. The waiting had been long; but also, what a beautiful feast! Nothing was lacking to it, not even the snow.

Have I told you, Mother, of my predilection for snow? As a very little girl, its whiteness delighted me. Where did that taste for snow come from? Perhaps from my being a little winter flower: the first adornment with which my child's eyes saw the earth embellished was its white mantle. So I wanted to see, on the day of my taking of the Habit, nature arrayed in white like myself. But the evening before, the temperature was so mild one could believe it was spring, and I no longer hoped for snow. On the morning of the 10th, no change! So I abandoned my child's, unrealizable desire, and I left the monastery.

My father was waiting for me at the cloister door. Coming toward me, his eyes full of tears, and pressing me to his heart: "Ah!" he cried, "there she is, then, my little queen!" Then, offering me his arm, we solemnly made our entrance into the chapel. That day was his triumph, his last feast here below! All his offerings were made; his family belonged to God. Céline having confided to him that later she too would leave the world for Carmel, that incomparable father answered in a transport of joy: "Come, let us go together before the Blessed Sacrament to thank the Lord for the graces he grants our family, and for the honor he does me in choosing spouses for himself in my house. Yes, the good God does me a great honor in asking me for my children. If I possessed something better, I would hasten to offer it to him." That better thing was himself! And the Lord received him as a holocaust offering; he tried him like gold in the furnace and found him worthy of him.


* * *

After the exterior ceremony, when I came back into the monastery, Monseigneur intoned the Te Deum. A priest pointed out to him that that canticle was sung only at professions, but the impetus was given and the hymn of thanksgiving continued to the end. Didn't that feast have to be complete, since in it all the others were reunited?

At the moment I set foot in the cloister, my gaze fell first on my pretty little Jesus, who smiled at me amid the flowers and the lights; then, turning toward the cloister courtyard, I saw it all covered with snow! What a delicateness of Jesus! Granting his little fiancée's desires, he gave her snow! What mortal is there, however powerful, who can make a single flake fall from heaven to charm his beloved?

Everyone was astonished at that snow as at a real event, because of the contrary temperature; and since then, many people aware of my desire often spoke, I know, of "the little miracle" of my taking of the Habit, finding that I had a singular taste in loving snow... So much the better! It made the incomprehensible condescension of the Spouse of virgins stand out all the more, of Him who cherishes lilies white as the snow.

Monseigneur came in after the ceremony and showered me with every kind of paternal kindness: he recalled to me, before all the priests surrounding him, my visit to Bayeux, my journey to Rome, not forgetting the hair put up; then, taking my head in his hands, His Lordship caressed me for a long time. Our Lord then made me think with ineffable sweetness of the caresses he will soon lavish on me before the assembly of the Saints, and that consolation became for me like a foretaste of heavenly glory.


* * *

I have just said it: January 10 was my good father's triumph day. I compare that feast to Jesus's entrance into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday. Like that of our divine Master, his one day of glory was followed by a painful passion; and just as Jesus's sufferings pierced his divine Mother's heart, so our hearts felt very deeply the wounds and humiliations of the one we cherished most on earth...

I remember that in the month of June 1888 — at the time we feared cerebral paralysis for him — I surprised our Mistress by saying to her: "I am suffering much, Mother, but I feel it, I can suffer still more." I was not then thinking of the trial awaiting us. I did not know that on February 12, one month after my taking of the Habit, our venerated father would drink of so bitter a chalice!... Ah! I did not say then that I could suffer more! Words cannot express my anguish and that of my sisters; I shall not try to write them...

Later, in the heavens, we shall love to converse about those dark days of exile. Yes, the three years of my father's martyrdom seem to me the most lovable, most fruitful of our lives; I would not exchange them for the most sublime ecstasies; and my heart, in the presence of that inestimable treasure, cries out in its gratitude: "Be blessed, my God, for those years of grace we have passed in evils."

O my beloved Mother, how precious and sweet was our cross, so bitter, since from all our hearts only sighs of love and gratitude escaped! We no longer walked; we ran, we flew on the paths of perfection.

Léonie and Céline were no longer of the world, while living in the midst of the world. The letters they wrote us at that time are stamped with an admirable resignation. And what parlors I spent with my Céline! Ah! Far from separating us, the grilles of Carmel united us more strongly: the same thoughts, the same desires, the same love of Jesus and of souls made us live. Never a word of earthly things mixed with our conversations. As long ago at Les Buissonnets, we plunged — no longer our gazes, but our hearts — beyond spaces and time; and to enjoy eternal happiness soon, we chose suffering and contempt here below.

My desire for sufferings was granted. Nevertheless my attraction for them did not diminish; so my soul soon shared the heart's trial. The dryness increased; I found consolation neither on the side of heaven nor on the side of earth; and yet, amid those waters of tribulation that I had called with all my wishes, I was the happiest of creatures.

So the time of my betrothal flowed by — alas! Too long for my desires. At the end of my year, you told me, Mother, not to think of making profession, that the Superior formally opposed it; and I had to wait eight months more! At first it was difficult for me to accept such a sacrifice; but soon the divine light penetrated my soul.

I was then meditating on the Foundations of the Spiritual Life, by Father Surin. One day, during prayer, I understood that my so keen desire to pronounce my vows was mixed with a great self-love; since I belonged to Jesus as his little plaything, to console him and to gladden him, I ought not to oblige him to do my will instead of his. I understood moreover that on her wedding day a fiancée would not be pleasing to her spouse if she were not adorned with magnificent ornaments, and I had not yet worked to that end. Then I said to Our Lord: "I no longer ask you to let me make profession; I shall wait as long as you want; only I cannot bear that, through my fault, my union with you be deferred; so I shall take all care to make myself a robe enriched with diamonds and precious stones of every kind; when you find it rich enough, I am sure nothing will keep you from taking me as your spouse."

I set to work with new courage. Since my taking of the Habit, I had already received abundant lights on religious perfection, particularly on the subject of the vow of poverty. During my postulancy, I was content to have at my use well-kept things and to find at hand what I needed. Jesus bore that patiently; for he does not like to show everything to souls at once; he ordinarily gives his light only little by little.

At the beginning of my spiritual life, around the age of thirteen or fourteen, I asked myself what I would gain later; I believed then that it was impossible to understand perfection better; but I very quickly recognized that the more one advances on that road, the more one believes oneself far from the goal. Now I resign myself to seeing myself always imperfect, and I even find my joy in it.

I come back to the lessons Our Lord gave me. One evening after Compline, I vainly sought our lamp on the shelf set apart for that use; it was grand silence, impossible to ask for it. I rightly told myself that a sister, believing she was taking her lantern, had carried ours away. But did I have to spend a whole hour in the darkness because of that mistake? Precisely that evening I had counted on working a lot. Without the interior light of grace, I would certainly have complained; with it, instead of feeling sorrow, I was happy, thinking that poverty consists in seeing oneself deprived, not only of agreeable things, but of indispensable things. And in the exterior darkness, I found my soul illuminated by a divine brightness.

At that time I was seized with a real love for the ugliest and least convenient objects: thus I felt joy when I saw the pretty little jug of our cell taken away from me, to receive in its place a big, badly chipped jug. I also made many efforts not to excuse myself, which was very difficult for me, especially with our Mistress, to whom I would have wanted to hide nothing.

