Plaistow, a strong, healthy man, a stoker, not likely to be led astray by imagination, attended him till the day before he died. [Brown, it appears, bore the best of characters, and had a strong friendship for Pearce.] On the afternoon before his death, at three o'clock, in broad daylight, Brown was attending the sick man, who wanted to get out of bed, but his companion prevented him. And this is what the witness says he saw : —

" I was standing on one side of the bunk, and while trying to prevent Pearce from rising, I saw on the other side of the bunk, the wife, two children, and the mother of the dying man, all of whom I knew very well, and they are all still living. They appeared to be very sorrowful, but in all other respects were the same as ordinary human beings. I could not see through them ; they were not at all transparent. They had on their ordinary clothes, and, perhaps, looked rather paler than usual. The mother said to me in a clearly audible voice, ' He will be buried on Thursday, at 12 o'clock, in about fourteen hundred fathoms of water.' They all then vanished instantly, and I saw them no more. Pearce did not see them, as he was delirious, and had been so for two days previously. I ran out of the berth in a state of great excitement, and did not enter it again while he was alive. He died on Tuesday, not Thursday, and was buried at four o'clock, not twelve. It was a sudden surprise to me to see the apparitions. I expected nothing of the kind, and when I saw them I was perfectly cool and collected. I had never before seen anything of the kind in my Hfe, and my health is, and always has been, good. About five minutes afterwards I told Captain Blacklock I would stop with the sick man no longer, but would not tell him why, thinking that if I did, nobody else would take my place. About an hour later, I told Captain Blacklock and Mr. Dunbar, the chief engineer, whose address is Old Mill, near Port William, Wigtownshire, Scotland."

The other sailors on board say that they saw that Mr. Brown was greatly agitated from some cause, and they gradually drew this narrative out of him. Captain Blacklock says : —

" Brown came down into the cabin, looking very pale and frightened, and declared in a strong and decided way that he would not attend the sick man any more on any conditions — not for a thousand pounds. I told him that he ought to attend a sick and dying comrade, especially as a storm was raging, and he needed kind and considerate help, such as any of us might need one day. I pressed him all the more, as I wanted a strong, steady man to attend the delirious invalid ; besides, it being bad weather, the other men were fagged and over-worked. Brown would not go back, and he left the cabin, as I think, crying, so I sent him out a glass of brandy. Shortly after that, I heard he was very ill, and that his mates had some trouble in soothing and calming him.

" We the undersigned, officials on board the Robert Lowe, declare the above statements to be true, so far as each of the circumstances came under our personal notice, but we none of us commit ourselves to any opinion as to the cause of the phenomenon. We give the statement simply because we have been requested to do so, rumours of the occurrence having gone abroad and caused inquiries to be made.

(Signed) "J. Blacklock, Commander.

" Andrew Dunbar, First Engineer.

(Signatures of six other members of the crew.)

" Witness, W. H. Harrison.

" October 20th, 1870."

[Captain Blacklock is dead. 1h.& Robert Lowe was lost in 1872, and onlyone or two of the crew escaped. The account included a description of some distressing experiences of Mrs. Pearce's, which had occurred in London during the few days before her husband's death, and filled her with anxiety on his account ; but this anxiety cannot be confidently assumed to have been a condition of Brown's experience.]

654 A. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 9 7. The narrator is the late Rev. W. Mountford, of Boston, U.S.A., a minister and author of repute.

One day, some fifteen years ago, I went from the place of my abode to see some friends who resided in the fen districts of Norfolk. They were persons whom I knew, not merely well, but intimately. They were two brothers who had married two sisters. Their houses were a mile and a quarter apart, but standing on the same road, and with only two or three other habitations intervening. The road was a straight, bare, open road, like what is so often to be seen in the fens, and used chiefly and almost exclusively by the occupants of the few farms alongside of it. The house at which I was visiting stood about ten yards from the edge of the road. The day was fine and clear — a day in March. About four o'clock in the afternoon I stood at the window, and looking tip the road I said, " Here is your brother coming." My host advanced to the window and said, " Oh yes, here he is ; and see, Robert has got Dobbin out at last." Dobbin was a horse which, on account of some accident, had not been used for some weeks. The lady also looked out of the window, and said to me, " And I am so glad, too, that my sister is with him. They will be delighted to find you here." I recognised distinctly the vehicle in which they rode as being an open one, also the lady and the gentleman, and both their dress and their attitudes. Our friends passed at a gentle pace along the front of the window, and then turning with the road round the corner of the house, they could not longer be seen. After a minute my host went to the door and exclaimed, " Why, what can be the matter ? They have gone on without calling, a thing they never did in their lives before. What can be the matter ? "

Five minutes afterwards, while we were seated by the fireside, the parlour door opened, and there entered a lady of about twenty-five years of age ; she was in robust health and in full possession of all her senses, and she was possessed, besides, of a strong common-sense. She was pale and much excited, and the moment she opened the door she exclaimed, " Oh, aunt, I have had such a fright ! Father and mother have passed me on the road without speaking. I looked up at them as they passed by, but they looked straight on and never stopped nor said a word. A quarter of an hour before, when I started to walk here, they were sitting by the fire; and now, what can be the matter? They never turned nor spoke, and yet I am certain that they must have seen me."

Ten minutes after the arrival of this lady, I, looking through the window up the road, said, " But see, here they are, coming down the road again." My host said, " No, that is impossible, because there is no path by which they could get on to this road, so as to be coming down it again. But sure enough, here they are, and with the same horse ! How in the world have they got here ?" We all stood at the window, and saw pass before us precisely the same appearance which we had seen before — lady and gentleman, and horse and carriage. My

654 B] TO CHAPTER VI 657

host ran to the door and exclaimed, " How did you get here ? How did you get on to the road to be coming down here again now ? " "I get on the road ? What do you mean? I have just come straight from home." "And did you not come down the road, and pass the house, less than a quarter of an hour ago ? " " No," said the lady and gentleman both. " This is the first time that we have come down the road to-day." "Certainly," we all said, "you passed these windows less than a quarter of an hour ago. And, besides, here is Mary, who was on the road and saw you." " Nonsense !" was the answer. "We are straight from home, as you may be very sure. For how could you have seen us pass by before, when you did see us coming down now .'' " " Then you mean to say that really you did not pass by here ten or fifteen minutes ago ? " " Certainly ; for at that time, probably, we were just coming out of the yard and starting to come here."

We all of us remained much amazed at this incident. There were four of us who had seen this appearance, and seen it under such circumstances as apparently precluded any possibility of our having mistaken some casual passengers for our intimate friends. We were quite satisfied that we had really not seen our bodily friends pass down the road that first time when we thought that we saw them. As for myself, I was sure that it was not they; and yet hardly could I help feeling that it could have been no persons else.

There is an old saying about keeping a thing ten years, and then finding a use for it. This curious experience of mine is as vivid in my mind as though it were of yesterday. Is it of use as illustrating mistakes as to identity, or is it rather a singular instance of what is called second-sight? M.

This account was first published in the Spiritual Magazine for August i860. On our writing to Mr. Mountford on the subject, he replied : —

Beacon Street, Boston, U.S.A., %th August 1884.

The narrative of which you have sent me a copy was written by myself, as you had rightly supposed. It was carefully prepared, and I believe it to be as exactly true as any report ever made by phonograph or photograph. At the time when the occurrence happened, I was simply amazed at it, and I felt but just simply as some untaught ploughman might have felt in the open field, if an aerolite had fallen at his feet, hot from the skies.

The persons besides myself, of whom I wrote in that account, were all of the family name of Coe, and were all of Islington, near King's Lynn ; and they were all living at the time when I wrote about them, but they have all been carried away. I have only to add that Mrs. Robert Coe said that she and her husband knew of their daughter's having started to see her aunt, but that they had had no intention of following her till Mr. Robert Coe, suddenly starting from his chair by the fireside, exclaimed " Let us go to Clement's."

654 B. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 194. Major W., resident near Conon Bridge, Ross-shire, writes : —

February gth, 1882. It was the month of August ; rather a dark night and very still ; the hour, midnight ; when before retiring for the night I went, as is often my custom, to the front door to look at the weather. When standing for a moment on the VOL. I. 2 T

step. I saw, coining round a turn in the drive, a large close carriage and pair of horses, with two men on the box. It passed the front of the house, and was going at a rapid rate towards a path which leads to a stream, running, at that point, between rather steep banks. There is no carriage-road on that side of the house, and I shouted to the driver to stop, as, if he went on, he must undoubtedly come to grief. The carriage stopped abruptly when it came to the running water, turned, and, in doing so, drove over the lawn. I got up to it ; and by this time my son had joined me with a lantern. Neither of the men on the box had spoken, and there was no sound from the inside of the carriage. My son looked in, and all he could discern was a stiff-looking figure sitting up in a corner, and draped, apparently, from head to foot in white. The absolute silence of the men outside was mysterious, and the white figure inside, apparently of a female, not being alarmed or showing any signs of life, was strange. Men, carriage, and horses were unknown to me, although I know the country so well. The carriage continued its way across the lawn, turning up a road which led past the stables, and so into the drive again and away. We could see no traces of it the next morning — no marks of wheels or horses' feet on the soft grass or gravel road ; and we never again heard of the carriage or its occupant, though I caused careful inquiries to be made the following day. I may mention that my wife and daughter also saw the carriage, being attracted to the window by my shout. This happened on the 23rd of August 1S7S.

After a visit to the house in September 1884, Mr. Podmore wrote : —

Major W., on whom I called to-day, is practically satisfied that what he and his family saw was not a real carriage. He showed me the whole scene of its appearance. The spot where the carriage appeared to turn barely leaves sufficient room for the passage of an ordinary carriage, and that a carriage should turn round there seems almost impossible. The carriage went for some distance across the lawn — a mossy and rather damp piece of grass — and stopped in front of the house for more than a minute, while Major W. spoke to the man, but without receiving any reply. His wife, whom I also saw, was attracted to the window by the sound of the wheels, in the first instance, on the gravel. Major W. made many inquiries among his neighbours, but could not find that any one had seen the carriage at all. The house is situated on a peninsula stretching between the Cromarty and Moray Firths, and some three miles from the neck of the peninsula. The locality is very lonely, there being no villages or hamlets, and but few private residences of any kind ; and it is difficult to imagine the errand which could bring a strange carriage into such a country at the dead of night. Major W. has had one other purely subjective hallucination.

655 A. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 103. In the following auditory case the actual word used by the agent was distinguished by the percipient. The account is from Mr. R. Fryer, of Bath, brother of our colleague, the Rev. A. T. Fryer, now of 13 Dumfries Place, Cardiff, who tells us that he " distinctly remembers being told of the occurrence within a few weeks of its happening." He explains that " Rod " was the name by which his brother, the percipient, was called in the family.

656A] TO CHAPTER VI 659

January 1S83. A strange experience occurred in the autumn of the year 1879. A brother of mine had been from home for three or four days, when, one afternoon, at half-past five (as nearly as possible), I was astonished to hear my name called out very distinctly. I so clearly recognised my brother's voice that I looked all over the house for him ; but not finding him, and indeed knowing that he must be distant some forty miles, I ended by attributing the incident to a fancied delusion, and thought no more about the matter. On my brother's arrival home, however, on the sixth day, he remarked amongst other things that he had narrowly escaped an ugly accident. It appeared that, whilst getting out from a railway carriage, he missed his footing, and fell along the platform ; by putting out his hands quickly he broke the fall, and only suffered a severe shaking. " Curiously enough," he said, " when I found myself falling I called out your name." This did not strike me for a moment, but on my asking him during what part of the day this happened, he gave me the time, which I found corresponded exactly with the moment I heard myself called.

In answer to an inquiry, Mr. R. Fryer adds : —

I do not remember ever having a similar experience to the one narrated to you ; nor should I care to, as the sensation, together with the suspense as to the why and wherefore of the event, is the reverse of pleasant.

In conversation, he explained that he had frequently expostulated with his brother on the latter's habit of alighting from trains in motion ; and the automatic utterance of his name, on this occasion, might thus be accounted for by association. The agent's account of the matter is as follows : —

Newbridge Road, Bath, November i6tk, 1885.

In the year 1879 I was travelling, and in the course of my journey I had to stop at Gloucester. In getting out of the train I fell, and was assisted to rise by one of the railway officials. He asked if I was hurt, and asked if I had any one travelling with me. I repHed "No" to both questions, and inquired why he asked. He replied, " Because you called out Rod." I distinctly recollect making use of the word Rod.

On arriving home, a day or two afterwards, I related the circumstance, and my brother inquired the time and date. He then told me he had heard me call at that particular time. He was so sure of its being my voice that he made inquiries as to whether I was about or not. John T. Fryer.

656 A. This case is taken from the " Report on the Census of Hallucinations " in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 308. The account was written in 1890 by one of the two percipients concerned, Miss A. E. R.

When out in camp in an Indian jungle, my sister and I were anxiously awaiting the return of her husband, who had left in the morning on a surveying expedition, promising to return early in the afternoon. Between six and seven P.M. we were very uneasy, and were watching the line of road, I should say, 200 yards distant from where we stood. Simultaneously we exclaimed, " There he is," and I distinctly saw him, sitting in his dog-cart driving his grey horse

66o APPENDICES [656 B

the syce occupying the seat behind. We at once returned to the tents — my sister ordering the bearer to get the Sahib's bath-water ready, and the butler to prepare dinner— I running to set my brother-in-law's mother's mind at rest as to the safety of her son. However, as time passed on, and he did not appear, our alarm returned, and was not allayed until he arrived in safety at eight o'clock. On interrogating him, we found he was just starting from the surveying ground, about eight miles distant, at the very time we had the above related experience. I should add, we were both in good health and certainly wide awake at the time, and I have never before or since had any experience of the kind.

Miss R. was about ten years old at the time of this incident. Her

sister, Mrs. H., writes : —

December ijth, 1890.

In answer to your request, I write to say that I fully endorse the statement made by my sister with reference to our experience in India. I was present at the time. Also I may state that there was no possibility of our mistaking any other person for my husband, as the road ended at our tents, and the figure we saw must necessarily have driven straight to us. I should also say we were in an isolated part of the country.

I called on Mrs. H. in December 1891, and she informed me that the incident took place "about 18 years ago," when her son, who was then twenty, was about two years old. She explained to me in conversation that a mistake of identity was impossible, both from the lonely nature of the country and from the great height of her husband, who is about 6 ft. 4 in. tall.

Mrs. H. added a further note to her sister's account, to the following

effect : —

December ^th, 1891.

I fully endorse all the details of this account. I may add that the time I saw my husband was about the hour I expected him home. He had been detained later than he expected, and I know would be concerned as to my anxiety about him. I have never had any other similar experience.

In this case the proof that the figure was not real depends not so much on the recognition— for the distance was probably too great for certain recognition — as on the combination of that with the very great improbability that any human being whatever was driving a dog-cart in the place at that moment.

656 B. The following case is quoted from Over the Teacups, by Oliver Wendell Holmes (3rd ed. 1891, p. 12). We are told in the Introduction that the part of the book containing these cases was written in March 1888.

I relate a singular coincidence which very lately occurred in my experience. ... I will first copy the memorandum made at the time : —

" Remarkable coincidence. On Monday, April 18th, being at table from 6.30 P.M. to 7.30, with and [the two ladies of my household], I

662 A] ' TO CHAPTER VI 66l

told them of the case of ' trial by battel ' offered by Abraham Thornton in 1817. I mentioned his throwing down his glove, which was not taken up by the brother of his victim, and so he had to be let off, for the old law was still in force. I mentioned that Abraham Thornton was said to have come to this country, 'and [I added] he may be living near us for aught that I know.' I rose from the table and found an English letter waiting for me, left while I sat at dinner. I copy the first portion of this letter : —

'20 Alfred Place West (near Museum), South Kensington, London, S.W., April "jth, i887.

' Dr. O. W. Holmes, — Dear Sir, — In travelling the other day I met with a reprint of the very interesting case of Thornton for murder, 181 7. The prisoner pleaded successfully the old Wager of Battel. I thought you would like to read the account, and send it with this . . . — Yours faithfully,

' Fred. Rathbone.' "

Mr. Rathbone is a well-known dealer in old Wedgwood and eighteenthcentury art. As a friend of my hospitable entertainer, M. Willett, he had shown me many attentions in England, but I was not expecting any communication from him ; and when, fresh from my conversation, I found this letter just arrived by mail and left while I was at table, and on breaking the seal read what I had a few moments before been telling, I was greatly surprised, and immediately made a note of the occurrence, as given above.

I had long been familiar with all the details of this celebrated case, but had not referred to it, so far as I can remember, for months or years. I know of no train of thought which led me to speak of it on that particular day. I had never alluded to it before in that company, nor had I ever spoken of it with Mr. Rathbone. . . .

The case I have given is, I am confident, absolutely free from every source of error. I do not remember that Mr. Rathbone had communicated with me since he sent me a plentiful supply of mistletoe a year ago last Christmas. The account I received from him was cut out of The Sporting Times of March 5th, 1887. My own knowledge of the case came from Kirby's Wonderful Museum, a work presented to me at least thirty years ago. I had not looked at the account, spoken of it, nor thought of it for a long time, when it came to me by a kind of spontaneous generation, as it seemed, having no connection with any previous train of thought that I was aware of. I consider the evidence of entire independence, apart from possible "telepathic" causation, completely waterproof, airtight, incombustible, and unassailable.

662 A. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 196. In the following case, the percipient, Mr. J. G. Keulemans, acquires information of what is happening at a distance through a mere mental impression, completely unexternalised, but yet conveying both the abstract idea of an event and the concrete picture of a scene. Mr. Keulemans' account, which I quote, is prefaced by some remarks of Gurney's on the evidential aspect of the case, as follows : —

It occasionally happens that a number of occurrences, perhaps trivial in character, and each of them likely enough to be dismissed as merely a very odd coincidence, fall to the experience of one person ; and if he is observant of his

impressions, he may gradually become conscious of a certain similarity between them, which leads him to regard them as telepathic, or at any rate as something more than accidental. Before it can be worth while to consider such evidence, we must have reason to believe that the witness is a good observer, and alive to the very general mistake of noting hits and not misses in these matters. Such an observer we believe that we have found in Mr. Keulemans, of 34 Matilda Street, Barnsbury, N., a well-known scientific draughtsman, of whose care and accuracy we have had several examples. He has experienced so many of these coincidences that, even before our inquiries quickened his interest in the matter, he had been accustomed to keep a record of his impressions — which, according to his own account, were invariably justified by fact. Some more of his cases will be given in the sequel. The one here quoted is trivial enough (except perhaps to the baby who fell out of bed), and of little force if it were a single experience. Yet it will be seen that the impression was precise in character, was at once written down, and proved to be completely correct. We may perhaps assume Mrs. Keulemans to have been the agent.

Mr. Keulemans writes : —

October i6tk, 1883.

My wife went to reside at the seaside on September 30th last, taking with her our youngest child, a little boy thirteen months old.

On Wednesday, October 3rd, I felt a strong impression that the little fellow was worse (he was in weak health on his departure). The idea then prevailed on my mind that he had met with a slight accident ; and immediately the picture of the bedroom, in which he sleeps, appeared in my mind's eye. It was not the strong sensation of awe or sorrow, as I had often experienced before on such occasions; but, anyhow, I fancied he had fallen out of the bed, upon chairs, and then rolled down upon the floor. This was about 11 a.m., and I at once wrote to my wife, asking her to let me know how the little fellow was getting on. I thought it rather bold to tell my wife that the baby had, to my conviction, really met with an accident, without being able to produce any confirmatory evidence. Also I considered that she would take.it as an insinuation of carelessness on her part ; therefore I purposely wrote it as 2i post sc7-ipttim.

I heard no more about it, and even fancied that this time my impression was merely the consequence of anxiety. But on Saturday last I went to see my wife and child, and asked whether she had taken notice of my advice to protect the baby against such an accident. She smiled at first, and then informed me that he had tumbled out of the bed upon the chairs placed at the side, and then found his way upon the floor, without being hurt. She further remarked, " You must have been thinking of that when it was just too late, because it happened the same day your letter came, some hours previously." I asked her what time of the day it happened. Answer: "About 11 a.m." She told me that she heard the baby fall, and at once ran upstairs to pick him up.

I am certain, without the shadow of a doubt, that I wrote immediately after the impression ; and that this was between 11 and 11.30 in the morning.

The following note was made by Gurney : —

I have seen the letter which Mr. Keulemans wrote to his wife. The envelope bears the post-mark of Worthing, October 3rd; and the postscript contained the following words : " Mind little Gaston does not fall out of bed.

662 B] TO CHAPTER VI 663

Put chairs in front of it. You know accidents soon happen. The fact is, I am almost certain he has met with such a mishap this very morning."

Mrs. Keulemans' aunt supplied the following testimony, a day or two after Mr. Keulemans' letter of October i6th : —

36 Teville Street, Worthing. Mrs. Keulemans (my niece) and her baby are staying at my house. The baby had fallen out of bed the morning of the day the letter li.e. Mr. Keulemans' letter] was received. C. Gray.

662 B. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 31. The following case, though undoubtedly sensory, seems still to belong to a somewhat indescribable stage of visualisation. If interpreted as telepathic, it is further of interest as illustrating that rarer type where the phantasm is not merely representative of the agent, but visibly reproduces some actual percept or idea which is prominently present at the time to the agent's consciousness. The account is from Mr. F. Gottschalk, of 20 Adamson Road, Belsize Park, N.W., and is dated February 12, 1886.

[Mr. Gottschalk begins by describing a friendship which he formed with Mr. Courtenay Thorpe, at the rooms of Dr. Sylvain Mayer, on the evening of February 20th, 1885. On February 24th, being anxious to hear a particular recitation which Mr. Thorpe was shortly going to give, Mr. Gottschalk wrote to him, at the Prince's Theatre, to ask what the hour of the recitation was to be.] In the evening I was going out to see some friends, when on the road there seemed suddenly to develop itself before me a disc of light, which appeared to be on a different plane to everything else in view. It was not possible for me to fix the distance at which it seemed to be from me.^ Examining the illumined space, I found that two hands were visible. They were engaged in drawing a letter from an envelope which I instinctively felt to be mine and, in consequence, thought immediately that the hands were those of Mr. Thorpe. I had not previously been thinking of him, but at the moment the conviction came to me with such intensity that it was irresistible. Not being in any way awe-struck by the extraordinary nature and novelty of this incident, but in a perfectly calm frame of mind, I examined the picture, and found that the hands were very white, and bared up to some distance above the wrist. Each forearm terminated in a ruffle ; beyond that nothing was to be seen. The vision lasted about a minute. After its disappearance I determined to find out what connection it may have had with Mr. Thorpe's actual pursuit at the moment, and went to the nearest lamp-post and noted the time.

By the first post the next morning, I received an answer from Mr. Thorpe, which began in the following way : " Tell me, pray tell me, why did I, when I saw your letter in the rack at the Prince's Theatre, know that it was from you.""'

Cf. a. remark in M. Marillier's account of his interesting subjective experiences, referred to in \Phantasms of the Livuig\ vol. i. p. 521 : " Je ne pourrais indiquer ni la place de I'image que j'ai objectivee, ni la distance a laquelle elle se trouve." The indescribableness of a certain sort of externalisation is well brought out in the same writer's description of his vision of parts of his body which could never actually be seen by him — e.g. the back of his head.

[We have seen this letter, which is dated " Tuesday night " ; and February 24th, 1885, fell on a Tuesday.] Mr. Thorpe had no expectation of receiving a letter from me, nor had he ever seen my writing. Even had he seen it, his knowledge of it would not affect the issue of the question, as he assured me that the impression arrived the moment he saw there was a letter under the "T clip," before any writing was visible. [Mr. Gottschalk explains that from the construction of the rack, which he has examined, the address on the envelope would be invisible.]

On the evening of February 27th, by arrangement, I again met him at the rooms of Dr. Mayer, and there put questions to him with a view to eliciting some explanation. As near as possible, I give them as they were put at the time, and add the answers. It is necessary for me here to state that he and the Doctor were in complete ignorance of what had happened to me. Having first impressed upon him the necessity of answering in a categorical manner and with the greatest possible accuracy, I commenced: —

"When did you get my Tuesday's letter?" "At 7 in the evening, when I arrived at the theatre." " Then what happened?" " I read it, but, being very late, in such a hurry that when I had finished I was as ignorant of its contents as if I had never seen it." " Then? " " I dressed, went on the stage, played my part, and came off." "What was the time then?" "About 20 minutes past 8." " What happened then ? " "I talked for a time with some of the company in my dressing-room." "For how long?" "Twenty minutes." "What did you then do? " " They having left me, my first thought was to find your letter. I looked everywhere for it, in vain. I turned out the pockets of my ordinary clothes, and searched among the many things that encumbered my dressingtable. I was annoyed at not finding it immediately, especially as I was anxious to know what it was about. Strangely enough I discovered it eventually in the coat which I had just worn in the piece 'School for Scandal.' I immediately read it again, was delighted to receive it, and decided to answer at once." "Now be very exact. What was the time when you read it on the second occasion ? " "As nearly as I can say, 10 minutes to 9."

Thereupon I drew from my pocket a little pocket-diary in which I had noted the time of my vision, and asked Dr. Mayer to read what was written under the date 24th JFebruary.

" Eight minutes to 9."

[Mr. Gottschalk has kindly allowed us to inspect his diary, which confirms all the dates given.]

Having estabhshed in this way, without any assistance, the coincidence of time between his actually opening the envelope and my seeing him do so, I was satisfied as to the principal part, and proceeded to analyse the incident in detail. The whiteness of the hands was accounted for by the fact that actors invariably whiten their hands when playing a part like the one Mr. Thorpe was engaged in — " Snake " in the " School for Scandal." The ruffles also formed part of the dress in this piece. They were attached to the short sleeves of the shirt which Mr. Thorpe was actually wearing when he opened my letter.

This is the first hallucination I ever had. I have had one since of a similar nature, which I will recount separately. Ferdinand Gottschalk.

Dr. Mayer, of 42 Somerset Street, I'ortman Square, W., corroborates as follows : —

662 C] TO CHAPTER VI 665

March xst, 1886. I well remember having read something \i.e. in Mr. Gottschalk's diary] — the exact words memory will not allow me to give — which tallied almost exactly with the story told by Courtenay Thorpe ; and can bear positive testimony of the above conversation having taken place. Sylvain Mayer.

We cannot lay any stress on Mr. Thorpe's impression as to the letter and its writer, since that may easily have been accidental. But it is a point to be noticed that he read the letter with very decided pleasure, after a considerable hunt for it — in other words, that the reading of the letter stood out rather distinctly from the general run of such experiences. Though the incident is trivial, the close correspondence of time and detail is strongly suggestive of telepathic clairvoyance. In the second case mentioned, an illuminated disc was again seen, which " seemed not to belong to the surroundings " ; but the details were not quite as distinctive as in the above instance.

662 C. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 35. In the case just quoted, the vision hardly suggested a real external object, and further stages remain, on the path to the final one of natural solid-looking externality. In the following case the image appeared with a sort of apparent relief, but certainly not yet as co-ordinate in any natural fashion with the real objects in view. The account is from Mr. Richard Searle, barrister, of Home Lodge, Heme Hill, who tells us that he has had no other experience of a hallucination.

, JVovetnber 2nd, 1883.

One afternoon, a few years ago, I was sitting in my chambers in the Temple, working at some papers. My desk is between the fireplace and one of the windows, the window being two or three yards on the left side of my chair, and looking out into the Temple. Suddenly I became aware that I was looking at the bottom window-pane, which was about on a level with my eyes, and there I saw the figure of the head and face of my wife, in a reclining position, v/ith the eyes closed and the face quite white and bloodless, as if she were dead.

I pulled myself together, and got up and looked out of the window, where I saw nothing but the houses opposite, and I came to the conclusion that I had been drowsy and had fallen asleep, and, after taking a few turns about the room to rouse myself, I sat down again to my work and thought no more of the matter.

I went home at my usual time that evening, and whilst my wife and I were at dinner, she told me that she had lunched with a friend who lived in Gloucester Gardens, and that she had taken with her a little child, one of her nieces, who was staying with us ; but during lunch, or just after it, the child had a fall and slightly cut her face so that the blood came. After telling the story, my wife added that she was so alarmed when she saw the blood on the child's face that she had fainted. What I had seen in the window then occurred to my mind, and I asked her what time it was when this happened. She said, as far as she remembered, it must have been a few minutes after 2 o'clock. This was the time, as nearly as I could calculate, not having looked at my watch, when I saw the figure in the window-pane.

I have only to add that this is the only occasion on which I have known my wife to have had a fainting-fit. She was in bad health at the time, and I did not mention to her what I had seen until a few days afterwards, when she had become stronger. I mentioned the occurrence to several of my friends at the time. R. S.

Mr. Paul Pierrard, of 27 Gloucester Gardens, W., writes as follows : —

4//^ December 1883.

It may be interesting for special observers to have a record of an extraordinary occurrence which happened about four years ago at my residence, 27 Gloucester Gardens, W.

At an afternoon party of ladies and children, among whom were Mrs. Searle, of Home Lodge, Heme Hill, and her little niece, Louise, there was a rather noisy, bustling, and amusing game round a table, when little Louise fell from her chair and hurt herself slightly. The fear of a grave accident caused Mrs. Searle to be very excited, and she fainted.

The day after, we met Mr. Searle, who stated that in the afternoon of the preceding day he had been reading important cases in his chambers, No. 6 Pump Court, Temple, when a peculiar feeling overcame him, and he distinctly saw, as it were in a looking-glass, the very image of his wife leaning back in a swoon, which seemed very strange at the moment.

By comparing the time, it was found that this extraordinary vision was produced at the very same instant as the related incident.

We often spoke of the case together, and could not find any explanation to completely satisfy our minds; but we registered this rare fact for which a name is wanted. Paul Pierrard.

Here there was more than the mere representation of the agent ; she was represented apparently in the aspect which she actually wore, but in which the percipient had never seen her, and in which she would hardly be consciously picturing herself. We are scarcely driven, however, in this case, to the difficult conception of '"'telepathic clairvoyance "; for it is possible to suppose that the idea of fainting, impressed on Mr. Searle's mind, worked itself out into perception in an appropriate fashion.

662 D. From Phantasms of the Livmg, vol. ii. p. 37. The stage of visualisation in the next case is particularly interesting. The narrator is Mrs. Taunton, of Brook Vale, Witton, Birmingham.

January 15//;, 1884. On Thursday evening, 14th November 1867, I was sitting in the Birmingham Town Hall with my husband at a concert, when there came over me the icy chill which usually accompanies these occurrences. Almost immediately, I saw with perfect distinctness, between myself and the orchestra, my uncle, Mr. W., lying in bed with an appealing look on his face, like one dying. I had not heard anything of him for several months, and had no reason to think he was ill. The appearance was not transparent or filmy, but perfectly solid-

1 This refers to a few other experiences of a different character, one of which, however, involved a hallucination of sight.

662D] TO CHAPTER VI 6e^

looking; and yet I could somehow see the orchestra^ not through, but behind it. I did not try turning my eyes to see whether the figure moved with them, but looked at it with a fascinated expression that made my husband ask if I was ill. I asked him not to speak to me for a minute or two ; the vision gradually disappeared, and I told my husband, after the concert was over, what I had seen. A letter came shortly after telling of my uncle's death. He died at exactly the time when I saw the vision. E. F. Taunton.

[The signature of Mrs. Taunton's husband is also appended.]

Rich. H. Taunton.

[We find from an obituary notice in the Belfast News-Letter that Mr. W. died on November 14th, 1867.]

The phantasm here was perfectly external, and is described as " perfectly solid-looking " ; yet it certainly did not hold to the real objects around the same relation as a figure of flesh and blood would have held ; it was in a peculiar way transparent. This feature is noticeable, as it is one which occasionally occurs also in hallucinations of the purely subjective class.-^ It may thus be taken as one of the numerous minor indications of the hallucinatory character of telepathic phantasms (see Pha?itas7}is, chap. xii. § 10).

The "Report on the Census of Hallucinations" {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. X.) gives further examples of what are there called " incompletely developed hallucinations," and discusses in chapter iv. the distinction between mental images, including what Kandinsky calls " pseudo-hallucinations,"

1 Of many subjective hallucinations, it has been specially noticed that they hid whatever was behind the place which they appeared to occupy ; and the rule seems to be that when the percept is completely externalised, it is solid-looking. But exceptions are not infrequent. Whitish transparent figures were a feature in a pathological case first published in the Phrenological Jotcrnal and Miscellany (Edinburgh), No. vi. p. 290, &c., and described in the well-known article on " Spectral Illusions " in Chambers's Miscellany. Wundt ( Grimdziige der physiologischen Psychologic, vol. ii. p. 357), records the experience of an overseer of forests, who saw heaps of wood all round him in his house, but also saw the furniture and carpet just as usual. [Cf. case 193.) Miss Morse, of Vermont, a careful observer, who has had hallucinations at rare intervals during a good many years, tells me that at first " they seemed to be pictured just withifi instead of before my eyes." Lately, however, "they have usually been projected into space; but however real the apparitions at first appear, a close inspection reveals that they have no solidity — that objects can be seen through them." Another of my informants, who on waking had a hallucination of a tall female figure, noticed that he could see a towel through her ; and similarly in one of my cases of persistent dream-images. Professor Goodwin reports that with him they " retain an appearance of solidity for some seconds after waking, the furniture of the room being distinctly recognised through these figures, like a dissolving view." Another correspondent describes such images as seen " as it were with one eye asleep, the other awake." In one of Paterson's cases {Edijiburgh Medical and Surgical Journal ior Jan. 1843), ^^^ phantasm appeared as though seen through gauze. I may also refer to the telepathic phantasms which gave the impression of being formed from mist {Phantasms, chap. xii. § 3, cases 315, 518, and Mrs. Deane's experience, p. 237). I have mentioned that the disappearance is occasionally through a stage of increased tenuity and transparency. — E. G.

2 Kritische und klinische Betrachtungen im Gebiete der Sinnestduschungen, Berlin,

and fully externalised sensory hallucinations. Examples of figures gradually developed out of a mist or glow of light are given on pp. 117, 120, and 293, and examples of transparent figures on pp. 117, 119, and 143 of the " Report."

663 A. In the Appendices to section 425 I have given some cases of premonitions occurring in dreams. Other precognitive cases are given in my article on " The Subliminal Self : the Relation of Supernormal Phenomena to Time" {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 334-593), and I quote here one of them (from p. 573). The narrative comes from Dr. A. S. Wiltse, of Skiddy, Kansas, personally known to Dr. Hodgson and myself as a careful and conscientious witness, who writes : —

This incident occurred in Morgan Co., Tennessee, I think in the spring of 1878. Mrs. Wiltse and myself had spent the day with her mother and stepfather, Mr. and Mrs. Todd. I had passed most of the day with Mr. Todd in the field where he was planting corn. We retired early, and Mrs. Wiltse almost immediately fell asleep.

Mr. Todd and myself being wakeful, lay and talked. There was but one room, in which there was an open fireplace containing fire mostly buried up with ashes, a large pine knot having been laid on top of these embers, and so nearly buried in ashes as to give about a one candle power of light. . . .

While we were talking, I saw a picture slide on to the wall at my feet, at such a height as to rest easily in the line of my vision. I called to Mr. and Mrs. Todd to cease talking, and told them what I saw. The picture was some feet in size each way, and remained before me long enough for me to describe [it] in detail to them. It was a landscape, the main features in which were a river with a large creek emptying into it very nearly at right angles. When I had given a full description, the picture disappeared with a quick movement like that with which it had appeared, but in the opposite direction from which it came. Mr. Todd said, " You have described Emerald River and Rock Creek where it empties into it," — which I thought correct, as I was famihar with the two streams.

While we were talking, another picture slid on to the wall in the same manner as the first one. It was the same picture as the first, with the addition of several open fields and wooded lands along the banks. In one of the fields was a log-house with its surroundings which I did not recognise. The picture remained stationary until I had described it thoroughly, when it disappeared similarly to the first.

Both Todd and his wife said I had described the " Cass Davis House," which was about a mile distant, across the river. At this another picture shd on to the wall, the very counterpart of the second one, except that a good portion of the landscape was left out, but the house was there, the door of which was closed, and as I announced its appearance, I heard the muftled report of a gun on the inside of the house, and immediately afterwards the door flew open and a man rushed out seemingly in a great fright.

At this point Todd said, "See here. Doc, are you seeing these things, or just playing off a drive on us 1 " I assured him that I actually saw, or seemed to see the things I describea, although they did not seem possessed of soHdity, but were more as if one should breathe over a looking-glass, then stand at some distance from it and observe his image ; it would look shadowy and dim.

663A] TO CHAPTER VI 669

In the meantime the door of the house in the picture had been left open so that I could see into the house, where I saw a man staggering toward the door with blood running from his mouth. He reached the door, where he supported himself by leaning against the door-facing, and steadied himself off the doorstep on to the ground. In so doing he left the print of his hand in blood upon the door-facing.

At this point the picture again disappeared and was immediately replaced by another much the same as the other, but in it the dead body of the man was lying on the ground some few feet from the door, while from the field advanced several people, with hoes and mattocks in their hands, who gathered round the body in apparent excitement and consternation, when the picture vanished and I saw nothing more.

I asked Todd if he was sure of the house ; he assured me that it bore the exact description I had given. I asked if tliere was any rumour, or ever had been to his knowledge, of a tragedy having occurred there. " Not that he had ever heard of." I believe I said that "something of the kind has occurred there or else will. If it is past we may never know it ; if it is to come, we may see."

When the corn which Todd had planted that day was ready for hoeing, I was with him again in the field a portion of a day, and together we left the field and started to go to Wartburg, the county seat about two miles distant. On the way we met Cass Davis, a quadroon, who asked us if we had heard of Henderson Whittaker killing himself. We had not, and he told us that during the (forenoon, I think) Whittaker went into the house, where Mr. Haun was sitting alone, and asked Haun to loan him his rifle to go hunting. Haun pointed to the corner where the rifle stood, saying, " I don't know whether it is loaded or not." Whittaker put his mouth over the muzzle to blow into the gun, pushing back the hammer with his foot. The foot slipped off and the gun was discharged into his mouth. Haun ran out into the field for help. The hands came up and I think found the young man dead in the yard. I have also been told that the hand-print of blood was left upon the door-facing, but these lesser points can be learned best from parties who lived in the neighbourhood at the time. The main points are absolutely certain. The tragedy occurred in the house I had described, and was of substantially the nature I had described from the picture-writing on the wall.

We obtained the following answers to questions sent to Mr. William Todd, January 15th, 1891, re Dr. Wiltse's Vision.

Q. r. " Did Dr. Wiltse describe to you picture appearances which he said he was seeing at the time ? "

A. I. "Yes."

Q. 2. " Did he describe particulars of what he was seeing, such as the print of a bloody hand upon the door-facing of the Cass Davis House ; the sound of a gun inside ; one man running out in apparent fright and the other staggering out of the doorway and dying upon the ground near the door ? "

A. 2. " He did describe the place and asked me if I knew of such a place ; I told him that it was the Cass Davis House."

Q. 3. " Do you recollect if he told you he believed something of such nature had happened in the Cass Davis House, or else would in the future ? "

A. 3. " He told me that something had happened at that place, or would in the future."

Q. 4. " Did the future events in that house, in the matter of the death of H. Whittaker, lead you to conclude that Dr. Wiltse really saw that night what he told you he was seeing ? "

A. 4. " It did as to H. Whittaker, and I do believe he saw what he said he saw." Wm. TonT), January 26th, 1891.

Mr. M. Haun writes as follows to Dr. Hodgson : —

Kismet, Tenn., March 2nd, 1891.

Your request received, and will say in reply, 1st, that I remember Dr. A. S. Wiltse having told me of his " prophetic vision," but whether it was before or after the fulfilment I can't say. However, the facts were about as follows : The young man shot himself in the mouth while attempting to blow in the gun ; ball passed out through the back of his neck just in the edge of his hair, rupturing some large vein or artery. He fell instantly and was unable to utter a word intelhgibly. He raised himself up on his hands with his head drooping over, and from his mouth the blood ran profusely, making a large pool of blood upon the floor. I ran about forty rods from the house to call the nearest help, and on returning found the young man lying full length, flat on his face, dead, his hat lying on the doorstep ; the print of his hand made on door-casing ; it seemed that he had crawled out upon his hands and knees.

Now the hand-print on the door; the blood-stained hat on the doorsteps; the kind of house and its location ; the season of the year when the accident occurred, correspond with the Dr.'s vision, if I remember correctly.

The tragedy occurred, I think, in the month of July, not far from the i8th. As to when the Dr. had this vision or dream I don't remember.

No. I don't remember thinking of his vision at the time, for, as before stated, I don't remember having heard it before, although I might have heard it. Maniphee Haun.

Mr. J. Bales writes to Dr. Hodgson : —

Wartburg, Tenn., March i\th, 1891.

In reply to yours of 2/27, will say that I remember hearing Dr. Wiltse talk of the occurrence you mentioned in regard to the tragedy which happened at the Cass Davis Place. He told me of it before it happened, and when it did occur he came and asked me if I remembered what he had told me about it before. As to the dates, I can't remember exactly, but it must have been twelve or fourteen years ago. There was no newspaper published here at that time, and there was never any publication of it, so far as I am aware.

I do not remember the appearance of a bloody hand on the door or anywhere else, but there was blood on the house in different places.

Would have answered you sooner, but I wanted to remember correctly before writing. Dr. A. S. Wiltse considered a truthful and honest man here. James Bales.

Mr. Howard writes to Dr. Hodgson : —

663 A] TO CHAPTER VI 671

Kismet, Tenn., March 2-^rd, iSgfi]. Your inquiry of recent date just received, and will say in reply that Dr. Wiltse told his vision to Mr. William Todd and his wife, my stepfather and my mother, a short time before the occurrence. I was informed by Mr. Todd that the details' in the case were exactly similar to the Dr.'s vision. My mother stated the same fact in my hearing, but she is now dead. I understand from different parties that the blood-print, &c., were exactly as seen in the vision. Dr. Wiltse was stopping at our house (Mr. Todd's) at the time, and, after relating his vision, my stepfather recognised the place described as the " Cass Davis House," where the tragedy afterwards occurred. I would refer you to Mr. William Todd for further particulars, as he probably remembers the date ; I do not. W. T. Howard.

I may refer also to a small group of predictions of numbers to be drawn in the conscription for the Belgian army ; the report of which was sent in 1894 by Professor G. Hulin, of the University of Ghent, to Professor Sidgwick, and given by me at length in the paper already mentioned {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 545). Five cases of the right numbers being predicted during the eight years, 1886-94, are given on good authority ; the numbers in the first four cases being respectively, 90, 112, 216, III. The first case was an especially striking one; a clearly externalised vision of the number 90 appeared to the percipient, and produced a strong impression on his mind, convincing him that he would draw that number. In the fifth case the man who was to draw first announced that his number would be 116, and on being told that that was already drawn, said it would be 115, which turned out correct. The report only professes to give correct predictions, and we have no means of knowing how often predictions of these numbers are made which turn out wrong. Neither are we told how many numbers there were to draw from, except in one case, where it appears that there were at least 150, the lowest of them being 46 and the highest 223. In this case the number 216 was the one rightly guessed. We must assume, I think, that these facts were known to the man who was to draw — the narrative certainly does not exclude this supposition, and, in fact, rather suggests it — and, if so, the chance of his making a correct guess was, of course, about I in 150, and the cases are hardly numerous enough to exclude the explanation of chance coincidence.

Dr. G. B. Ermacora, in an article published in 1898 in the Rivista di Studi Psichici (of which a translation, with the title " Sur la possibilite des theories rationnelles de la premonition," appeared in the Annales des Sciences Psychiques, January-February, 1899, P- 46), suggests that the fulfilment of premonitions about the results of drawing by lot — when the drawing is done by the person who experiences the premonition — might be explained by telaesthesia, as we might suppose that in such a case the drawing of the number is not accomplished blindly, but is guided by a supernormal perception which leads the subject to select automatically, and probably unconsciously, the particular number.

6/2 APPENDICES [665 A

665 A. From the Journal S.P.R,, vol. vii. p. 25. The following case is interesting on account of the different stages through which the impression passed. It will be noticed that it began with a vivid sense of presence, then took the form of an externalised visual hallucination, but transparent, — thus being what was called in the Report on the Ce?isus of Hallucinatiotis (as just mentioned) an incompletely developed hallucination,— and finally assumed a "pseudo-hallucinatory" form. The account was received by me from Mr. Kearne, of 37 Avonmore Gardens, West Kensington, on December 24th, 1894, and the signatures of the two other witnesses were added later.

On the evening of February loth, 1894, I was sitting in my room expecting the return of two friends from a concert in the provinces where they had been performing. The friends in question had lived with me for some years, and we were more than usually attached to one another. I had no knowledge by what particular train they intended returning to town, but knew when the last train they could catch was due to arrive in London (9.5 p.m.) and how long to a few minutes they would take from the terminus to get home (about 10 p.m.). Our profession entails a great deal of travelling; my friends have had plenty of experience in this direction, and there was no question of their being well able to look after themselves. I may just add that one of these friends has made this same journey weekly for the last eight or nine years, so that I knew quite well his usual time of arrival at Liverpool Street.

On the day mentioned they were performing at an afternoon concert, and I had every reason to believe they would be tired and get home as soon as possible. I allowed half-an-hour beyond the usual time (10.30 p.m.) of arrival to elapse before I got at all uneasy, speculating as people will under such circumstances as to what was keeping them, although arguing to myself all the time that there was not the slightest occasion for alarm. I then took up a book in which I was much interested, sitting in an easy chair before the fire with a reading-lamp close to my right side, and in such a position that only by deliberately turning round could I see the window on my left, before which heavy chenille curtains were drawn. I had read some twenty minutes or so, was thoroughly absorbed in the book, my mind was perfectly quiet, and for the time being my friends were quite forgotten, when suddenly without a moment's warning my whole being seemed roused to the highest state of tension or aliveness, and I was aware, with an intenseness not easily imagined by those who have never experienced it, that another being or presence was not only in the room but close to me. I put my book down, and although my excitement was great, I felt quite collected and not conscious of any sense of fear. Without changing my position, and looking straight at the fire, I knew somehow that my friend A. H. was standing at my left elbow, but so far behind me as to be hidden by the arm-chair in which I was leaning back. Moving my eyes round sHghtly without otherwise changing my position, the lower portion of one leg became visible, and I instantly recognised the grey-blue material of trousers he often wore, but the stuff appeared semi-transparent, reminding me of tobacco smoke in consistency.^ I could have touched it with my hand without moving

1 The trousers of grey-blue stuff proved to be what A. H. wore the evening the vision was seen.

665 A] TO CHAPTER VI 673

more than my left arm. With that curious instinctive wish not to see more of such a "figure," I did no more than glance once or twice at the apparition and then directed my gaze steadily at the fire in front of me. An appreciable space of time passed, — probably several seconds in all, but seeming in reality much longer, — when the most curious thing happened. Standing upright between me and the window on my left, and at a distance of about four feet from me and almost immediately behind my chair, I saw perfectly distinctly the figure of my friend, — -the face very pale, the head slightly thrown back, the eyes shut, and on one side of the throat, just under the jaw, a wound with blood on it-The figure remained motionless with the arms close to the sides, and for some time, how long I can't say, I looked steadily at it ; then all at once roused myself, turned deliberately round, the figure vanished, and I realised instantly that I had seen the figure behind me without moving from my first position, — an impossible feat physically. I am perfectly certain I never moved my position from the first appearance of the figure as seen physically, until it disappeared on my turning round.

I should like to state that for the last fifteen years I have been the witness of psychic phenomena of almost every kind, that in consequence I am not flurried or afraid at their appearance as one strange to them would be ; but in all that time never once has anything of a psychical nature happened to me alone and unsought for ; it was in fact a unique experience to me. I was now of course thoroughly alarmed, and as rapidly as possible considered what was to be done. My first thought was to go to the railway terminus and see if anything had happened. I, however, carefully noted the time (10.50 p.m.) by the clock in front of me, and reflected that if the apparition meant an accident to my friend at anything like the time of its appearance, the last train had been due in London at least i^ hours, so that it could not have happened on the journey home. How I got through the next 40 minutes, with our housekeeper worrying about our missing friends, I don't know. At the end of this time I heard a hansom stop before the door (11.35 p-m.). My friends came in and apparently [did] not hurry themselves to come up and see me, from which fact I felt reassured that nothing very serious could have happened, or I should have been informed of it at once. My friend B. then came up, saying, " Come and see A. H., what a state he is in." I found him in the bathroom with his collar and shirt torn open, the front of the latter with blood upon it, and bathing a wound under his jaw which was bleeding. His face was very pale, and he was evidently suffering from a shock of some kind. As soon as I could, I got an account of what had happened.

They had arrived in London punctually, and feeling tired, although in good spirits, drove with a third gentleman, who had been performing with them, to a restaurant opposite King's Cross Station to have some supper. Before leaving the restaurant, my friend, A. H. (whose apparition I saw), complained of feeling faint from the heat of the place, went out into the street to get some fresh air, and had hardly got into the open when he felt his senses leave him, and he fell heavily forward, striking his jaw on the edge of the kerb, then rolling over on his back. On recovering consciousness, two policemen were standing over him, one of whom, — failing to unfasten his collar to give him air, — had cut both that and his tie. After informing the rest of the party of what had happened, a cab was called, and my two friends were driven home as quickly as possible. The exact time that my friend, A. H., fainted was not of course noted by them ; but judging by the average time a cab takes to do the distance, VOL. I. 2 u

cut rather short on this occasion in the effort to get A. H. home quickly, it would correspond within three minutes to the time when the apparition appeared to me.

In conclusion it may be of interest to state that a curious mental sympathy seems to exist between A. H. and myself. In addition to the phenomenon of saying the same thing at the same time, and being aware on special occasions of one another's thoughts, I have on many occasions distinctly felt his approach before seeing him, and generally when I have been walking in the street and he has overtaken me on the top of the 'bus. On one occasion I was making a purchase in a shop, and the man took his time wrapping up the article I wanted. Without any apparent reason, I began to get uneasy, and felt that unless he quickly handed me my parcel and let me go, I must leave it and go into the street. To his astonishment, I suddenly rushed out of the shop, saw my friend riding past on a 'bus, signed to him to come down, and we returned to the shop together. I don't know which of the three was most surprised.

i Percy K'eak^b., Jamiary gth, 1895. Alfred 'Ho'BJi ay, Jatiuary gth, 1895. Arthur B^i'iX, January gth, 1895.

[I had an interview with Mr. Kearne and Mr. Bent on December 29th, 1894, when we went carefully over the tvnes of the various incidents of the evening in question, and were satisfied that the accident and the apparition were probably simultaneous. Mr. A. H., I understand, had no conscious thought or impression of Mr. Kearne at the time of the accident.]

665 B. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. v. p. 68. The following is an instance of a visual impression of a communication which the agent was at the moment anxious to make to the percipient. It was sent to us by Mr. Robert Lodge, an Associate of the Society. The letters were addressed to him by a relative.

50 Adelaide Square, Bedford, February i^ih, 1S91.

In answer to your request I send you account about the telegram.

On the 27th of April 1889, we were expecting my sister-in-law and her daughter from South America. My wife, being away from home, was unable to meet them at Southampton, so an intimate friend of the family, a Mr. P., offered to do so. It was between Derby and Leicester about 3.30 P.M. My wife was travelling in the train. She closed her eyes to rest, and at the same moment a telegram paper appeared before her with the words, " Come at once, your sister is dangerously ill." During the afternoon I received a telegram from Mr. P. to my wife, worded exactly the same and sent from Southampton 3.30 P.M. to Bedford. On my wife's arrival home about 9 p.m., I deferred communicating it until she had some refreshment, being very tired. I afterwards made the remark, " I have some news for you," and she answered, " Yes, I thought so, you have received a telegram from Mr. P. ! " I said, " How do you know?" She then told me the contents and her strange experiences in the train, and that it impressed her so much that she felt quite anxious all the rest of the journey.

With regard to the above, my wife had no idea of her sister being ill, and was not even at the time thinking about them, but was thinking about her own child she had just left at a boarding school. Also the handwriting my wife

665 C] TO CHAPTER VI 6;$

saw, she recognised at once to be Mr. P.'s. But then, again, he would have been writing on a white paper form, and the one she saw was the usual brown coloured paper. Fredk. L. Lodge.

In reply to inquiries, Mr. F. Lodge wrote as follows : —

The letter I sent you, with account of vision, I wrote from my wife's dictation. After it occurred in the train she took notice of the hour, and from the time marked on the telegram of its despatch from Southampton, we at once remarked it must have occurred as Mr. P. was filling in a form at Southampton. Mr. P. is now in South America constructing a railway line, and will not return to England for about a year. The occurrence was mentioned to him.

Two years having elapsed, my wife could not say the exact time now, but it was between 3 and 4 p.m., although when it happened, we did notice from the telegram that the time corresponded. Fredk. L. Lodge.

665 C. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. v. p. 147. The following account of a very curious experience of Mr. Dickinson, a photographer, of 43 Grainger Street, Newcastle-on-Tyne, was obtained for us by Mr. E. T. Nisbet, of Newcastle-on-Tyne.

February z^th, 1891.

On Saturday, the 3rd of January this year, I arrived at my place of business a few minutes before 8 a.m. The outer door, is protected by an iron gate, in which is a smaller lock-up gate, through which I passed into the premises. Having opened the office and turned the gas on at meter, and lit the gas-fire, I stood at the office counter for a few minutes waiting for the lad who takes down the iron gate at the front door. Before the lad came, however, a gentleman called to inquire if his photographs were finished ; I asked him if he had the receipt (which usually accompanies any inquiry), and he replied that he had no

receipt, but his photograph was taken on (giving the date), and that the

prints were promised to be sent to him before this call. Having got the date and his name, I referred to my book and found the order as he stated. I read out to him the name and address, to which he replied, "That is right." In my book I found a date given on which the negative was ready to be put into the printer's hands, and the date being seventeen days previous I had no hesitation in saying, " Well, if you call later on you will get some," and I called his attention to the fact that it was very early, and explained to him that the employees would not be at work until nine o'clock, and if he could call after that time he would be certain to get some of his photographs. He said, "I have been travelling all night, and cannot call again." With that he turned abruptly, and went out. Anxious to retain his good will, I shouted after him, " Can I post what may be done ? " but I got no answer. I turned once more to the book, looked at the number, and on a slip of paper wrote, " No. 7976, Thompsott, post." (This I wrote with pen and ink, and have the paper yet.) At nine o'clock, when Miss S. (clerk and reception-room attendant) came, I handed the shp of paper to her and asked her to have it attended to, telling her that the man had called for them, and seemed much disappointed that he had not received them before. Miss S., with considerable surprise, exclaimed: " Why, an old man called about these photographs yesterday (Friday), and I told him they could not be ready this week owing to the bad weather, and that we were nearly three weeks behind with our work." I suggested that it was quite time

6^6 APPENDICES [665 C

Mr. Thompson's were ready, and inquired who was printing the order. I was told it was not in print, and pointing to a pile of negatives Miss S. said, " Thompson's is amongst that lot, and they have been waiting quite a fortnight." I asked to be shown the negative, and about half-an-hour later Miss S. called me, saying, " This is Thompson's negative." I took it in my hands and looked at it carefully, remarking, "Yes, that is it ; that is the chap who called this morning." Miss S. again referred to the fact that she had told the man who had called on the previous day that none were done, or could be done that week. " Well," I said, " put this to one side and I will see to it myself on Monday, and endeavour to hurry it forward." On the Monday (January 5th), I was in one of the printing rooms, and, about 10.30 a.m., having one or two printing frames empty, I thought of Thompson's negative, and accordingly went down to the office and asked Miss S. for it. " Oh yes," she replied, " and here are a few more equally urgent ; you may take them as well." I said, "That cannot be, as I have only two or three frames at liberty " (she had about twenty negatives in her hand, holding them out tome) ; " give me Thompson's first and let me get my mind at rest about it." To which she answered, " His is amongst this lot ; I will have to pick it out." (Each negative was in a paper bag.) I offered to help her, and she commenced at one end of the batch and I at the other, and before we got half-way through I came across one which I knew was very urgent, and turned away to look up the date of taking it, when crash ! went part of the negatives on the floor. This accident seemed so serious that I was almost afraid to pick up the fallen negatives, but on doing so, one by one, I was greatly relieved to find otily one was broken, but judge of my horror to find that that one was Thompson's ! I muttered something (not loud, but deep), and would fain have relieved my feelings, but the presence of ladies restrained me (this accident being witnessed also by my head-printer. Miss L.). I could not honestly blame Miss S. for this — each thought the other was holding the lot, and between us we let them drop. The negative was broken in two, right across the forehead of figure. I put the pieces carefully away, and, taking out a memo, form, wrote to Mr. Thompson, asking him to kindly give another sitting, and offering to recoup him for his trouble and loss of time ; this letter was posted five minutes after the negative was broken, and the affair was forgotten by me for the time. However, on Friday, the 9th of January, I was in the printing-room upstairs when I was signalled by the whistle which communicates with the office, and Miss S. asked if I could go down, as the gentleman had called about the negative. I asked " What negative 1 " " Well," she replied, "the one we broke, Mr. Thompson's." I answered, "I am very busy, and cannot come down, but you know the terms I offered him ; send him up to be taken at once." " But he is dead ! " said Miss S. " Dead !" I exclaimed, and without another word I hastened down the stairs to my office. Here I saw an elderly gentleman, who seemed in great trouble. " Surely," said I to him, " you don't mean to say that this man is dead .?" " It is only too true," he replied. " Well, it must have been dreadfully sudden," I said sympathetically, " because I saw him only last Saturday." The old gentleman shook his head sadly, and said, "You are mistaken, for he died last Saturday."

"Nay," I returned, " I am not mistaken, for I recognised the negative by him." However, the father (for such was his relationship to iny sitter) persisted in saying I was mistaken, and that it was he who called on the Friday and not his son, and, he said, " I saw that young lady (pointing to Miss S.), and she told me the photographs would not be ready that week." " That is quite right,"

665 C] TO CHAPTER VI 677

said Miss S., but Mr. D. also saw a gentleman on Saturday morning, and when I showed Mr. D. the negative he said, ' Yes, that's the man who called.' I told Mr. D. then of your having called on the Friday." Still Mr. Thompson sen. seemed to think that we were wrong, and the many questions and crossquestions I put to him only served to confirm him in his opinion that I had got mixed ; but this he said : No one was authorised to call, nor had they any friend or relative who would know of portraits being ordered, neither was there any one likely to impersonate the man who had sat for his portrait. I had no further interview with the old gentleman until a week later, when he was much calmer in his appearance and conversation, and at this interview he told me that his son died on Saturday, January 3rd, at about 2.30 p.m.; he also stated that at the time I saw him (the sitter) he was unconscious, and remained so up to the time of his death. I have not had any explanation of this mysterious visit up to present date, February 26th, 1891.

It is curious to me that I have no recollection of hearing the man come upstairs, or of him going down. In appearance he was pale and careworn, and looked as though he had been very ill. This thought occurred to me when he said he had been travelling all night. (Signed) James Dickinson.

43 Grainger Street, Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Miss S. signs the following statement : —

I am the Miss S. referred to in the foregoing narrative. I have read Mr. Dickinson's statement carefully, and I can testify that everything in it referring to me has been correctly stated. Ethel Maud Simmon.

66 Malcolm Street, Heaton, April \st, 1891.

The next statement was written by Mr. Nisbet from Mr. Thompson sen.'s information, and with a little alteration and addition signed by him.

March 22nd, 1891.

At the beginning of December 1890, my son, John Thompson, got photographed by Mr. Dickinson, of Grainger Street, Newcastle-on-Tyne. He was wishful to present a photograph of himself to each of his chief comrades on New Year's Day. During the Christmas week he took typhoid fever and was very ill.

On Friday, January 2nd, 1891, I went to Newcastle to purchase certain articles for him, and being in Newcastle I thought I would kill two birds with one stone, so I called at Dickinson's to see if his photos were ready. I called chiefly because he seemed anxious about them — he spoke of them when he was delirious. I saw a young woman at Dickinson's who told me that the photos were not ready.

On Saturday, January 3rd, my son died at 2.5 p.m.

On Monday, January 5th, 1891, I received a letter addressed to my son asking him to call and sit again for his photograph as the negative had been broken. I still possess this letter and envelope (dated January 5th, 1891).

On Friday, January 9th, I called at Mr. Dickinson's, when he explained that he had seen my son in his place on the previous Saturday. I told him he must be mistaken, as my son was then ill in bed, but I told him that / had called on the Friday about the photographs. Mr. Dickinson persisted in saying

1 Mr. Nisbet has seen it.

6/8 APPENDICES [666 A

he had seen my son on the Saturday, so I showed him the " burial lines " to convince him.

I know of no one who could have called about the photos on the Saturday, nor do I know of any of my son's friends who could be mistaken for him. My son was 21 years of age, and was studying for the Primitive Methodist ministry. There was always strong sympathy between me and my son. I had the power of influencing him at a distance. My son was calm and steady, not easily excited ; the joy of the household, and a general favourite with the public. — Yours truly, Thompson.

Mr. Dickinson informed Mr. Nisbet that he was perfectly well at the time of this occurrence. He has never had any other experience at all resembling this, but he is subject to nightmare and walking in his sleep.

Mr. Nisbet learned that Mr. Dickinson was not quite sure whether he was present when Mr. Thompson was photographed ; his assistant said he was, but Mr. Dickinson could not remember. They photographed about 40 people on the day Mr. Thompson sat. Mr. Dickinson was quite sure that Miss S. had said nothing to him on the Friday about Mr. Thompson, senior, calling, and Miss S. confirmed this.

Professor Sidgwick was introduced to Mr. Dickinson in September 1 89 1, and heard his story vividly and fully told by himself. Extracts only from his notes need be given here.

D. did not hear T. come in, but being busy writing was not surprised at this, though he was surprised that he had come so early. . .

T. said that " He could not call later, he had been travelling all night." He had an overcoat on, and a careworn look — looked ill. The thought passed through D.'s mind, "Yes, poor man, you have been travelling all night, and you are going home to die." Meanwhile T. turned and went out : he had not sat down, but stood all the time. D. ran round the counter towards the door and called after him, " Can I post them ?" but got no answer, and did not hear the visitor go down or out; this he would ordinarily have done, but the not hearing did not surprise him. He thought the visitor was " huffed," and turned to copy out the number of the order and the name on a piece of paper, on which he wrote the word "post." (This paper Mr. Nisbet saw, and remembers reading the number and name, but the paper seems to be lost.) All this, according to his recollection, with perfect wakefulness, and without the least idea or feeling of anything abnormal.

Careful inquiries (described fully in the account in the Journal') were made by Mr. Nisbet to ascertain whether it could have been possible for Mr. Thompson, junior, to have actually called at the photographer's, unknown to his family, or whether any one else had called on his behalf; with the result that both these hypothetical explanations of the case seemed to be excluded.

666 A. The following example of a " reciprocal " case (quoted from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 162) is from the Hon. Mrs. Parker, of 60 Elm Park Gardens, S.W., who wrote to us on May 24th, 1883 : —

666 A] TO CHAPTER VI 679

The following experience happened in the month of November 1877, in Regency Square, Brighton. My husband [since deceased] was undergoing a course of magnetism from Mr. L., an American. The treatment consisted of rubbing by mesmeric passes down the back and arms and legs, but in all this there was no intention of putting my husband to sleep. The passes were intended to give strength. Mr. L. called himself, I believe, a professional mesmerist, but at the time we employed him he was not practising as such. He had come to Brighton for rest.

After the treatment my husband was in the habit of sitting, for some hours, in his wheel-chair, at the top of the Square garden, and on the day of which I am writing he had expressed a wish to stay out rather later than usual. I went into the house for luncheon, leaving him alone, but on looking out of the window a little later, at two o'clock, I saw a man standing in front of his chair, and apparently talking to him. I wondered who it was, and concluded it must be a stranger, as I did not recognise the figure, or the wide-awake hat and rather oddly-cut Inverness cape which he wore. However, as it very often happened that strangers did stop and speak to him, I was not surprised. I turned away my eyes for a moment, and when I again looked up the garden, the man had disappeared. I could not see him leaving the garden by any of the numerous gates, and remarked to myself how very quickly he must have walked to be so soon out of sight. Regency Square does not possess a tree and scarcely a shrub, so that there was nothing to impede my view.

When my husband came in a little later, I said to him, carelessly, " Oh, who was that talking to you in the square just now ? "

He replied, " No one has spoken to me since you left. No one has even passed near me."

" But I saw a man standing in front of you and — as I thought — talking to you about a quarter of an hour ago. His dress was so odd, I could n't at all tell who it could be."

At this my husband laughed, saying, " I should think not, for there was no one to recognise. I assure you not a soul has been near me since you left."

" Have you been asleep ? " I asked, though I did not think it very likely. He assured me he had not. So the subject dropped ; still in my own mind I knew I had seen the mysterious figure.

Two days afterwards, Mr. L., after giving my husband his treatment, came, as was his usual habit, to speak to me before leaving the house. After a few words and directions, he said, " It is a very odd thing, but the same experience has happened to me twice since I have attended your husband, that, when in quite another place, I have suddenly felt as if I were standing by his side, either in your drawing-room or out there in the garden."

I looked at him, and for the first time noticed his overcoat which he had put on before coming into the room, and the wide-awake in his hand. It struck me that these articles were very similar to those worn by the figure I had seen, and that in every way Mr. L. resembled this same figure. I asked him when, and at what time, he had had the last experience spoken of ? " The day before yesterday," was the reply. " I had just finished an early dinner, and was sitting in front of the fire with a newspaper. It was about two o'clock; I remember the time perfectly. Suddenly I felt I was no longer there, but standing near your husband in the Square garden."

I then told him of the figure I had seen at the same time and place, and how I now recognised it to be his. Afterwards I asked my husband if he had

68o APPENDICES [666 B

mentioned the circumstance to Mr. L., but he had not done so, and had indeed forgotten all about it. My husband was the only person to whom I had mentioned the fact of my vision. It could not by any possibility have got round to Mr. L. Augusta Parker.

In answer to the inquiry whether she had ever had any other hallucination of the senses, Mrs. Parker replied that she had had one other. It seems likely, however, that this was merely a case of mistaken identity, the figure being seen at the end of a long hotel passage ; and this was her own impression at the time.

666 B. The next case (from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 164) was one of collective percipience. The full names of the persons concerned were given to us, but not allowed to be printed. Mrs. S., one of the percipients, writes : —

April 1883. A and B are two villages in Norfolk, distant about five miles from each other. At the time of the occurrence about to be related, the clergymen of these parishes both bore the same name, though there was no relationship between them ; at the same time there was a great friendship between the two families. On the 20th February 1870 a daughter, Constance, about fourteen years old, of the clergyman of A, was staying with the other family — a daughter, Margaret, in that family, being her great friend. Edward W., the eldest son of the Rector of A, was- at that time lying dangerously ill at home with inflammation of the lungs, and was frequently delirious. On the day mentioned, at about noon, Margaret and Constance were in the garden of B Rectory, running down a path which was separated by a hedge from an orchard adjoining ; they distinctly heard themselves called twice, apparently from the orchard, thus : " Connie, Margaret — Connie, Margaret." They stopped, but could see no one, and so went to the house, a distance of about forty yards, concluding that one of Margaret's brothers had called them from there. But to their surprise they found that this was not the case; and Mrs. W., Margaret's mother, assured the girls no one had called them from the house, and they therefore concluded they must have been mistaken in supposing they had heard their names repeated. This appeared to be the only explanation of the matter, and nothing more was thought of it.

That evening Constance returned to her home at A. On the following day Mrs. W. drove over to inquire for the sick boy Edward. In the course of conversation, his mother said that the day before he had been delirious, and had ■ spoken of Constance and Margaret, that he called to them in his delirium, and had then said, "Now I see them running along the hedge, but directly I call them they run towards the house." Mrs. W., of B, at once called to mind the mystery of the previous day, and asked, " Do you know at what time that happened ? " Edward's mother replied that it was at a few minutes past twelve, for she had just given the invalid his medicine, twelve being his hour for taking it. So these words were spoken by Edward at the same time at which the two

The letters are substituted for those actually given, for the sake of clearness. The names of the villages were not suppressed in the accounts that follow ; but as they were suppressed in this first one, it has been thought right to suppress them throughout.

666B] TO CHAPTER VI 68i

girls had heard themselves called, and thus only could the voice from the orchard be accounted for. M. K. S.

(The " Margaret " of the narrative.)

The following statement is from Mrs. R., the " Constance" of the narrative.

Sept. 1884.

Margaret and I were walking in some fields at B., away from the road, but not very far from the house. Here I heard a voice call " Connie and Margaret " clearly and distinctly. I should not have identified it with Ted's voice (z>. her brother's at A), for we thought it was one of the B brothers at the time, till we found no one had called us. I remember that it was before early dinner, and that I was expecting to be fetched home that same morning, because of Ted's illness ; and that Mrs. W. thought of asking mother if Ted had mentioned our names in any way, before she told her of what had passed at B. I ought to add that an explanation of the story might be found in the conduct of some B plough-boy, playing a trick upon us. The situation was such that he might easily have kept out of sight behind a hedge. C. E. R.

Mr. Podmore says : —

Nffvember zdth, 1883.

I saw Mrs. R. yesterday. She told me that they recognised the voice vaguely as a well-known one at the time. She thinks that the coincidence in time was quite exact, because Mrs. W. of B made a note of the circumstance immediately. Her brother — an old school-fellow of mine — cannot recollect the incident at all.

If a written note was made, the girls' experience must have seemed odder than the " nothing more was thought of it " in Mrs. S.'s account would imply. Mrs. W. of A says : —

My son was about seventeen years old. He had had fever and inflammation, and was weakened by illness. It was about twelve o'clock. I was sitting with him, after his washing and dressing, and he seemed quiet and sleepy, but not asleep. He suddenly sprang forward, pomted his finger, with arms outstretched, and called out in a voice the loudness of which astonished me, " Connie and Margaret ! " with a stress on each name, " near the hedge," looked wildly at them, and then sank down, tired. I thought it odd at the time, but, considering it a sort of dream, did not allude to it. The next day, Mrs. W. called with Connie and Margaret, and said the girls had heard their names called ; had run home ; were walking by a hedge in their field, had found no one had called them from B Rectory. The voice sounded familiar, but as far as I can remember — my daughter will say — it was not distinctly thought to be Edward's. I at once told my story, as it was too striking not to be named.

They said it was about twelve o'clock. Though he was constantly delirious in the evening, when the pulse rose, he was never so in the middle of the day, and there was no appearance of his being so at the time this occurred.

M. A. W.

Mrs. W. of B says : —

August 1884.

Connie was staying with us on account of the illness of her brother Edward, and had — with Margaret — been reading with me one morning. At about 11.30

they went into the garden to play (they were girls of about thirteen and fourteen), and in half-an-hour came up to the window to know what I wanted. I said " Nothing," and that I had not called them, though they had heard both their names called repeatedly. I asked them where they were when they heard it, and they said in the next walk — which, you will remember, is formed on one side by the orchard hedge. Margaret said directly, " There, Connie ; I said it was not mother's, but a boy's voice." Then I turned to look at the clock — for we had some boys as pupils then — and I said, " It would not be one of the boys, for they are not out of the study ; it is now twelve o'clock, and I hear them coming out."

I was to take Connie home that afternoon, and, on arriving, of course my first question was " How was Edward?" Mrs. W. told me that he had not been so well, and had been very delirious. She said that morning he had been calling,'•Margaret ! Connie! Margaret ! Connie J Oh, they are running by a hedge, and won't listen to we." I did not say what had happened at home, but asked if she knew at what time this had so distressed him. She said " Yes ; " for she had looked at the clock, hoping it was nearly time to give him his medicine, which always quieted him, and was thankful to find it was just twelve o'clock.

666 C. The following case is taken from Mrs. Sidgwick's paper, " On the Evidence for Clairvoyance," in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 41. The case was sent to us by Mr. W. B. H., who writes : —

Bridgeport, Ct., December iZih, 1889.

. . . The incidents were related to me by Mr. S. R. Wilmot, a manufacturer of this city, several years ago, and I wrote them down from memory, and he afterwards revised the manuscript. Mr. Wilmot and his wife and sister are still living here, and would, no doubt, be happy to answer any questions about the matter. He does not know that I have had his narrative compared with a file of the New York Herald, as per memorandum appended. It seems to stand the test pretty well, however.

If published, please do not give my name, as I have simply acted as scribe, and have no personal knowledge about the incidents. W. B. H.

The manuscript account, in which Mr. Wilmot's corrections are embodied, was as follows :—

On October 3rd, 1863, I sailed from Liverpool for New York, on the steamer City of Limerick, of the Inman line, Captain Jones commanding. On the evening of the second day out, soon after leaving Kinsale Head, a severe storm began, which lasted for nine days. During this time we saw neither sun nor stars nor any vessel ; the bulwarks on the weather bow were carried away, one of the anchors broke loose from its lashings, and did considerable damage before it could be secured, and several stout storm sails, though closely reefed, were carried away, and the booms broken.

Upon the night following the eighth day of the storm the tempest moderated a little, and for the first time since leaving port I enjoyed refreshing sleep. Toward morning I dreamed that I saw my wife, whom I had left in the United States, come to the door of my state-room, clad in her night-dress.

1 The other accounts make it probable that it was not till next day that Mrs. W. of B went to A.

666 C] T O C H A P T E R V I 683

At the door she seemed to discover that I was not the only occupant of the room, hesitated a little, then advanced to my side, stooped down and kissed me, and after gently caressing me for a few moments, quietly withdrew.

Upon waking I was surprised to see my fellow-passenger, whose berth was above mine, but not directly over it — owing to the fact that our room was at the stern of the vessel— leaning upon his elbow, and looking fixedly at me. "You're a pretty fellow," said he at length, "to have a lady come and visit you in this way." I pressed him for an explanation, which he at first declined to give, but at length related what he had seen while wide awake, lying in his berth. It exactly corresponded with my dream.

This gentleman's name was William J. Tait, and he had been my roommate in the passage out, in the preceding July, on the Cunard steamer Olympus J a native of England, and son of a clergyman of the Established Church. He had for a number of years lived in Cleveland, in the State of Ohio, where he held the position of librarian of the Associated Library. He was at this time perhaps fifty years of age, by no means in the habit of practical joking, but a sedate and very religious man, whose testimony upon any subject could be taken unhesitatingly.

