From the time of Dr. Dee the practice had continued, faintly and intermittently, in England as in many other countries. The "Miss A." of our Proceedings (vol. viii. p. 498) had her attention directed to this psychical artifice by a spontaneous symboHcal vision of a golden key lying at the bottom of a glass of water. I saw her use a crystal ; tried it myself, but in vain ; and begged others to try it. Several of these experimenters proved successful ; especially Miss Goodrich-Freer, whose careful observations have been, in my view, of great importance in showing the wide range of phenomena which this simple artifice can induce. Other observers (" Miss Angus," &c.) have followed ; and it is already clear that we have here one of the most puissant " autoscopes " (to use a word of Professor Barrett's) which experimental psychology can offer.

621. Before citing individual cases, it will be well to describe briefly the general type of the experiment, and to see how near we can get to a psychological explanation.

Let the observer gaze, steadily but not fatiguingly, into some speculum, or clear depth, so arranged as to return as little reflection as possible. A good example of what is meant will be a glass ball enveloped in a black shawl, or placed in the back part of a half-opened drawer ; so arranged, in short, that the observer can gaze into it with as little distraction as may be from the reflection of his own face or of surrounding objects. After he has tried (say) three or four times, for ten minutes or so at a time — preferably in solitude, and in a state of mental passivity — he will perhaps begin to see the glass ball or crystal clouding, or to see some figure or picture apparently in the ball. Perhaps one man or woman in twenty will have some slight occasional experience of this kind ; and perhaps one in twenty of these seers (the percentages must as yet be mainly guess-work) will be able by practice to develop this faculty of inward vision up to a point where it will sometimes convey to him information not attainable by ordinary means.

How comes it, in the first place, that he sees any figure in the crystal at all? Common hypnotic experiments supply two obvious answers, each of which no doubt explains some part of the phenomena.

In the first place, we know that the hypnotic trance is often induced by gazing at some small bright object. This may or may not be a mere effect of suggestion ; but it certainly sometimes occurs, and the " scryer "

1 For prehistoric and historic crystal-gazing see Mr. Andrew Lang's Making of Religion, and Miss Goodrich-Freer's " Recent Experiments in Crystal-Vision," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. V. p. 486, to both of which I refer in 620 A.

consequently may be partially hypnotised, and in a state which facihtates hallucinations.

In the second place, a hypnotised subject — hypnotised but in a fully alert state — can often be caused by suggestion to see (say) a portrait upon a blank card ; and will continue to see that portrait on that card, after the card has been shuffled with others ; thus showing that he discerns with unusual acuteness such points de repere, or little guiding marks, as may exist on the surface of even an apparently blank card.

Correspondently with the first of these observations, we find that crystal-vision is sometimes accompanied by a state of partial hypnotisation, perhaps merging into trance. This has been the case with various French hysterical subjects ; and not only with them but with that exceptionally sound and vigorous observer, Mr. J. G. Keulemans. His evidence (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 516-521) is just what one would have expected a priori on such a matter.

Correspondently with the second oi the above observations, we find that points de repere do occasionally seem to determine crystal-visions.

This, again, has been noticed among the French hysterical subjects ; and not only with them, but with another among our best observers, Mrs. Verrall (see 623 A).

622. These things being so — both these causes being apparently operative along the whole series of " scryers," or crystal-gazers, from the most unstable to the most scientific — one might be tempted to assume that these two clues, if we could follow them far enough, would explain the whole group of phenomena. Persons who have not seen the phenomena, indeed, can hardly be persuaded to the contrary. But the real fact is, as even those who have seen much less of crystal-gazing than I have will very well know, that these explanations cannot be stretched to cover a quarter — perhaps not even a tenth — of the phenomena which actually occur.

Judging both from the testimony of scryers themselves, and from the observations of Dr. Hodgson and others (myself included), who have had many opportunities of watching them, it is very seldom that the gaze into the glass ball induces any hypnotic symptoms whatever. It does not induce such symptoms with successful scryers any more than with unsuccessful. Furthermore, there is no proof that the gift of crystal-vision goes along with hypnotic sensibility. The most that one can say is that the gift often goes along with telepathic sensibility; but although telepathic sensibility may sometimes be quickened by hypnotism, we have no proof that those two forms of sensitiveness habitually go together.

The ordinary attitude of the scryer, I repeat, is one of complete detachment ; an interested and often puzzled scrutiny and analysis of the figures which display themselves in swift or slow succession in the crystal ball.

This last sentence applies to the theory oi points de repere as well. As

623] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 239

a general rule, the crystal vision, however meaningless and fantastic, is a thing which changes and develops somewhat as a dream does ; following, it may be, some trivial chain of associations, but not maintaining, any more than a dream maintains, any continuous scheme of line or colour. At the most, the scraps of reflection in the crystal could only start such a series of pictures as this. And the start, the initiation of one of these series, is often accompanied by an odd phenomenon mentioned above — a milky clouding of the crystal, which obscures any fragments of reflected images, and from out of which the images of the vision gradually grow clear. I cannot explain this clouding. It occurs too often and too independently to be a mere effect of suggestion. It does not seem to depend on any optical condition — to be, for instance, a result of change of focus of the eye, or of prolonged gazing. It is a picture like other pictures ; it may come when the eyes are quite fresh (nor ought they ever to be strained) ; and it may persist for some time, so that the scryer looks away and back again, and sees it still. It comes at the beginning of a first series of pictures, or as a kind of drop-scene between one series of pictures and another. Its closest parallel, perhaps, is the mist or cloud out of which phantasmal figures, " out in the room," sometimes seem to form themselves.

Moreover, the connection, if one can so call it, between the crystal and the vision is a very variable one. Sometimes the figures seem clearly defined within the crystal and limited thereby : sometimes all perception of the crystal or other speculum disappears, and the scryer seems clairvoyantly introduced into some group of life-sized figures. Nay, further, when the habit of gazing is fully acquired, some scryers can dispense with any speculum whatever, and can see pictures in mere blackness; thus approximating to the seers of "faces in the dark," or of illusions hypnagogiques .

623. On the whole it seems safest to attempt at present no further explanation of crystal-gazing than to say that it is an empirical method of developing internal vision ; of externalising pictures which are associated with changes in the sensorial tracts of the brain, due partly to internal stimuli, and partly to stimuli which may come from minds external to the scryer's own. The hallucinations thus induced appear to be absolutely harmless. I at least know of no kind of injury resulting from them ; and I have probably heard of most of the experiments made in England, with any scientific aim or care, during the somewhat limited revival of crystal-gazing which has proceeded for the last few years. We still want to know more on every point connected with these visions. How far, for instance, do they follow optical laws? Is there any tendency to complementary colouring, so that a green picture would be seen after a red? Are they magnified by the interposition of a magnifying glass? and, if so, is this a mere result of suggestion, or of the presence of something in the field of view which is really

magnified? Would they be magnified if the scryer did not know that a magnifier was interposed, or, on the other hand, if he beUeved that a plain glass interposed was a magnifier ? Some interesting experiments on these and kindred questions will be found in 623 A. I can imagine no fitter problem for research in a psychological laboratory.

624. A simpler experiment, which should be within the power of almost any one who has a good hypnotic subject, is the following : Describe some historic scene to the entranced subject, telling him that he will see the scene, as he conceives it, in a glass ball when he awakes. Awaken him, and make him look into the ball. He is then confronted with his own mental images, as though in an external picture, and he explains them as best he can. If these externalised pictures show a tendency to contain explanatory words, helping him to grasp their meaning, it will be needful to suggest in the trance that no such words should appear. In the experiments which I quote in 624 A, it will be seen that the hypnotic stratum sent up no such explanation along with the pictures ; so that it was safe to offer these working lads large sums of money if they could tell me the subjects of pictures which they were actually drawing from memories of their own not five minutes old. These experiments, which I record at some length as eminently suitable for repetition, were made with two excellent hypnotic subjects with whom the late Edmund Gurney and Mrs. Sidgwick had long worked.

625. These experiments illustrate the gradual transition between the common forms of post-hypnotic hallucination, which, however surprising at first, are now undisputed, and the crystal-vision which I am anxious to present as no " occult practice " or superstitious fancy, but as the empirical development of processes more familiar but quite equally empirical.

But, indeed, as with automatic script, so here also we shall soon find that hypnotic experiments of this kind are not necessary in order to convince us that the crystal-pictures are, in their own sense, a reality. Quite apart from the veridicality of some of them ; — the intrinsic evidence which they contain of knowledge outside the experimenter's ordinary knowledge ; — they occur to a greater or less extent with so many persons of sanity and probity that we can no more doubt their existence than we can doubt the existence of the allied phenomena of hypnagogic hallucinations or of coloured audition already discussed. I give in Appendices an account of several important groups of these crystalvisions.

626. The crystal-visions which the reader will find in detail in those Appendices have been in one sense logically placed at this point in my argument. We are diocussing the control of i7iward vision, and crystalgazing stands along with hypnotic suggestion as an empirical method of establishing that control.

A genera] review of results already thus obtained was needed for com-

628] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 241

parison with the phenomena of spontaneous inward vision — the veridical hallucinations — of which we shall presently have to treat.

But from another point of view the crystal-visions come here too early in our scheme. For few of our phenomena are likely to strike the reader as more fantastic and incredible. The visions appear lawless ; — it seems to depend on mere chance whether one sees a skeleton or a scene of one's childhood — a nonsensical string of letters, or a picture of what a friend is doing at a distance — a Punch and Judy show, or a prophetic vision.

In a sense this is so ; the crystal picture is what we must call (for want of knowledge of determining causes) a random glimpse into inner vision, a reflection caught at some odd angle from the universe as it shines through the perturbing medium of that special soul. Normal and supernormal knowledge and imaginings are blended in strangely mingled rays. Memory, dream, telepathy, telssthesia, retrocognition, precognition, all are there. Nay, there are indications of spiritual communications and of a kind of ecstasy.^

627. We cannot pursue all these phenomena at once. In turning, as we must now turn, to the spontaneous cases of sensory automatism — of every type of which the induced visions of the crystal have afforded us a foretaste — we must needs single out first some fundamental phenomenon, illustrating some principle from which the rarer or more complex phenomena may be in part at least derived. Nor will there be difficulty in such a choice. Theory and actual experience point here in the same direction. If this inward vision, this inward audition, on whose importance I have been insisting, are to have any such importance — if they are to have any validity at all — if their contents are to represent anything more than dream or meditation — they must receive knowledge from other minds or from distant objects; — knowledge which is «(?/ received by the external organs of sense. Communication must exist from the subliminal to the subliminal as well as from the supraliminal to the supraliminal parts of the being of different individual men. Telepathy, in short, must be the prerequisite of all these supernormal phenomena.

Actual experience, as we shall presently see, confirms this view of the place of telepathy. For when we pass from the induced to the spontaneous phenomena we shall find that these illustrate before all else this transmission of thought and emotion directly from mind to mind.

628. Now as to telepathy, there is in the first place this to be said, that such a faculty must absolutely exist somewhere in the universe, if the universe contains any unembodied intelligences at all. Only if all the life of the cosmos be incarnated in organisms like our own, is it conceivable that all communication may pass through sensory channels resembling

1 It is right also to state, although I cannot here discuss the problems involved, that I believe these visions to be sometimes seen by more than one person, simultaneously or successively.

VOL. I. Q

ours. If there be any life less rooted in flesh — any life more spiritual (as men have supposed that a higher life would be), then either it must not be social life — there can be no exchange of thought in it at all — or else there must exist some method of exchanging thought which does not depend upon either tongue or brain.

Thus much, one may say, has been evident since man first speculated on such subjects at all. But the advance of knowledge has added a new presumption — it can be no more than a presumption — to all such cosmic speculations. I mean the presumption of continidty. Learning how close a tie in reality unites man with inferior lives, — once treated as something wholly alien, impassably separated from the human race — we are led to conceive that a close tie may unite him also with superior lives, — that the series may be fundamentally unbroken, the essential qualities of life the same throughout. It used to be asked whether man was akin to the ape or to the angel. I reply that the very fact of his kinship with the ape is proof presumptive of his kinship with the angel.

It is natural enough that man's instinctive feeling should have anticipated any argument of this speculative type. Men have in most ages believed, and do still widely believe, in the reality of prayer ; that is, in the possibility of telepathic communication between our human minds and minds above our own, which are supposed not only to understand our wish or aspiration, but to impress or influence us inwardly in return.

So widely spread has been this belief in prayer that it is somewhat strange that men should not have more commonly made what seems the natural deduction — namely, that if our spirits can communicate with higher spirits in a way transcending sense, they may also perhaps be able in like manner to communicate with each other. The idea, indeed, has been thrown out at intervals by leading thinkers — from Augustine to Bacon, from Bacon to Goethe, from Goethe to Tennyson.

Isolated experiments from time to time indicated its practical truth. Yet it is only within the last few years that the vague and floating notion has been developed into definite theory by systematic experiment.

629. To make such experiment possible has indeed been no easy matter. It has been needful to ehcit and to isolate from the complex emotions and interactions of common life a certain psychical element of whose nature and working we have beforehand but a very obscure idea.

If indeed we possessed any certain method of detecting the action of telepathy, — of distinguishing it from chance-coincidence or from unconscious suggestion, — we should probably find that its action was widely diffused and mingled with other more commonplace causes in many incidents of life. We should find telepathy, perhaps, at the base of many sympathies and antipathies, of many wide communities of feeling ; operating, it may be, in cases as diff'erent as the quasi-recognition of some friend in a stranger seen at a distance just before the friend himself unex-

630] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 243

pectedly appears, and the Pheme or Rumour which in Hindostan or in ancient Greece is said to have often spread far an inexplicable knowledge of victory or disaster.

Could the growing influence of telepathy be thus traced onwards from communications where it merely vivifies, so to say, an emotion or a knowledge mainly due to common sensory sources — to communications where no such ordinary means of knowledge can have intervened, we might learn much of the interweaving of sensory and supersensory faculty which we cannot at present reach.

We cannot do this, I say, because we are obliged, for the sake of clearness of evidence, to set aside, when dealing with experimentation, all these mixed emotional cases, and to start from telepathic communications intentionally planned to be so trivial, so devoid of associations or emotions, that it shall be impossible to refer them to any common memory or sympathy ; to anything save a direct transmission of idea, or impulse, or sensation, or image, from one to another mind.

The history of the first sporadic attempts at this form of experiment in the early days of mesmerism, of the various steps by which recent workers have developed and systematised the investigation, and of the varied, yet concordant, results already obtained, must, I think, be regarded as one of the most important chapters in psychology.

630. On that chapter, then, it would be needful for me now to embark, but that, in my view, it has been already written by a masterhand. I speak from too intimate a connection of friendship with the late Edmund Gurney to allow me to give full expression to my opinion of the quality of his work, and of its value to the world. But at this special point the argument of my own book comes into contact so close with Phantasms of the Living, that I am forced to choose between two courses. I must either myself rewrite his Chapters II. and III. — with much additional evidence, indeed, but with less of freshness and of scientific skill — or I must transfer much of those chapters to my own pages, working in our additional evidence where I deem that he would himself have inserted it. I have chosen the second alternative. The fate of Phantasms of the Living has been in one way peculiarly unfortunate. A pioneer book on a novel and complex subject, it needed to create its own public ; while at the same time it was not only the opinion but the confident hope of its author and his collaborators that if the demand for a second issue came, the accretion of evidence and the progress of the inquiry would then necessitate an amount of change, enlargement, reconsideration, such as is seldom called for between a first and a second edition. By the time that the first large edition was exhausted — 1886-1889 — this expectation of progress in our knowledge of the subject had been amply fulfilled. But in the meantime the author had passed from earth. No one of the survivors felt competent to the task of reproducing the work in such form as Gurney would now have wished it to assume. Reluctantly we gave up

the attempt.^ However, the book, of course, subsists ; it can be found in many Ubraries ; it is still indispensable for any one who desires to make his study of the subject complete. For those who cannot consult it, the numerous extracts in my Appendices will give some notion of its style and methods.

631. Meanwhile, the evidence collected in the Appendices to 630 will carry us over certain stepping-stones of great importance to our general argument. Setting aside for the present the motor automatisms to be discussed later (in Chapter VIII.), and confining our attention to the sensory alone, we see that telepathy may act upon each definite type of sensation in turn, or may generate vague impressions not referable to any special organ of sense. We have seen that the hypnotic trance assists but is not essential to its action. We see that there is a fairly continuous "transition from experimental to spontaneous telepathy" {e.g. in the case of Dr. and Mrs. S., 630 F) ; so that at no point is there a decisive gap ; although it is of course impossible to say that the agency operative in close proximity is absolutely identical with the agency operative at indefinite distances. The one may differ from the other, for example, in some such way as cohesion differs from gravitation.

The reader, I trust, will carry away from the evidence originally included in these chapters of Edmund Gurney's, and from that which I quote in addition, a pretty clear notion of what can at present actually be done in the way of experimental transferences of small definite ideas or pictures from one or more persons — the " agent " or " agents " — to one or more persons — the "percipient" or "percipients." In these experiments actual contact has been forbidden, to avoid the risk of unconscious indications by pressure. In many cases, however, the agent and percipient have been in the same room ; and there has therefore still been some possible risk of unconscious whispering — a risk which has been fully discussed (see 573 A), and, as I believe, successfully avoided. It is, however, at present still doubtful how far close proximity really operates in aid of telepathy, or how far its advantage is a mere efifect of self-suggestion — on the part either of agent or of percipient. Some few pairs of experimenters — notably the late Mr. Kirk with Miss G. (630 D) and Mr. Glardon with Mrs. M. (630 E) — have obtained results of just the same type at distances of half a mile or more. Similarly, in the case of induction of hypnotic trance, Dr. Gibert, as we have already seen (668 A), attained at the distance of nearly a mile results which are usually supposed to require close and actual presence.

632. We must clearly realise that in telepathic experiment we encounter just the same dif^culty which makes our results in hypnotic

The abridged French translation, " Les Hallucinations Telepathiques" in the " Bibliotheque de Philosophie Contemporaine" (Alcan, Paris, 1S91), is still procurable in a second edition. Mr. Podmore's book, " Apparitions and Thought-transference," contains much of the same material.

633] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 245

therapeutics so unpredictable and irregular. We do not know how to get our suggestions to take holdoi the subhminal self. They are liable to fail for two main reasons. Either they somehow never reach the subliminal centres which we wish to affect, or they find those centres preoccupied with some self-suggestion hostile to our behest. This source of uncertainty can only be removed by a far greater number of experiments than have yet been made — experiments repeated until we have oftener struck upon the happy veins which make up for an immense amount of sterile exploration. Meantime we must record, but can hardly interpret. Yet there is one provisional interpretation of telepathic experiment which must be noticed thus early in our discussion, because, if true, it may conceivably connect our groping work with more advanced departments of science, while, if seen to be inadequate, it may bid us turn our inquiry in some other direction. I refer to the suggestion that telepathy is propagated by " brainwaves " ; or, as Sir W. Crookes has more exactly expressed it, by etherwaves of even smaller amplitude and greater frequency than those which carry the X rays. These waves are conceived as passing from one brain to another, and arousing in the second brain an excitation or image similar to the excitation or image from which they start in the first. The hypothesis is an attractive one ; because it fits an agency which certainly exists, but whose effect is unknown, to an effect which certainly exists, but whose agency is unknown.

633. In this world of vibrations it may seem at first the simplest plan to invoke a vibration the more. It would be rash, indeed, to affirm that any phenomenon perceptible by men may not be expressible, in part at least, in terms of ethereal undulations. But in the case of telepathy the analogy which suggests this explanation, the obvious likeness between the picture emitted (so to say) by the agent and the picture received by the percipient — as when I fix my mind on the two of diamonds, and he sees a mental picture of that card — goes but a very short way. One has very soon to begin assuming that the percipient's mind ttiodifies the picture despatched from the agent : until the likeness between the two pictures becomes a quite symbolical affair. We have seen that there is a continuous transition from experimental to spontaneous telepathy ; from our transferred pictures of cards to monitions of a friend's death at a distance. These monitions may indeed be pictures of the dying friend, but they are seldom such pictures as the decedent's brain seems likely to project in the form in which they reach the percipient. Mr. L. — to take a well-known case in our collection {Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 210) — dies of heart disease when in the act of lying down undressed, in bed. At or about the same moment Mr. N. J. S. sees Mr. L. standing beside him with a cheerful air, dressed for walking and with a cane in his hand. One does not see how a system of undulatiojss eould have transmuted the physical facts in this way.

A still greater difficulty for the vibration-theory is presented by collective

telepathic hallucinations. It is hard to understand how A can emit a pattern of vibrations which, radiating equally in all directions, shall affect not only his distant friend B, but also the strangers C and D, who happen to be standing near B ; — and affect no other persons, so far as we know, in the world.

634. The above points have been fair matter of argument almost since our research began. But as our evidence has developed, our conception of telepathy has needed to be more and more generalised in other and new directions, — still less compatible with the vibration theory. Three such directions may be briefly specified here — namely, the relation of telepathy (a) to telsesthesia or clairvoyance, (^b) to time, and {c) to disembodied spirits, {a) It is increasingly hard to refer all the scenes of which percipients become aware to the action of any given mind which is perceiving those distant scenes. This is especially noticeable in crystal-gazing experiments, {b) And these crystal-visions also show what, from the strict telepathic point of view, we should call a great laxity of time relations. The scryer chooses his own time to look in the ball ; — and though sometimes he sees events which are taking place at the moment, he may also see past events, — and even, as it seems, future events (</. 663) . I at least cannot A^ny precognition, nor can I draw a definite line amid these complex visions which may separate precognition from telepathy, {c) Precognition itself may be explained, if you will, as telepathy from disembodied spirits ; — and this would at any rate bring it under a class of phenomena which I think all students of our subject must before long admit. Admitting here, for argument's sake, that we do receive communications from the dead which we should term telepathic if we received them from the living, it is of course open to us to conjecture that these messages also are conveyed on ether-waves. But since those waves do not at any rate emanate from material brains, we shall by this time have got so far from the original brain-wave hypothesis that few will care still to defend it.

I doubt, indeed, whether we can safely say of telepathy anything more definite than this : Life has the power of manifesting itself to life. The laws of life, as we have thus far known them, have been only laws of life when already associated with matter. Thus limited, we have learnt httle as to Life's true nature. We know not even whether Life be only a directive Force, or, on the other hand, an effective Energy. We know not in what way it operates on matter. We can in no way define the connection between our own consciousness and our organisms. Just here it is, I should say, that telepathic observations ought to supply us with some hint. From the mode in which some element of one individual life, — apart from material impact, — gets hold of another organism, we may in time learn something of the way in which our own life gets hold of our own organism, — and maintains, intermits, or abandons its organic sway.^

1 It is plain that on this view there is no theoretical reason for limiting telepathy to human beings. For aught we can say, the impulse may pass between man and the lower animals, or between the lower animals themselves. See 634 A.

636] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 247

635. The hypothesis which I suggested in Phantasms of the Living itself, in my " Note on a possible mode of psychical interaction," seems to me to have been rendered increasingly plausible by evidence of many kinds since received ; evidence of which the larger part falls outside the limits of this present work. I still believe — and more confidently than in 1886 — that a " psychical invasion " does take place ; that a " phantasmogenetic centre " is actually established in the percipient's surroundings ; that some movement bearing some relation to space as we know it is actually accomplished ; and some presence is transfei'red, and may or may not be discerned by the invaded person ; some perception of the distant scene in itself is acquired, and may or may not be remembered by the invader.

But the words which I am here beginning to use carry with them associations from which not the scientific reader alone may well shrink in disgust. I am falling into the language of a " palaeolithic psychology " — into the habits of thought of the savage who believes that you can travel in dreams and infest your enemy as a haunting spirit. Fully realising the offence which such expressions must give, — the apparent levity of a return to conceptions so enormously out of date, — I see no better line of excuse than simply to retrace to my reader the way in which the gradual accretion of evidence has obliged me, for the mere sake of covering all the phenomena, to use phrases and assumptions which go far beyond those which Edmund Gurney and I employed in our first papers on this inquiry in 1883.

636. The facts of the case, then, are briefly as follows. When in 1882 our small group began the collection of evidence bearing upon " veridical hallucinations " — or apparitions which coincided with other events in such a way as to suggest a casual connection — we found that the subject had hardly as yet been seriously attacked. Cases, indeed, of various kinds had been vaguely recorded ; but scarcely any of these reached the evidential level on which we wished our narratives to stand. Our own collection was miserably scanty as compared with the magnitude of the harvest waiting to be reaped ; but at the same time it was copious enough to indicate those types of coincidental apparition which were at once commonest and most capable of evidential treatment. These were apparitions of living persons, coinciding with some crisis which those persons were undergoing at a distance ; and especially the apparitions of persons who might indeed be regarded as still living, but who were undergoing the crisis of death. These cases, I say, were the first to attain to a number and a weight which carried conviction to our own minds, and in various papers in the S.P.R. Proceedings, and then in Phantasms of the Living, they were set forth in evidential form, and were connected with experimental telepathy, being themselves regarded as spontaneous examples, upon a more impressive scale, of these transferences of impression from one to another mind.

But at the same time there were scattered among these cases from the

first certain types which were with difficulty reducible under the conception of telepathy pure and simple — even if such a conception could be distinctly formed. Sometimes the apparition was seen by more than one percipient at once — a result which we could hardly have expected if all that had passed were the transference of an impression from the agent's mind to another mind, which then bodied forth that impression in externalised shape according to laws of its own structure. There were instances, too, where the percipient seemed to be the agent also — in so far that it was he who had an impression of having somehow visited and noted a distant scene, whose occupant was not necessarily conscious of any immediate relation with him. Or sometimes this "telepathic clairvoyance " developed into "reciprocity," and each of the two persons concerned was conscious of the other ; — the scene of their encounter being the same in the vision of each, or at least the experience being in some way common to both. These and cognate difficulties were present to my mind from the first ; and in the above-mentioned " Note on a suggested mode of psychical interaction," included in vol. ii. of Phantasms of the Living, I indicated briefly the extension of the telepathic theory to which they seemed to me to point.

637. Meantime cases of certain other definite types continued to come steadily to hand, although in lesser numbers than the cases of apparition at death. To mention two important types only — there were apparitions of the so-called dead and there were cases of precognition. With regard to each of these classes, it seemed reasonable to defer belief until time should have shown whether the influx of first-hand cases was likely to be permanent ; whether independent witnesses continued to testify to incidents which could be better explained on these hypotheses than on any other. Before Edmund Gurney's death in i888 our cases of apparitions and other manifestations of the dead had reached a degree of weight and consistency which, as his last paper showed, was beginning to convince him of their veridical character; and since that date these have been much further increased ; and especially have drawn from Mrs. Piper's and other trance-phenomena an unexpected enlargement and corroboration. The evidence for communication from the departed is now in my personal estimate quite as strong as that for telepathic communication between the living ; and it is moreover evidence which inevitably alters and widens our conception of telepathy between living men.

The evidence for precognition, again, was from the first scantier, and has advanced at a slower rate. It has increased steadily enough to lead me to feel confident that it will have to be seriously reckoned with ; but I cannot yet say — as I do say with reference to the evidence for messages from the departed — that almost every one who accepts our evidence for telepathy at all, must ultimately accept this evidence also. It must run on at any rate for some years longer before it shall have accreted a convincing weight.

633] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 249

But at whatever point one or another mquirer may happen at present to stand, I urge that this is the reasonable course for conviction to follow. First analyse the miscellaneous stream of evidence into definite types ; then observe the frequency with which these types recur, and let your sense of their importance gradually grow, if the evidence grows also.

Now this mode of procedure evidently excludes all definite a priori views, and compels one's conceptions to be little more than the mere grouping to which the facts thus far known have to be subjected in order that they may be realised in their ensemble.

No more ambitious than this is my " palaeolithic psychology." I merely endeavour, like my cannibal precursors, to find a formula which will somehow cover the observed facts — though with this difference, that where they find their formula easily credible, and do not care what white men say, I find my formula credible with difficulty — credible mainly just because I have heard what white men say, and because I cannot think that they have " saved the phenomena " — or have even shown much more grasp than the Stone Age possessed of the limit of cosmic possibilities.

"What definite reason do I know why this should not be true?" — this is the question which needs to be pushed home again and again if one is to realise — and not in the ordinary paths of scientific speculation alone — how profound our ignorance of the Universe really is.

My own ignorance, at any rate, I recognise to be such that my notions of the probable or improbable in the Universe are not of weight enough to lead me to set aside any facts which seem to me well attested, and which are not shown by experts actually to conflict with any better-established facts or generalisations. Wide though the range of established science may be, it represents, as its most far-sighted prophets are the first to admit, a narrow glance only into the unknown and infinite realm of law.

638. The evidence, then, leading me thus unresisting along, has led me to this main difference from our early treatment of veridical phantasms. Instead of starting from a root-conception of a telepathic impulse merely passing from mind to mind, I now start from a root-conception of the dissociability of the self, of the possibility that different fractions of the personality can act so far independently of each other that the one is not conscious of the other's action.

Naturally the two conceptions coincide over much of the ground. Where experimental thought-transference is concerned — even where the commoner types of coincidental phantasms are concerned — the second formula seems a needless and unprovable variation on the first. But as soon as we get among the difficult types — reciprocal cases, clairvoyant cases, collective cases, above all, manifestations of the dead — we find that the conception of a telepathic impulse as a message despatched and then left alone, as it were, to effect its purpose needs more and more of straining, of manipulation, to fit it to the evidence. On the other hand, it is

just in those difficult regions that the analogies of other splits of personality recur, and that phantasmal or automatic behaviour recalls to us the behaviour of segments of personality detached from primary personality, but operating through the organism which is common to both.

The innovation which we are here called upon to make is to suppose that segments of the personality can operate in apparent separation from the organism. Such a supposition, of course, could not have been started without proof of telepathy, and could with difficulty be sustained without proof of survival of death. But, given telepathy, we have some psychical agency connected with man operating apart from his organism. Given survival, we have an element of his personality — to say the least of it — operating when his organism is destroyed. There is therefore no very great additional burden in supposing that an element of his personality may operate apart from his organism, while that organism still exists.

Ce fCest que le premier pas qui coute. If we have once got a man's thought operating apart from his body — if my fixation of attention on the two of diamonds does somehow so modify another man's brain a few yards off that he seems to see the two of diamonds floating before him — there is no obvious halting-place on his side till we come to "possession" by a departed spirit, and there is no obvious halting-place on my side -till we come to " travelUng clairvoyance," with a corresponding visibility of my own phantasm to other persons in the scenes which I spiritually visit. No obvious halting- place, I say; for the point which at first seems abruptly transitional has been already shown to be only the critical point of a continuous curve. I mean, of course, the point where consciousness is duplicated — where each segment of the personality begins to possess a separate and definite, but contemporaneous stream of memory and perception. That these can exist concurrently in the same organism our study of hypnotism has already shown, and our study of motor automatisms will still further prove to us.

Here, then, we see in operation just the kind of split which would have seemed most definitely improbable beforehand. " Whatever " (the objector might have thought) " may be the vagaries of spirit, if spirit exist, it is hard to suppose that a brain, constructed to give expression to one single intelligence, accustomed to co-ordinate many minor impulses under one central control, can express two concurrent streams of intelligence, the secondary intelligence showing no sign of disorganisation, but being often at least the equal of the first." We know, however, that this kind of mental analogue of duplex telegraphy is not found in practice a difficulty. Whether the secondary intelligence represent another phase of the primary or be the manifestation of some extraneous mind, it seems at any rate to have plenty of room to work in. Nay, more than two streams of intelligence have in this book already been seen, and will be again seen later on, to be able to operate through the same organism, with imperfections

641] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 251

apparently merely due to defect of external muscular modes of selfexpression.

639. Such, then, being the observed facts, we cannot suppose that they have already revealed to us all the ways in which dissociations of personality may take place. On the principle of continuity we might even expect to find something intermediate between the dissociations which express themselves through the brain and that great dissociation in which the brain is at last discarded for good and all in what we know as Death. Already in a certain sense a man is in two places at once when his brain is acting as two centres for two different groups of the elements of character and memory. There is already what the schoolmen called a " bilocation," although it is hidden among unseen cells. And before we reach the supreme dissociation of death, we shall be prepared by this line of argument for evidence which shows spiritual activity at a distance during the comatose condition which often precedes and merges into death. That phenomenon will present itself as a form of dissociation, with some analogies to death on the one hand, and some analogies to the hypnotic trance on the other.

640. Dissociation of personality, combined with activity in the metetherial environment ; such, in the phraseology used in this book, will be the formula which will most easily cover those actually observed facts of veridical apparition on which we must now enter at considerable length. And after this preliminary explanation I shall ask leave to use for clearness in my argument such words as are simplest and shortest, however vague or disputable their connotation may be. I must needs, for instance, use the word "spirit," when I speak of that unknown fraction of a man's personality — not the supraliminal fraction — which we discern as operating before or after death in the metetherial environment. For this conception I can find no other term, but by the word spirit I wish to imply nothing more definite than this. Of the spirit's relation to space, or (which is a part of the same problem) to its own spatial manifestation in definite form, something has already been said, and there will be more to say hereafter. And similarly those terms, invader or invaded, from whose strangeness and barbarity our immediate discussion began, will depend for their meaning upon conceptions which the evidence itself must gradually supply.

641. That evidence, as it now lies before us, is perplexingly various both in content and quality. For some of the canons needed in its analysis I have already referred the reader to long extracts from Edmund Gurney's writings. Certain points must still be mentioned here before the narrative begins.

It must be remembered, in the first place, that all these veridical or coincidental cases stand out together as a single group from a background of hallucinations which involve no coincidence, which have no claim to veridicality. If purely subjective hallucinations of the senses affected insane or disordered brains alone, — as was pretty generally the assumption,

even in scientific circles, when our inquiry began, — our task would have been much easier than it is. There can be no question as to the sound and healthy condition of many of our informants, and it would much simphfy matters if we were entitled to argue — say, in one of our cases where a schoolboy sees his brother's phantom while he is playing in a cricket match, — " This schoolboy was in perfect health ; this apparition was the only one which he ever saw, therefore it necessarily had some cause outside himself."

Most people, in point of fact, do thus argue, when an apparition, unique in their lives, presents itself to them while they are feeling thoroughly well and at ease in mind. It so happens that it was left for Edmund Gurney to show unexpected difficulties in this presumption. His census of hallucinations (1884) showed a frequency, previously unsuspected, of scattered hallucinations among sane and healthy persons, the experience being often unique in a lifetime, and in no apparent connection with any other circumstance whatever (see 612).

Since casual hallucinations of the sane, I say, are iXvis frequent, we. can hardly venture to assume that they are all vej-idical. And the existence of all these perhaps merely subjective hallucinations greatly complicates our investigation of veridical hallucinations. It prevents the mere existence of the hallucinations, however strangely interposed in ordinary life, from having any evidential value, and throws us upon external forms of evidence ; — coincidences, especially, between the hallucinations and some event taking place at a distance. For we have as yet no clear criterion in the percipient's feelings which can show us which hallucination is or is not caused by something otherwise unknown which is occurring outside him. Hypnotic hallucinations, for instance, which correspond to no external fact beyond the hypnotiser's suggestive utterance heard in the usual way, form perhaps the most distinct and persistent group of all hallucinations of the sane. We have then, I repeat, at present no general subjective test which can discriminate falsidical from veridical hallucinations. It does not indeed follow that we need despair of finding such a test. Some individual sensitives, liable to both kinds of hallucinations, believe that they have actually learnt to distinguish for themselves between the two classes, or even to distinguish in the veridical class between apparitions due to the agency of incarnate or of discarnate spirits ; and it is of course to be hoped that as such sensitivity comes to be more often recognised, and more seriously valued, the sensitive's own discriminative power may become an increasingly important factor of evidence.

642. Meantime we have to rely on the evidence afforded by external coincidence ; — on the mere fact, to put such a coincidence in its simplest form, that I see a phantom of my friend Smith at the moment when Smith is unexpectedly dying at a distance. A coincidence of this general type, if it occurs, need not be difficult to substantiate, and we have

643] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 253

in fact substantiated it with more or less completeness in several hundred cases.

The prima facie conclusion will obviously be that there is a causal connection between the death and the apparition. To overcome this presumption it would be necessary either to impugn the accuracy of the informant's testimony, or to show that chance alone might have brought about the observed coincidences.

On both of these questions there have been full and repeated discussions elsewhere. I need not re -argue them at length here, but will give in the Appendices to this section some of the more important points. Thus the general canons of evidence for coincidental hallucinations were given by Edmund Gurney at the outset of this inquiry so clearly that no restatement is needed. It then became manifest that our evidence was weak in one particular where our canons dwelt on the importance of strength. Only a small proportion of the coincidental phantasms were recorded in writing before the coincidental event was known. Some discussion of this point is given in 642 B ; to which I have added a list of cases — much more numerous now than when the question was first raised — where some contemporary record has actually been preserved. The next Appendix deals with a cognate point — the danger of illusions of memory, creating or magnifying the interesting coincidences. But on these and other points the reader should also consult the " Report on the Census of Hallucinations," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. (already analysed in 612 A), where every source of error as yet discovered has been pretty fully considered.

To that volume also I must refer him for a thorough discussion of the arguments for and against chance-coincidence (summarised in 612 A). The conclusion to which the Committee unanimously came is expressed in the closing words : " Between deaths and apparitions of the dying person a connection exists which is not due to chance alone."

We have a right, I think, to say that only by another census of hallucinations, equally careful, more extensive, and yielding absolutely different results, could this conclusion be overthrown.

643. In forming this conclusion, apparitions at death are of course selected, because, death being an unique event in man's earthly existence, the coincidences between death and apparitions afford a favourable case for statistical treatment. But the coincidences between apparitions and crises other than death, although not susceptible of the same arithmetical precision of estimate, are, as will be seen, quite equally convincing. To this great mass of spontaneous cases we must now turn.

The arrangement of these cases is not easy ; nor are they capable of being presented in one logically consequent series. Each narrative may be regarded from many points of view. There is first of all the nature of the external event, as death or crisis, to which they correspond ; there is the mode of their appearance — in dreams, semi-somnolence, or vigi-

lance ; there is the special sense (or senses) which they affect — as sight or hearing ; and, lastly, there is the effect produced on possible percipients — as their collective perception, by several persons together, or their elective perception by one person only out of several, &c. One of these divisions — the distinction of visual and auditory cases — which was fittingly enough employed in arranging the first collection in Pha?itasms of the Living — may here fall into the background.^ The statistical proportions of visual, auditory, bisensory, and trisensory hallucinations have now been worked out, so far as our materials carry us ; and, since we do not suppose that we are concerned with ocular sight or with aural audition, it becomes a minor question which inner sense in each special percipient is most easily stimulated ; or, I ought to add, which inner sense each special agent can most easily stimulate. This distinction, at least, with many others, can conveniently be discussed a propos of individual cases ; while the basis of our general arrangement should be found in some more fundamental character.

Now one advantage of the conception of /ij^/zzV^s;/ invasion or excursion on which I have already dwelt is that it is at any rate sufficiently fundamental to allow of our arrangement of all our recorded cases — perhaps of all possible cases of apparition — in accordance with its own lines. And even though there be many cases for which the metaphor of invasion seems needlessly strong, and the older metaphor of " telepathic impact " quite sufficient, yet these cases also, although in some sense less complete, will arrange themselves naturally in the same divisions.

Let us take A for the "agent," or the spirit supposed in each case to be invasive or excursive : P for the " percipient," the spirit which plays the more passive role, receiving and sometimes observing the visit of A. Naturally the agent is often — perhaps in reality always — a percipient also. He goes forth to acquire information as well as to give it ; but his subliminal self, which makes this excursion, cannot always report the results to his supraliminal self — from whom we outsiders are forced to make our inquiry. His power of giving us information, indeed, is, as we shall see, particularly liable to be cut short by his death.

We want, then, a scheme which is to include, on the lines of this conception of invasion or excursion, all observable telepathic action, from the faint currents which we may imagine to be continually passing between man and man, up to the point — reserved for the following chapter — where one of the parties to the telepathic intercourse has definitely quitted the flesh. The first term in our series must be conveniently vague ; the last must lead us to the threshold of the spiritual world.

644. I must begin with cases where the action of the excursive fragment of the personality is of the weakest kind — the least capable of

1 Visual cases, when occurring indoors at any rate, are generally stronger evidentially than auditory cases, because less likely to be originated by mere mistake or illusion.

644] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 255

affecting other observers, or of being recalled into the agent's own waking memory.

Such cases, naturally enough, will be hard to bring up to evidential level. It must depend on mere chance whether these weak and aimless psychical excursions are observed at all ; or are observed in such a way as to lead us to attribute them to anything more than the subjective fancy of the observers.

How can a casual vision — say, of a lady sitting in her drawing-room, — of a man returning home at six o'clock — be distinguished from memory-images on the one hand and from what I may term " expectation-images " on the other? The picture of the lady may be a slightly modified and externalised reminiscence ; the picture of the man walking up to the door may be a mere projection of what the observer was hoping to see.

I have assumed that these phantoms coincided with no marked event. The lady may have been thinking of going to her drawing-room ; the man may have been in the act of walking home ; — but these are trivial circumstances which might be repeated any day.

Yet, however trivial, almost any set of human circumstances are sufficiently complex to leave room for coincidence. If the sitter in the drawing-room is wearing a distinctive article of dress, never seen by the percipient until it is seen in the hallucination ; — if the phantasmal homeward traveller is carrying a parcel of unusual shape, which the real man does afterwards unexpectedly bring home with him ; — there may be reason to think that there is a causal connection between the apparent agent's condition at the moment, and the apparition.

I will quote one of these " arrival-cases," so to term them, where the peculiarity of dress was such as to make the coincidence between vision and reality well worth attention. The case is interesting also as one of our earliest examples of a psychical incident carefully recorded at the time ; so that after the lapse of nearly forty years it was possible to correct the percipient's surviving recollection by his contemporary written statement.

It is taken from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 94, having been contributed by Colonel Bigge, of 2 Morpeth Terrace, S.W., who took the account out of a sealed envelope, in Gurney's presence, for the first time since it was written on the day of the occurrence.

An account of a circumstance which occurred to me when quartered at Templemore, Co. Tipperary, on 20th February 1847.

This afternoon, about 3 o'clock p.m., I was walking from my quarters towards the mess-room to put some letters into the letter-box, when I distinctly saw Lieut. -Colonel Reed, 70th Regiment, walking from the corner of the range of buildings occupied by the officers towards the mess-room door; and I saw him go into the passage. He was dressed in a brown shooting-jacket, with grey summer regulation tweed trousers, and had a fishing-rod and a landing-net in his hand. Although at the time I saw him he was about 15 or 20 yards from

me, and although anxious to speak to him at the moment, I did not do so, but followed him into the passage and turned into the ante-room on the left-hand side, where I expected to find him. On opening the door, to my great surprise, he was not there ; the only person in the room was Quartermaster Nolan, 70th Regiment, and I immediately asked him if he had seen the colonel, and he replied he had not ; upon which I said, " I suppose he has gone upstairs," and I immediately left the room. Thinking he might have gone upstairs to one of the officers' rooms, I listened at the bottom of the stairs and then went up to the first landing-place ; but not hearing anything I went downstairs again and tried to open the bedroom door, which is opposite to the anteroom, thinking he might have gone there ; but I found the door locked, as it usually is in the middle of the day. I was very much surprised at not finding the colonel, and I walked into the barrack-yard and joined Lieutenant Caulfield, 66th Regiment, who was walking there ; and I told the story to him, and particularly described the dress in which I had seen the colonel. We walked up and down the barrack-yard talking about it for about ten minutes, when, to my great surprise, never having kept my eye from the door leading to the mess-room (there is only one outlet from it), I saw the colonel walk into the barracks through the gate — which is in the opposite direction — accompanied by Ensign Willington, 70th Regiment, in precisely the same dress in which I had seen him, and with a fishing-rod and a landing-net in his hand. Lieutenant Caulfield and I immediately walked to them, and we were joined by Lieut-Colonel Goldie, 66th Regiment, and Captain Hartford, and I asked Colonel Reed if he had not gone into the mess-room about ten minutes before. He replied that he certainly had not, for that he had been out fishing for more than two hours at some ponds about a mile from the barracks, and that he had not been near the mess-room at all since the morning.

At the time I saw Colonel Reed going into the mess-room, I was not aware that he had gone out fishing — a very unusual thing to do at this time of the year; neither had I seen him before in the dress I have described during that day. I had seen him in uniform in the morning at parade, but not afterwards at all until 3 o'clock — having been engaged in my room, writing letters, and upon other business. My eyesight being very good, and the colonel's figure and general appearance somewhat remarkable, it is morally impossible that I could have mistaken any other person in the world for him. That I did see him I shall continue to believe until the last day of my existence.

William Matthew Bigge,

Major, 70th Regiment.

[On July 17th, 1885, after Colonel Bigge had described the occurrence, but before the account was taken from the envelope and read, he dictated the following remarks to Gurney] : —

When Colonel R. got off the car about a couple of hours afterwards. Colonel Goldie and other officers said to me, " Why, that's the very dress yon described." They had not known where he was or how he was engaged. The month, February, was a most unlikely one to be fishing in. Colonel Reed was much alarmed when told what I had seen.

The quartermaster, sitt'ng at the window, would have been bound to see a real figure ; he denied having seen anything.

I have never had the slightest hallucination of the senses on any other occasion.

645] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 257

[It will be seen that these recent remarks exhibit two slips of memory. It is quite unimportant whether Colonel Reed was seen walking in at the gate or getting off a car. But in making the interval between the vision and the return two hours instead of ten minutes, the later account unduly diminishes the force of the case. If there is any justification at all for the provisional hypothesis that the sense of impending arrival is a condition favourable for the emission of a telepathic influence, it is of importance that, at the time when the phantasmal form was seen, Colonel Reed was not busy with his fishing, but was rapidly approaching his destination ; for thus the incident, at any rate, gets the benefit of analogy with other cases.]

In these arrival cases, there is, I say, a certain likelihood that the man's mind may be fixed on his return home, so that his phantasm is seen in what might seem both to himself and to others the most probable place.

645. But there are other cases where a man's phantasm is seen in a place where there is no special reason for his appearing, although these places seem always to lie within the beat and circuit of his habitual thought.

In such cases there are still possible circumstances which may give reason to think that the apparition is causally connected with the apparent agent. The phantasm of a given person may be seen repeatedly by different percipients, or it may be seen collectively by several persons at a time ; or it may combine both these evidential characteristics, and may be seen several times and by several persons together.

Now considering the rarity of phantasmal appearances, considering that not one person in (say) five thousand is ever phantasmally seen at all ; the mere fact that a given person's phantasm is seen even twice, by different percipients (for we cannot count a second appearance to the same percipient as of equal value), is in itself a remarkable fact ; while if this happens three or four times we can hardly ascribe such a sequence of rare occurrences to chance alone. I cite almost in full the case of Mrs. Hawkins {nee Eden, daughter of the late Primus of Scotland), from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 78.

Mrs. Hawkins writes from Beyton Rectory, Bury St. Edmunds, as follows : —

March 2t^th, 1885.

I send you my cousins' accounts of my apparition.

I have also sent you the account of my next appearance, which unfortunately cannot now be related by the eye-witness.

Again, a third time one of my httle sisters reported that she had seen me on the stairs, when I was seven miles off; but she might so easily have been mistaken that I have never put any faith in that appearance. Then I was about twenty.

1 This account — omitted here — is related by Mrs. Hawkins herself and refers to her apparition having been seen in her own home in 1847 by the nursery-maid, now dead. VOL. I. R

For many years after that these appearances seem to have entirely ceased, but in the autumn of 1877 I was seen in this house by my eldest son, then aged twenty-seven, who may, I hope, give you his own account of it.

Lucy Hawkins.

Mrs. Hawkins prefaces her cousins' accounts thus : —

The event described in the enclosed accounts took place at Cherington, near Shipston-on-Stour, in Warwickshire, the residence of my uncle, Mr. William Dickins, who was for many years chairman of Quarter Sessions in the county. The ladies who saw the appearance are two of his daughters, one of them a little older than myself, the other three or four years younger. I was then just seventeen.

The only mistake that I can discover in either of the accounts is that Mrs. Malcolm says I had been hiding with her "brother," whereas I had really been all the time with her sister. Miss Lucy Dickins — a fact of no importance, except that she (Miss D.) might (if necessary) bear witness that I /i^^T really been with her all the time in the washhouse, and so could not have been near where I was seen.

I remember we were all somewhat awed by what had happened, and that it broke up our game. I myself quite thought it was a warning of speedy death ; but as I was not a nervous or excitable girl, it did not make me anxious or unhappy, and in course of time the impression passed off.

Writing to Mrs. Hawkins in September 1884, Miss Dickins said : —

Georgie [Mrs. Malcolm] is coming here on Friday, and I propose then to show her your letters, and Mr. Gurney's, and that we should each write our impressions of what we saw independently, and see how far they agree, and we will send the result to you. It is all very fresh in my memory, and I can at this moment conjure you up in my mind's eye, as you appeared under that tree and disappeared in the yard. I even recollect distinctly the dress you wore, a sort of brown and white, rather large check, such as was in fashion then, and is now, but was in abeyance in the intermediate years.

Shortly afterwards Miss Dickins wrote : —

Cherington, Shipston-on-Stour. September 2gth, 1884.

I send the two accounts which Georgie and I wrote about your apparition. We wrote them independently, and so I think they are wonderfully good evidence, as they tally to almost every particular, except the little fact that I thought she joined me in searching the yard for you, and she thinks not — but that has nothing to do with the main fact of the story, our entire belief that we saw you in the body.

In the autumn of 1845, we were a large party of young ones staying in the house, and on one occasion were playing at a species of hide-and-seek, in which we were allowed to move from one hiding-place to another, until caught by the opposite side. At the back of the house there was a small fold-yard opening on one side into the orchard, on the other into the stableyard, and there were other buildings to the left. I came round tlie corner of these buildings, and saw my cousin standing under some trees about twenty yards from me, and I

645] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 259

distinctly saw her face; my sister, who at the moment appeared on the other side, also saw her and shouted to me to give chase. My cousin ran between us in the direction of the fold-yard, and when she reached the door we were both close behind her and followed instantly, but she had entirely disappeared, though scarcely a second had elapsed. We looked at one another in amazement, and searched every corner of the yard in vain; and when found some little time afterwards, she assured us that she had never been on that side of the house at all, or anywhere near the spot, but had remained hidden in the same place until discovered by one of the enemy. S. F. D.

I well remember the incident of your " fetch " appearing to us. I believe I wrote down the details at the time, but do not know what has become of that record, so must trust to my memory to recall the circumstances, and do not fear its [not] being faithful though nearly forty years have passed.

We were playing our favourite game of Golowain, which consisted in dividing into sides at hide-and-seek, the party hiding having the privilege of moving on from place to place until they reached the " Home," unless meanwhile caught by the pursuing party.

As I stood towards the end of the game, as a seeker, in the orchard, I saw you, who belonged to the opposite party, stealing toward me. As your dress was the same as your sister's and there was the possibility of my mistaking you for her, who was on my side, I shouted her name, and she answered me from the opposite side of the wood. I then gave chase, and you turned, and looked at me laughing, and I saw your face distinctly. But at the same instant, Nina, also my friend, but your enemy, appeared round some corner, and being still nearer to you than I was, I left the glory of your capture to her. She was close upon you as you fled into a cow-yard. I was so sure your fate was sealed that I followed more slowly, and hearing the bell ring, that, according to the rules of our game, recalled us to the " Home," I went on there, to find Nina upbraiding you for having so mysteriously escaped her in this cow-yard.

In astonishment you said you never had been near the place. Of course I supported my little sister in her assertion; whilst our brother supported _y(72^, saying he had been hiding with you, and that, being tired, you had both remained hidden in one place until the bell warned you that the game was over — that place being a washhouse in a distinct part of the premises from the cow or fold-yard, into which we believed we liad chased you.

G. M. {nee Dickins).

In answer to inquiries, both Miss Dickins and Mrs. Malcolm say that they have never had any other experience of visual hallucination.

The following account is from Mrs. Hawkins's son : —

June loth, 1885. In the autumn of 1877, I was living at my father's house, Beyton Rectory, Bury St. Edmunds. The household consisted of my father, mother, three sisters, and three maid-servants. One moonlight night I was sleeping in my room, and had been asleep some hours, when I was awakened by hearing a noise close to my head, like the chinking of money. My waking idea, therefore, was that a mail was trying to take my money out of my trousers pocket, which lay on a chair close to the head of my bed. On opening my eyes, I was astonished to see a woman, and I well remember thinking with sorrow that it

26o CHAPTER VI [646

must be one of our servants who was tr3ang to take my money. I mention these two thoughts to show that I was not thinking in the shghtest degree of my mother. When my eyes had become more accustomed to the light, I was more than ever surprised to see that it was my another, dressed in a peculiar silver-grey dress, which she had originally got for a fancy ball. She was standing with both hands stretched out in front of her as if feeling her way ; and in that manner moved slowly away from me, passing in front of the dressing-table, which stood in front of the curtained window, through which the moon threw a certain amount of light. Of course, ray idea all this time was that she was walking in her sleep. On getting beyond the table she was lost to my sight in the darkness. I then sat up in bed, listening, but hearing nothing; and, on peering through the darkness, saw that the door, which was at the foot of my bed, and to get to which she would have had to pass in front of the light, was still shut. I then jumped out of bed, struck a light, and instead of finding my mother at the far end of the room, as I expected, found the room empty. I then for the first time supposed that it was an "appearance," and greatly dreaded that it signified her death.

I might add that I had, at that time, quite forgotten that my mother had ever appeared to any one before, her last appearance having been about the year 1847, three years before I was born.

Edward Hawkins.

[In answer to inquiries, Mr. E. Hawkins says : — ] I can assure you that neither before nor since that time have I ever had any experience of the sort.

I quote several other cases of repeated apparitions in the Appendices to this section. Mr. Gorham Blake's case in Phantasms of the Living (vol. ii. p. 86), should also be consulted.

Impressive as is the repetition of the apparition in these cases, it is yet less so to my mind than the collective character of some of the perceptions. In Mrs. Hawkins's first case there were two simultaneous percipients. In one of Mr. Blake's cases there were two ; and in Canon Bourne's first case (645 D) there were three percipients.

646. And we now come to other cases, where the percipience has been collective, although it has not been repeated. Here is a case where two persons at one moment — a moment of no stress or excitement whatever— see the phantasm of a third ; that third person being perhaps occupied with some supraliminal or subliminal thought of the scene in the midst of which she is phantasmally discerned. Both the percipients supposed at the moment, naturally enough, that it was their actual sister whom they saw : and one can hardly fancy that a mere act of tranquil recognition of the figure by one percipient would communicate to the other percipient a telepathic shock such as would make her see the same figure as well.

The account is taken from the " Report on the Census of Hallucinations " {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 306).

646] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 261

From Miss C. J. E.

March 1892.

I was playing the harmonium in the church of at about 4 p.m., August

1889, when I saw my eldest sister walk up the church towards the chancel with a roll of papers under her arm. When I looked up again she had disappeared, and I thought she had just come in for a few minutes and gone out again ; but when I asked her afterwards what she wanted in the church, she was much surprised, and told me she had been in the rectory library all the afternoon, studying genealogical tables. I am not sure of the exact date, but it was about the time I mention.

I was practising on the harmonium ; as far as I remember I was quite well and not worried about anything. I was eighteen years old. A younger sister was the only other person in the church with me at the time. She was standing beside me on an old stone coffin, and also noticed my eldest sister walk up the church with papers under her arm, but thought it nothing unusual and looked away, and when she looked back again my sister had disappeared.

My eldest sister looked just as usual and wore her hat and jacket, as I and my younger sister both noticed. She walked rather briskly, looking straight before her. She assures us that she was sitting alone in the rectory library (the rectory is within a stone's throw of the church) all the afternoon.

In answer to the question whether she has had any other hallucinations

Miss E. says : —

I have seen dark forms in my room at night when there was no one in the room but myself, but as I am nervously inclined I am not very positive about it, as it may have been partly imagination. But the apparition [of my sister] I positively saw.

Miss E. writes further : —

April \i,th, 1892.

I am quite sure that the figure could not have been any one else looking like K., for I saw distinctly every detail of her face and figure and dress, and noticed that she was looking straight before her. My sight is excellent, and I know I could not have been mistaken. When I looked up, the figure was about three yards from me, I should say. The figure may have gone back past me without my noticing it, but I think it very improbable, as I was sitting with my face towards the aisle through which it must have passed.

The other percipient, Miss H. E., writes : —

My sisters and I were spending the day with our uncle at ; as he is

the rector his garden leads into the churchyard. In the course of the afternoon C. and I went into the church ; she began to play the harmonium and I stood on a stone coffin beside her with my hand on her shoulder ; my sister was playing a hymn, and I was looking down at the book to read the words. C. casually looked up ; I did the same, and following the direction of her eyes saw K. walking to us up the church with — and this rather surprised me — a long bundle of papers in her hand. We made no remark and took no further notice

of her movements, for when we go to we often just wander in to see the

church. It was certainly K. herself; I could see her face quite well. C. and I finished our hymn and found that she had gone. C. and I soon after went in to

tea. At tea we were surprised to hear K. say, " I am so sorry I did not see the church, but part of the afternoon I was looking at pedigrees in the study; before that I passed the church gate ; I was going in, but turned back to the study instead," or words to that effect. C. and I exchanged glances, but said nothing. However, next morning we attacked K. on the subject ; she was much surprised, had certainly not been in church at all, but had first been in the library studying the family pedigree, and then gone to the church gate and returned. My sister and I both have perfectly good eyesight. It seems impossible that K. can have visited the church, but my sister and I are both positively certain that we saw K. or her likeness. The day after we both described the details of her dress, so far as we could recollect them, and K. said that it was a correct account of her dress the day before. I saw the pedigree papers before I went out, and both C. and I thought them very like the papers the figure had in her hand. These are, as far as I remember, the details of the case without exaggeration or diminution.

It was possible, but rather improbable, that K. should have left the church without our notice, because she must have passed back the same way close to us.

Miss K. E. writes : —

Upon the afternoon during which this curious incident happened, I wandered about my uncle's garden for a while, and half thought of going into the church, but changed my mind and did not. I went into the library, and being interested in genealogy, studied my uncle's family pedigree until tea-time, when I remarked to my sisters that I had not been to the church all the afternoon, and they told me that they had seen me there. I felt no unusual sensations during the afternoon, and am much mystified by the incident.

647. In the following case the apparition was seen by its original and by others at the same time. The account (taken from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 217) came from Mrs. Hall, of The Yews, Gretton, near Kettering, and was received in December 1883.

In the autumn of 1863, I was living with my husband and first baby, a child of eight months, in a lone house, called Sibberton, near Wansford, Northamptonshire, which in bygone days had been a church. As the weather became more wintry, a married cousin and her husband came on a visit. One night, when we were having supper, an apparition stood at the end of the sideboard. We four sat at the dining-table ; and yet, with great inconsistency, 1 stood as this ghostly visitor again, in a spotted, light muslin summer dress, and without any terrible peculiarities of air or manner. We all four saw it, my husband having attracted our attention to it, saying, " It is Sarah," in a tone of recognition, meaning me. It at once disappeared. None of us felt any fear, it seemed too natural and familiar.

The apparition seemed utterly apart from myself and my feelings, as a picture or statue. My three relatives, who, with me, saw the apparition, are all dead; they died in about the years 1868-69. Sarah Jane Hall.

[The dress in which the figure appeared was not like any that Mrs. Hall had at the time, though she wore one like it nearly two years afterwards. Mrs. Hall has had other visual hallucinations, which were all connected with ill-

648] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 263

health or nervous shock ; one which occurred a few months before that here described had represented herself as if "laid out."]

648. The question of the true inmport of collectivity of percipience renews in another form that problem of invasion to which our evidence so often brings us back. When two or three persons see what seems to be the same phantom in the same place and at the same time, does that mean that that special part of space is somehow modified ? or does it mean that a mental impression, conveyed by the distant agent — the phantom-begetter — to one of the percipients is reflected telepathically from that percipient's mind to the minds of the other — as it were secondary — percipients? The reader already knows that I prefer the former of these views. And I observe — as telling against that other view, of pyschical contagion — that in certain collective cases we discern no probable link between any one of the percipient minds and the distant agent.

In some of that group of collective cases which we are at this moment considering, this absence of link is noticeable in a special way. The agent may indeed be acquainted with the percipients, — as Mrs. Beaumont (645 C) was acquainted with the various persons who saw her. But there is nothing to show that any thought or emotion was passing from agent to percipients at the moment of the apparition. On the contrary, the indication is that there is no necessary connection whatever between the agent's condition of mind at the moment and the fact that such and such persons observed his phantasm. The projection of the phantasm, if I may so term it, seems a matter wholly automatic on the agent's part, as automatic and meaningless as a dream.

Assuming, then, that this is so — that these bilocations do occur without any appreciable stimulus from without, and in moments of apparent calm and indifference — in what way will this fact tend to modify previous conceptions ?

It suggests that the continuous dream-life which we must suppose to run concurrently with our waking life is potent enough to effect from time to time enough of dissociation to enable some element of the personality to be perceived at a distance from the organism. How much of consciousness, if any, may be felt at the point where the excursive phantasm is seen, we cannot say. But the notion that a mere incoherent quasidream should thus become perceptible to others is fully in accordance with the theories suggested in this work. For I regard subliminal operation as continuously going on, and I hold that the degree of dissociation which can generate a perceptible phantasm is not necessarily a profound change, since that perceptibility depends so largely upon idiosyncrasies of agent and percipient as yet wholly unexplained.

That special idiosyncrasy on the part of the agent which tends to make his phantasm easily visible has never yet, so far as I know, received a name, although for convenience' sake it certainly needs one. I propose to

use the Greek word xj/vxoppayw, which means strictly " to let the soul break loose," and from which I form the -vfoxd?, psychorrhagy zxid psychorrhagic, on obvious analogies. When I say that Mrs. Beaumont or Mr. Williams, agents in the cases cited in 645 A and C, were born with the psychorrhagic diathesis, I express what I believe to be an important fact, physiological as well as psychological, in terms which seem pedantic, but which are the only ones which mean exactly what the facts oblige me to say. That which "breaks loose " on my hypothesis is not (as in the Greek use of the word) the whole principle of life in the organism ; rather it is some psychical element probably of very varying character, and definable mainly by its power of producing a phantasm, perceptible by one or more persons, in some portion or other of space. I hold that this phantasmogenetic effect may be produced either on the mind, and consequently on the brain of another person — in which case he may discern the phantasm somewhere in his vicinity, according to his own mental habit or prepossession — or else directly on a portion of space, " out in the open," in which case several persons may simultaneously discern the phantasm in that actual spot.

649. Let us apply the view to one of our most bizarre and puzzling cases — that of Canon Bourne (see 645 D). Here I conceive that Canon Bourne, while riding in the hunting-field, was also subliminally dreaming of himself (imagining himself with some part of his submerged consciousness) as having had a fall, and as beckoning to his daughters — an incoherent dream indeed, but of a quite ordinary type. I go on to suppose that. Canon Bourne being born with the psychorrhagic diathesis, a certain psychical element so far detached itself from his organism as to affect a certain portion of space — near the daughters of whom he was thinking — to affect it, I say, not materially nor even optically, but yet in such a manner that to a certain kind of immaterial and non-optical sensitivity a phantasm of himself and his horse became discernible. His horse was of course as purely a part of the phantasmal picture as his hat. The non-optical distinctness with which the words printed inside his hat were seen indicates that it was some inner non-retinal vision which received the impression from the phantasmogenetic centre. The other phantasmal appearance of Canon Bourne chanced to affect only one percipient, but was of precisely the same character ; and of course adds, so far as it goes, to the plausibility of the above explanation.

That explanation, indeed, suffers from the complexity and apparent absurdity inevitable in dealing with phenomena which greatly transcend known laws ; but on the other hand it does in its way colligate Canon Bourne's case with a good many others of odd and varying types. Thus these appearances of Canon Bourne's, Mrs. Beaumont's, Mrs. Hawkins', &c., are in my view exactly parallel to the hauntings ascribed to departed spirits. There also we find a psychorrhagic diathesis — a habit or capacity on the part of certain spirits of detaching some psychical element in such

650] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 265

a manner as to form a phantasmal picture, which represents the spirit as going through some dream-hke action in a given place.

The phantasmogenetic centre may thus, in my view, be equally well produced by an incarnate or by a discarnate spirit.

These psychorrhagic cases are also, I think, important as showing us the earliest or feeblest stages of self-projection — where the dissociation belongs to the dream-stratum — implicating neither the suprahminal will nor the profounder subliminal strata.

650. And now let us pass on from these psychorrhagic cases, which hardly concern anybody beyond the phantom- begetter himself — and do not even add anything to his own knowledge — to cases where there is some sort of communication from one mind to another, or some knowledge gained by the excursive spirit.

It is impossible to arrange these groups in one continuous logical series. But, roughly speaking, the degree in which the psychical collision is recollected on either side may in some degree indicate its intensiiy, and may serve as a guide to our provisional arrangement.

And following this scheme I shall begin with a group of cases which seem to promise but httle information, — cases, namely, where A, the agent, in some way impresses or invades P, the percipient, — but nevertheless neither A nor P retains in supraliminal memory any knowledge of what has occurred.

Now to begin with we shall have no difficulty in admitting that cases of this type are likely often to occur. The psychical r<xpprochement of telepathy takes place, ex hypothesi, in a region which is subliminal for both agent and percipient, and from whence but few and scattered impressions rise for either of them above the conscious threshold. Telepathy will thus probably operate far more continuously than our scattered glimpses would in themselves suggest.

But how can we outside inquirers know anything of telepathic incidents which the principals themselves fail altogether to remember?

In ordinary life we may sometimes learn from bystanders incidents which we cannot learn from the principals themselves. Can there be bystanders who look on at a psychical invasion?

The question is of much theoretical import. On my view that there is a real transference of something from the agent, involving an alteration of some kind in a particular part of space, there might theoretically be some bystander who might discern that alteration in space more clearly than the person for whose benefit, so to say, the alteration was made. If, on the other hand, what has happened is merely a transference of some impulse " from mind to mind " ; — then one can hardly understand how any mind except the mind aimed at could perceive the telepathic impression. Yet, in collective cases, persons in whom the agent feels no interest, nay, of whose presence along with the intended percipient he is not aware, do in fact receive the impression in just the same way as that intended

percipient himself. This was explained by Gumey as probably due to a fresh telepathic transmission, — this time from the due or original percipient's mind to the minds of his neighbours of the moment.

Such a supposition, however, in itself a difficult one, becomes much more difficult when the telepathic impulse has never, so far as we know, penetrated into the due or intended percipient's mind at all. If in such a case a bystander perceives the invading figure, I must think that he perceives it merely as a bystander, — not as a person telepathically influenced by the intended percipient, who does not in fact perceive anything whatsoever. I quote in illustration a bizarre but well-attested case, which this explanation seems to fit better than any other.

From Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 214. We received the first account of this case — the percipient's evidence — through the kindness of Mrs. Martin, of Ham Court, Upton-on-Severn, Worcester.

Antony, Torpoint, December \i^h, 1882. Helen Alexander (maid to Lady Waldegrave) was lying here very ill with typhoid fever, and was attended by me. I was standing at the table by her bedside, pouring out her medicine, at about 4 o'clock in the morning of the 4th October 1880. I heard the call-bell ring (this had been heard twice before during the night in that same week), and was attracted by the door of the room opening, and by seeing a person entering the room whom I instantly felt to be the mother of the sick woman. She had a brass candlestick in her hand, a red shawl over her shoulders, and a flannel petticoat on which had a hole in the front. I looked at her as much as to say, " I am glad you have come," but the woman looked at me sternly, as much as to say, " Why wasn't I sent for before ? " I gave the medicine to Helen Alexander, and then turned round to speak to the vision, but no one was there. She had gone. She was a short, dark person, and very stout. At about 6 o'clock that morning Helen Alexander died. Two days after her parents and a sister came to Antony, and arrived between i and 2 o'clock in the morning ; I and another maid let them in, and it gave me a great turn when I saw the living likeness of the vision I had seen two nights before. I told the sister about the vision, and she said that the description of the dress exactly answered to her mother's, and that they had brass candlesticks at home exactly like the one described. There was not the slightest resemblance between the mother and daughter.

Frances Reddell.

This at first sight might be taken for a mere delusion of an excitable or over-tired servant, modified and exaggerated by the subsequent sight of the real mother. If such a case is to have evidential force, \nq. must ascertain beyond doubt that the description of the experience was given in detail before any knowledge of the reality can have affected the percipient's memory or imagination. This necessary corroboration has been kindly supplied by Mrs. Pole-Carew, of Antony, Torpoint, Devonport.

December yst, 1883. In October iSSo, Lord and Lady Waldegrave came with their Scotch maid, Helen Alexander, to stay with us. [The account then describes how

650] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 267

Helen was discovered to have caught typhoid fever.] She did not seem to be very ill in spite of it, and as there seemed no fear of danger, and Lord and Lady Waldegrave had to go a long journey the following day (Thursday), they decided to leave her, as they were advised to do, under their friends' care.

The illness ran its usual course, and she seemed to be going on perfectly well till the Sunday week following, when the doctor told me that the fever had left her, but the state of weakness which had supervened was such as to make him extremely anxious. I immediately engaged a regular nurse, greatly against the wish of Reddell, my maid, who had been her chief nurse all through the illness, and who was quite devoted to her. However, as the nurse could not conveniently come till the following day, I allowed Reddell to sit up with Helen again that night, to give her the medicine and food, which were to be taken constantly.

