Miss Fancher once told Judge Dailey that she had seen him upon a given evening with a gentleman whom she described. After some difficulty Judge Dailey recollected that upon that evening he had been with a friend named Sisson. We are not told how he identified the evening. Some months later Judge Dailey, Mr. Sisson, and another person called upon Miss Fancher. She at first said she had not before seen either of the two gentlemen, but after a moment's reflection said that one, pointing to Mr. Sisson, was the man she had seen with the Judge. This is one of the best cases, as it is corroborated by Mr. Sisson, and it appears that his account was written only six months or so after the event. We would like to know, however, whether any further questions were asked Miss Fancher after she had first stated that she did not recognise Mr. Sisson.

In brief, the evidence which Judge Dailey has collected will seem satisfactory only to those who are already satisfied of the possibility of clairvoyance. It will do little towards establishing that possibility. And as Miss Fancher's clairvoyant powers are said to be much less keen now than they were some years ago, it is not probable that her case will contribute much of value to the evidence for the supernormal. One can readily appreciate the repugnance which Miss Fancher felt to submitting herself to the commission of experts suggested by the New York Medico-Legal Society, but it is much to be regretted that her friends should have allowed the value of her case to be lost through mere negligence.

237 A. The following account is taken from the " Report of Dr. Ira Barrows on the Case o{ Miss Anna Winsor." Extracts from this Report were made by Dr. C. W. Fillmore, and sent to the American Society for Psychical Research. Dr. Barrows and Dr. Fillmore were both of Providence, R. I., and are now deceased. Professor James made some inquiry into the case in 1889, and stated (Proceedings of the American S.P.R., Vol. I., p. 552) that the mother and brother of the patient, and Dr. Wilcox, the former partner of Dr. Barrows, bore corroborative testimony. I recount the case as far as possible in the words of Dr. Barrows, with some abridgments and omissions, and a few explanatory remarks. The parts omitted are chiefly accounts of the patient's spasms, and purely medical descriptions.

The case of Anna Winsor represents an extreme form of hysteroepilepsy, with very violent and frequent convulsions, and intervals of insane delusions. Much relief was given by hypnotism (called by Dr. Barrows "magnetism," or " animal magnetism "), but no cure was effected. The detailed record extends over two and a half years, from May 9th, i860, to January 1863, but some of Dr. Barrows' comments were made at a later date. Miss Winsor died in 1873.

237A] TO CHAPTER II 355

There is clear evidence of a secondary personality, and there seems to have been hypergesthesia of vision, and perhaps also telsesthesia, and even hetersesthesia ; but in the absence of details concerning the experiments made in these directions, we cannot infer with any certainty that supernormal faculty was manifested. It is interesting to note that the first attempt apparently of the secondary personality to communicate resulted in a writing movement of the toes. But the most remarkable feature in the case was that later on the right arm became, as it were, the permanent possession of the secondary personality. The personations appear to have been — chiefly, at least, — of the insane type, and there is no evidence of the control of the organism by any external intelligence. The beneficent control of the "right arm " personality is doubtless to be referred to the subject's own subliminal self.

May gth, i860. — Called to visit Miss Winsor, aged eighteen years. From her mother and sister learned the following regarding her history.

When teething had been subject to convulsions. Had grown up a tolerably healthy girl. Had passed through the primary school ; was attending a higher one when at fifteen she was attacked with rheumatic fever. She suffered particularly in her joints, and especially the vertebral joints. For seven months she was unable to walk. It was 2|- years before she was able to return to school, and then was very weak, and suffered with rheumatic cardialgia. She continued in school eight months, and then, May 6th, i860, left school; complained of chilliness and severe headache.

May yik. — Unusually quiet, wandering about the house unconscious of what she did, scarcely tasting food, and oppressed with drowsiness. May 8th. — Reclined upon lounge all day.

May ()th. — First visit. Found her stupid, pulse small, frequent, irregular. Tongue dry ; skin hot and dry. Treated her for what appeared to be typhoid fever. At the end of about seventeen days she became convalescent, and I anticipated a speedy recovery. Now, suddenly and without apparent cause, about June ist, a relapse of fever. Head ached; tongue dried; delirium supervened ; convulsions followed ; loss of consciousness. The whole vertebral column sensitive to slight pressure. Hard pressure upon the cervical and upper dorsal vertebrae would produce spasm. Tetanic spasms alternating with coma.

No change worthy of notice until June 15th. Apparently unconscious of everything around her; em?; elated, haggard, and seemingly about to die; we noticed her toes m'^-'ng as if trying to form letters on the sheet. Not giving any particular attention to this, she began, with her forefinger, to form letters on the sheet as if trying to spell some word. It was suggested that paper and a pencil be given to her. She began to write names of persons long since dead. Then followed directions about her sickness, and predictions as to her future, saying: " It (always using the third person singular) will be a long time sic\; lose her sense of smell; be blind many months; doubtful if she ever walks again. Her sickness will develop many phases and strange phenomena." Continues to be very sick. Spasms increase in frequency and severity.

About June 26th she became very sensitive to magnetic influence. The touch of many persons became painful, so that it was difficult to get suitable

watchers. A rubber comb, the contact of a cat, as well as the touch of sundrypersons, were not only painful, but caused spasms.

August ()th. — Tried animal magnetism. Succeeded in putting her to sleep; slept a short time, but more quiet through the day. August loth (apparently), tried magnetism again ; did not succeed. On August 26th she thinks it is the 4th of July. [This suggests the waking here of some fragment of her personality that had been dormant since July 4th.]

Sepfefnber Sth. — She has not been able to utter a word for ten weeks. All communications are made by writing.

September \2)th. — Complains that the room is dark; cannot see. Tells what is going on in an adjoining room. Tells the time by a clock in another room. 14th and 15th. — " Balls " of pain in back and head. i6th, a.m. — Some delirium; in the evening a raving maniac. Tore her hair out by handfuls; fought and bit all who came near her. Rubbed with Tinct. Bell.: magnetism. Succeeded at 12.50 in getting her quiet. 17th and i8th. — Wild with delirium. Tears her hair, bed-clothes, pillow-cases, both sheets, night-dress all to pieces. Her right hand prevents her left hand, by seizing and holding it, from tearing out her hair, but tears her clothes with her left hand and teeth.

[This appears to be the first distinctly noted usurpation of the right arm by the secondary personality.]

September 2^th. — Writes the time of day; motions for a book; holds it upside down. Right hand predicts the number of spasms she will have a day : some days more, some less. 25th, 26th, 27th, 2Sth. — Talks again, but in whispers. 29th. — Complains of great pain in right arm, more and more intense, when suddenly it falls down by her side. She looks at it in amazement. Thinks it belongs to some one else ; positive it is not hers. Sees her right arm drawn around upon her spine. Cut it, prick it, do what you please to it, she takes no notice of it. Complains of great pain in the neck and back, which she now calls her shoulder and arm ; no process of reasoning can convince her of the contrary. [To the present time (1866, when the Report was read at a Medical Society in Boston), now nearly five years, the hallucination remains firm. She beheves her spine is her right arm, and that her right arm is a foreign object and a nuisance. She believes it to be an arm and hand, but treats it as if it had intelligence and might keep away from her. She bites it, pounds it, pricks it, and in many ways seeks to drive it from her. She calls it " Stump ; old Stump." Sometimes .she is in great excitement and tears, pounding " Old Stump." Says " Stump " has got this, that, or the other that belongs to her.]

The history of September is her daily and nightly history to October 25th.

October zz^th. — After a spasm, becomes speei,l.]°ss.

October 26th. — One spasm lasting one hour; still spe^/^hless. 27th. — Sleeps all day, but occasionally screams as from pain. Rouses in evening and personates different people. 28th, 29th, 30th. — Same. 31st. — Right itand writes, "On November 21st at five o'clock precisely she will swallow water; will swallow nothing but liquid until December ist, when she will swallow a piece of cracker the size of a wafer."

November xst to lotk. — More or less .spasms daily. Reason gradually returns. Much depressed in spirits, nth. — Strings beads ; makes figured bead basket and lamp mats; works only with the left hand; every bead in its exact place ; works with her eyes closed, and the same in the evening without light as in the daytime. November 12th. — Fell from bed to lounge in a spasm.

237A] TO CHAPTER II 357

From eleven to twelve at night sits up apparently asleep and writes with her paper against the wall ; after she awakes seems to be unconscious of what she has written. 13th. — Spasms as usual. In the evening, while sleeping, personates "Aunt Chloe"; writes for flour, mixes and makes some biscuits; pares an apple and makes a pie ; icses both hands when asleep, when awake has no power to move the right. November 14th, 15th, i6th, 17th, i8th. — Diary about the same. 20th and 2[st. — Delirious and spasms. To-day, November 21st, is the day she is to swallow, at five o'clock p.m., water. A quarter before five I secretly took the striking weight from the clock standing in the entry ; took two tumblers of water and put a drop of medicine into one ; at three minutes before five offered her each glass successively ; rejected both. At five o'clock a gurgling sound was heard in her throat. She motioned for the water; passed the tumbler in which I had secretly put a drop of medicine ; rejected it ; passed the other ; took a mouthful, and with great effort swallowed a part of it, some of it running out of her mouth. The deglutition was performed like one attempting it with the mouth wide open.

Jamtary ist, 1861. — From November 20th up to this time, raving delirium; pulls her hair nearly all out from the top of her head. If she can get a pin, plunges it into whoever comes near her. Tears her clothes sadly. Swallows the bit of cracker December ist, as predicted. The right hand protects her against the left as miich as possible. She now becomes more rational ; talks again; first loud words uttered since November 6th. Calls for a book; reads with it upside down. January 4th. — Becomes blind. From this time to February ist, constant delirium ; frequent spasms.

February ist to nth. — ]>fo particular change. Swallows water when in the magnetic sleep, and personates sundry persons ; personates a Quaker ; speaks loud and rapidly ; gives an amusing lecture. When the magnetism passes off, remembers nothing of the past; can hardly speak in whispers, and is much prostrated. February nth. — Takes and swallows a little nourishment — a few tea-spoonfuls of whips, blanc-mange, &c. More or less spasms nearly every day. Under the influence of magnetism writes poetry; personates different persons, mostly those who have long since passed away. Whenever in the magnetic state, whatever she does or says is not remembered when she comes out of it. Commences a series of drawings with her right (paralysed) hand, " Old Stump." Also writes poetry with it. Whatever " Stump " writes or draws, or does, she appears to take no interest in ; says it is none of hers, and that she wants nothing to do with " Stump" or " Stump's." I have sat by her bed and engaged her in conversation, and drawn her attention in various ways, while the writing and drawing has been uninterrupted. She had never exhibited any taste for or taken any lessons in drawing.

March. — During this month she complains much of pain in her head, in back of head chiefly, in nape and dorsal vertebras, which she now calls her right arm. I will here remark further about these drawings. She became blind, 4th January ; is still blind; sees as well with eyes closed as open; keeps them closed much of the time. Reads and draws with them closed. Draws in the dark as well as in the light; is clairvoyant. She writes several pieces of poetry, chiefly with the right hand, and as often in twilight and evening before gas is lighted, while it is dark. The handwriting differs greatly in different pieces. The spasms do not differ, either in form or frequency, from last month. The only remedy that has appeared to afford any relief is animal magnetism. The galvanic current has been tried without any success.

April gth. — Becomes deaf; great pain in head ; is conscious of her suffering most of the time. Commences bead work; makes three bead baskets; does it all with her left hand ; threads her needle, strings her beads, makes her baskets ; works alike by daylight, gaslight, twilight, and in the dark. I have sat by her in the evening and witnessed her work. I lowered the gas to almost total darkness, and asked her to thread her needle and proceed with her work, which she did at once, not seeming to notice that the room was darkened. She selected a small needle from her needlebook, stuck it perpendicularly into a cushion lying by her, bit off the end of the thread, rolled it between her thumb and finger and passed it through the needle's eye as easily and readily as I would have passed it through a finger ring, and proceeded at once to string her beads ; eyes closed.

May i^th. — Delirious, imagining herself Queen Anne. . . . May 19th. — Three spasms in the a.m.; at 2 p.m. a fourth. Her head is drawn downward and rests upon her knees ; but suddenly her body elevates and she balances upon her head ; remains in this position a few moments, falls over upon her right side ; her body forms an arch while she rests upon the right side of her right foot and upon her right hand, and remains in this position half-an-hour. The spasm passes off; she sinks down prostrate, still delirious; seizes a pencil and paper with her right hand and writes, " Give an injection of Tinct. of Aconite and warm water." Gave it ; slept after it several hours. 20th to 23rd.— Daily spasms, but not so severe. 24th. — Raving delirium ; imagines herself a dog; barks and growls. 26th. — Awakes delirious. At 5.30 a.m. has a spasm lasting until 8 o'clock. All the muscles of the body and limbs are rigid, except those of right ar?n. With this hand, but partially rigid, she takes a pencil and paper and writes, "After some time in June Anna will be able to swallow for the remainder of the summer." 31st. — Imagines herself a dog; barks, growls, howls ; sets dogs in the street to barking. Seems pleased and imitates them; laps water; sometimes draws back from it; growls and gnashes her teeth ; froths at the mouth ; attempts to bite ; acts as if she had hydrophobia.

fune 1st 3.nd ind. — Hydrophobia and dog personation continued. Spasms in which the legs being drawn under her, her head is drawn down upon her knees, somewhat resembling a ball ; she rolls over and over from left to right and from right to left, to which I give the name " Rolling spasms " or Anakulisma (revolving), nth. — Gave Tinct. Bell, in warm water. This prescription is written by her 7'ight haftd while she is delirious. Her finger and toe nails become very dark purple. These spasms with delirium continue nearly every day through the month. Bell, injections appear to mitigate, and magnetism enables her to sleep several hours during the nights.

August. — Head drawn over upon right shoulder ; left hand closed so that it cannot be forced open. Catinot use either hand while awake., although she uses her right hand readily while asleep.

October. — Spasms vary; body jerks from side to side; motion like the pendulum of a clock, but rapid ; continues several minutes, sometimes making 1000 vibrations, after which she faints. Draws pictures ; sews ; does bead work, chiefly with her right hand, her left being still closed, although she can use her thumb, and helps with that. This seems to be done in a clairvoyant state, as light and darkness are the same to her, and the work goes on in both alike.

November. — Ruptured a blood-vessel in the lungs; hemorrhage; speaks

237A] TO CHAPTER II 359

only in whispers. December. — Hemorrhage continues; still clairvoyant; draws ; sews ; bead work with left hand only when awake, with both when asleep.

Jatiuary 1862. — Nine weeks since she has spoken aloud, twenty-two since she has swallowed. January 27th. — Sight restored. Obliged to have the room darkened because the light is painful. Eighteen months' erratic vision. During these months she had read with her eyes closed and her book upside down. Thinks she sees through her forehead and top of her head. Seldom sleeps without magnetism.

June "jth. — Recovered her voice ; can speak loud. . . .

September \oth. — Great pain in head ; delirious and beats her head against the wall. September 20th.— Sitting on the floor ; raving; imagines herself a dog ; growls, barks, and laps water. Has not slept ; eyes crossed. Put her on bed ; tears clothing. Magnetised her ; slept several hours.

[ When her delirium was at its height, as well as at all other times, her right hand is rational, asking and answering questions in writing; giving directions; trying to prevent her tearing her clothes ; when she pulls out her hair seizes and holds her left hand. When she is asleep, carries on conversation the same ; writes poetry ; never sleeps ; acts the part of a nurse as far as it can ; pulls the bed-clothes over the patient, if it can reach them, when uncovered ; raps on the headboard to awaken her mother (who always sleeps in the room) if anything occurs, as spasms, &c.]

January 1863. — At night and during her sleep " Stump" writes letters, some of them very amusing ; writes poetry ; some pictures original. Writes " Hasty Pudding," by Barlow, in several cantos, which she had never read ; all correctly written, but queerly arranged, as,._^., one line belonging in one canto, would be transposed with a line in another canto. She has no knowledge of Latin or French, yet " Stump " produces the following rhyme of Latin and English. 1

" Stump " writes both asleep and awake, and the writing goes on while she is occupied with her left hand in other matters. Ask her what she is writing, she replies, "/ am not writing; that is ' Stump' writing. I don't know what he is writing. I don't trouble myself with ' Stump's ' doings." Reads with her book upside down and sometimes when covered with the sheet. " Stump " produces two bills of fare in French. . . . Cannot sleep without being magnetised fifteen or twenty minutes at night, and then usually sleeps twelve to fourteen hours.

During the last two and a half years I have been obliged to be absent three or four times for a week or more, and although she has been attended and magnetised by either my friend Dr. C, or Dr. S. — who both have the power of magnetising — she has lost sleep and become raving crazy, tearing her hair, pounding her head ; giving herself the name " Queen Victoria," " Queen Anne," Mary, &c., and calling her mother " Queen of Sheba," " Bloody Mary," &c. ; myself " Dr. Kane," the " Old Giant," " God Almighty," and so on. . . . After going into the magnetic sleep at night she is very patient, pleasant, modest. Is pleased to see friends ; converses pleasantly and rationally upon all subjects but one ; upon this she is monomaniac. Her right hand and arm is not hers. Attempt to reason with her and she holds up her left arm and says, " This is

1 These were six doggerel verses of four lines each, each line beginning in Latin and ending in English, given in full in Dr. Barrows' report, but omitted here.

36o APPENDICES [238 A

my left arm. I see and feel my right arm drawn behind me. You say this 'stump ' is my right arm. Then I have three arms and hands." In this arm the nerves of sensation are paralysed, but the nerves of motion preserved. She has no will to move it. She has no knowledge of its motion. This arm appears to have a separate intelligence. When she sleeps it writes or converses by signs. It never sleeps ; watches over her when she sleeps; endeavours to prevent her from injuring herself or her clothing when she is raving. It seems to possess an independent life, and, to some extent, foreknowledge.

238 A. A detailed record of the case of Mary Lurancy Vennum was originally given in the Religio-Philosophical Journal m 1879, and shortly afterwards published in pamphlet form under the title " The Watseka Wonder," by E. W. Stevens. The first part of the account which I shall give here consists of an abridgment from the narrative given in the pamphlet by Dr. Stevens (second edition, Chicago, Religio-Philosophical Publishing House, 1887), with some further statements by Mr. Rolf. The second part consists of some additional evidence obtained by Dr. Hodgson in personal interviews with some of the chief witnesses, which was published in the Religio-Philosophical Jour7ial for December 20th, 1890. Colonel J. C. Bundy, who was Editor of the Religio-Philosophical Joitrnal when the record was first published, and was himself well known as a skilful and scrupulously honest investigator of spiritistic phenomena, speaks in the highest terms of Dr. Stevens (who died in 1885), and adds: "We took great pains before and during publication to obtain full corroboration of the astounding facts from unimpeachable and competent witnesses."

The case briefly is one of alleged " possession " or " spirit-control." The subject of the account, Mary Lurancy Vennum, a girl nearly fourteen years old, living at Watseka, Illinois, became apparently controlled by the spirit of Mary Roff, a neighbour's daughter who had died at the age of eighteen years and nine months, when Lurancy Vennum was a child of about fifteen months old. The most extraordinary feature in the case was that the " control " by Mary Roff lasted almost continuously for a period of nearly four months, from February ist till May 21st, 1878. The narrative by Dr. Stevens was prepared shortly afterwards with the assistance of the chief witnesses, and confirmed by the parents of both Mary Roff and Lurancy Vennum. I give extracts from it, with some slight verbal alterations, and abridgments which are indicated by the square brackets.

[Mary Lurancy Vennum, the " Watseka Wonder," was born April 16th, 1864, in Milford township, about seven miles from Watseka, Illinois. The family moved to Iowa in July 1864 (when Lurancy was about three months old), and returned to within eight miles from Watseka in October 1865 (three months after the death of Mary Roff). Lurancy was then about a year and a half old. After two other moves in the neighbourhood, the family moved into Watseka on April ist, 1871], locating about forty rods from the residence of A. B. Roff. They remained at this place during the summer. The only

238 A] TO CHAPTER II 361

acquaintance ever had between the two famihes during the season was simply one brief call of Mrs. Roff, for a few minutes, on Mrs. Vennum, which call was never returned, and a formal speaking acquaintance between the two gentlemen. Since 1871 the Vennum family have lived entirely away from the vicinity of Mr. Roff 's, and never nearer than now, on extreme opposite limits of the city.

" Rancy," as she is familiarly called, had never been sick, save a light run of measles in 1873. A few days before the following incidents took place she said to her family : " There were persons in my room last night, and they called ' Rancy ! Rancy ! ! ' and I felt their breath on my face." The very next night she arose from her bed, saying that she could not sleep, that every time she tried to sleep persons came and called " Rancy ! Rancy ! ! " to her. Her mother went to bed with her, after which she rested and slept the rest of the night.

[On July nth, 1877, she had a sort of fit, and was unconscious for five hours. Next day the fit recurred, but while lying as if dead she described her sensations to her family, declaring that she could see heaven and the angels, and a little brother and sister and others who had died. The fits or trances, occasionally passing into ecstasy, when she claimed to be in heaven, occurred several times a day up to the end of January 1878; she was generally believed to be insane, and most friends of the family urged that she should be sent to an insane asylum.

At this stage Mr. and Mrs. Asa B. Roff, whose daughter, Mary Roff, as we shall see, had had periods of insanity, persuaded Mr. Vennum to allow him to bring Dr. E. W. Stevens of Janesville, Wisconsin, to investigate the case.]

On the afternoon of January 31st, 1878, the two gentlemen repaired to Mr. Vennum's residence, a little out of the city. Dr. Stevens, an entire stranger to the family, was introduced by Mr. Roff at four o'clock p.m. ; no other persons present but the family. The girl sat near the stove, in a common chair, her elbows on her knees, her hands under her chin, feet curled up on the chair, eyes staring, looking every way like an "old hag." She sat for a time in silence, until Dr. Stevens moved his chair, when she savagely warned him not to come nearer. She appeared sullen and crabbed, calhng her father "Old Black Dick" and her mother " Old Granny." She refused to be touched, even to shake hands, and was reticent and sullen with all save the doctor, with whom she entered freely into conversation, giving her reasons for doing so ; she said he was a spiritual doctor, and would understand her.

[She described herself first as an old woman named Katrina Hogan, and then as a young man named Willie Canning, and after some insane conversation had another fit, which Dr. Stevens relieved by hypnotising her. She then became calm, and said that she had been controlled by evil spirits. Dr. Stevens suggested that she should try to have a better control, and encouraged her to try and find one. She then mentioned the names of several deceased persons, saying there was one who wanted to come, named Mary Roff.]

Mr. Roff being present, said : " That is my daughter ; Mary Roff is my girl. Why, she has been in heaven twelve years. Yes, let her come, we'll be glad to have her come." Mr. Roff assured Lurancy that Mary was good and intelligent, and would help her all she could ; stating further that Mary used to be subject to conditions like herself. Lurancy, after due deliberation and counsel with spirits, said that Mary would take the place of the former wild and : unreasonable influence. Mr. Roff said to her, "Have your mother bring you

to my house, and Mary will be likely to come along, and a mutual benefit may be derived from our former experience with Mary."

[On the following morning, Friday, February ist, Mr. Vennum called at the office of Mr. Roff and informed him that the girl claimed to be Mary Roff, and wanted to go home. He said, " She seems like a child real homesick, wanting to see her pa and ma and her brothers."

Mary Roff was born in Indiana in October 1846. The family, after several changes of residence, including a visit to Texas in 1857, finally made their permanent home in Watseka in 1859. Mary had had fits frequently from the age of six months, which gradually increased in violence. She also had periods of despondency, in one of which, in July 1864, she cut her arm with a knife until she fainted. Five days of raving mania followed, after which she recognised no one, and seemed to lose all her natural senses, but when blindfolded could read and do everything as if she saw. After a few days she returned to her normal condition, but the fits became still worse, and she died in one of them in July 1865. Her mysterious illness had made her notorious in the neighbourhood during her life-time, and her alleged clairvoyant powers are said to have been carefully investigated " by all the prominent citizens of Watseka," including newspaper editors and clergymen.

It was in February 1878 that her supposed "control" of Lurancy began. The girl then became " mild, docile, polite, and timid, knowing none of the family, but constantly pleading to go home," and " only found contentment in going back to heaven, as she said, for short visits."]

About a week after she took control of the body, Mrs. A. B. Roff and her daughter, Mrs. Minerva Alter, Mary's sister, hearing of the remarkable change, went to see the girl. As they came in sight, far down the street, Mary, looking out of the window, exclaimed exultingly, " There comes my ma and sister Nervie ! " — the name by which Mary used to call Mrs. Alter in girlhood. As they came into the house she caught them around their necks, wept and cried for joy, and seemed so happy to meet them. From this time on she seemed more homesick than before. At times she seemed almost frantic to go home.

On the I ith day of February, 1878, they sent the girl to Mr. Roff's, where she met her " pa and ma," and each member of the family, with the most gratifying expressions of love and affection, by words and embraces. On being asked how long she would stay, she said, " The angels will let me stay till some time in May; " and she made it her home there till May 21st, three months and ten days, a happy, contented daughter and sister in a borrowed body.

The girl now in her new home seemed perfectly happy and content, knowing every person and everything that Mary knew when in her original body, twelve to twenty-five years ago, recognising and calling by name those who were friends and neighbours of the family from 1852 to 1865, when Mary died, calling attention to scores, yes, hundreds of incidents that transpired during her natural life. During all the period of her sojourn at Mr. Roff's she had no knowledge of, and did not recognise any of Mr. Vennum's family, their friends or neighbours, yet Mr. and Mrs. Vennum and their children visited her and Mr. Roff's people, she being introduced to them as to any strangers. After frequent visits, and hearing tliem often and favourably spoken of, she learned to love them as acquaintances, and visited them with Mrs. Roff three times.

One day she met an old friend and neighbour of Mr. Roff's, who was a widow when Mary was a girl at home. Some years since the lady married a

238 A] TO CHAPTER II 363

Mr. Wagoner, with whom she yet lives. But when she met Mrs. Wagoner she clasped her around the neck and said, " O Mary Lord, you look so very natural, and have changed the least of any one I have seen since I came back." Mrs. Lord was in some way related to the Vennum family, and lived close by them, but Mary could only call her by the name by which she knew her fifteen years ago, and could not seem to realise that she was married. Mrs. Lord lived just across the street from Mr. Roff's for several years, prior and up to witliin a few months of Mary's death; both being members of the same Methodist church, they were very intimate.

Some days after Mary was settled in her new home Mrs. Parker, who lived neighbour to the Roffs in Middleport in 1852, and next door to them in Watseka in i860, came in with her daughter-in-law, Nellie Parker. Mary immediately recognised both of the ladies, calling Mrs. Parker " Auntie Parker," and the other " Nellie," as in the acquaintance of eighteen years ago. In conversation with Mrs. Parker Mary asked, " Do you remember how Nervie and I used to come to your house and sing? " Mrs. Parker says that was the first allusion made to that matter, nothing having been said by any one on that subject, and says that Mary and Minerva used to come to their house and sit and sing " Mary had a little lamb," &c. Mrs. Dr. Alter (Minerva) says she remembers it well. This was when Mr. Roff kept the post-office, and could not have been later than 1852, and twelve years before Lurancy was born.

One evening, in the latter part of 'March, Mr. Roff was sitting in the room waiting for tea, and reading the paper, Mary being out in the yard. He asked Mrs. Roff if she could find a certain velvet head-dress that Mary used to wear the last year before she died. If so, to lay it on the stand and say nothing about it, to see if Mary would recognise it. Mrs. Roff readily found and laid it on the stand. The girl soon came in, and immediately exclaimed as she approached the stand, " Oh, there is my head-dress I wore when my hair was short ! " She then asked, " Ma, where is my box of letters ? Have you got them yet?" Mrs. Roff rephed, "Yes, Mary, I have some of them." She at once got the box with many letters in it. As Mary began to examine them she said, " Oh, ma, here is a collar I tatted ! Ma, why did you not show to me my letters and things before ? " The collar had been preserved among the relics of the lamented child as one of the beautiful things her fingers had wrought before Lurancy was born ; and so Mary continually recognised every little thing and remembered every little incident of her girlhood.

It will be remembered that the family moved to Texas in 1857. Mr. Ro£E asked Mary if she remembered moving to Texas or anything about it. " Yes, pa, and I remember crossing Red River and of seeing a great many Indians, and I remember Mrs. Reeder's girls, who were in our company." And thus she from time to time made first mention of things that transpired thirteen to twenty-five years ago.

[Occasionally she would go into trance, and the control, Mary Roff, described this as going to heaven, and seeing the beautiful things there and talking with the angels, and sometimes during the trance other spirits would present themselves and speak freely their own language and sentiments.]

On May 7th Mary called Mrs. Roff to a private room, and there in tears told her that Lurancy Vennum was coming back. She seemed very sad, and said she could not tell whether she was coming to stay or not ; that if she thought she was coming to stay, she would want to see Nervie and Dr. Alter and Allie, and bid them good-bye. She sat down, closed her eyes, and in a few

moments the change took place, and Lurancy had control of her own body. Looking wildly around the room, she anxiously asked, " Where am I ? I was never here before."

Mrs. Ro£f replied, "You are at Mr. Roff's, brought here by Mary to cure your body."

She cried and said, " I want to go home."

Mrs. Ro£f asked her if she could stay till her folks were sent for. She said, "No."

She was then asked if she felt any pain in her breast. (This was during the period that Mary was suffering pain in the left breast ; continually holding her hand, pressing it.) She replied, " No, but Mary did."

In about five minutes the change was again made, and Mary came overjoyed to find herself permitted to return, and called, as she often had, for the singing of her previous girlhood's favourite song, " We are Coming, Sister Mary."

In conversation with the writer about her former life, she spoke of cutting her arm as hereinbefore stated, and asked if he ever saw where she did it. On receiving a negative answer, she proceeded to slip up her sleeve as if to exhibit the scar, but suddenly arrested the movement, as if by a sudden thought, and quickly said, "Oh, this is not the arm; that one is in the ground," and proceeded to tell where it was buried, and how she saw it done, and who stood around, how they felt, &c., but she did not'feel bad. I heard her tell Mr. Roff and the friends present, how she wrote to him a message some years ago through the hand of a medium, giving name, time, and place. Also, of rapping and of spelling out a message by another medium, giving time, name, place, &c., &c., which the parents admitted to be all true. I heard her relate a story of her going into the country with the men, some twenty odd years ago, after a load of hay, naming incidents that occurred on the road, which two of the gentlemen distinctly remembered.

For the discovery of facts unknown to others, Mary seemed remarkably developed. One afternoon she, with much concern and great anxiety, declared that her brother Frank must be carefully watched the coming night, for he would be taken very sick, and would die if not properly cared for. At the time of this announcement he was in his usual health, and engaged with the Roff Bros.' band of music up town. The same evening Dr. Stevens had been in to see the family, and on leaving was to go directly to Mrs. Hawks, far off in the Old Town, and the family so understood it. But at about nine and a half o'clock the same evening Dr. Stevens returned unannounced to Mr. Marsh's, Mr. Roff's next neighbour, for the night. At two o'clock in the morning Frank was attacked with something like a spasm and congestive chill, which almost destroyed his consciousness. Mary at once saw the situation as predicted, and said, "Send to Mrs. Marsh's for Dr. Stevens." "No, Dr. Stevens is at Old Town," said the family. "No," said Mary, "he is at Mr. Marsh's ; go quick for him, pa." Mr. Roff called, and the doctor, as Mary said, was at Mr. Marsh's. On his arrival at the sick bed Mary had entire control of the case. She had made Mrs. Roff sit down, had provided hot water and cloths and other necessaries, and was doing all that could be done for Frank. The doctor seconded her efforts, and allowed her to continue. She saved her brother, but never made a move after the doctor's arrival, without his co-operation or advice.

Mary often spoke of seeing the children of Dr. Stevens in heaven, who

238 A] TO CHAPTER II 365

were about her age and of longer residence there than herself. She said she was with them much, and went to his home with him. She correctly described his home, the rooms and furniture, gave the names and ages of his children.

During her stay at Mr. Roff's her physical condition continually improved, being under the care and treatment of her supposed parents and the advice and help of her physician. She was ever obedient to the government and rules of the family, like a careful and wise child, always keeping in the company of some of the family, unless to go in to the nearest neighbours across the street. She was often invited and went with Mrs. Roff to visit the first families of the city, who soon became satisfied that the girl was not crazy, but a fine, well-mannered child.

As the time drew near for the restoration of Lurancy to her parents and home, Mary would sometimes seem to recede into the memory and manner of Lurancy for a little time, yet not enough to lose her identity or permit the manifestation of Lurancy's mind, but enough to show she was impressing her presence upon her own body.

[On May 19th, in the presence of Henry Vennum, Lurancy's brother, Mary left control for a time, and " Lurancy took full possession of her own body," recognising Henry as her brother. The change of control occurred again when Mrs. Vennum came to see her the same day.]

On the morning of May 21st Mr. Roff writes as follows: —

" Mary is to leave the body of Rancy to-day, about eleven o'clock, so she says. She is bidding neighbours and friends good-bye. Rancy to return home all right to-day. Mary came from her room upstairs, where she was sleeping with Lottie, at ten o'clock last night, lay down by us, hugged and kissed us, and cried because she must bid us good-bye, telling us to give all her pictures, marbles, and cards, and twenty-five cents Mrs. Vennum had given her to Rancy, and had us promise to visit Rancy often."

[Mary arranged that her sister, Mrs. Alter, should come to the house to say good-bye to her, and that when Lurancy came at eleven o'clock she should take her to Mr. Roff's office, and he would go to Mr. Vennum's with her. There was some alternation of the control on the way, but the final return of the normal Lurancy Vennum took place before they reached Mr. Roff's office, and on arriving at her own home she recognised all the members of her own family as such, and was perfectly well and happy in her own surroundings. A few days later, on meeting Dr. Stevens, under whose care she had been at Mr. Roff's house, she had to be introduced to him as an entire stranger, and treated him as such. The next day she came to him spontaneously, saying Mary Roff had told her to come and meet him, and had made her feel he had been a very kind friend to her, and she gave him a long message purporting to be from Mary.

A letter from Mr. Roff, dated December 4th, 1886, published in the Religio-Philosophical Journal, states that Lurancy Vennum continued to live with her parents until January ist, 1882, when she married a farmer, George Binning. The Roffs saw her often both before and after her marriage, until she moved further west in 1884, "and then," Mr. Roff says, "Mary would take control of Lurancy just as she did during the time she was at our house in 1878. . . . Aside from this, she had little opportunity of using her mediumship, her parents being afraid to converse with her on the subject lest it should cause a return of the 'spells' (as they called them), . . . and her husband never having made

himself acquainted with spiritualism. . . . Lurancy has what might be called, perhaps, a remembrance of her old experience while controlled by the spirit. She always speaks of it thus : ' Mary told me,' or ' Mary made me acquainted,' &c. She became acquainted with several persons while Mary controlled her, . . . and when the control left her, she continued the acquaintance thus formed. . . . She has never had any occasion for a physician since she left us, never having been sick since then." Mr. Roff also stated that at the birth of her first child she became entranced, and did not recover consciousness till after the child was born.]

Dr. Hodgson visited Watseka on April 12th, 1890, and cross-examined the principal witnesses of the case who were still living in the neighbourhood, including Mr. and Mrs. Roff, Mrs. Minerva Alter (their daughter), Mrs. Robert Doyle, Mrs. Kay, Mrs. Marsh, Mrs. Wagner, and Mrs. T. Vennum, a distant cousin of Lurancy's. The evidence obtained from them was published by Dr. Hodgson in the Religio-PhilosopJiical Journal for December 20th, 1890, from which I quote extracts as follows : —

Mr. Roff stated that when Lurancy Vennum first arrived at his house she looked around and said, "Where's Nervie?" — the name by which Mary Roff had been accustomed to call her sister Minerva, now, and at the time of Lurancy Vennum's experience, Mrs. Minerva Alter.

Mrs. Roff stated that Lurancy Vennum had never been in her house until she came there as Mary Roff. After looking round the house she said, " Why, there's our old piano, and there's the same old piano cover." This piano and cover had been familiar to Mary Roff in another house, where Mary Roff died. Lurancy referred to some peculiar incidents in Mary Roff's life ahnost every day, and she spoke once in detail about her stay at a water-cure place in Peoria where Mary Roff had been. Mrs. Roff once said to her, "Mary, do you remember when the stove pipe fell down and Frank was burned.?" "Yes." " Do you know where he was burned t " " Yes ; I'll show you," and she showed the exact spot on the arm where Frank was burned.

Mrs. Minerva Alter said that the mannerisms and behaviour of Lurancy when under the control resembled those of her sister Mary. Lurancy Vennum knew Mrs. Alter previously as Mrs. Alter, having met her at the school, &c., but when under the control of Mary she embraced Mrs. Alter affectionately and called her " Nervie" — a name by which Mrs. Alter had not been called for many years, but which was Mary's special pet name for her. In later years she had been commonly called Minnie by her intimate friends. Lurancy, as Mary Roff, stayed at Mrs. Alter's home for some time, and almost every hour of the day some trifling incident of Mary Roff's life was recalled by Lurancy. One morning she said, " Right over there by the currant bushes is where Allie greased the chicken's eye." Allie was a cousin of Mary Roff, and lived in Peoria, 111. She visited the Roffs in the hfetime of Mary, with whom she played. This incident happened several years before the death of Mary Roff. Mrs. Alter remembered it very well, and recalled their bringing the chicken into the house for treatment. Lurancy in her ordinary state had never met

Allie, who is now Mrs. H , living in Peoria, 111. One morning Mrs. Alter

asked her if she remembered the old dog (a dog which died during the lifetime

238 A] TO CHAPTER II 367

of Mary Roff). Lurancy replied, " Yes ; he died just there," and she pointed out the exact spot where the dog had breathed his last.

Mrs. Robert Doyle stated that she called upon Lurancy Vennum before she was removed to the house of Mr. Roff. She said, " What's the matter, Lurancy ? "

L. V. — " That's not my name. You knew me when I was a little girl. You know well enough what my name is. It is Mary Roff. Your husband's in partnership with my father, and you have a baby named for my sister Minerva."

Mr. Doyle was a partner of Mr. Roff in 1863, and was in partnership with him when Mary Roff died. The partnership was dissolved about six years later, when Lurancy Vennum was six or seven years old. Mrs. Doyle had a daughter named Minerva after Mary Roff's sister, who was a baby at the time of the death of Mary Roff.

When Lurancy was being taken to Mr. Roff's house she tried to get to another house on the way, insisting that it was her home. They had to take her past it almost forcibly. This house was the house where Mr. Roff was living at the time of Mary Roff's death, and was also the house in which Mary Roff died. They shortly afterwards moved to another house, to which Lurancy was being taken.

Mrs. Wagner stated that she knew Lurancy Vennum very well both before, and during, and after the remarkable circumstances of her connection with Mary Roff. When Mary Roff died Mrs. Wagner's name was Mrs. Lord, and Mary Roff had been in her class at Sunday School. She had known Mary Roff for several years before her death — since the year 1861. Mary Roff died in 1865, and Mrs. Lord married a second time in 1866. When she called upon the Roffs after Lurancy had gone there she was greeted very affectionately by Lurancy as Mrs. Lord. She made inquiries, and ascertained that none of the family had mentioned that she was going to the house. Mrs. Wagner said that throughout the time during which Lurancy purported to be Mary Roff she invariably called her Mrs. Lord, and that after Lurancy Vennum's return to her ordinary state she invariably called her Mrs. Wagner.

One circumstance which I ascertained seemed at first sight to weaken, but on further consideration, to strengthen the evidence in favour of the spiritistic interpretation. Mrs. Kay stated that she knew Lurancy Vennum and also Mary Roff, but that Lurancy as Mary Roff did not know her. It appeared, however, that Mary Roff had not seen Mrs. Kay for two years before her death. Mrs. Kay had hved in the state of Wisconsin for two years, returning to Watseka in August, 1865, the month after Mary Roff's death, and Mrs. Kay thought she had changed in appearance somewhat during the fifteen years which had elapsed between the time of her seeing Mary Roff and that of seeing Lurancy under the control.

Dr. Hodgson tried in vain to get some direct statements from Mrs. George Binning (formerly Lurancy Vennum), but received no answer to his inquiries. He writes: —

I have no doubt that the incidents occurred substantially as described in the narrative by Dr. Stevens, and in my view the only other interpretation of the case — besides the spiritistic — that seems at all plausible is that which has been put forward as the alternative to the spiritistic theory to account for the

trance-communications of Mrs. Piper and similar cases, viz., secondary personality with supernormal powers. It would be difficult to disprove this hypothesis in the case of the Watseka Wonder, owing to the comparative meagreness of the record and the probable abundance of " suggestion " in the environment, and any conclusion that we may reach would probably be determined largely by our convictions concerning other cases. My personal opinion is that the " Watseka Wonder " case belongs in the main manifestations to the spiritistic category.

409 A]



Appendices to Chapter IV

407 A. In illustration of the occasional heightening of the sensory faculties in dreams, I give the following case, described by Dr. Hodgson : —

July 'ipth, 1900. One of the most vivid experiences in my life occurred when I was eighteen or nineteen years old. It was a " dream " of music in sleep which continued tq be audible after I woke for at least a quarter of an hour. So it appears in memory now. I seemed to be well aware at the time that I was listening to music from "the other world." No special melody or harmony remained in recollection, but the music was very complex, very widespread as it were, very rich, very sweet, and with an ineffable one-ness about it. I awoke during the influence of it, and lay in ecstasy still hearing it, and remember gazing meanwhile at a star which was visible through a gap in my window-bhnd. It was just before dawn, and the music seemed to die away as the first light grew. No pleasure that I have ever had in hearing music before or since was at all comparable with the exquisite peaceful joy which flooded me as I listened to that music then. It produced such an effect upon me that I began to learn the violin, which I practised regularly for four years. R. Hodgson.

409 A. The two next cases are illustrative of self-suggestion in dreams. I quote the first from a paper by Dr. Faure in the Archives de Medecine, vol. i., 1876, p. 554.

A shop assistant, strongly built and regular in habits, awoke one morning in a state of fever and agitation, perspiring copiously, anxious and uneasy. He announced that all his savings were gone; he was ruined, done for. He said that on the previous day, while driving a van, he had got into a quarrel with a coachman ; and that, in the confusion, his van had broken in the front window of a mirror-maker. He would have to pay for the damage. He told the story with great detail ; and still saw himself caught round the neck by his adversary, who had struck him so violently that he had lost consciousness, and that they had had to carry him into a wine-merchant's shop to bring him to. His wife assured us that when he had returned home the evening before he was in his usual condition ; that he had seen to his business, passed the evening at home, and gone to bed with no trouble upon him.

For three days X continued in this state of mind, unable to calm himself

for a moment, although he was taken to the actual place where the imaginary

accident had occurred. It was some days later before he thoroughly understood

that it had been a dream. And for a whole month he would fall daily into the

VOL. I. 369 2 A

same confusion of memory — would sit down in despair, crying and repeating " We are ruined ! " Even seven years afterwards he still had occasional crises of this nature, when he forgot the truth, and lived for several days under the shock of this imaginary disaster.

We may compare with this the next case, where " the touch of a vanished hand " appeared to bring physical relief to the dreamer — the recovery being more rapid than ordinary conditions could explain.

409 B. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 374. The account is given by M. L. Holbrook, M.D., Editor of the Herald of Health, 13 and 15 Laight Street, New York, and is dated July 30, 1884,

In the spring of 1870,1 had anattackof acute bronchitis, which was verysevere, and from the fact that I had had a similar attack every winter and spring for several years, I felt considerable alarm, and believed it would ultimately become chronic, and perhaps terminate my life. As I was then young, and had just entered on a career of labour which I wished to follow for a long time, I became very despondent at such a prospect. In this depressed condition I fell into a sleep which was not very profound, and the following circumstance, which is still fresh in my mind, appeared to take place. My sister, who had been dead more than twenty years, and whom I had almost forgotten, came to my bedside, and said, "Do not worry about your health, we have come to cure you; there is much yet for you to do in the world." Then she vanished, and my brain seemed to be electrified as if by a shock from a battery, only it was not painful, but delicious. The shock spread downwards, and over the chest and lungs it was very strong. From here it extended to the extremities, where it appeared like a delightful glow. I awoke almost immediately and found myself well. Since then I have never had an attack of the disease. The form of my sister was indistinct, but the voice was very plain ; and I have never before had such an experience, nor since. M. L. Holbrook, M.D.

Compare this again with Dr. Tissi^'s account of his hysterical subject, Albert. *' Every time," said Albert, " that I dream that I have been bitten or beaten, I suffer all day in the part attacked."

415 A. The following is a case of a lost object, where waking effort soon after the loss fails to recall any supraliminal knowledge of the place of deposit. The account is quoted from the Jourjial S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 142 (October 1889).

February i,th, 1889. On reaching Morley's Hotel, at five o'clock on Tuesday, 29th January 1889, I missed a gold brooch, which I supposed I had left in a fitting-room at Swan & Edgar's. I sent there at once, but was very disappointed to hear that after a diligent search they could not find the brooch. I was very vexed, and worried about the brooch, and that night dreamed that I should find it shut up in a number of the Queen newspaper that had been on the table, and in my dream I saw the very page where it would be. I had noticed one of the plates on that page. Directly after breakfast I went to Swan & Edgar's and asked to see the papers, at the same time telling the young ladies about the dream, and where I had seen the brooch. The papers had been moved from that room, but were

1 Tissie, F^es Revcs, p. 121.

415BJ TO CHAPTER IV 371

found, and, to the astonishment of the young ladies, I said, " This is the one that contains my brooch ; " and there, at the very page I expected, I found it.

A. M. Bickford-Smith.

We received a substantially similar account from Mrs. Bickford-Smith's brother-in-law, Mr. H. A. Smith, who was a witness of the trouble taken to find the brooch, both at the hotel, and by sending to Swan & Edgar's, on the previous evening.

Yet here, be it observed, Mrs. Bickford-Smith had not had an opportunity of herself inspecting the scene of the loss. Had she returned to Swan & Edgar's before the dream, it is possible that the sight of the books on the table might have revived some recollection of seeing the brooch between the leaves of the Queen.

415 B. The next case was given in the Proceedings of the American S.P.R. (vol. i. No. 4, p. 363) on the authority of Professor Royce of Harvard. The narrator was Colonel A. v. S. of Texas (whose full name was known to Professor Royce). This case is more complicated than that last given, inasmuch as the missing article was apparently revealed to the percipient by her dead brother in a dream — and revealed in a place where it had been previously looked for in vain. The " orthodox " explanation, however, would be that the position of the knife was first perceived by the subliminal self, which only succeeded in informing the supraliminal self through a dramatic dream.

In the New York Herald oi December nth inst. I have noticed your interview, in which you say that you request any person having some unusual experience, such as an exceptionally vivid dream, &c. &c., should address you. The following seems to me a very extraordinary dream, for the truth of which I pledge you my word of honour.

About five years ago I lived with my four children, one boy and three girls, on a farm in Massachusetts. This only son, at the age of about fourteen years, lost his life in an accident, about six months previous to this narration. The youngest of the girls was the pet sister of his since her birth. My wife had died some six years previous to this story; being motherless, made these children unusually affectionate towards each other. One day I had occasion to buy for my girls each a very small lady's knife, about two and a half inches long. A few days afterwards the girls received company from our neighbours' girls, some five or six of them. My youngest one, some eight or nine years old, was so delighted with this, her first knife, that she carried it with her at all times. During the afternoon the children strolled to the large barn, filled with hay, and at once set to climbing the mow to play, and jumping on the hay. During the excitement of the play my little girl lost her knife. This terrible loss nearly broke her heart, and all hands set to work to find the lost treasure, but without success. This finally broke up the party in gloominess. In spite of my greatest efforts to pacify the child with all sorts of promises, she went to bed weeping. During the night the child dreamed that her dead dear beloved brother came to her, taking her by the hand, saying, " Come, my darling, I will show you where your httle knife is," and, leading her to the barn, climbing the mow, showed her the knife, marking the place. The dream was

so life-like that she awoke, joyfully telling her sister that her brother had been here, and showing her where she would find her knife. Both girls hastily dressed, and running to the barn, the little girl, assisted by her sister, got on top of the hay, and walked direct to the spot indicated by her brother, and found the knife on top of the hay. The whole party said that they all looked there many times the day before, and insisted that the knife was not there then. This, I think, is a very remarkable dream. — Yours, &c.

"In answer to a request for further confirmation," continues Professor Royce, "our correspondent writes, under date of December 2gth,

Yours of December 22nd inst. to hand. According to your request I will give the statement of my girls. The little dreamer says : —

" I have a very vivid recollection of my dream up to this day. I could today walk every step that I walked in my dream with brother. I cannot recollect at what time of the night I had my dream. I don't think I ever was awake during the night, but, on waking in the morning, I had the feeling that I was sure I could go and get the knife. I told my sisters. They at first laughed at my dream, but I insisted that brother had shown me the knife, and I could not have peace in my mind until I went to the barn to get it. One sister went with me. On reaching the hay, I told her to let me go ahead, and walked direct to the spot without hesitating a moment, and picked up my knife ! "

She never had any other similar experience, and no other similar experience happened in my family. The sister who went along with her says : —

" As we got up and were dressing, sister told me she knew where her knife was ; that brother took her out to the barn during the night and showed it to her. I laughed and tried to persuade her that this was only a dream, but she said that she was so sure of seeing the knife that she would show it to me. She said that brother took her by the hand, and led her to the place, talking to her all the way, and tried to quiet her. She would not give peace until I went along. On getting on top of the hay she walked direct to the spot, saying, ' Here brother picked the knife up out of the hay,' and at once said, ' and oh, here it is,' picking up the knife. We had been looking this place all over, again and again, the previous evening."

417 A. Here is a case in which a difficult problem in bookkeeping, which had baffled the narrator's waking endeavours, was solved during sleep. I quote it from the Zoist, vol. viii. p. 328. It was communicated to Dr. EUiotson, with the dreamer's name and address, by Dr. Davey, of the Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum.

January \i,th, 1850.

My dear , — In accordance with your request, I herewith transmit

you particulars, as they occurred, of the peculiar dream, if such it may be called, which proved of so essential service to me.

As I mentioned to you, I had been bothered since September with an error in my cash account for that month, and despite many hours' examination, it defied all my efforts, and I almost gave it up as a hopeless case. It had been the subject of my waking thoughts for many nights, and had occupied a large portion of my leisure hours. Matters remained thus unsettled until the nth

417 B] TO CHAPTER IV 373

December. On this night I had not, to my knowledge, once thought of the subject, but I had not long been in bed, and asleep, when my brain was as busy with the books as though I had been at my desk. The cash-book, banker's pass-books, &c., &c., appeared before me, and without any apparent trouble I almost immediately discovered the cause of the mistake, which had arisen out of a complicated cross-entry. I perfectly recollect having taken a slip of paper in my dream and made such a memorandum as would enable me to correct the error at some leisure time ; and, having done this, that the whole of the circumstances had passed from my mind. When I awoke in the morning I had not the slightest recollection of my dream, nor did it once occur to me throughout the day, although I had the very books before me on which I had apparently been engaged in my sleep. When I returned home in the afternoon, as I did early for the purpose of dressing, and proceeded to shave, I took up a piece of paper from my dressing-table to wipe my razor, and you may imagine my surprise at finding thereon the very memorandum I fancied had been made during the previous night. The effect on me was such that I returned to our office and turned to the cash-book, when I found that I had really, when asleep, detected the error which I could not detect in my waking hours, and had actually jotted it down at the time. . . .

P.S. — I may add that, on a former occasion, nearly a similar occurrence took place ; with, however, this difference, that I awoke at the conclusion of the dream, and was perfectly aware, when certainly awake, of having made the memorandum at that time. This, however, was not the case in the occurrence I have above detailed. ... C. J. E.

Mr. E. wrote later : —

I have no recollection whatever as to where I obtained the writing materials, or rather paper and pencil, with which I made the memorandum referred to. It certainly must have been written in the dark, and in my bedroom, as I found both paper and pencil there the following afternoon, and could not for a long time understand anything about it. The pencil was not one which I am in the habit of carrying, and my impression is that I must have either found it accidentally in the room, or gone downstairs for it. C. J. E.

417 B. Some striking cases in which, during sleep, complex inferences have been drawn, from data presumably present to the waking mind, with more than waking intelligence, were recorded by Professor W. Romaine Newbold, of the University of Pennsylvania, in a paper entitled "Sub-conscious Reasoning," in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. pp. 11-20, from which I give the following extracts : —

The first case (says Professor Newbold) was given me by my friend and colleague, WiUiam A. Lamberton, Professor of Greek in the University of Pennsylvania, and I transcribe his ov/n written statement.

" I went to the Lehigh University in the fall of 1869 as instructor in Latin and Greek. My spare time, however, partly as the result of old leanings of my undergraduate days, partly in consequence of a somewhat intimate companionship that sprang up between me and the instructor in mathematics, after a few months came to be given almost entirely to mathematics. I then made acquaintance for the first time with the pleasures of descriptive geometry;

I may say here that this branch of mathematics has a more direct tendency towards quickening the power of mentally picturing bodies and lines in space than any other part of mathematics that can be called elementary. I mention this here because it may have some bearing upon the experience now to be related.

" Outside of this study of descriptive geometry, my mathematical work was entirely algebraic and analytic. I soon began to tr}' my hand at certain problems. Somewhere in the spring, I think it was, of 1870, I attacked this problem : Given an ellipse, to find the locus of the foot of the perpendicular let fall from either focus upon a tangent to this ellipse at any point. I endeavoured to solve this analytically, starting from the well-known equations of the tangent to an ellipse, and of a perpendicular to a given line from a given point. No thought of attempting a geometrical solution ever entered my head. After battling with these equations for a considerable time — it was over a week and may have been two weeks — I came to the natural conclusion that I was bogged, and that all my efforts, if continued, would only sink me deeper in the bog ; the proper thing to do was to call a halt, dismissing the problem as far as possible from my thoughts, and after some time, when my mind had got completely free from it, to return to it afresh, when, I had no doubt, a few minutes would put me in possession of the solution. This I did absolutely and with success. After about a week, I woke one morning and found myself in possession of the desired solution under circumstances to me strange and interesting, so much so that the impression of them has never died away, or even, so far as I can say, become dim or altered in any way. First : the solution was entirely geometrical, whereas I had been labouring for it analytically without ever drawing or attempting to draw a single figure. Second : it presented itself by means of a figure objectively pictured at a considerable distance from me on the opposite wall. Now, although I have been able, and have been so for years, to picture to myself a geometrical figure — even moderately complicated — and use it for solution of a geometrical problem without external lines being drawn, such figures have sensationally for me a distinct location in myself, viz., in the eye itself ; they are never, so far as I know, externally presented. This, however, was distinctly external. The room that I occupied had once been a recitation room. It was a long room, running east and west, with two windows on the south side, one in the south-east corner. The north wall had once been partially occupied by a long blackboard, set in the wall and surrounded by a moulding. The blackboard surface was simply a blackened — possibly slated— portion of the wall itself. This had been painted over, but the black showed through the white paint and the moulding was still there ; so that, apart from the tradition, with which I was familiar, the fact of a blackboard having been there was perfectly clear and evident. My bed was so placed between the windows on the south and the north wall, that on opening my eyes in the morning the first thing I would be likely to see was the blackboard surface. On opening my eyes on the morning in question, I saw projected upon this blackboard surface a complete figure, containing not only the lines given by the problem, but also a number of auxiliary lines, and just such lines as without further thought solved the problem at once. Both foci were joined with the point of contact of the tangent: the perpendicular was prolonged beyond its point of intersection with the tangent till it met the line from the other focus through the point of contact with the ellipse ; a line was drawn from the centre of the ellipse to the

417C] TO CHAPTER IV 375

foot of the perpendicular, and, lastly, the locus, a circle on the major axis of the ellipse as diameter, was drawn. I sprang from bed and drew the figure on paper; needless to say, perhaps, that the geometrical solution being thus given, only a few minutes were needed to get the analytical one.

" W, A. Lamberton." Professor Newbold continues : —

Professor Lamberton has showed me his note-book containing the statement of the problem and the analytical solution. He is unable to find the contemporary drawing above mentioned, and no contemporary account is forthcoming. It is possible that some of the details of the phenomenon have become obscured in the lapse of twenty-five years, but the essential points seem to me to be indubitable, — that Professor Lamberton saw that morning an externalised hallucinatory figure, and that, whatever its precise character, it suggested to him the solution which he had sought in vain by the analytical method. There is no clue to the time at which the reasoning processes necessary to attain the result were carried out, but from general considerations it seems to me most probable that they formed part of some forgotten dream and were not going on " sub-consciously " during waking life. Professor Lamberton is of Scotch-Irish descent, is a man of the most robust physical and mental health, and is of a temperament precisely the opposite of that in which traces of true " sub-conscious " processes are usually found. The function of the disused blackboard, as apparently providing a pomt de repere for the hallucination, is of interest and will suggest many analogies. This is Professor Lamberton's only hallucinatory experience. He informs me further that his colour memory is bad, although his memory for line and form is excellent. He visualises little, and it was not until some time after the above experience that he learned that it was within the power of some persons voluntarily to externalise their visual memories.

417 C. The following account is also taken from Professor Newbold's paper, just quoted. He writes : —

For [these] cases I am indebted to another friend and colleague. Dr. Herman V. Hilprecht, Professor of Assyrian in the University of Pennsylvania. Both occurred in his own experience, and I write the account of the first from notes made by me upon his narrative.

During the winter, 1882-1883, he was working with Professor Friedrich Delitzsch, and was preparing to publish, as his dissertation, a text, transHteration, and translation of a stone of Nebuchadnezzar I. with notes. He accepted at that time the explanation given by Professor Delitzsch of the name Nebuchadnezzar— " Nabu-ktidurru-usur" " Nebo protect my mason's pad, or mortar board," i.e., "my work as a builder." One night, after working late, he went to bed about two o'clock in the morning. After a somewhat restless sleep, he awoke with his mind full of the thought that the name should be translated " Nebo protect my boundary." He had a dim consciousness of having been working at his table in a dream, but could never recall the details of the process by which he arrived at this conclusion. Reflecting upon it when awake, however, he at once saw that kudiirru, " boundary," could be derived from the verb kaddru, to enclose. Shortly afterwards he published this translation in his dissertation, and it has since been universally adopted.

I quote this experience, in itself of a familiar type, on account of its interest when viewed in connection with the more curious dream next to be related. I was told of the latter shortly after it happened, and here translate an account written in German by Professor Hilprecht, August 8th, 1893, before the more complete confirmation was received.

"One Saturday evening, about the middle of March 1893, I had been wearying myself, as I had done so often in the weeks preceding, in the vain attempt to decipher two small fragments of agate which were supposed to belong to the finger-rings of some Babylonian. The labour was much increased by the fact that the fragments presented remnants only of characters and lines, that dozens of similar small fragments had been found in the ruins of the temple of Bel at Nippur with which nothing could be done, that in this case furthermore I had never had the originals before me, but only a hasty sketch made by one of the members of the expedition sent by the University of Pennsylvania to Babylonia. I could not say more than that the fragments, taking into consideration the place in which they were found and the peculiar characteristics of the cuneiform characters preserved upon them, sprang from the Cassite period of Babylonian history {circa 1 700-1 140 B.C.) ; moreover, as the first character of the third hne of the first fragment seemed to be KU, I ascribed this fragment, with an interrogation point, to King Kurigalzu, while I placed the other fragment, as unclassifiable, with other Cassite fragments upon a page of my book where I published the unclassifiable fragments. The proofs already lay before me, but I was far from satisfied. The whole problem passed yet again through my mind that March evening before I placed my mark of approval under the last correction in the book. Even then I had come to no conclusion. About midnight, weary and exhausted, I went to bed and was soon in deep sleep. Then I dreamed the following remarkable dream. A tall, thin priest of the old pre-Christian Nippur, about forty years of age and clad in a simple abba, led me to the treasure-chamber of the temple, on its south-east side. He went with me into a small, low-ceiled room, without windows, in which there was a large wooden chest, while scraps of agate and lapis-lazuli lay scattered on the floor. Here he addressed me as follows : ' The two fragments which you have published separately upon pages 22 and 26, belong together, are not finger-rings, and their history is as follows. King Kurigalzu {circa 1300 B.C.) once sent to the temple of Bel, among other articles of agate and lapislazuli, an inscribed votive cylinder of agate. Then we priests suddenly received the command to make for the statue of the god Ninib a pair of earrings of agate. We were in great dismay, since there was no agate as raw material at hand. In order to execute the command there was nothing for us to do but cut the votive cylinder into three parts, thus making three rings, each of which contained a portion of the original inscription. The first two rings served as earrings for the statue of the god ; the two fragments which have given you so much trouble are portions of them. If you will put the two together you will have confirmation of my words. But the third ring you have not yet found in the course of your excavations, and you never will find it.' With this, the priest disappeared. I awoke at once and immediately told my wife the dream that I might not forget it. Next morning — Sunday — I examined the fragments once more in the light of these disclosures, and to my astonishment found all the details of the dream precisely verified in so far as the means of verification were in my hands. The original inscription on the votive C3'linder read: 'To the god Ninib, son of Bel, his lord, has Kurigalzu, pontifex of Bel, presented this.'

417 C]

TO CHAPTER IV

"The problem was thus at last solved. I stated in the preface that I had unfortunately discovered too late that the two fragments belonged together, made the corresponding changes in the Table of Contents, pp. 50 and 52, and, it being not possible to transpose the fragments, as the plates were alreadymade, I put in each plate a brief reference to the other. (Cf . Hilprecht, ' The Babylonian Expedition of the University of Pennsylvania,' Series A, Cuneiform Texts, Vol. I., Part i, ' Old Babylonian Inscriptions, chiefly from Nippur.')

"H. V. Hilprecht."

Upon the priest's statement that the fragments were those of a votive cylinder. Professor Hilprecht makes the following comment : —

" There are not many of these votive cylinders. I had seen, all told, up to that evening, not more than two. They very much resemble the so-called seal cylinders, but usually have no pictorial representations upon them, and the inscription is not reversed, not being intended for use in sealing, but is written as it is read."

The following transliteration of the inscription, in the Sumerian language, will serve to give those of us who are unlearned in cuneiform languages an idea of the material which suggested the dream. The straight vertical lines represent the cuts by which the stone-cutter divided the original cylinder into three sections. The bracketed words are entirely lost, and have been supplied by analogy from the many similar inscriptions.

Line

I.

Dingir

N

inib du

(mu)

To the god Ninib, child

dingir

En-

(HI)

of the god Bel

luga

1 - a - ni

(ir)

his lord

Ku-r

(i- galzu)

Kurigalzu

pa-

(tesi dingir Enlil)

pontifex of the god Bel

(in-

na-

ba)

has presented it.

I translate also the following statement which Mrs. Hilprecht kindly made at my request.

" I was awakened from sleep by a sigh, immediately thereafter heard a spring from the bed, and at the same moment saw Professor Hilprecht hurrying into his study. Thence came the cry, ' It is so, it is so.' Grasping the situation, I followed him and satisfied myself in the midnight hour as to the outcome of his most interesting dream. "J. C. Hilprecht."

At the time Professor Hilprecht told me of this curious dream, which was a few weeks after its occurrence, there remained a serious difficulty which he was not able to explain. According to the memoranda in our possession, the fragments were of different colours, and therefore could have scarcely belonged to the same object. The original fragments were in Constantinople, and it was with no little interest that I awaited Professor Hilprecht's return from the trip

1 An apparent discrepancy between Professor Hilprecht's account and that of Mrs. Hilprecht calls for explanation. Professor Hilprecht states that he verified his dream on Sunday morning at the University ; Mrs. Hilprecht that he verified it immediately upon awaking, in his library. Both statements are correct. He had a working copy in his library which he examined at once, but hurried to the University next morning to verify it by comparison with the authorised copy made from the originals. — W. R. N.

3/8 APPENDICES [417 C

which he made thither in the summer of 1893. I translate again his own account of what he then ascertained.

November lotk, 1895.

"In August 1893, I was sent by the Committee on the Babylonian Expedition to Constantinople, to catalogue and study the objects got from Nippur and preserved there in the Imperial Museum. It was to me a matter of the greatest interest to see for myself the objects which, according to my dream, belonged together, in order to satisfy myself that they had both originally been parts of the same votive cylinder. Halil Bey, the director of the museum, to whom I told my dream, and of whom I asked permission to see the objects, was so interested in the matter, that he at once opened all the cases of the Babylonian section, and requested me to search. Father Scheil, an Assyriologist from Paris, who had examined and arranged the articles excavated by us before me, had not recognised the fact that these fragments belonged together, and consequently I found one fragment in one case, and the other in a case far away from it. As soon as I found the fragments and put them together, the truth of the dream was demonstrated ad oculos — they had, in fact, once belonged to one and the same votive cylinder. As it had been originally of finely veined agate, the stone-cutter's saw had accidentally divided the object in such a way that the whitish vein of the stone appeared only upon the one fragment and the larger grey surface upon the other. Thus I was able to explain Dr. Peters's discordant description of the two fragments."

Professor Hilprecht is unable to say what language the old priest used in addressing him. He is quite certain that it was not Assyrian, and thinks it was either English or German.

There are two especial points of interest in this case, the character of the information conveyed, and the dramatic form in which it was put. The apparently novel points of information given were : —

1. That the fragments belonged together.

2. That they were fragments of a votive cylinder.

3. That the cylinder was presented by King Kurigalzii.

4. That it was dedicated to Ninib.

5. That it had been made into a pair of earrings.

6. That the "treasure chamber" was located upon the south-east side of the temple.

A careful analysis reveals the fact that not one of these items was beyond the reach of the processes of associative reasoning which Professor Hilprecht daily employs. Among the possible associative consequents of the writing upon the one fragment, some of the associative consequents of the writing on the other were sub-consciously involved ; the attraction of these identical elements brings the separate pieces into mental juxtaposition, precisely as the pieces of a " dissected map " find one another in thought. In waking life the dissimilarity of colour inhibited any tendency on the part of the associative processes to bring them together, but in sleep this difference of colour seems to have been forgotten — there being no mention made of it — and the assimilation took place. The second point is more curious, but is not inexplicable. For as soon as the fragments were brought into juxtaposition mentallj', enough of the inscription became legible to suggest the original character of the object. This is true also of the third and fourth points. The source of the fifth is not so clear. Upon examining the originals. Professor Hilprecht felt convinced from the size

421 A] TO CHAPTER IV 379

of the hole still to be seen through the fragments that they could not have been used as finger-rings, and that they had been used as earrings, but the written description which he had before him at the time of his dream did not bring these points to view. Still, such earrings are by no means uncommon objects. Such a supposition might well have occurred to Professor Hilprecht in his waking state, and, in view of the lack of positive confirmation, it would be rash to ascribe it to any supernormal power. The last point is most interesting. When he told me this story, Professor Hilprecht remembered that he had heard from Dr. John P. Peters, before he had the dream, of the discovery of a room in which were remnants of a wooden box, while the floor was strewn with fragments of agate and lapis-lazuli. The walls, of course, and ceiling have long since perished. The location, however, of the room he did not know, and suggested I should write to Dr. Peters and find out whether it was correctly given in his dream, and whether Dr. Peters had told him of it. Dr. Peters replied that the location given was correct, but, he adds, he told Professor Hilprecht all these facts as long ago as 1891, and thinks he provided him with a drawing of the room's relation to the temple. Of this Professor Hilprecht has no recollection. He thinks it probable that Dr. Peters told him orally of the location of the room, but feels sure that if any such plan was given him it would now be found among his papers. This is a point of no importance, however. We certainly cannot regard the location as ascertained by supernormal means.

421 A. In the case next to be quoted, in which a young man sees in a dream the place where his friend's watch has fallen in a field, it might be suggested that the loser's subliminal self had seen the watch fall, and afterwards communicated that knowledge telepathically to his sleeping friend. The analogy of other cases, however, would seem rather to point to an excursion or extension of the dreamer's perception, so as to include the field where the watch was found. The account was originally sent to Professor W. James, and I quote it from the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. P- 397-

Prof. James, — Dear Sir, — I am informed that you are at the head of the Boston Branch of the English Society of Psychical Research, and beg to call your attention to a singular incident which took place near here some time ago, and which has never been chronicled. It is, in brief, as follows : — •

A young man of this place, J. L. Squires by name, was at work on the farm of T. L. Johnson, with another young man, Wesley Davis, who was one day far from the buildings mending fence around a large pasture. Squires was not with him, nor had he ever been far into the pasture. At some time during the day Davis lost his watch and chain from the vest pocket, and although he searched diligently, could not find it, as he had no idea as to the probable locality of the watch. Although only a silver watch, Davis worked for a living and could hardly afford its loss.

In his sympathy for his friend, Squires could not keep his mind off the watch, and after two or three days' thinking of it, went to bed one night still thinking of it. During the night he had a dream, or vision, as we may call it, and saw the watch lying on the ground with the chain coiled in a peculiar position ; rocks, trees, and all the surroundings were perfectly plain to him. Telling

38o APPENDICES [421 A

his story at the breakfast table, he was, of course, well laughed at, but being so convinced that he could go straight to the watch, he saddled a horse and found it exactly as he expected to.

All the parties concerned are wholly honest and reliable. I will have a detailed statement sworn to if you would like it.

John E. Gale, Guilford, Vermont.

Mr. Squires writes : —

In the month of March 1887, I, Jesse L. Squires, of Guilford, in the county of Windham, and State of Vermont, being then in the twenty-third year of my age, began working for T. L. Johnson, a farmer living in the town aforesaid.

In the month of September following — the exact day of the month I do not remember — I was about one mile from the farm buildings with a young man named Wesley Davis, with whom I had for several years been acquainted, and who had been working with me at said Johnson's for several months, looking after some cattle that had strayed from a pasture. The cattle, eighteen or twenty head, were found in a large mow lot, and seeing us, started to run away in a direction opposite to that in which we wished to drive them. In order to head off the cattle and turn them back, Davis ran one way and I the other, and while running Davis lost his watch and chain from his vest pocket, but did not discover his loss until eight or nine o'clock that night, when it was, of course, too late to search for it. Believing that he must have lost the watch while engaged in getting the cattle back into the pasture, Davis and myself returned to the place the next morning and looked for the watch all the forenoon. Not having any idea of the probable locality in which the watch was lost, and not being at all certain that it was lost while after the cattle, we did not succeed in finding it, although we searched for it until twelve o'clock. The watch was one that Davis had had for some time, and he was much attached to it, and felt very badly about his loss. He worked hard for his living, and could not afford to lose the watch, for which he had paid twenty-five dollars. I felt sorry for him, and thought about the watch continually all the afternoon after we returned from looking for it, and was still thinking of it when I went to sleep that night.

During my sleep, at what hour I could not tell, I saw the watch as it lay upon the ground in the mow lot, over a mile away. It was in the tall grass, at least ten inches high. The face of the watch was turned up, and the small steel chain which was attached to it, lay in a curve like a half circle. About three feet from the watch was a large spot where the grass had been crushed and matted by a creature lying down ; about ten rods to the north was a brush fence ; about ten or twelve feet to the eastward of the watch was a granite cobble stone one or two feet in diameter, which lay about half out of the ground. When I awoke the next morning, which was Sunday, I felt as certain that I could go straight to the watch as if I had really seen it, and told Davis so, and tried to have him go out and get it. He had no faith in my " vision," "dream,'^ or whatever it may be called, and would not go. In spite of the jests and laughter of the entire family, I saddled a horse and went directly to the watch, which I found with all its surroundings exactly as I had seen it. I was not nearer than forty rods to Davis when the watch was lo.st, as I ascertained after it was found.

The watch had run down and stopped, the hands pointing to 9.40 o'clock, which I also noted in my dream. J. L. Squires.

421 B] TO CHAPTER IV 381

Mr. Gale adds : —

Guilford, Vermont, March i^th, 1892. I hereby certify that I have known the above J. L. Squires for over twenty years, and that I know him to be strictly temperate, honest, and truthful. He has always been in the best of health. He tells me that he has recently had an experience similar to the above, which I will send you if you wish. . . .

John E. Gale, Justice of the Peace.

421 B. The next case also points to an extension of the dreamer's perception. It is taken from the Journal S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 210. Mr. Podmore, who obtained the account, wrote : —

Mr. Watts, who told me the incident immediately before writing it down at my request, is quite unable to find any explanation of the matter. He is quite clear that he had no opportunity to tell any one beforehand, that the image of the broken statue had actually come into his mind at the moment when he was brushing his hair, and the violent shock which he seems to have felt when he saw his dream realised is strong evidence that he is not mistaken on this point.

From Mr. J. Hunter Watts, of 39 Seething Lane, E.G.

July letk, 1889. I will endeavour to commit to paper the little episode which I related to you verbally. About six years ago I was with my brother George in Paris, where he bought for some eight or ten francs a plaster-of-Paris " Venus de Milo" — a ghastly copy of the original. I protested against the purchase as I had to share the bother of bringing the thing home, and as it was some four or five feet high our fellow-travellers imagined we had with us a corpse rolled up in paper. Arrived home I would not consent to the house being disfigured with the thing, so as a compromise my brother planted it on the summit of a fern rockery in the corner of the garden, where it stood for many months, and I had forgotten its existence save when it was directly in sight. Out of sight it was out of mind. One autumn morning, just after I had risen from bed, I was combing my ambrosial locks before the looking-glass, and I caught myself reflecting that after all it was a pity the thing had blown down and broken, for it did not look so bad at a distance surrounded by the ferns. " Strange too," I thought to myself, "that the head should be so neatly decapitated, though the fall made no other fracture." Then I pulled myself up mentally, for all at once it came to my mind that I had been dreaming, and I smiled to myself that such a trumpery thing should be the subject of my dreams. The whole matter would have been forgotten, would have gone to the Hmbo of things unremembered, but on going downstairs to breakfast and finding the table not yet furnished, I went for a stroll into the garden. It was wet under foot and a strong wind was blowing. When I came to the fernery I gave a start and for a moment I stood tozit ebahi, for there was the poor "Venus de Milo," the body unbroken, lying across the ferns, and the head, neatly decapitated, in the middle of the walk, exactly as I had seen it in my dream. For the moment I was convinced that I had been walking in my sleep and had visited the garden, but that I found could not be the case, as it had rained all night and my garments would have been wet through, and my feet,

if unshod, muddy, or their covering, if they had any, defiled, which was not the case. Neither am I given to walking in my sleep. I have never done so. I walked back to the house feeling, to use a vulgar phrase, " knocked all sill)^." Can it be, I asked myself and I have asked myself the same question a score of times since, that while my body material slumbered in bed some immaterial part of my being wandered in the garden. If so, that immaterial part of me had a remarkable disregard for wind and rain.

The episode is a trifling one, but it has often given me pause and it remains to me inexplicable. As you know I am a Bank Holiday sort of young man, not given to day-dreams. J. Hunter Watts.

In answer to the inquiry whether the statue could have been seen from his bedroom window, or from any other window in the house, Mr. Hunter Watts says : " No, impossible ; only by stretching the head out of window another side of house — from rooms occupied by ladies."

A lady to whom Mr. Watts related the dream corroborates as follows : — *

45 HUNGERFORD ROAD, CaMDEN RoAD, N. August (jth.

