529. The stimulants and narcotics, to which our review next leads us, forms a standing menace to human virtue. By some strange accident of our development, the impulse of our organisms towards certain drugs — alcohol, opium, and the like — is strong enough to overpower, in a large proportion of mankind, not only the late-acquired altruistic impulses, but even the primary impulses of self-regard and self-preservation. We are brought back, one may almost say, to the "chimiotaxy" of the lowest organisms, which arrange themselves inevitably in specific relation to oxygen, malic acid, or whatever the stimulus may be. We thus experience in ourselves a strange conflict between moral responsibility and molecular affinities ; — the central will overborne by dumb unnumbered elements of our being. With this condition of things hypnotic suggestion deals often in a curious way. The suggestion is not generally felt as a strengthening of the central will. It resembles rather a molecular redisposition ; it leaves the patient indifferent to the stimulus, or even disgusted with it. The man for whom alcohol has combined the extremes of delight and terror now lives as though in a world in which alcohol did not exist at all. (See 629 A and B ; also a case of the cure of excessive smoking in 529 C.)

530. Even for the slave of morphia the same sudden freedom is sometimes achieved. It has been said of victims to morphia-injection that a cure means death ; — so often has suicide follovved on the distress caused by giving up the drug. But in certain cases cured by suggestion it seems that no craving whatsoever has persisted after the sudden disuse of the drug. There is something here which is in one sense profounder than moral reform. There is something which suggests a spirit within us less injured than we might have feared by the body's degradation. The morphinomaniac character — the lowest type of subjection to a ruling vice — disappears from the personality in proportion as the drug is eliminated from the system. The shrinking outcast turns at once into the respectable man. (See 530 A.)

531. The theme which comes next in order, while of first-rate importance, cannot be freely treated except in a purely medical work. I have spoken of the standing danger which the stimulus of alcohol constitutes to human health and happiness. There exists, I need not say, a stimulus still more powerful, and still more inextricably interwoven with the tissue of life itself. In my chapter on Genius I have endeavoured (as

532] HYPNOTISM 177

the disciple of Plato) to show how that instinct for union with beauty which manifests itself most obviously in sexual passion may be exalted into a symbolical introduction into a sacred and spiritual world. In my discussion of hysteria I showed how suggestion may be used to relieve certain of the more delicate sorrows into which that passion may betray the yearning and unconscious heart. But there are baser yearnings, sorrows of fouler stain ; there are madnesses and melancholies whose cause even the physician or the confessor must often guess rather than hear. It must be enough to say that in many such cases the hypnotising physician has proved the most helpful of confessors ; that in this direction also impulses have been arrested, appetites transformed ; that here, too, as with the victims of alcohol or morphia, the world holds many men and women sane and sound whom but for hypnotic suggestion we might now have sought in vain ; — save in the prison, the madhouse, or the grave.-"^

532. Some of these profound and pervasive disorders of the sexual passion, if fully analysed, might supply us with types of almost every variety of pei-versity and folly. But even apart from these, and apart from troubles consequent on any intelligible instinct, any discoverable stimulus of pleasure, there are a multitude of impulses, fears, imaginations, one or more of which may take possession of persons not otherwise apparently unhealthy or hysterical, sometimes to an extent so distressing as to impel to suicide. I believe that these irrational fears or " phobies " are often due to heredity ; — not always to a reversion to primitive terrors, — but (as in the case of horror at injury to finger-nails quoted from Mr. Francis Galton in 526 B) to an accidental and, so to say, traumatic inheritance of some prenatal suggestion. However originated, these morbid aversions (like other idees fixes which I reserve for later mention) may often lie very deep, and in their sudden removal by hypnotic suggestion they remind one of the deep-seated tumours which Esdaile used to astonish the Calcutta coolies by extirpating while they slept.

A frequent form of idee fixe consists of some restricting or disabling preoccupation or fear. Some of these " phobies " have been often described of late years, — as, for instance, agoraphobia, which makes a man dread to cross an open space ; and its converse, claustrophobia, which makes him shrink from sitting in a room with closed doors ; or the still more distressing mysophobia, which makes him constantly uneasy lest he should have become dirty or defiled (see Appendices to this section).

All these disorders involve a kind of displacement or cramp of the attention ; and for all of them, one may broadly say, hypnotic suggestion is the best and often the only cure. Suggestion seems to stimulate antagonistic centres ; to open clogged channels ; to produce, in short, however we imagine the process, a rapid disappearance of the insistent notion.

See, for example, Von Schrenck-Notzing's work, Die Suggestions- Therapie bei kvankhaften Erscheinungen des Geschlechts-Lebens.

VOL. J, M

I have spoken of this effect as though it were mainly to be valued intellectually, as a readjustment of the dislocated attention. But I must note also that the moral results may be as important here as in the cases of inhibition of dipsomania and the like, already mentioned. These morbid fears which suggestion relieves may be ruinously degrading to a man's character. The ingredients of antipathy, of jealousy, which they sometimes contain, may make him dangerous to his fellows as well as loathsome to himself. One or two cases of the cure of morbid jealousy are to my mind among the best records which hypnotism has to show (see 557 A).

533. The extirpation of tumours, however, is not the only purgative process which the bodily organism ever needs. And the psychical organism also — to continue our metaphor — is subject to many blockings and cloggings which it would be well to disperse if we could. The treasure of memory is mixed with rubbish ; the caution which experience has taught has often been taught too well ; philosophic calm has often frozen into apathy. Plato would have the old men in his republic plied well with wine on festal days, that their tongues might be unloosed to communicate their wisdom without reserve. " Accumulated experience," it has been said with much truth in more modern language,-*^ " hampers action, disturbs the logical reaction of the individual to his environment. The want of control which marks the decadence of mental power is [sometimes] itself undue control, a preponderance of the secondary over the primary influences."

Now the removal of shyness, or mauvaise honte, which hypnotic suggestion can effect, is in fact a purgation of memoiy, — inhibiting the recollection of previous failures, and setting free whatever group of aptitudes is for the moment required. Thus, for the boy called on to make an oration in a platform exhibition, hypnotisation sets free the primary instinct of garrulity without the restraining fear of ridicule. For the musical executant, on the other hand, a similar suggestion will set free the seconda?y instinct which the fingers have acquired, without the interference of the learner's puzzled, hesitating thoughts.

I may remark here (following Gurney and Bramwell) how misleading a term is mono-ideism for almost any hyi^notic state. There is a selection of ideas to which the hypnotic subject will, attend, and there is a concentration upon the idea thus selected ; but those ideas themselves may be both complex and constantly shifting, and indeed this is just one of the ways in which the hypnotic trance differs from the somnambulic — in which it may happen that only a relatively small group of brain-centres are awake enough to act. The somnambulic servant-girl, for instance, may persist in laying the tea-table, whatever you say to her, and this may fairly be called mono-ideism ; but the hypnotic subject (as Bramwell has justly

1 Dr. Hill, British Medical Journal, July 4th, 1891.

534] HYPNOTISM 179

insisted, see 534: A) can be made to obey simultaneously a greater number of separate commands than he could possibly attend to in waking life.

534. From these inhibitions of memory, — of attention as directed to the experiences of the past, — we pass on to attention as directed to the experiences of the present. And here we are reaching a central point ; we are affecting the macula lutea (as it has been well called) of the mental field. Many of the most important of hypnotic results will be best described as modifications of attention.

Any modification of attention is of course likely to be at once a check and a stimulus ; — a check to certain thoughts and emotions, a stimulus to others. And in many cases it will be the dynamogenic aspect of the change — the new vigour supplied in needed directions — which will be for us of greatest interest. Yet from the inJiibitive side also we have already had important achievements to record. All these arrests and destructions of idees fixes, of which so much has been said, were powerful modifications of attention, although the limited field which they covered made it simpler to introduce them under a separate heading.

And even now it may not be without surprise that the reader finds described under the heading oi inhibition of attention a phenomenon so considerable and so apparently independent z.'s> hypnotic suppression of pain. This induced analgesia has from the first been one of the main triumphs of mesmerism or hypnotism. All have heard that mesmerism will stop headaches ; — that you can have a tooth out " under mesmerism " without feeling it. The rivalry between mesmerism and ether, as anaesthetic agents in capital operations, was a conspicuous fact in the medical history of early Victorian times. But the ordinary talk, at any rate of that day, seemed to assume that if mesmerism produced an effect at all it was an effect resembling that produced by narcotics — a modification of the intimate structure of the nerve or of the brain which rendered them for the time incapable of transmitting or of feeling painful sensations. The state of a man's nervous system, in fact, when he is poisoned by chloroform, or stunned by a blow, or almost frozen to death, or nearly drowned, &c., is such that a great part of it is no longer fit for its usual work, — is no longer capable of those prolongations of neurons, or whatever they be, which constitute its specific nervous activity. We thus get rid of pain by getting rid for the time of a great deal of other nervous action as well ; and we have to take care lest by pushing the experiment too far we get rid of life into the bargain. But on the other hand, a man's nervous system, when hypnotic suggestion has rendered him incapable of pain, is quite as active and vigorous as ever, — quite as capable of transmitting and feeling pain, — although capable also of inhibiting it altogether. In a word, the hypnotic subject is above pain instead of below it.

To understand this apparent paradox, we must reflect for a moment on the probable origin and meaning of pain. The human organism, as

i8o CHAPTERV [535

the Darwinian analysis has shown us, may be roughly said to consist of a complex of ingenious but imperfect mechanisms designed to enable our race to overrun the earth. As competition has become more severe, fresh artifices have been developed to enable our ancestors to secure food and to avoid danger. Pain is a warning of danger, useless to the protozoon or to the stationary vegetable, but indispensable to active creatures with miscellaneous risks. Yet as intelligence advances and nerves at the same time grow more sensitive, pain becomes but a mixed advantage. It is well to be warned (say) not to touch the fire ; but a neuralgia's constant signal of mal-nutrition tends simply to exhaust the sufferer and to hinder its own cure. What we want to do now is to choose our capacities of pain ; to shut off pain when we know it will be useless ; to rise as definitely above it as our earliest ancestors were below it, or as the drunken or narcotised man is below it now. Nay, if one counts weariness and wakefulness along with pain, one may say that the suppression of pain and the suppression of microbes have become the two main physical needs of the human race. With noxious microbes hypnotic suggestion can only indirectly deal ; but with pain and weariness it can deal more directly and successfully than any other agency whatever. It attacks the real origo mali ; — not, indeed, the pressure on the tooth-nerve, which can only be removed by extraction, but the representative power ot the central sensorium which converts that pressure for us into pain. It diverts attention from the pain, as the excitement of battle might do ; but diverts it without any competing excitement whatever. The battleexcitement (so to say) pours so much water out through pipe A that there is none left to flow through pipe B ; the hypnotic suggestion simply shuts a cock on pipe B, and leaves pipe A to flow or not, as may be convenient. For some fortunately susceptible persons, such as I have seen, this power of suppressing pain and weariness simply abolishes the main troubles of life at a blow. The drawback is that for many persons the process is a tedious one, or cannot with our present knowledge be performed at all. Hypnotic suggestion is not yet a panacea ; but it is much nearer to being a panacea than anything else has ever been ; and it works on the only plan from which a panacea can possibly be developed.

To this topic of influence 07i attention we shall have to recur again and again. For the present it may suffice if I refer the reader to a few cases — chosen from among some thousands which have been printed, from the Zoist downwards, in more or less detail, where mesmeric and hypnotic practice has removed or obviated the distress or anguish till now unmistakably associated with various bodily incidents — from the extraction of a tooth to the great pain and peril of childbirth (see Appendices).

535. This suppression of pain has naturally been treated from the therapeutic point of view, as an end in itself; and neither physician nor patient has been inclined to inquire exactly ivhat has occurred ; — what physiological or psychological condition has underlain this great subjec-

535] HYPNOTISM i8l

tive relief. Yet in the eye of experimental psychology the matter is far from a simple one. We are bound to ask what has been altered. Has there been a total ablation, or some mere translation of pain? What objective change on the bodily side has occurred in nerve or tissue? and, on the mental side, how far does the change m consciousness extend? How deep does it go? Does any subliminal knowledge of the pain persist?

The very imperfect answers which can at present be given to these questions may, at any rate, suggest directions for further inquiry.

(i) In the first place, it seems clear that when pain is inhibited in any but the most simple cases, a certain group of changes is produced whose nexus is psychological rather than physiological. That is to say, one suggestion seems to relieve at once all the symptoms which form one idea of pain or distress in the patient's mind ; while another suggestion is often needed to remove some remaining symptom, which the patient regards as a different trouble altogether. The suggestion thus differs both from a specific remedy, which might relieve a specific symptom, and from a general narcotisation, which would relieve all symptoms equally. In making suggestions, moreover, the hypnotiser finds that he has to consider and meet the patient's own subjective feelings, describing the intended relief as the patient wishes it to be described, and not attempting technical language which the patient could not follow. In a word, it is plain that in this class, as in other classes of suggestion, we are addressing ourselves to a mind, an intelligence, which can of itself select and combine, and not merely to a tissue or a gland responsive in a merely automatic way.

(2) It will not then surprise us if, — pain being thus treated as a psychological entity, — there shall prove to be a certain psychological complexity in the response to analgesic suggestion.

By this I mean that there are occasional indications that some memory of the pain, say, of an operation, has persisted in some stratum of the personality; — thus apparently indicating that there was somewhere an actual consciousness of the pain when the operation was performed. Thus in the Revue de I'lfypnotisme, August 1887, Dr. Mesnet records a case where after an accouchement, rendered apparently painless by hypnotic trance, the patient remembered in a subsequent hypnotic trance the latter part of the delivery ; a period, that is to say, when the length of the trial had somewhat weakened the hypnotic control. With this we may compare certain accounts of the revival of pain in dreams after operations performed under chloroform (see 535 A) .

(3) Such experiences, if more frequent, might tempt us to suppose that the pain is not wholly abrogated, but merely translated to some stratum of consciousness whose experiences do not enter into our habitual chain of memories. Yet we possess (strangely enough) what seems direct evidence that the profoundest organic substratum of our being is by suggestion

i82 CHAPTER V [536'

wholly freed from pain. It had long been observed that recoveries from operations performed in hypnotic trance were unusually benign ; — there being less tendency to inflammation than when the patient had felt the knife. The same observation — perhaps in a less marked degree — has since been made as to operations under chemical anaesthesia. The shock to the system, and the irritation to the special parts affected, are greatly diminished by chloroform. And more recently Professor Delboeuf, by an experiment of great delicacy on two symmetrical wounds, of which one was rendered painless by suggestion, has distinctly demonstrated that pain tends to induce and keep up inflammation (see 534 A) .

Thus it seems that pain is abrogated at once on the highest and on the lowest level of consciousness ; yet possibly in some cases (though not usually, see 535 B) persists obscurely in some stratum of our personality into which we gain only occasional and indirect glimpses. And if indeed this be so, it need in no way surprise us. We need to remember at every point that we have no reason whatever to suppose that we are cognisant of all the trains of consciousness, or chains of memory, which are weaving themselves within us. I shall never attain on earth — perhaps I never shall in any world attain — to any complete conspectus of the variously interwoven streams of vitality which are, in fact, obscurely present in my conception of myself.

536. It is to hypnotism in the first place that we may look for an increased power of analysis of these intercurrent streams, these irregularly superposed strata of our psychical being. In the meantime, this power of inhibiting almost any fraction of our habitual consciousness at pleasure gives for the first time to the ordinary man — if only he be a suggestible subject — a power of concentration, of choice in the exercise of faculty, such as up till now only the most powerful spirits — a Newton or an Archimedes — have been able to exert.

The man who sits down in his study to write or read, — in perfect safety and intent on his work, — continues nevertheless to be involuntarily and inevitably armed with all that alertness to external sights and sounds, and all that sensibility to pain, which protected his lowly ancestors at different stages of even pre-human development. It is much as though he were forced to carry about with him all the external defences which his forefathers have invented for their defence ; — to sit at his writing-table clad in chain-mail and a respirator, and grasping an umbrella and a boomerang. Let him learn, if he can, inwardly as well as outwardly, to get rid of all that, to keep at his command only the half of his faculties which for his purpose is worth more than the whole. Dissociation and choice ; — dissociation between elements which have always hitherto seemed inextricably knit ; — choice between faculties which till now we have had to use all together or not at all ; — such is the promise, such is the incipient performance of hypnotic plasticity in its aspect of inhibitive suggestion.

537. I come now to the division of hypnotic achievement with which

537] HYPNOTISM 183

I next proposed to deal, namely, the dynamogejiic results of hypnotic suggestion. Intensified vitality, heightened faculty, concentrated attention, strengthened will ; such are the fittest descriptive phrases which we can find for these phenomena — phrases which all of them imply some obscure operation in a realm beyond our view. Nay, more, the realisation of these phrases presently shows us that even the effects which we have for convenience' sake classed as inhibitive are in reality dynamogenic. Inhibition is not disability, and the active, purposive restraint which the word connotes implies first that effective command of attention — that sway over the hidden springs of thought and emotion — which we shall now be tracing on a larger scale, and with different purposes, in its dynamogenic aspect.

Yet the practical convenience of our arrangement is hereby only the more plainly seen. What has thus far been written is well fitted to clear the way for what is to follow. While we dealt with inhibitions our subject was clearly defined ; we knew what phenomena of life we desired to check ; we could measure the success attained in each several direction. But now that we launch out upon the dynamogenic power of hypnotic suggestion, in whatsoever direction it may lie, we are embarking on an inquiry to which no term can be foreseen. We know, of course, that the physical energy manifested in the organism can never overpass its physical sources of supply in warmth and nutriment. But this is a test so rough as to be practically useless here. Within these broad limits the metabolism in the organism — the kind of energy into which food and warmth are transformed — may vary indefinitely in character and in intensity. And as for a psychical energy informing each one of us, — if such exist apart from the physical, — we have no reason whatever for supposing that we are here moving in a closed circuit, or manipulating a constant sum.

In default of any more comprehensive purview of the phenomena before us, it will be convenient to return again to the mere practical or educational standpoint ; — to consider what it is which we are wont subjectively to regard as a heightening or concentration of power. We can roughly define the directions in which, as we say, we strengthen the faculties of the young. Perception, imagination, attention, character, — these we endeavour to train. We try to teach our children ( i ) to get from their external sensory organs all the healthful pleasure and knowledge that they can; (2) and to develop their central sensory organs, or inner world of imagination, into sane and helpful fertility; (3) and to direct their intellectual energy whithersoever they may desire, keeping hold by memory on previous acts of attention; (4) and, finally, to convert knowledge and imagination into wisdom and virtue by the exercise of enlightened will. This road is long and hard ; but we shall find that at every point there is already some beginning of aid from hypnotic suggestion ; some hint of a short cut which may some day take us far on our way.

i84 CHAPTER V [538

538. I will begin, then, with w^hat seems the most external and measurable of these different influences — the influence, namely, of suggestion upon man's perceptive faculties ; — its power to educate his external organs of sense.

This wide subject is almost untouched as yet ; and there is no direction in which one could be more confident of interesting results from further experiment.

The exposition falls naturally into three parts, as suggestion effects one or other of the three following objects : —

(i) Restoration of ordinary senses from some deficient condition.

(2) Vivification of ordinary senses; — hyperseslhesiae.

(3) Development of new senses; — hetergesthesias.

(i) The first of these three headings seems at first sight to belong to therapeutics rather than to psychology. It is, however, indispensable as a preliminary to the other two heads ; since by learning how and to what extent suggestion can repair defective senses we have the best chance of guessing at its modus operandi when it seems to excite the healthy senses to a point beyond their normal powers. I give iii Appendices several cases bearing on this subject.

Two points may be mentioned here. Improvement of vision seems sometimes to result from relaxation of an involuntary ciliary spasm, which habitually over-corrects some defect of the lens (see 538 B). This is interesting, from the analogy thus shown in quite healthy persons to the fixed ideas, the subliminal errors and fancies characteristic of hysteria. The stratum of self whose business it is to correct the mechanical defect of the eye has in these instances done so amiss, and cannot set itself right. The corrected form of vision is as defective as the form of vision which it replaced. But if the state of trance be induced, or if it occur spontaneously, it sometimes happens that the error is suddenly righted; the patient lays aside spectacles ; and since we must assume that the original defect of mechanism remains, it seems that that defect is now perfectly instead of imperfectly met (see 416). This shows a subliminal adjusting power operating during trance more intelligently than the supraliminal intelligence had been able to operate during waking life.

Another point of interest lies in the effect of increased attention, as stimulated by suggestion, upon the power of hearing. The two cases of Lou6 and another, quoted in 538 A, are among the most significant that I know. If Lout's susceptibility to self-suggestion could be reached by patients generally, there might be, with no miracle at all, a removal of perhaps half the annoyance which deafness inflicts on mankind.

539. I pass on to cases of the production by suggestion or selfsuggestion of hyperaesthesia, — of a degree of sensory delicacy which overpasses the ordinary level, and the previous level of the subject himself.

The rudimentary state of our study of hypnotism is somewhat strangely illustrated by the fact that most of the experiments which show hyper-

540] HYPNOTISM 185

assthesia most delicately have been undertaken with a view of proving something else — namely, mesmeric rapport, or the mesmerisation of objects, or telepathy. In these cases the proof of rapport, telepathy, &c., generally just falls short, — because one cannot say that the action of the ordinary senses might not have reached the point necessary for the achievement, though there is often good reason to believe that the subject was supraliminally ignorant of the way in which he was, in fact, attaining the knowledge in question.

In these extreme cases, indeed, the explanation by hyperaesthesia is not always proved. There may have been telepathy, although one has not the right to assume telepathy, in view of certain slighter, but still remarkable, hypersesthetic achievements, which are common subjects of demonstration. The ready recognition oi points de repere, on the back of a card or the like, which are hardly perceptible to ordinary eyes, is one of the most usual of these performances.

In this connection the question arises as to the existence of physiological limits to the exercise of the ordinary senses. In the case of the eye a minimum visibile is generally assumed ; and there is special interest in a case of clairvoyance versus cornea-reading, where, if the words were read (as appears most probable) from their reflection upon the cornea of the hypnotiser, the common view as to the minimum visibile is greatly stretched (see 539 A).

540. With regard to the other senses, whose mechanism is less capable of minute dissection, one meets problems of a rather different kind. What are the definitions of smell and touch? Touch is already split up into various factors — tactile, algesic, thermal ; and thermal touch is itself a duplicate sense, depending apparently on one set of nerve-terminations adapted to perceive heat, and another set adapted to perceive cold. Taste is similarly split up ; and we do not call anything taste which is not definitely referred to the mouth and adjacent regions. Smell is vaguer ; and there are cognate sensations (like that of the presence of a cat) which are not referred by their subject to the nose. The study of hyperaesthesia does in this sense prepare the way for what I have termed heteraesthesia, in that it leaves us more cautious in definition as to what the senses are ; it accustoms us to the notion that people become aware of things in many ways which they cannot definitely realise.

Let us now consider the evidence for hetersesthesia ; — for the existence, that is to say, under hypnotic suggestion, of any form of sensibility decidedly different from those with which we are famihar. It would sound more accurate if one could say " demanding some end-organ different from those which we know that we possess." But we know too little of the range of perceptivity of these end-organs in the skin which we are gradually learning to distinguish — of the heat- feeling spots, cold- feeling spots, and the like — to be able to say for what purposes a new organ would be needed. For certain heteraesthetic sensations, indeed, as the

i86 CHAPTER V [540

perception of a magnetic field, one can hardly assume that any end-organ would be necessary. It is better, therefore, to speak only of modes of sensibility.

Now to any one who reflects on the evolutionary process by which, as is commonly assumed, man's organism has been developed from the simplest germ — a process which is undoubtedly still at work, and which must, so far as we can tell, continue at work for ages perhaps very far exceeding the ages already past — to any one, I say, who takes a broad view of human development, it must seem a very improbable thing that that development should at this particular moment have reached its final term ; or rather, to put the question at issue in a narrower form, that this immensely complex nervous system, which has gradually become responsive in so many ways to external nature, should never again become responsive, or be recognised as responsive, in any fresh way. I can imagine no theory, except the theory that all species were created immutably as they stand to-day, which could even seern to justify the tacit assumption, still frequently met with, that new forms of human sensitivity are antecedently improbable. They may be, and they often have been, claimed on insufficient evidence ; but that they must occur some time and somehow I, for one, can hardly doubt.

Let us consider a moment in what general fashion we can conceive the differentiation of senses to have taken place.

In some sense or other we must needs attribute what I have called pancesthesia to the primal germ. We must suppose that its potential sensations were such that all actual sensations of animals and men could be got out of them. The protoplasm may itself have been capable (and in low forms may still be capable) of vague sensations of many different kinds. Or it may have been capable only of some one vague sensation, though able also to develop new forms of protoplasm with varied sensitivities.-'

In either of these cases — let us take the former as somewhat the simpler to deal with — the question among sensations was one of the development of the fittest ; that is to say, that, as the organism became more complex and needed sensations more definite than sufficed for the protozoon, certain sensibilities got themselves defined and stereotyped upon the organism by the evolution of end-organs. Others failed to get thus externalised ; but may, for aught we know, persist nevertheless in the central organs ; — say, for instance, in what for man are the optic or olfactory tracts of the brain. There will then be no apparent reason why these latent powers should not from time to time receive sufficient stimulus, either from within or from without, to make them perceptible to the waking intelligence, or perceptible at least in states (like trance) of narrow concentration.

The great variety of senses which we believe the lower animals to

Or, as suggested by Nagel (540 A), there may have been at a certain stage mixed sense-organs, by means of which two or three sensations were perceived simultaneously.

542] HYPNOTISM 187

possess may well suggest to us that we also might have been developed thus or thus ; — that we need not be surprised if the human organism should some day show a trace of any form of sensibility which the ant or the bee may have inherited along with us from the ancestral germ, although only they and not we may have thus far needed to develop it.

541. As the result of these considerations, I approach alleged hetersesthesise of various kinds with no presumption whatever against their real occurrence. Yet on the other hand, my belief in the extent of possible hypercesthesia continually suggests to me that the apparently new perceptions may only consist of a mixture of familiar forms of perception, pushed to a new extreme, and centrally interpreted with a new acumen.

The conditions of experiment are by no means easy, I set aside, in the first place, a large number of experiments where there has been reason to think that the subject has followed, either fraudulently, or merely as the result of suggestion, the preconceived ideas of the experimenters. But more than this; self-suggestion on the subject's own part may be quite enough to make him translate some perception really gained in an old way into terms of some imagined new sensibility. Without presuming to criticise past evidence wholesale, I yet hope that the experience now attained may lead to a much greater number of well-guarded experiments in the near future. In a series of Appendices I very briefly present the actual state of this inquiry. In default of any logical principle, I shall there divide these alleged forms of sensibility according as they are excited by inorganic objects on the one hand, or by organisms (dead or living) on the other.

542. In the meantime I pass on to that group of the dynamogenic effects of suggestion which takes the next place in my scheme above indicated. I proceed from changes affecting the external senses to changes affecting the more central vital operations — either the vaso-motor system, or the neuro-muscular system, or the central sensory tracts. The effects of suggestion on character — induced changes to which we can hardly guess the nervous concomitant — will remain to be dealt with in yet another section.

First, then, as to the* effects of suggestion on the vaso-motor system. Simple effects of this type form the commonest of "platform experiments." The mesmerist holds ammonia under his subject's nose, and tells him it is rose-water. The subject smells it eagerly, and his eyes do not water. The suggestion, that is to say, that the stinging vapour is inert has inhibited the vaso-motor reflexes which would ordinarily follow, and which no ordinary effort of will could restrain. Vice versa, when the subject smells rose-water, described as ammonia, he sneezes and his eyes water. These results, which his own will could not produce, follow on the mesmerist's word. No one who sees these simple tests applied can doubt the genuineness of the influence at work. We find then, as might be expected, that action on glands and secretions constitutes a

i88 CHAPTER V [543-

large element in hypnotic therapeutics. The Hterature of suggestion is full of instances where a suppressed secretion has been restored at a previously arranged moment, almost with "astronomical punctuality." And yet in what memory is that command retained? by what signal is it announced? or by what agency obeyed?

In spite of this underlying obscurit)-, common to every branch of suggestion, these vaso-motor phenomena are by this time so familiar that a few references in my Appendices will suffice for their illustration.

543. This delicate responsiveness of the vaso-motor system has given rise to some curious spontaneous phenomena, and has suggested some experiments, which are probably as yet in their infancy. The main point of interest is that at this point spontaneous self-suggestion, and subsequently suggestion from without, have made a kind of first attempt at the modification of the human organism in what may be called fancy directions,— at the production of a change which has no therapeutic aim, and so to say, no physiological unity ; but which is guided by an intellectual caprice along lines with which the organism is not previously familiar. I speak of the phenomenon commonly known as " stigmatisation," from the fact that its earliest spontaneous manifestations were suggested by imaginations brooding on the stigmata of Christ's passion ; — the marks of wounds in hands and feet and side. This phenomenon, which was long treated both by savants and by devotees as though it must be either fraudulent or miraculous, — ou supercherie, ou miracle, — is now found (like a good many other phenomena previously deemed subject to that dilemma) to enter readily within the widening circuit of natural law. Stigmatisation is, in fact, a form of vesication ; and suggested vesication — with the quasi-burns and real blisters which obediently appear in any place and pattern that is ordered — is a high development of that same vaso-motor plasticity of which the ammonia-rose-water experiment was an early example (see cases in Appendices) .

Equally striking, in a somewhat different direction, was Professor Charcot's production by suggestion of "blue oedema" (see 543 F), an experiment which, in itself a mere curiosity, was typical of a wide range of analogous effects which might in various states of the system prove actively beneficial.

544. The group of suggestive effects which we reach next in order is a wide and important one. The education of the central sensory faculties, — of our power of inwardly representing to ourselves sights and sounds, &c., — is not less important than the education of the external senses. The powers of construction and combination which our central organs possess differ more widely in degree in different healthy individuals than the degrees of external perception itself. And the stimulating influence of hypnotism on iinagination is perhaps the most conspicuous phenomenon which the whole subject offers ; yet it has been little dwelt upon, save from one quite superficial point of view.

545] HYPNOTISM 189

Every one knows that a hypnotised subject is easily hallucinated ; — that if he is told to see a non-existent dog, he sees a dog, — that if he is told not to see Mr. A., he sees everything in the room, Mr. A. excepted. Common and conspicuous, I say, as this experiment is, even the scientific observer has too often dealt with it with the shallowness of the platform lecturer. The lecturer represents this induced hallucinability simply as an odd illustration of his own power over the subject. " I tell him to forget his name, and he forgets his name ; I tell him that he has a baby on his lap, and he sees and feels and dandles it." At the best, such a hallucination is quoted as an instance of "mono-ideism." But surely to criticise thus is to judge something which is profound and complex from a merely external and accidental point of view. The hypnotiser's power over his patient is itself (telepathy apart) a mere result of suggestion. There may be a kind of delegation of that power by the subject to the hypnotiser, but all analogy shows us that it is really exercised by the subject over himself. A truly hallucinable person can suggest to himself his own hallucinations with no external aid (see a case recorded by Dr. Wingfield in 518 D). " Mono-ideism," again, so far as it is ever a true description of the hypnotised subject's state, is a description only of its inhibitive and not of its dynamogenic aspect, — of what is not going on in his mind, rather than of what is going on. No mere inhibition will produce hallucinations. An ordinary person cannot feel a baby on his lap any the better for abstracting his attention from all objects of thought except babies. The real kernel of the phenomenon is not the inhibition but the dynamogeny; — not the abstraction of attention or imagination from other topics, but the increased power which imagination gains under suggestion ; — the development of faculty, useless, if you will, in that special form of imagining the baby, but faculty mentally of a high order — faculty in one shape or another essential to the production of almost all the most admired forms of human achievement.

On this theme I shall have much to say ; yet here again it will be convenient to defer fuller discussion until I review what I have termed " sensory automatism " in a more general way. We shall then see that this quickened imaginative faculty is not educed by hypnosis alone ; that it is a part of the equipment of the subliminal self, and will be better treated at length in connection with other spontaneous manifestations. Enough here to have pointed out the main fact ; for when pointed out it can hardly be disputed, although its significance for the true comprehension of hypnotic phenomena has been too often overlooked.

545. Yet here, and in direct connection with hypnotism, certain special features of hallucinations need to be insisted upon, both as partly explaining certain more advanced hypnotic phenomena, and also as suggesting lines of important experiment. The first point is this.

Post-hypnotic hallucinations can be postponed at will. The singular accuracy, indeed, with which they can sometimes be ordered for

190 CHAPTERV [546

any given minute in the remote future will demand our attention when we are considering the stimulating effects of hypnotism on memory and intelligence. For the moment it is enough to note that post-hypnotic hallucinations afford a striking corroboration of the view here insisted on — namely, that it is an abiding element in the personality, — the subliminal self, or some fragment of the subliminal self, — which manufactures these quasi-percepts. Experience shows that a constant watchfulness is exercised, so that if, for example, the hypnotiser tells the subject that he will (when awakened) poke the fire when the hypnotiser has coughed three times, the awakened subject, although knowing nothing of the order in his waking state, will be on the look-out for the coughs, amid all other disturbances, and will poke the fire at the fore-ordained signal (see 551 A). Moreover, when the post-hypnotic suggestion is executed there will often be a slight momentary relapse into the hypnotic state, and the subject will not afterwards be aware that he has (for instance) poked the fire at all. This means that the suggested act belongs properly to the hypnotic, not to the normal chain of memory ; so that its performance involves a brief reappearance of the subliminal self which received the order.

546. Another characteristic of these suggested hallucinations tells in exactly the same direction. It is possible to suggest no mere isolated picture, — a black cat on the table, or the like, — but a whole complex series of responses to circumstances not at the time predictable. This point is well illustrated by what are called " negative hallucinations " or " systematised ansesthesise." Suppose, for instance, that I tell a hypnotised subject that when he awakes there will be no one in the room with him but myself. He awakes and remembers nothing of this order, but sees me alone in the room. Other persons present endeavour to attract his attention in various ways. Sometimes he will be quite unconscious of their noises and movements ; sometimes he will perceive them, but will explain them away, as due to other causes, in the same irrational manner as one might do in a dream. Or he may perceive them, be unable to explain them, and feel considerable terror until the " negative hallucination " is dissolved by a fresh word of command. It is plain, in fact, throughout, that some element in him is at work all the time in obedience to the suggestion given,— is keeping him by ever fresh modifications of his illusion from discovering its unreality (see e.g., in 546 A, Mrs. Sidgwick's experiments on the function of /^/«/j" de repere in negative hallucinations). Nothing could be more characteristic of what I have called a " middlelevel centre " of the subliminal self, — of some element in his nature which is potent and persistent without being completely intelligent; — a kind of dream-producer, ready at any moment to vary and defend the dream.

547. Another indication of the subliminal power at work to produce these hallucinations is their remarkable range — a range as wide, perhaps, as that over which therapeutic effects are obtainable by suggestion. The

549] HYPNOTISM 191

post-hypnotic hallucination may affect not sight and hearing alone (to which spontaneous hallucinations are in most cases confined), but all kinds of vaso-motor responses and organic sensations — cardiac, stomachic, and the like — which no artifice can affect in a waking person. The legendary flow of perspiration with which the flatterer sympathises with his patron's complaint of heat — si dixeris "^stuo,'" sudat — is no exaggeration if applied to the hypnotic subject, who will often sweat and shiver at your bidding as you transplant him from the Equator to frosty Caucasus.

548. Well, then, given this strength and vigour of hallucination, one sees a possible extension of knowledge in more than one direction. To begin with, by suggesting to the subject that he is feeling or doing something which is beyond his normal range of faculties, we may perhaps enable him to perceive or to act as thus suggested.

Here, as elsewhere, it is desirable to push as far as possible our inquiry into phenomena which may still count as normal, so as to see if any bridge or passage between normal and supernormal be anywhere indicated ; and here, as elsewhere, we have to regret the lamentable scarcity of purely psychological experiments over the whole hypnotic field. We are habitually forced to base our psychological inferences on therapeutic practice ; and in directions where there has been no therapeutic effort there are gaps in our knowledge, which those hypnotists who have good subjects at their disposal should be invited to fill up as soon as may be.

What we need is to address to a sensitive subject a series of strong suggestions of the increase of his sensory range and power. We must needs begin by suggesting hallucinatory sensations : — the subject should be told that he perceives some stimulus which is, in fact, too feeble for ordinary perception. If you can make him think that he perceives it, he probably will after a time perceive it ; the direction given to his attention heightening either peripheral or central sensory faculty. You may then be able to attack the question as to how far his specialised end-organs are really concerned in the perception ; — and it may then be possible to deal in a more fruitful way with those alleged cases of transposition of senses which have so great a theoretical interest as being apparently intermediate between hypersesthesia and telaesthesia or clairvoyance. If we once admit (as I, of course, admit) the reality of telaesthesia, it is just in some such way as this that we should expect to find it beginning.

549. I start from the thesis that the perceptive power within us precedes and is independent of the specialised sense-organs, which it has developed for earthly use.

vovi opa Koi vovs aKoveu ' ToKka Kco(f>a kol Tvcf)Xd.

I conceive further that under certain circumstances this primary telsesthetic faculty resumes direct operations, in spite of the fleshly barriers which are constructed so as to allow it to operate through certain channels alone. And I conceive that in thus resuming exercise of the wider faculty,

the incarnate spirit will be influenced or hampered by the habits or selfsuggestions of the more specialised faculty ; so that there may be apparent compromises of different kinds between telaesthetic and hyperaesthetic perception,— as the specialised senses endeavour, as it were, to retain credit for the perception which is in reality widening beyond their scope.

In this attitude of mind, then, I approach the recorded cases of transposition of special sense. I quote at some length in 549 B certain experiments which cannot lightly be set aside.

The case there cited, I say, is not easy to explain. Two main hypotheses have been put forward as a general explanation of such cases, neither of which seems to me quite satisfactory, (i) The common theory would be that these are merely cases of erroneous self-suggestion ; — that the subject really sees with the eye, but thinks that he sees with the knee, or the stomach, or the finger-tips. This may probably have been so in many instances (see 549 A) ; but Dr. Fontan's case cannot, I think, be so explained without overriding his definite statements in an unjustifiable way. (2) Dr. Prosper Despine and others suppose that, while the accustomed cerebral centres are still concerned in the act of sight, the fingerend (for example) acts for the nonce as the end-organ required to carry the visual sensation to the brain. I cannot here get over the mechanical difficulty of the absence of a lens. However hyperaesthetic the finger-end might be (say) to light and darkness, I can hardly imagine its acting as an organ of definite sight.

My own suggestion (which, for aught I know, may have been made before) is that the finger-end is no more a true organ of sight than the arbitrary " hypnogenous zone " is a true organ for inducing trance. I think it possible that there may be actual telaesthesia, — not necessarily involving any perception by the bodily organism ; — and that the spirit which thus perceives in wholly supernormal fashion may be under the impression that it is perceiving through some bizarre corporeal channel — as the knee or the stomach. I think, therefore, that the perception may not be optical sight at all, but rather some generalised telaesthetic perception represented as visual, but incoherently so represented ; so that it may be referred to the knee instead of the retina. And here again, as at several previous points in my argument, I must refer the reader to what will be said in my chapter on Possession by external spirits (Chapter IX.) to illustrate the operation even of the subject's own spirit acting without external aid.

550. And now I come to the third main type of the dynamogenic efficacy of suggestion ; — its influence, namely, on attention, on will, and on character; — character, indeed, being largely a resultant of the direction and persistence of voluntary attention.

It will be remembered that for convenience' sake I have discussed the dynamogenic effect of suggestion first upon the external senses, then upon the internal sensibility, — the mind's eye, the mind's ear, and the imagina-

550] HYPNOTISM 193

tion generally ; — and now I am turning to similar effects exercised upon that central power which reasons upon the ideas and images which external and internal senses supply, which chooses between them, and which reacts according to its choice. These are the "highest-level centres," which I began by saying that the hypnotist could rarely hope to reach ; — since those spontaneous somnambulisms which the hypnotic trance imitates and develops do so seldom reach them. The phenomena which here follow, therefore, lie beyond our original ground of hope. They show that the hypnotic range is wider than the somnambulic; — how much wider, experience alone can show. The step which we are making here, though a considerable one, is not a sudden one. We have already found a good deal of intelligence of a certain kind in hypnotic phenomena ; what we do here is to pass from one stage to another and higher stage of consciousness of intelligent action. To explain my point, I may roughly say that there are three habitual degrees of such consciousness, as follows : — {a) I do not at all know how I supply my arm with blood. That is an organic process wholly below my conscious level. {b~) I know in a certain sense how I move my arm. That is an organic process associated with certain conscious sensations of choice and will, {c) Given this fact that I am moving my arm, I can understand, more fully than at those previous stages, how I am writing words on paper. In that action there is a larger element of acquired capacity and conscious choice. And I wish to explain that the forward step which we are making in this section is, in fact, a carrying on of the results of suggestion from stage {b) to stage (r) — from a point at which there is but a small element resembling conscious choice to a point where that element is important and complex.

To explain this statement, let us dwell for a moment upon the degree of intelligence which we have already seen displayed in those modifications of the organism which suggestion has effected. Take, for instance, the formation of a cruciform blister, as recorded by Dr. Biggs, of Lima (543 B). That performance needed an unusual combination of capacities; — the capacity of directing physiological changes in a new way, and also, and combined therewith, the capacity of recognising and imitating an abstract, arbitrary, non-physiological idea, such as that of crucifonnity. \ All this, in my view, is the expression of subliminal control over the organism — more potent and profound than supraliminal. Or here, perhaps, in order to give some concreteness to this abstract expression, I may describe this increased physiological modifiability as a recovery of primitive plasticity. Not that this really is a simple idea ; for we do not know how or why that early plasticity of the indefinite amoeba, the claw-renewing crab, has been lost by higher animals. We have no notion what kind of change would be needed to enable a higher animal to take that plasticity on again.

The problem here presented on a larger scale has some resemblance to the individual problems involved in such histories of alternating personality as Louis Vive's (233 A). That partially paralysed and otherwise

VOL. I. N

much damaged young man could be put back by certain artifices into his state of uninjured boyhood, — "before the viper bit him," and his long series of troubles began. His paralysis disappeared in a moment, and there was thus a real recovery of plasticity, — of power of many kinds over his organism. If we ask how those powers came to have been so long obscured, the only answer is hysterical self-suggestion. Can it be some kind of self-suggestion which prevents the mammal from crediting himself with crustacean recuperativeness? Or, in more sober language, do not these experiments in suggestive blistering show that there does still persist in us a potential control over reparative secretions much greater than the common experience of life is apt to reveal to us ?

This dormant plasticity, then, the hypnotic suggestions reawaken. But now consider with what degree of intelligence, of directive choice, they reawaken it. They reawaken it neither blindly nor wisely, but with intelligent caprice. The plasticity, I say first, is not blindly and vaguely restored ; the vesication is localised on a pre-arranged plan, the rest of the body remaining unchanged. Nor, on the other hand, is the plasticity restored with perfect wisdom ; in lima S.'s case, for instance (543 D), the vesication is annoying to the subject, who would have gladly avoided it. The order given for specifically shaped blisters is a capricious one ; but in each case the capricious order is intelligently obeyed. Bizarre as this result may seem, it is very much what might have been expected on the theory suggested at the beginning of this chapter. It is a result of the action of middle-level centres putting into exercise subliminal powers.

I have chosen this point in my argument for a brief analysis of the intelligence involved in the vaso-motor effects of suggestion, just because we are now going on to suggestions more directly affecting central faculty, and in which, as I have said, highest-level centres begin to be involved. For I want to prepare the reader for an intermediate stage in which high faculties are used, in obedience to suggestion, for purely capricious ends.

551. I speak of calculations subliminally performed in the carrying out of post-hypnotic suggestions.

These suggestions a ecJUance — commands, given in the trance, to do something under certain contingent circumstances, or after a certain time has elapsed — form a very convenient mode of testing the amount of mentation which can be started and carried out without the intervention of the supraliminal consciousness. Experiments have been made in this direction by three men especially who have in recent times done some of the best work on the psychological side of hypnotism, namely, Edmund Gurney, Delboeuf, and Milne Bramwell. A summary of their results is given in 551 A, B, and C.

Dr. Milne Bramwell's experiments (to mention these as a sample of the rest) were post-hypnotic suggestions involving arithmetical calculations ; the entranced subject, for instance, being told to make a cross when 20,180 minutes had elapsed from the moment of the order. Their primary im-

552] HYPNOTISM 195

portance lay in showing that a subliminal or hypnotic memory persisted across the intervening gulf of time, — days and nights of ordinary life, — and prompted obedience to the order when at last it fell due. But incidentally, as I say, it became clear that the subject, whose arithmetical capacity in common life was small, worked out these sums subliminally a good deal better than she could work them out by her normal waking intelligence.

Of course, all that was needed for such simple calculations was close attention to easy rules ; but this was just what the waking mind was unable to give, at least without the help of pencil and paper. If we lay this long and careful experiment, concerned though it was with very easy problems, side by side with the accounts already given of the solution of problems in somnambulic states, which states were forgotten on waking, it seems clear that there is yet much to be done in the education of subliminal memory and acumen as a help to supraliminal work.

552. Important in this connection is an account given by Dr. Dufay of help given by him to an actress in the representation of her roles by hypnotisation (see 552 A). Every one knows how much more vividly the objectivation de types, as Professor Richet long ago called it, is effected in the hypnotic than in the normal state \ and it seems obvious that stage-fright is just the kind of nervous annoyance from which hypnotisation should give relief. Somewhat similarly I believe that self- hypnotisation is employed by some professional " trance-speakers," whose utterances (while by no means obliging us to refer them to ''spirit-control") are often remarkably ready and fluent. It is possible for some persons, that is to say, thus to secure a cheap substitute for genius on stage or platform ; to evoke by suggestion or self-suggestion an uprush of subliminal thought and diction, or of dramatic gesture and intonation, which, even if it is of no very rare quality, at least carries the self-inspired artist over many ordinary stumbling-blocks.

Here, again, the hypnotisation is a kind of extension of " secondary automatism " ; — of the familiar lapse from ordinary consciousness of movements (walking, pianoforte playing, &c.), which have been very frequently performed. The possibilities thus opened up are very great : no less than the combination by mankind of the stabiUty of instinct with the plasticity of reason. The insect, as we know, performs with great ease and perfection certain difficult acts, by dint of an instinct which perhaps in many cases is " lapsed intelligence " ; — an obscurely conscious effort gradually ^transformed through generations into an unintelligent but accurate automatism. Man benefits by a similar lapsed intelligence or secondary lautomatism, but to a very small degree in comparison with the amount of Iwork which he has to perform by conscious effort. There seems no Ireason why his range of automatism should not thus be largely increased [in two main ways. Many things (namely) which now are unpleasant to do might be done with indifference, and many things which now are difficult to do might be done with ease.

Other cases where memory has been greatly quickened by hypnotic suggestion are given in 552 B, and we have already found that the lapsed recollections of secondary states may be recovered by hypnotism in the primary state (see also 552 C).

553. Let us pass on from these specialised influences of suggestion on certain kinds of attention to its influence on attention generally, as needed, for instance, in education. This is eminently one of the directions where a wider knowledge of hypnotism is likely to stimulate experiment which may be of great practical value. Incapacity, indolence, and inattention divide between them the responsibility for most failures whether in work or in play. Inattention may no doubt be called a special form of indolence ; but it is often so far " constitutional " that strenuous voluntary effort cannot cure it. If we can arrest this shifting of the mental focus to undesired ideational centres in at all the same way as we can arrest the choreic or fidgetty shiftings of motor impulse to undesired motor centres, we shall have done perhaps as much for the world's ordinary work as if we had raised the average man's actual intelligence a step higher in the scale. We shall have checked waste, although we may not have improved quality. The well-known case of Dr. Forel's warders (553 A) who were enabled by hypnotic suggestion to sleep soundly by the side of the patients they had to watch, and wake only when the patients required to be restrained, shows us how by this means the attention may be concentrated on selected impressions and waste of energy be avoided in a way that could hardly be compassed by any ordinary exercise of the will.

How far, indeed, we can go in actually heightening intelligence by suggestion we have yet to learn. We must not expect to add a cubit to intellectual any more than to physical stature. Limitations at birth must prevent our developing the common man into a Newton ; but there seems no reason why we should not bring up his practical achievements much nearer than at present to the maximum of his innate capacity. One illustrative instance and references to others are given in 553 B.

554. In passing on from the influence of suggestion on attention to its influence on tvill, I am not meaning to draw any but the most everyday distinction between these two forms of inward concentration. The point, in fact, which I wish now to notice is rather a matter of common observation than a provable and measurable phenomenon. I speak of the energy and resolution with which a hypnotic suggestion is carried out ; — \\-\t ferocity, even, with which the entranced subject pushes aside the opposition of much more powerful men. I do not, indeed, assert that he would thus risk very serious injury ; for I believe (with Bramwell and others) that there does exist somewhere within him a knowledge that the whole proceeding is a mere experiment. But, nevertheless, he actually risks something ; he behaves, in short, as a confident, resolute man would behave, and this however timid and unaggressive his habitual character may be. I believe that much advantage may yet be drawn from this confident

555] HYPNOTISM 197

temper. We can thus inhibit the acquired self-distrust and shyness of the supraliminal self, and get the subliminal self concentrated upon some task which may be as difficult as we please ; — which may, if we can adjust it rightly, draw out to the uttermost the innate powers of man. We can command — sometimes with success — clairvoyant excursions ; nay, we may order — not without some hope — even action upon matter at a distance. Among his experiments with the subject referred to in 573 C, Dr. Backman records a case in which, during one of her clairvoyant excursions, he had tried to make her seize and shake a bunch of keys which she had observed in the room she was clairvoyantly visiting. It was afterwards ascertained that there really was a bunch of keys in the place as described, though it did not appear that the desired movement had taken place. Still, if " telekinesis " be (as I hold) a reality, such experiments as these seem, at any rate, a reasonable way of trying to achieve it.

One direction, at any rate, in which a beginning can be made is the attainment of control over muscles not habitually subject to will, whether from ancestral disuse, or as belonging to the unstriped or " involuntary " type. Various movements of this kind may be made as the result of suggestion ; and I may add here that when a definite type of action is set before several hypnotised subjects a spirit of emulation will often carry them far. A singular illustration of this may be drawn from the very phenomena which Charcot used to cite in order to prove an almost opposite thesis; — the thesis, namely, that the subject was an obedient automaton, and that in order to prove hypnosis, — to demonstrate " le grand hypnotisme," at any rate, — there must needs occur some muscular phenomena incapable of being simulated by the subject. And in effect, in his once famous "three stages," there did sometimes occur certain neuro-muscular phenomena which no one in an ordinary waking condition could reproduce. Yet it by no means follows hence that these are phenomena inevitably accompanying the trance, or in themselves beyond the range of the subliminal will of the subject. On the contrary, I rather take these Salpetriere phenomena as showing us how much the subliminal will of entranced subjects is capable of achieving. I believe that these women wished to be hypnotised, and wished to go through the " classical stages," and wished m the course of these often-described stages to perform evolutions which should attract admiring attention. What one really saw exhibited was not the powerful will of the hypnotiser, but the still more powerful will of the hysteric.

555. It is not indeed in the Salpetriere school alone that there has been much confusion of thought as regards the will-power and general independence of the hypnotised subject. It has been supposed that the mere fact of being hypnotised tended to weaken the will; that the hypnotised person fell inevitably more and more under the control of the hypnotiser, and even that he could at last be induced to commit crimes See Dr. Backman 's paper in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 207.

by suggestion (see 555 A). A few quotations from Dr. Milne Bramwell, given in 555 B, will show on how small a foundation of fact these fanciful theories have been erected. It may suffice to say here that nothing is easier, either for subject or for hypnotiser, than to avert undue influence. A trusted friend has only to suggest to the hypnotised subject that no one else will be able to affect him, and the thing is done. As to the crimes supposed to be committed by hypnotised persons under the influence of suggestion, the evidence for such crimes, in spite of great efforts made to collect it and set it forth, remains, I think, practically nil.

This fact, I must add, is quite in harmony with the views expressed in the present chapter. For it implies that the higher subliminal centres (so to term them) never really abdicate their rule ; that they may indeed remain passive while the middle centres obey the experimenter's caprice, but are still ready to resume their control if such experiment should become really dangerous to the individual. And this runs parallel with common experience in the spontaneous somnambulisms. The sleeper may perform apparently rash exploits ; but yet, unless he be suddenly awakened, serious accidents are very rare. Nevertheless, both in spontaneous and in induced somnambulism, accidents ??iay occur ; nor should any experiment be undertaken in a careless or jesting spirit.

But the role of the hypnotiser, as our command over hypnotic artifice increases, is likely to become continually smaller in proportion to the role played by the subject himself. Especially must this be so where the object is to strengthen the subject's own power of will. All that can be done from without in such a case is to imbue the man's spirit with the sense of its unexhausted prerogatives, — the strength which he may then employ, not only to avert pain or anxiety, but in any active direction which his original nature itself admits.

556. These last words may naturally lead us on to our next topic : the influence of suggestion on character; — on that function of combined attention and will, which is, of course, also ultimately a function of the possibilities latent in the individual germ.

And while character is thus a complex notion, the effect on character of suggestion and self-suggestion seems at first sight a notion at once too complex and too diffused for definite treatment. All men endeavour to influence character, not indeed hypnotically, but yet by such intensest suggestion and self-suggestion as they can bring to bear. Many men, moreover, trust for the improvement of character to another influence, not easy of discussion here, namely, to prayer, — to the aid of saints or of a Divine Mediator, or to the direct Grace of God. And yet again, these religious or philosophic creeds, which might have been thought to lie outside my present topic, are brought within it by the confidence of many believers in the efficacy of their faith to relieve physical as well as moral ill. These creeds thus become schemes of se//-suggestio7i, — of which it is not only legitimate but necessary for me to give some account.

556] HYPNOTISM 199

In approaching this mingled matter it will be most convenient (recurring to the subjects already discussed from a somewhat different point of view in sections 527-531) to begin with those moral suggestions which are obviously hypnotic, and which develop themselves directly from some therapeutic purpose, as when the suggestion to avoid morphia leads to the moral reform of the morphinomaniac. From the morphinomaniac or the drunkard the transition iS easy to the criminel-ne, — the apparently hopeless case of congenital moral deficiency. And we may then inquire how far the crude moral stimuli which afifect this extreme type of physical and moral disaster can be best elevated into a more intellectual air — can be best modified for the advantage of sufferers who can be reached by religious and philosophical thought, — by what I have called those " schemes of self-suggestion " which the great traditions and the great conceptions of our race can alone supply.

First of all, then, and going back to the evidence already given as to the cure of the victims of morphia (see 350), we may say with truth that there we have seen as tremendous a moral lift — as sudden an elevation from utter baseness to at least normal living — as can be anywhere presented to us. The morphia habit, as is well known, leaves absolutely no department of character unpoisoned. Cowardice, treachery, callous selfabsorption, — such are the characteristics of the morphinomaniac, even though physical exhaustion may preclude the drunkard's more active sins of violence or lust. In this slimy dissolution of self-respect there seems to be nothing on which sage or evangelist can take hold. Yet we have seen hypnotic suggestion effect the magical change, and restore the degraded outcast to a safe and honourable position among his fellow-men.

Here, then, the question arises as to the possible range of such sudden reformations. Did we succeed with the morphinomaniac only because his was functional, and not an organic, degradation? We know, indeed, that we can cure a morbid condition of tissue where we could not rectify a congenital distortion or defect. May not the morphinomaniac's state be a kind of chemical sinfulness ? — a poisoning of cells which once functioned normally, and which are capable of functioning normally again, if only the poison be removed ?

And may it not be a much harder task to create honesty, purity, unselfishness in a brain whose very conformation must keep the spirit that thinks through it nearly on the level of the brute ? The question is of the highest psychological interest ; the answer, though as yet rudimentary, is unexpectedly encouraging. The examples given in 556 A show that if the subject is hypnotisable, and if hypnotic suggestion be applied with sufficient persistency and skill, no depth of previous baseness and foulness need prevent the man or woman whom we charge with " moral insanity," or stamp as a " criminal-born," from rising into a state where he or she can work steadily, and render services useful to the community.

I purposely limit my assertion to these words. We must still work

within the bounds of natural capacity. Just as we cannot improvise a genius, we cannot improvise a saint. But what experience seems to show is that we can select from the lowest and poorest range of feelings and faculties enough of sound feeling, enough of helpful faculty, to keep the man in a position of moral stability, and capable of falling in with the common labours of his kind.

We can produce in time somewhat the same sort of effect which Rarey and others have produced (perhaps by somewhat similar means) upon horses rendered useless through those defects of stability which in a horse we call vice. Rarey effected a life-long inhibition of those equine impulses which were inconvenient to man. Enough of horse-power was left in the horse to render him a harmless and tractable, even if an insipid, companion and servant in stable or hunting-field. Looking to parallel effects produced in human beings, it will be seen that I was justified in saying that hypnotic suggestion had effected changes of character in cases which the ordinary educator, or the ordinary missionary, would have deemed most unfavourable, and in which the common opinion of science would have strongly endorsed their despairing prognosis. The advantage gained is great, and should not be forgotten by criminologists. But it is another question whether we shall be justified in concluding that because these apparently extreme cases have yielded to our treatment, therefore all cases of moral obliquity are likely so to yield.

557. Such an expectation is hardly legitimate without something of closer analysis. With no pretence at logic, but merely for the convenience of the present argument, we may divide known faults or sins into the four following classes : —

(i) Bodily sins depending on specific temptation, as drunkenness, &c. These, as we have seen, can generally be reached by suggestion.

(2) Faults associated with gross congenital defects of organisms.

These also can be reached in surprising degree.

(3) Faults depending on an id^e fixe. Jealousy is the type of such a

fault. All jealousy, we may say, is morbid ; that I should hate B. simply because A. prefers B. to myself is the rational result of an insistent association of ideas which appropriate suggestion has sometimes demolished at a stroke.

(4) Sins deliberately maintained for the supposed advantage of the

sinner. Now the first three of these are faults from which the afilicted person generally, although not always, earnestly desires to be free. The jealous person, like the drunkard, can often recognise that beneath the morbid insistence there is a stratum of cool self-reproval ; — an ideal of life with the morbid craving removed. It is where that subjacent wish for improvement exists that suggestion can get an adequate hold (see 557 A).

558. This last observation affords a hint as to the kind of moral faults

559] HYPNOTISM 201

which suggestion can be expected to cure. As a matter of experience thus far, we find that the sins which popular theology attributes to the flesh, rather than those which are credited to the world or to the devil, have been the readiest to disappear. If we expand our definition of the flesh to include not only faults of self-indulgence but also faults of sloth and cowardice on the one hand, and faults of hastiness and irascibility on the other, — such failings as obviously vary with the state of the bodily organism, — we shall include, I think, almost all attested moral cures.

There remains Xht fourth class of sins, namely, sins deliberately maintained for the supposed advantage of the sinner.

Are we to suppose that the effect of suggestion is necessarily limited to the three earlier categories? Must we despair of reaching our fourth class of faults, — the deep-seated sins such as hardness, selfishness, treachery, spiritual pride ? There is no a priori reason for such a distinction. However remote from the so-called " flesh," all moral faults alike may probably have some counterpart in the organism ; and, if so, all should be modifiable by the same subliminal attack.

Nor have we any experimental proof that these " worldly and devilish " sins are not in fact capable of similar cure by suggestion. The absence of notable cures may be sufficiently explained by two facts, already hinted at, namely, that the sufferers from these defects are seldom anxious to have them removed ; and that if they are thus anxious they are not likely to consult a physician, but rather to seek support of a directly moral or religious kind.

The mental attitude, say, of the fraudulent trustee is very different from that of the dipsomaniac. The dipsomaniac feels himself wholly unsuited to his environment ; beneath all his morbid craving the instinct of self-preservation bids him to desist. The fraudulent man, on the other hand, has in one sense adapted himself with special skill to his temporary environment. I say his temporary environment ; — reverting to the comparison of man on earth to the larva, of man after bodily death to the imago. Selfishness, hardness, treachery (as I have said) are like the clumps of stinging hairs with which the caterpillar is protected ; and the selfish man is like a caterpillar which has so developed those protective larval characters that it has no energy left for transformation into the imago.

We cannot reckon on any instinct of self-preservation to make him wish for change of character ; although we may hope that in every man some subliminal consciousness of his connection with another world persists.

559. And here we approach a point of much interest. Hypnotic suggestion or self-suggestion, although it is an agency in great part unexplained, is of course not an agency which stands wholly alone and separate from all other influences. It melts into the suasion of ordinary life ; — into modes of influence which were practised before hypnotism was dreamt of. The physician (as we have seen) has extended his domain by becoming a confessor and a counsellor as well ; he has utilised for moral ends the authority with which his scientific knowledge has invested him.

But there are already other persons wielding with authority this suasive power, and it is, as I have above implied, to ministers of religion rather than to physicians that a man turns who is conscious of sin rather than of disease.

There must of course be a connection between all these suasive processes. Can we find any intermediate instances ; — cases where rehgious conviction seems to be communicated with the rapidity and decision of hypnotic suggestion?

I need not say that there are many such instances. From the rude animistic dances and ceremonies of the savage up to the " missions " and " revivals " in English and American churches and chapels, we find sudden and exciting impressions on mind and sense called into play for the purpose of producing religious and moral change ; and sometimes actually producing not only — what from the analogy of hypnotic suggestion seems comparatively easy — a change of belief, but also — what is far harder — a change of habits. Among the lower races especially these exciting reunions often involve both hysterical and hypnotic phenomena. There are sometimes convulsive accesses ; and there is sometimes the milder, and probably wholly healthy, phenomenon of a deep restorative sleep, out of which the anxious and repentant neophyte awakes with a sense of settled conviction and of peace. The influence which has been exerted upon him is thus intermediate between hypnotic artifice, dependent on trance-states for access to subliminal plasticity, and ordinary moral suasion, addressed primarily to ordinary waking reason.

This, of course, is what we must desire; — that the series of influences should thus be continuous ; that hypnotism should be regarded as simply a systematisation of artifices by which a man's own self-suggestive power, — the will which he exerts over his own organism, — should become continually more potent for both his moral and his physical good.

560. Let us pause here to consider the point which we have already reached. We began by defining hypnotism as the empirical development of the sleeping phase of man's personality. In that sleeping phase the most conspicuous element, — the most obvious function of the subliminal self, — is the repair of wasted tissues, the physical, and therefore also largely the moral, refreshment and rejuvenation of the tired organism. We have now traced the manner in which that function has been performed in the hypnotic state, and by suggestion and self-suggestion. We have found that the promised development of sleep is a reality ; that we have in hypnotism a veritable evolution of those recuperative energies which give its practical value to sleep. From this side, — and it is from this side only that the mass of men regard sleep, — the case for hypnotism is now fairly complete ; and this long chapter might here draw to a close.

The reader, however, knows that my initial promise would not in reality be thus fulfilled. My own definition of sleep, — of the phase of personality which I undertook that hypnotism would be found to develop, — was of much wider scope. I believe that during sleep the subliminal

562] HYPNOTISM 203

self has other functions beyond the recuperation of the organism. Those other functions are concerned in some unknown way with the spiritual world ; and the indication of their exercise is given by the sporadic occurrence, in the sleeping phase, of supernormal phenomena. Such phenomena, as we shall presently see, occur also at various points in hypnotic practice. To them we must now turn, if our account of the phenomena of induced somnambulism is to be complete.

561. Yet here, in order to give completeness to our intended review, we shall need a certain apparent extension of the scope of this chapter. We shall need to consider a group of cases which might have been introduced at various points in our scheme, but which are perhaps richest in their illustrations of the supernormal phenomena of hypnotism.

Spontaneous somnambulisms, — those crude uprushes of incoherent subliminal faculty which sometimes break through the surface of sleep,— seem to occupy a kind of midway position among the various phenomena through which our inquiry has thus far carried us.

The somnambulism often starts as an exaggerated dream ; it develops into a kind of secondary personality. The thoughts and impulses which the upheaval raises into manifestation, — the psychical output, — resemble sometimes the inspirations of genius, sometimes the follies of hysteria. And, finally, the spontaneous sleep-waking state itself is manifestly akin to hypnosis, — is sometimes actually interchangeable with the induced somnambulisms of the hypnotic trance. The chain of memory which repeated spontaneous somnambulisms gradually form, — while lying quite outside the primary or waking memory, — vyill often be found to form part of the hypnotic memory, which gradually accretes in similar fashion from repeated hypnosis.

It would be easy to go further, and to compare these sudden uprushes of the subliminal during sleep to those urgent uprushes in waking hours which we shall presently have to discuss as sensory and motor automatisms. But the reader will already have understood the true affinities of these singular intercalations in the uniformity of sleep ; — will already have realised that such things needs must be; — that it would have been strange indeed if that phase of the personality in which subliminal operation is relatively the most dominant should have been without those insurgences or outbreaks of the subliminal which even the most strenuous waking vigilance cannot always avert or control.

562. Nor, again, will it surprise us to find these sleep-wakings fertile in supernormal operation, though it be supernormal operation scattered and diffused upon random and trivial ends. What is here thrown forth comes not from the mine, but from the volcano ; we have not to deal with therapeutic results educed by careful suggestion, but with the miscellaneous ejects of some focus of submerged excitation. From what has been observed in spontaneous somnambulism (I have already said), we might have divined almost the full range of phenomena to which induced somnam-

bulism has now introduced us. Nay, even at the present day, the lessons of spontaneous somnambuHsm are not exhausted. They should teach us still to watch for further developments ; they should forbid us to abandon, in the plain uniformity of hypnotic practice, our hope of some sudden felicitous inroad upon the more secret faculties of man.

563. For one form of sleep-waking capacity we are already prepared by what has been said in Chapter IV. of the solution of problems in sleep. This is one of the ways in which we can watch the gradual merging of a vivid dream into a definite somnambulic act. The solution of a problem (as we have seen) may present itself merely as a sentence or a diagram, constructed in dream and remembered on waking. Or the sleeper (as in various cases familiar in text-books) may rise from bed and write out the chain of reasoning, or the sermon, or whatever it may be. Or again, in rarer cases ("Rachel Baker" is a curious example — see 563 A) the somnambulic output may take the form of oratory, and edifying discourses may be delivered by a preacher whom no amount of shaking or pinching will silence or, generally, even interrupt. This, so to speak, is genius with a vengeance ; this is a too persistent uprush of subliminal zeal, co-operating even out of season with the hortatory instincts of the waking self.

564. The group of sleep-waking cases which we may next discuss illustrate a natural evolution of the faculty of the sleeping phase of personality. The subliminal self, exercising in sleep a profounder ijifluence over the organism than the supraliminal can exert, may also be presumed to possess a profounder knowledge of the organism, — of its present, and therefore of its future, — than the supraliminal self enjoys.

I refer in 564 A to two cases in which the somnambulic personality is discerned throughout as a wiser self — advising a treatment, or at least foreseeing future developments of the disease with great particularity. Of course in such a case prediction is often simply a form of suggestion ; the symptom occurs simply because it has been ordained beforehand. In the case of cures of long-standing disease the sagacity which foresees probably co-operates with the control which directs the changes in the organism.

565. The next stage is a very important one. We come to the manifestation in spontaneous sleep-waking states of manifestly supernormal powers, — sometimes of telepathy, but more commonly of clairvoyance or telsesthesia. Unfortunately these cases have been, as a rule, very insufficiently observed (see, (f.^., the case of Mollie Fancher, in 236 A). Still, it appears that in spontaneous somnambulism there is frequendy some indication of supernormal powers, though the observers — even if competent in other ways — have generally neglected to take account of the hypersesthesia and heightening of memory and of general intelligence that often accompany the state. I quote, however, from Dr. Dufay (in 565 A) a case which does not seem open to these objections, and give some references to other cases.

566. Before leaving this subject of spontaneous sleep-waking states,

567] HYPNOTISM 205

I ought briefly to mention a form of trance with which we shall have to deal more at length in a later chapter. I speak of trance ascribed to spirit-possession. As will be seen, I myself fully adopt this explanation in a small number of the cases where it is put forward. Yet I do not think that spirit-agency is necessarily present in all the trances even of a true subject of possession. With all the leading sensitives — with D. D. Home, with Stainton Moses, with Mrs. Piper and others — I think that the depth of the trance has varied greatly on different occasions, and that sometimes the subliminal self of the sensitive is vaguely simulating, probably in an unconscious dream-like way, an external intelligence. This hypothesis suggested itself to several observers in the case especially of D. D. Home, with whom the moments of strong characterisation of a departed personality, though far from rare, were yet scattered among tracts of dreamy improvisation which suggested only the utterance of Home's subliminal self (see Chapter IX.). However we choose to interpret these trances, they should be mentioned in comparison with all the other sleepwaking states. They probably form the best transition between those shallow somnambulisms, on the one hand, which are little more than a vivid dream, and those profound trances, on the other hand, in which the native spirit quits, as nearly as may be, the sensitive's organism, and is for the time replaced, as nearly as may be, by an invading spirit from that unseen world.

567. This brief review of non-hypnotic somnambulisms has not been without its lessons. It has shown us that the supernormal powers which we have traced in each of the preceding chapters in turn do also show themselves, in much the same fashion, in spontaneous sleep-waking states of various types. We must now inquire how far they occur in sleepwaking states experimentally induced.

And here the very fact of induction suggests to us a question specially applicable to the hypnotic state itself. Is hypnosis ever supernormally induced? Can any one, that is to say, be thrown into hypnotic trance by a telepathic impact ? or, to phrase it more generally, by any influence, inexplicable by existing science, which may pass from man to man?

The question which I thus attack at a comparatively late point of my discussion has given rise to more of heated controversy than any other in the history of my subject. A battle which seemed internecine raged for years between the partisans of " mesmeric effluence," on the one hand, and the partisans of a purely physiological or a purely ' suggestive " causation of hypnosis on the other. The victory gradually fell to the latter of these groups, and when Edmund Gurney and I first wrote on hypnotism, some twenty years ago, hardly a single hypnotist supported us in our question as to the real discomfiture of the old, or " mesmeric," hypothesis.

I do not say that even now much change has occurred in the then general opinion. Yet efflux of time, and certain considerations set forth in earlier sections of this chapter, may now enable us to a certain extent to see round the former controversy, to concede to each side the estab-

2o6 CHAPTER V [568-

lishment of certain definite theses, and to suggest limitations of the field still open to dispute.

In the first place one may say that of the anti-mesmeric schools of opinion, the " purely physiological " school has on the whole failed, the " purely suggestive " school has triumphantly succeeded. The school of Nancy, reinforced by hypnotists all over Europe, has abundantly proved that "pure suggestion " (whatever that be) is the determining cause of a very large proportion of hypnotic phenomena. That is beyond dispute ; and the two other schools, the " pure physiologists " and the " mesmerists " alike, must now manage to prove as best they can that their favourite methods play any real part in the induction of any case of hypnosis. For to the pure suggestionist, monotonous stimulation and mesmeric passes are alike in themselves inert, are alike mere facilitations of suggestion, acting not directly on the patient's organism, but rather on his state of mental expectation.

