In the year 1837 Vito Mangiamele, who gave his age as 10 years and 4 months, presented himself before Arago in Paris. He was the son of a shepherd of Sicily, who was not able to give his son any instruction. By chance it was discovered that by methods peculiar to himself he resolved problems that seemed at the first view to require extended mathematical knowledge. In the presence of the Academy Arago proposed the following questions : " What is the cubic root of 3,796,416?" In the space of about half a minute the child responded 156, which is correct. "What satisfies the condition that its cube plus five times its square is equal to 42 times itself increased by 40?" Everybody understands that this is a demand for the root of the equation x^ + 5 jr^ — 42 JIT — 40 = o. In less than a minute Vito responded that 5 satisfied the condition ; which is correct. The third question related to the solution of the equation x^ — 4. ;ir— 16779 = 0. This time the child remained four to five minutes without answering : finally he demanded with some hesitation if 3 would not be the solution desired. The secretary having informed him that he was wrong, Vito, a few moments afterwards, gave the number 7 as the true solution. Having finally been requested to extract the loth root of 282,475,249 Vito found in a short time that the root is 7.

At a later date a committee, composed of Arago, Cauchy, and others, complains that " the masters of Mangiamele have always kept secret the methods of calculation which he made use of."

There is another point on which something might have been learnt from the study of so marked a group of automatists — utilisers of subliminal capacity — as these " prodigies " form. Their bodily characteristics might have been examined with a view to tracing such physical concomitants as may go with this facility of communication between psychical strata. We have, however, few data available for this purpose. Colburn inherited supernumerary digits, and Mondeux is reported to have been hysterical. On the other hand the " prodigies " of whose lives after childhood anything is known seem to have been free from nervous taint. No one, for instance, could well be more remote from hysteria than the elder Bidder ; — or than his son, the late Mr. Bidder, Q.C., or than Mr. Blyth of Edinburgh, perhaps the best living English representative of what we may call the calculating diathesis.

It is plain, then, that no support is given by what we know of this group to the theory which regards subliminal mentation as necessarily a sign of some morbid dissociation of psychical elements. Is there, on the other hand, anything to confirm a suggestion which will occur in some similar cases, namely, that, — inasmuch as the addition of subliminal to supraliminal mentation may often be a completion and integration rather than a fractionation or disintegration of the total individuality, — we are likely sometimes to find traces of a more than common activity of the ri'g/i^ or less used cerebral hemisphere? Finding no mention of ambidexterity in the meagre notices which have come down to us of the greater " prodigies," I begged Mr. Blyth and the late

Scripture, o/>. cit., p. 17,

311] GENIUS 85

Mr. Bidder, Q.C., to tell me whether their left hands possessed more than usual power. Mr. Blyth's reply has been already given above ; I now quote Mr. Bidder's.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 356.)

Ravensbury Park,

September nth, 1891.

As to ambidexterity. Of course I am ignorant of the train of thought that led you to ask the question; but oddly enough I am a very good example of it. I am not aware that my father was ambidextrous ; nor are any of my children, so far as I know. For myself, in all sports, — bowling, throwing, fishing, tennis, racquets, &c., — I almost invariably use the left hand. I cannot throw to any purpose with the right. In cricket, however, I bat with the right hand. In shaving, I shave one half of the face with the left hand and the other with the right, in each case taking the part which shaves forwards, so as to have no backwai'd shaving. In writing I write with the right hand, being so taught ; but some years ago I discovered that if I let my left hand move unconstrainedly and without conscious thought as to how it should form the letters, I could write with equal fluency, though not so well-formed letters. But the direction of the writing is reversed ; so that it is requisite either to look through the paper or view it in a looking-glass to read the writing. My left hand and nerve system seems to have learnt by sympathy what the right had acquired by education and practice.

Further, I found that taking two pencils one in each hand I could write simultaneously with both hands, — the two writings proceeding in opposite directions. I have occasionally found since that other people could to some extent do the same. I repeatedly tried very hard to write one word with one hand and another with the other ; — but it won't do ; the result is always a nondescript production of parts of both words, — something like the nonsense words in Alice in Wonderland. I enclose a specimen which will show the simultaneous writing.

It thus appears that in the only two cases in which I have been

I able to make inquiry there is somewhat more of dextro-cerebral capacity than in the mass of mankind. 311. We may now pass on to review some further instances of subliminal co-operation with conscious thought ; — first looking about us for any cases comparable in definiteness with the preceding ; and then extending our view over the wider and vaguer realm of creative and artistic work.

Before we proceed to the highly-specialised senses of hearing and sight, let us see whether we can find traces of subliminal intensification of those perceptions of a less specialised kind which underlie our more elaborate modes of cognising the world around us. The sense of the efflux of time, and the sense of weight, or of muscular resistance, are amongst the profoundest elements in our organic being. And the « sense of time is indicated in several ways as a largely subliminal faculty.

I

There is much evidence to show that it is often more exact in men sleeping than in men awake, and in men hypnotised than in men sleeping. The records of spontaneous somnambulism are full of predictions made by the subject as to his own case, and accomplished, presumably by self-suggestion, but without help from clocks, at the precise minute foretold. Or this hidden knowledge may take shape in the imagery of dream, as in a case published by Professor Royce, of Harvard,^ where his correspondent describes " a dream in which I saw an enormous flaming clock-dial with the hands standing at 2.20. Awaking immediately, I struck a match, and upon looking at my watch found it was a few seconds past 2.20."

I should, however, have been puzzled to produce any clear example of the subliminal time-sense as manifesting itself in a sane and waking person, had not a Mr. Higton sent to me some years ago the following record of personal experiences on which he desired my opinion. I made his acquaintance, and found him a sensible, serious witness ; but I did not then perceive the full significance of his communication, and I have, unfortunately, lost sight of him.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 337.)

Mr. W. Higton, 27 St. Leonard Street, Pimlico, S.W., sends me, September 1889, the following experiences — abbreviated from a long paper which I have returned to him.

1. " It is now some three years since the exact time of day presented itself to my mind independently of any internal knowledge or of any external physical appearances" (as of clock, &c.).

Mr. Higton had no idea of the exact time, when "within a few yards of Tattersall's there instantaneously appeared before me the face of a clock of an immense size. Every figure was perfectly visible ; and the huge black hands distinctly indicated 11.25; while at the same moment or, correctly speaking, a fraction of a second later, I felt convinced and absolutely certain that the time indicated on the dial was the right time " (as in fact it was by his watch). " The phenomenon has recurred during the past three years at least five and, I think, six times; the first three occurring at intervals of about three months, and the last two or three being divided by a considerably longer interval."

2. On another occasion Mr. Higton was walking through a field as to which a legend ran that a young lady was murdered there, while she held a sprig of thyme, and that any one passing through the field and not thinking of the murder would smell thyme. Mr. Higton paid no credit to this legend ; — often walked through the field, but thought about the murder. " However, I did walk through the field one gloomy November afternoon, absorbed so deeply in some new practical scheme that I did not think about the murder, and most certainly should not have thought about it if the strongest conceivable smell of thyme that ever rose to human nostrils had not risen to mine. The odour of it lasted at least a quarter

1 Proceedhigs of American S.P.R., vol. i. No. 4, p. 360.

312] GENIUS 87

of a minute, until my concentrated thoughts were disorganised, and made to dwell on the magical subject."

3. " When I was at home assisting my father in his business it used to be my work to weigh the hides which were taken from the beasts we killed, preparatory to sending them to the dealer ; and it was my custom before placing them in the scale to see how near the weight I would guess them to be. By this means I became tolerably expert in estimating their weight, invariably being not more than three or four pounds out. Now on several occasions before I guessed, or even thought of guessing, a certain weight came into my mind which (as in the case of the time indicated on the dial) I was inwardly assured was correct. I remember one case distinctly, in which the hide weighed 87f lb., which were the exact figures which occurred to me prior to weighing, and independently of any computation whatever. Indeed, on one occasion, the fourth, I think, I ventured to ticket the hide, without weighing it, in accordance with the figures which came into my mind; and on the following Tuesday exactly the number of pounds named on the ticket were paid for at the market to which the hides were delivered. As you will easily believe, I did not tell my father I had not weighed the hide on the ground that I knew the weight without doing so ! "

Setting aside for the moment the hallucination of the sense of smell, I would point out that we have here precisely such uprushes of subliminal faculty, concerned with the deep organic sensations of the efflux of time and of muscular resistance, as theory had led us to expect. We need not postulate any direct or supernormal knowledge,— but merely a subliminal calculation, such as we shall see in the case of " arithmetical prodigies," expressing itself supraliminally, sometimes in a phantasmal picture, sometimes as a mere " conviction," |Without sensory clothing. And I would interpret in much the same iray the story of the smell of thyme in the haunted field. We may Isuppose, I think, that although Mr. Higton was not " consciously " ^thinking of the local legend, his subliminal self remembered it, and produced the appropriate hallucination of smell in the same way in which it produced the picture of the clock-face, as indicating that it knew the precise hour. Thus we have, I think, a reasonable explanation of what seems at first sight an extravagant ghost story; — an I explanation which is the more probable insomuch as it is deduced from our own analysis of Mr. Higton's evidence, and does not seem I to have occurred to himself.

312. Passing on here to subliminal products of visual type, I am jlad to be able to quote the following passage, which seems to me to pgive in germ the very theory for which I am now contending on the I authority of one of the most lucid thinkers of the last generation.

The passage occurs in an article by Sir John Herschel on " Sen-Ssorial Vision," in his Familiar Lectures on Scientific Szibjects, 1816. Sir John describes some experiences of his own, " which consist in the

involuntary production of visual impressions, into which geometrical regularity of form enters as the leading character, and that, under circumstances which altogether preclude any explanation drawn from a possible regularity of structure in the retina of the optic nerve." Twice these patterns appeared in waking daylight hours, — with no illness or discomfort at the time or afterwards. More frequently they appeared in darkness ; but still while Sir John was fully awake. They appeared also twice when he was placed under chloroform ; " and I should observe that I never lost my consciousness of being awake and in full possession of my mind, though quite insensible to what was going on. . . . Now the question at once presents itself — What are these Geometrical Spectres? and how, and in what department of the bodily or mental economy do they originate? They are evidently not dreams. The mind is not dormant, but active and conscious of the direction of its thoughts ; while these things obtrude themselves on notice, and by calling attention to them, direct the train of thought into a channel it would not have taken of itself. ... If it be true that the conception of a regular geometrical pattern implies the exercise of thought and intelligence, it would almost seem that in such cases as those above adduced we have evidence of a thought, an intelligence, working within our own organisation distinct from that of our own personality." And Sir John further suggests that these complex figures, entering the mind in this apparently arbitrary fashion, throw light upon " the suggestive principle " to which " we must look for much that is determinant and decisive of our volition when carried into action." " It strikes me as not by any means devoid of interest to contemplate cases where, in a matter so entirely abstract, so completely devoid of any moral or emotional bearing, as the production of a geometrical figure, we, as it were, seize upon that principle in the very act, and in the performance of its office."

From my point of view, of course, I can but admire the acumen which enabled this great thinker to pierce to the root of the matter by the aid of so few observations. He does not seem to have perceived the connection between these "schematic phantasms," to borrow a phrase from Professor Ladd,'^ and the hallucinatory figures of men or animals seen in health or in disease. But even from his scanty data his inference seems to me irresistible ; — " we have evidence of a thought, an intelligence, working within our own organisation, distinct from that of our own personality." I shall venture to claim him as the first originator of the theory to which the far fuller evidence now accessible had independently led myself.

On this point see Professor James's Prhtciples of PsycJiology, vol. ii. p. 84, note. Goethe's well-known phantasmal flower was clearly no mere representation of retinal structure. A near analogy to these patterns lies in the so-called "spirit-drawings," or automatic arabesques, discussed elsewhere in this chapter (see Section 324).

2 See Professor Ladd's paper on this subject in Mind, April 1S92.

313] GENIUS 89

313. Cases observed as definitely as those just quoted are few in number; and I must pass on into a much trodden — even a confusedly trampled — field ; — the records, namely, left by eminent men as to the element of subconscious mentation, which was involved in their best work. Most of these stories have been again and again repeated ; — and they have been collected on a large scale in a celebrated work, — to me especially distasteful, as containing what seems to me the loose and extravagant parody of important truth. It is not my business here to criticise Dr. Von Hartmann's Philosophy of the Unconscious in detail ; but I prefer to direct my readers' attention to a much more modest volume, in which a young physician has put together the results of a direct inquiry addressed to some Frenchmen of distinction as to their methods especially of imaginative work.'^ I quote a few of the replies addressed to him, beginning with some words from M. Sully Prudhomme, — at once psychologist and poet, — who is here speaking of the subconscious clarification of a chain of abstract reasoning. " I have sometimes suddenly understood a geometrical demonstration made to me a year previously without having in any way directed thereto my attention or will. It seemed that the mere spontaneous ripening of the conceptions which the lectures had implanted in my brain had brought about within me this novel grasp of the proof."

With this we may compare a statement of Arago's — " Instead of obstinately endeavouring to understand a proposition at once, I would admit its truth provisionally ; — and next day I would be astonished at understanding thoroughly that which seemed all dark before."

Condillac similarly speaks of finding an incomplete piece of work finished next day in his head.

Somewhat similarly, though in another field, M. Rett^, a poet, tells Dr. Chabaneix that he falls asleep in the middle of an unfinished stanza, and when thinking of it again in the morning finds it completed. And M. Vincent d'Indy, a musical composer, says that he often has on waking a fugitive glimpse of a musical effect which (like the memory of a dream) needs a strong immediate concentration of mind to keep it from vanishing.

De Musset writes, " On ne travaille pas, on ^coute, c'est comma un inconnu que vous parle a I'oreille."

Lamartine says, " Ce n'est pas moi qui pense ; ce sont mes idees qui pensent pour moi."

R^my de Gourmont : " My conceptions rise into the field of consciousness like a flash of lightning or like the flight of a bird."

M. S. writes : " In writing these dramas I seemed to be a spectator at the play ; I gazed at what was passing on the scene in an eager,

1 " Le Subconscient chez les Artistes, les Savants, et les Ecrivains," par le Dr. Paul Chabaneix, Paris, 1897.

wondering expectation of what was to follow. And yet I felt that all this came from the depth of my own being."

Saint-Saens had only to Hsten, as Socrates to his Daemon ; and M. Ribot, summing up a number of similar cases, says : " It is the unconscious which produces what is vulgarly called inspiration. This condition is a positive fact, accompanied with physical and psychical characteristics peculiar to itself. Above all, it is impersonal and involuntary, it acts like an instinct, when and how it chooses ; it may be wooed, but cannot be compelled. Neither reflection nor will can supply its place in original creation. . . . The bizarre habits of artists when composing tend to create a special physiological condition, — to augment the cerebral circulation in order to provoke or to maintain the unconscious activity."

In what precise way the cerebral circulation is altered we can hardly at present hope to know. Meantime a few psychological remarks fall more easily within our reach.

314. In the first place, we note that a very brief and shallow submergence beneath the conscious level is enough to infuse fresh vigour into supraliminal trains of thought. Ideas left to mature unnoticed for a few days, or for a single night, seem to pass but a very little way beneath the threshold. They resemble pebbles which the earthworm sucks into its burrow and re-ejects upon the lawn, rather than an uprushing lava-stream from caves of hidden fire. They represent, one may say, the first stage of a process which, although often inconspicuous, is not likely to be discontinuous, — the sustenance, namely, of the supraliminal life by impulse or guidance from below.

In the second place, we see in some of these cases of deep and fruitful abstraction a slight approach to duplication of personality. John Stuart Mill, intent on his Principles of Logic, as he threaded the crowds of Leadenhall Street, recalls certain morbid cases of hysterical distraction; — only that with Mill the process was an integrative one and not a dissolutive one — a gain and not a loss of power over the organism.

And thirdly, in some of these instances we see the man of genius achieving spontaneously, and unawares, much the same result as that which is achieved for the hypnotic subject by deliberate artifice. For he is in fact co-ordinating the waking and the sleeping phases of his existence. He is carrying into sleep the knowledge and the purpose of waking hours ; — and he is carrying back into waking hours again the benefit of those profound assimilations which are the privilege of sleep. Hypnotic suggestion aims at co-operations of just this kind between the waking state in which the suggestion, say, of some functional change, is planned and the sleeping state in which that change is carried out, — with benefit persisting anew into waking life. The hypnotic trance, which is a developed sleep, thus accomplishes for the ordinary man what ordinary sleep accomplishes for the man of genius.

315] GENIUS 91

The coming chapters on Sleep and Hypnotism will illustrate this point more fully. But I may here anticipate my discussion of dreams by quoting one instance where dreams, self-suggested by waking will, formed, as one may say, an integral element in distinguished genius.

The late Robert Louis Stevenson, being in many ways a typical man of genius, was in no way more markedly gifted with that integrating faculty — that increased power over all strata of the personality — which I have ascribed to genius, than in his relation to his dreams (see " A Chapter on Dreams" in his volume Ac7'oss the Plains^. Seldom has the essential analogy between dreams and inspiration been exhibited in such a striking way. His dreams had always (he tells us) been of great vividness, and often of markedly recurrent type. But the point of interest is that, when he began to write stories for publication, the " little people who managed man's internal theatre " understood the change as well as he.

When he lay down to prepare himself for sleep, he no longer sought amusement, but printable and profitable tales ; and after he had dozed off in his box-seat, his little people continued their evolutions with the same mercantile designs. . . . For the most part, whether awake or asleep, he is simply occupied — he or his little people — in consciously making stories for the market. . . .

The more I think of it, the more I am moved to press upon the world my question : " Who are the Little People ? " They are near connections of the dreamer's, beyond doubt ; they share in his financial worries and have an eye to the bank-book ; they share plainly in his training ; . . . they have plainly learned like him to build the scheme of a considerate story and to arrange emotion in progressive order ; only I think they have more talent ; and one thing is beyond doubt, — they can tell him a story piece by piece, like a serial, and keep him all the while in ignorance of where they aim.

That part [of my work] which is done while I am sleeping is the Brownies' part beyond contention; but that which is done when I am up and about is by no means necessarily mine, since all goes to show the Brownies have a hand in it even then.

Slight and imperfect as the above statistics and observations admittedly are, they seem to me to point in a more useful direction than do some of the facts collected by that modern group of anthropologists who hold that genius is in itself a kind of nervous malady, a disturbance of mental balance, akin to criminality or even to madness. I must here pause and briefly consider the evidence advanced in support of a thesis almost directly contradictory of my own.

315. Professor Lombroso especially, in his popular if somewhat superficial book on the Man of Genius, has gathered together many anecdotes of the follies and frailties of eminent men. Striking, however, though his collection is, there are many reasons for caution in drawing from it the deductions which he suggests. In the first place (and this the author himself to a great extent admits) the distinguished men with whom he

deals do not and cannot form any true psychological class. They are merely a somewhat random selection from a much larger number of persons whose acts or writings have made them well known in the ancient or in the modern world. Many of them succeeded by means of qualities as remote as possible from those elsewhere in the book assumed as characteristic of genius ; rose in their professions, for instance, by mere hard work and worldly wisdom, or were brought into prominence by political accidents. Were any charge of degeneracy or '' nervosity " made out against all these eminent men as a body, it would merely seem to prove the paradox that degeneracy makes for success. But in truth many of the cases alleged admit of a much simpler explanation. There are in most of us some traits of human nature which we are not very anxious to reveal. If the great world looks at us too closely these traits tend to come out. The case is the same with those who are born great as with those who achieve greatness. Lombroso's chronique scandaleuse of poets and painters might be well matched by the chronique sca7idaleuse of princes and peers. The Memoires de St. Sinio7i, for instance, would amply suffice to prove the thesis that a trace of the blood royal — or even a place at court — in itself implied a neurotic heredity. But it is scarcely worth while to go to history for what any valet de chambi-e will maintain of any hero. What you have to prove is rather that the average man is any less degenerate than his betters. And this is not easy ; for we must reckon in our account abnormalities of defect as well as of exaggeration ; bluntness and opacities must be set against irritabilities and illusions ; and hardly a good easy man among us but might be analysed into half neuropath and half Philistine, if it would serve a theory.

316. Yet while thus demurring at many points both to Professor Lombroso's statistics themselves and to the conclusions based upon them, I recognise that there are underlying facts of great importance which give to his view such plausibility as it possesses. It is certainly not true, as I hold, either that the human race in general is nervously degenerating, or that nervous degeneration tends to a maximum in its most eminent merpbers. But it can be plausibly maintained that the proportion of nervous to other disorders tends to increase. And it is certain that not nervous degeneration but nervous change or development is now proceeding among civilised peoples more rapidly than ever before, and that this selfadaptation to wider environments must inevitably be accompanied in the more marked cases by something of nervous instability. And it is true also that from one point of view these changes might form matter for regret ; and that in order to discern what I take to be their true meaning we have to regard the problem of human evolution from a somewhat unfamiliar standpoint.

The thesis which I have called plausible only, — the increased modern importance of nervous in comparison with other disorders — is quite untrustworthy unless in the first place we remember that such increase is

317] GENIUS 93

probably relative only, other types of disease having positively declined, as their common causes — hunger, filth, and exposure — have become rarer among civilised men. Moreover, our standard of health and sanity becomes constantly higher. Savages and rude populations probably suffer from nervous instabilities as often as we, but they notice it less intelligently, and care less about it. The second proposition, that nervous development is now proceeding more rapidly than ever before, is I think proved by the great general advance in all achievements needing rapid and precise nervous adjustment. The perpetual " record-breaking " in athletics, which we take in this age as a matter of course, is far more of a nervous than of a muscular affair, and the standard of modern capacity for every kind of work of brain and hand (I do not say the standard of industrial probity, or of imaginative elevation), rises as steadily as the standard of the machinery with which we supplement our bodily powers.

317. I pass on to the second point mentioned just above. The nervous system itself is probably tending in each generation to become more complex and more delicately ramified. As is usual when any part of an organism is undergoing rapid evolutive changes, this nervous progress is accompanied with some instability. Those individuals in whom the hereditary or the acquired change is the most rapid are likely also to suffer most from this perturbation which masks evolution — this occasional appearance of what may be termed " nervous sports " of a useless or even injurious type. Such are the fancies and fanaticisms, the bizarre likes and dislikes, the excessive or aberrant sensibilities, which have been observed in some of the eminent men whom Lombroso discusses. Their truest analogue, as we shall presently see more fully, lies in the oddities or morbidities of sentiment or sensation which so often accompany the development of the human organism into its full potencies, or precede the crowning effort by which a fresh organism is introduced into the world.

Such at least is my view ; but the full acceptance of this view must depend upon some very remote and very speculative considerations bearing upon the nature and purport of the whole existence and evolution of man. Yet however remote and speculative the thesis which I defend may be, it is not one whit remoter or more speculative than the view which, faute de tnieux, is often tacitly assumed by scientific writers. My supposed opponent and I are like two children who have looked through a keyhole at the first few moves in a game of chess, — of whose rules we are entirely ignorant. My companion urges that since we have only seen pawns moved, it is probable that the game is played with the pawns alone ; and that the major pieces seen confusedly behind the pawns are only a kind of fringe or ornament of the board. I reply that those pieces stand on the board like the pawns ; and that since they are larger and more varied than the pawns, it is probable that they are meant to play some even more important role in the game as it develops. We agree that we must wait and see whether the pieces are moved ; and I now

maintain that I have seen a piece moved, although my companion has not noticed it.

The chessboard in this parable is the Cosmos ; the pawns are those human faculties which make for the preservation and development on this planet of the individual and the race ; the pieces are faculties which may either be the mere by-products of terrene evolution, or on the other hand may form an essential part of the faculty with which the human germ or the human spirit is originally equipped, for the purpose of self-development in a cosmical, as opposed to a merely planetary, environment.

318. I know not where to find what I may call the planetary scheme of man's evolution set forth at length. Perhaps one of its supporters might argue somewhat as follows : " The basis from which we start must be the existence of the material universe. This universe has certain laws, presumably antecedent to living matter, and to which living matter, however it may have come to exist in the universe, must inevitably conform. Living creatures, if life is to persist, must eat and must propagate ; and the germ from which they sprang must have involved the faculties necessary for thus persisting. That germ developed along various lines into various animals ; and the higher animals prove their superiority by outliving and dominating the lower. The main set and tendency of man's faculties points to a more and more complete dominion over the material world. But the way in which faculties develop is largely by the occurrence of sports, — of unpredictable varieties. Some of these, although they may not tend to increase man's power over the material world, tend to his pleasure in other ways, and are fostered by him. And, apart from actual sports, the brain is such a complex affair, and the inter-connections of faculty are so subtle, that the mere development of those useful faculties which lie in the direct track of evolution tends also to the formation of by-products, — instincts, appetites, and powers, which tend to persist and grow, and which gradually come to fill a large part of human consciousness. Religion, Art, spiritual love, &c., are such by-products; their existence proves that the brain is a complex thing ; but it does not prove that any spiritual world exists which can satisfy their cravings."

These arguments of course receive many answers from theological and philosophical standpoints. It is urged in various ways that the qualities here described as by-products are at once too fundamental and too elevated to be thus regarded as the mere incidental concomitants of faculties of far lower range.

Arguments of this type, however, for the most part ignore altogether the evolutionary scheme put forward on the other side, and rest upon considerations which in this work I am myself precluded from urging. I must now try to show that the evolutionary scheme itself, when more closely considered, points to a wider than planetary scope.

319. The weak point in the materialistic synthesis, briefly given above, is of course the superficial way in vvliich it is forced to treat the appearance

319] GENIUS 95

of life on the planet. In our absolute ignorance of the source from whence life came, we have no ground for assuming that it was a purely planetary product, or that its unknown potentialities are concerned with purely planetary ends. It would be as rash for the biologist to assume that life on earth can only point to generations of further life on earth as it would have been for some cosmic geologist to assume — before the appearance of life on earth — that geological forces must needs constitute all the activity which could take place on this planet.

Since the germ of life appeared on earth, its history has been a history not only of gradual self-adaptation to a known environment, but of gradual discovery of an environment, always there, but unknown. What we call its primitive simple irritability was in fact a dim pansesthesia ; a potential faculty, as yet unconscious of all the stimuli to which it had not yet learnt to respond. As these powers of sensation and of response have developed, they have gradually revealed to the living germ environments of which at first it could have no conception.

It is probable, to begin with, that the only environment which the vast majority of our ancestors knew was simply hot water. For the greater part of the time during which life has existed on earth it would have been thought chimerical to suggest that we could live in anything else. It was a great day for us when an ancestor crawled up out of the slowly-cooling sea ; — or say rather when a previously unsuspected capacity for directly breathing air gradually revealed the fact that we had for long been breathing air in the water ; — and that we were living in the midst of a vastly extended environment, — the atmosphere of the earth. It was a great day again when another ancestor felt on his pigment-spot the solar ray ; — or say rather when a previously unsuspected capacity for perceiving light revealed the fact that we had for long been acted upon by light as well as by heat ; and that we were living in the midst of a vastly extended environment, — namely, the illumined Universe that stretches to the Milky Way. It was a great day when the first skate (if skate he were) felt an unknown virtue go out from him towards some worm or mudfish ; — or say rather when a previously unsuspected capacity for electrical excitation demonstrated the fact that we had long been acted upon by electricity as well as by heat and by light ; and that we were living in an inconceivable and limitless environment, — namely, an ether charged with infinite energy, overpassing and interpenetrating alike the last gulf of darkness and the extremest star. All this, — phrased perhaps in some other fashion, — all men admit as true. May we not then suppose that there are yet other environments, other interpretations, which a further awakening of faculty still subliminal is yet fated by its own nascent response to discover? Will it be alien to the past history of evolution if I add : It was a great day when the first thought or feeling flashed into some mind of beast or man from a mind distant from his own? — when a previously unsuspected capacity of telepathic percipience revealed the fact

that we had long been acted upon by telepathic as well as by sensory stimuli ; and that we were living in an inconceivable and limitless environment,— a thought-world or spiritual universe charged with infinite life, and interpenetrating and overpassing all human spirits, — up to what some have called World-Soul, and some God?

This, as I conceive, is the scheme of Evolution, so far as we can as yet guess it. This is the progress of the game of chess, from the play of pawns to the play of pieces ; and in telepathy, as I take it, we have seen a piece already moved.

320. It is not, however, with the more advanced moves in this game that I am at present concerned. I am dealing not with supernormal sensitivities, but with genius, — defined as the co-operation of the submerged with the emergent self, — as the integration of subliminal with suprahminal faculty within the limits of the range of faculties which all men admit and know. Yet it seemed needful to look for a moment somewhat further, in order to show the true position of genius in the evolutionary scale, in which it forms by no means either an extreme term or an accidental deviation. For it will be easily understood that one of the corollaries from the conception of a constantly widening and deepening perception of an environment infinite in infinite ways, will be that the faculties which befit the material environment have absolutely no primacy, unless it be of the merely chronological kind, over those faculties which science has often called by-products, because they have no manifest tendency to aid their possessor in the struggle for existence in a material world. The higher gifts of genius — poetry, the plastic arts, music, philosophy, pure mathematics— all of these are precisely as much in the central stream of evolution — are perceptions of new truth and powers of new action just as decisively predestined for the race of man — as the aboriginal Australian's faculty for throwing a boomerang or for swarming up a tree for grubs. There is, then, about those loftier interests nothing exotic, nothing accidental ; they are an intrinsic part of that ever-evolving response to our surroundings which forms not only the planetary but the cosmic history of all our race.

What inconsistencies, what absurdities, underlie that assumption that evolution means nothing more than the survival of animals fittest to conquer enemies and to overrun the earth. On that bare hypothesis the genus ho7no is impossible to explain. No one really attempts to explain him except on the tacit supposition that Nature somehow intended to evolve intelligence — somehow needed to evolve joy ; was not satisfied with such an earth-over-runner as the rabbit, or such an invincible conqueror as the influenza microbe. But how much intelligence, what kind of joy Nature aimed at — is this to be left to be settled by the instinct of Phojnme sensuel moyen ? or ought we not rather to ask of the best specimens of our race what it is that they live for? — whether they labour for the meat that perisheth, or for Love and Wisdom ? To more and more among mankind

321] GENIUS 97

the need of food is supplied with as little conscious effort as the need of air ; yet these are often the very men through whom evolution is going on most unmistakably — who are becoming the typical figures of the swiftlychanging race.

321. Once more. If this point of view be steadily maintained, we shall gain further light on some of those strangenesses and irregularities of genius which have led to its paradoxical juxtaposition with insanity as a divergence from the accepted human type. The distinctive characteristic of genius is the large infusion of the subliminal in its mental output ; and one characteristic of the subliminal in my view is that it is in closer relation than the supraliminal to the spiritual world, and is thus nearer to the primitive source and extra-terrene initiation of life. And earthly Life itself — embodied as it is in psycho-physically individualised forms — is, on the theory advanced in these pages, a product or characteristic of the etherial or metetherial and not of the gross material world. Thence in some unknown fashion it came ; there in some unknown fashion it subsists even throughout its earthly manifestation ; thither in some unknown fashion it must after earthly death return. If indeed the inspirations of genius spring from a source one step nearer to primitive reality than is that specialised consensus of faculties which natural selection has lifted above the threshold for the purposes of working-day existence, then surely we need not wonder if the mind and frame of man should not always suffice for smooth and complete amalgamation ; if some prefiguration of faculties adapted to a later stage of being should mar the symmetry of the life of earth. An often-quoted analogy has here a closer application than is often apprehended. The grub comes from the egg laid by a winged insect, and a winged insect it must itself become ; but meantime it must for the sake of its own nurture and preservation acquire certain larval characters — characters sometimes so complex that the observer may be excused for mistaking that larva for a perfect insect destined for no further change save death. Such larval characters, acquired to meet the risks of a temporary environment, I seem to see in man's earthly strength and glory. I see the human analogues of the poisonous tufts which choke the captor — the attitudes of mimicry which suggest an absent sting — the " death's head " coloration which disconcerts a stronger foe.

But meantime the adaptation to aerial life is going on ; something of the imago or perfect insect is preformed within the grub ; and in some species, even before they sink into their transitional slumber, the rudiments of wings still helpless protrude awkwardly beneath the larval skin. Those who call Shelley, for instance, " a beautiful but ineffectual angel beating his wings in the void," may adopt, if they choose, this homelier but exacter parallel. Shelley's special gifts were no more by-products of Shelley's digestive system than the wings are by-products of the grub.

Or at any rate this new use of a well-worn simile may serve to suggest that for a long time yet it must be on the future as much as on the past, VOL. I. G

on what is now in process of evolution as much as on what has already been evolved, that the attention of psychologists should be fixed. We are watching the emergence of unguessed potentialities from the primal germ. The mind is no walled plot which a diagram will figure ; it is a landscape with lines which stretch out of view, and an ever-changing horizon.

322. And thus there may really be something at times incommensti7-abk between the inspirations of genius and the results of conscious logical thought. Just as the calculating boy solves his problems by methods which differ from the methods of the trained mathematician, so in artistic matters also that " something of strangeness " which is in " all excellent beauty," may be the expression of a real difference between subliminal and supraliminal modes of perception. I cannot help thinking that such a difference is perceptible in subliminal relations to speech ; that the subliminal self will sometimes surpass conscious effort, if it is treating speech as a branch of Art, in Poetry ; — or else in some sense will fall short of conscious effort, when it is merely using words as an unavoidable medium to express ideas which common speech was hardly designed to convey.

Thus, on the one hand, when in presence of one of the great verbal achievements of the race — say the Agajtiemnon of ^schylus — it is hard to resist the obscure impression that some form of intelligence other than supraliminal reason or conscious selection has been at work. The result less resembles the perfection of rational choice among known data than the imperfect presentation of some scheme based on perceptions which we cannot entirely follow.

But, on the other hand, even though words may thus be used by genius with something of the mysterious remoteness of music itself, it seems to me that our subliminal mentation is less closely bound to the faculty of speech than is our supraliminal. There is a phrase in common use which involves perhaps more of psychological significance than has yet been brought out. Of all which we can call genius, or which we can ally with genius — of art, of love, of religious emotion — it is common to hear men say that they transcend the scope of speech.

Now, to many persons this seems a mere vague sentimental expression. They hold, perhaps, that language — in however inward and abbreviated a form — is the absolutely ne-cessary instrument of all definite thinking. Or even if they do not insist upon this view a priori, they consider that just as at the opera, ce qui ne vaut pas la peine d'etre dit, on le chante, so in a more general way the assertion that an idea is not expressible in words, can but mean that it in some way falls short of the standard implied in articulate speech.

From the point of view of this work no such presumption can be formed. On the contrary, the relation to language of the subliminal self is a question which obviously stands in need of special inquiry.

323. Let us consider the position of speech among human modes of

323] GENIUS 99

self-expression. The whole person of one human being is more or less expressive to others of his kind. In repose it tells of action and emotion in the past ; in movement it shows action and emotion as now going forward. Gesture — the way in which the body is held — is even now used along with speech as the most general term for communication.

Now, if we are thus communicating by the movement of our muscles, we shall naturally seek out such groups of muscles as we can move the most rapidly and delicately. There are four such groups, namely : the muscles (i) of the eye and orbit; (2) of the mouth and throat; (3) of the fingers, and (4) of the toes.

Three of these groups we all of us use. With the muscles of the eye and orbit we express emotion; with the muscles of mouth and throat we express both emotion and definite ideas ; with the fingers we write ; and the experience moreover of such men as are born without fingers has shown us that the toes can be trained to nearly equal efficiency ; as with certain handless copyists of pictures famihar for many years now in Continental galleries.

Now among many ways of self-expression which can be educed from these groups of muscles, taken singly or together, one great system has dominated the rest. Above all things men have needed definite sound to carry the message to a distance in space, and fixed record in order to preserve it in time. Spoken language has become an absolute necessity for any intellectual life much above the level of brutes ; and written language — a symbolic and summarised gesture — has become an absolute necessity for anything which we can call civilisation. The constant use of throat and fingers for verbalisation has relegated to the background all other forms of gesture.

There is, however, no a priori ground for supposing that language will have the power to express all the thoughts and emotions of man. It may indeed be maintained that the inevitable course of its development tends to exhibit more and more clearly its inherent limitations. " Every language," it has been said, " begins as poetry and ends as algebra." To use the terms employed in this work, every language begins as a subliminal uprush and ends as a supraliminal artifice. Organic instincts impel to primitive ejaculation ; unconscious laws of mind shape early grammar. But even in our own day— and we are still in the earth's infancy— this naivete of language is fast disappearing. The needs of science and of commerce have become dominant. Science has dehberately created for herself an arbitrary system of signs ; — either actual arrangements of letters and numerals, or technical vocabularies, constructed on elaborate plans. Commerce is endeavouring to reach the same algebraical pitch, with bookkeeping, telegraphic codes, pidgin English, Volapuk and the like.

Of course, the development of language is not left entirely to the counting-house and the laboratory. In other directions a spiritualisation of human speech is being pushed on, and our vocabulary, based as it is on

loo CHAPTER III [324

concrete objects and direct sensations, is refined for the expression of philosophical thought. But this is as though one were to try to chip flint arrow-heads into razors ; nor can we wonder if our supraliminal manipulation leaves us with an instrument less and less capable of expressing the growing complexity of our whole psychical being.

324. What then, we may ask, is the attitude and habit of the subliminal self likely to be with regard to language ? Is it not probable that other forms of symbolism may retain a greater proportional importance among those submerged mental operations which have not been systematised for the convenience of communication with other men ?

I think that an inteUigent study of visual and motor automatism will afford us sufficient proof that symbolism, at any rate pictorial symbolism, becomes increasingly important as we get at the contents of those hidden strata. Telepathic messages, especially, which form, as we shall see, the special prerogative or characteristic of subliminal communication, seem to be conveyed by vague impression or by inward or externalised picture oftener than by articulate speech. And I may so far anticipate later discussion of automatic writings (whether self-inspired or telepathic), as to point out a curious linguistic quality which almost all such writings share. The " messages " of a number of automatists, taken at random, will be sure to resemble each other much more closely than do the supraliminal writings of the same persons. Quite apart from their general correspondence in ideas — which belongs to another branch of our subject — there is among the automatic writings of quite independent automatists a remarkable correspondence of literary style. There is a certain quality which reminds one of a translation, or of the compositions of a person writing in a language which he is not accustomed to talk. These characteristics appear at once in automatic script, even of the incoherent kind ; they persist when there is no longer any dream-like incoherence ; they are equally marked, even when, as often happens, the automatic script surpasses in intelligence, and even in its own kind of eloquence, the products of the waking or supraliminal mind.

And side by side and intercurrent with these written messages come those strange meaningless arabesques which have been baptized as " spiritdrawings " — though they rarely show any clear trace of the operation of an external intelligence. Instances of this form of automatism are described in a book called Spirit Drawings : a Personal Narrative, by W. M. Wilkinson, some account of which is given in Appendix 811 A (Vol. II.). These complex and fanciful compositions — often absolutely automatic — appear to me like a stammering or rudimentary symbolism ; as though the subliminal intelligence were striving to express itself through a vehicle perhaps more congenial to its habits than articulate language.

325. Returning, then, from these illustrations drawn from actual automatism to our proper subject oi genius, — that happy mixture of subliminal with supraliminal faculty — we may ask ourselves in what kind of subliminal

326] GENIUS loi

uprush this hidden habit of wider symbolism, of self-communion beyond the limits of speech, will be likely to manifest itself above the conscious threshold.

The obvious answer to this question lies in the one word Art. The inspiration of Art of all kinds consists in the invention of precisely such a wider symbolism as has been above adumbrated. I am not speaking, of course, of symbolism of a forced and mechanical kind — symbolism designed and elaborated as such — but rather of that pre- existent but hidden concordance between visible and invisible things, between matter and thought, between thought and emotion, which the plastic arts, and music, and poetry, do each in their own special field discover and manifest for human wisdom and joy.

In using these words, I must repeat, I am far from adopting the formulae of any special school. The symbolism of which I speak implies nothing of mysticism. Nor indeed, in my view, can there be any real gulf or deep division between so-called realistic and idealistic schools. All that exists is continuous ; nor can Art symbolise any one aspect of the universe without also implicitly symbolising aspects which lie beyond.

326. And thus in the Arts we have symbolism at every stage of transparency and obscurity ; from symbolisms which merely summarise speech to symbolisms which transcend it. Sometimes, as with Music, it is worse than useless to press for too close an interpretation. Music marches, and will march for ever, through an ideal and unimaginable world. Her melody may be a mighty symbolism, but it is a symbolism to which man has lost the key. Poetry's material, on the other hand, is the very language which she would fain transcend. But her utterance must be subliminal and symbolic, if it is to be poetry indeed ; it must rise (as has been already hinted) from a realm profounder than deliberate speech ; it must come charged, as Tennyson has it, with that " charm in words, a charm no words can give."

This branch, indeed, of internal audition, — that which involves complexity rather than intensity of imagined sounds, — offers, so to say, the richest opportunities for subliminal manifestation, — the readiest vent-holes for the uprush of the hidden fire. The sounds that rise within our waking consciousness from a source beyond the will do not confine themselves to the mere shaping of scattered sentences, — the airy syllabling of phrases that tend to nought. There is an inward consonance, an obscure concent, which forms the groundwork of Poetry, the fount of Song, — the cradle from whence those " sphere-born harmonious sisters. Voice and Verse," issue in preformed divinity into the common day. This is true not only for Song, strictly so termed, but also for Poetry unaccompanied by music ; that is to say, for interrelations of rhythm and articulation taken apart from interrelations of pitch, definite time-intervals, or timbre. For the true poet — as Goethe has somewhere said — the melody of his coming poem floats as a self-created and impalpable entity within him, before

words have shaped themselves or thought itself is born. lo mi son un, said a greater even than Goethe, —

" lo mi son un, che quando Amore spira, noto, ed in quel modo Che detta dentro, vo significando."

And here a reflection may be made which, while it clears up (as seems to me) an old confusion, will also well illustrate the latent capacities of the subliminal consciousness ; its power to convey potent and intimate messages through mechanism of the slenderest kind. We know that as we advance from sounds non-human to human sounds, from sounds nonvocal to sounds which the human throat can produce, our conception of any given sound increasingly needs, to make it complete, a motor as well as an auditory representation within us. Our grasp, say, of the word London is imperfect if we cannot articulate the word with our mind's voice as well as hear it with our mind's ear.

In all definite inward audition there is, then, probably a motor element as well as a sensory. And I hold that one difference between imagined poetry and imagined music or song lies in the fact that imagined verbal rhythm may be almost wholly motor, while imagined tunes must be largely sensory as well. To those, then, who are perplexed at the fact that many poets have lacked musical ear it may be answered that the mental imagery of such poets may have been mainly motile ; — may have consisted in a delicate imagination of such laryngeal movements as are concerned in the utterance of melodious speech. I believe that with careful self-observation many men " with an ear for verse " will recognise that the essential part of poetic excitation has lain in scarcely perceptible changes of tension in the muscles of the throat. The rhythmical modulations, indeed, have their birth beyond the will ; but it is about that physical centre of imagined utterance that the emotional stress will gather and the inexplicable promptings throng ; through that motor channel the reverberating tremors rise and fall ; — and flood the flats of common consciousness as with the earthquake-wave of an unfathomed sea.

And there is yet another and even stranger form of inward audition. There exists among men a mighty complex of conceptions which lie apart from — some say beyond — articulate speech and reasoned thought. There is a march and uprising through ideal spaces which some hold as the only true ascent ; there is an architecture which some count as alone abiding, —

" seeing it is built

Of music, therefore never built at all,

And, therefore, built for ever."

Whether considered in regard to its development in the race, or to its activity in the individual. Music resembles not so much a product of terrene needs and of natural selection as a subliminal capacity attaining to

327] GENIUS 103

an accidental manifestation independently of the requirements or of the external stimuli of the supraliminal self. We know the difficulty of explaining its rise on any current theory of the evolution of human faculty. We know that it is like something discovered, not like something manufactured ; — like wine found in a walled-up cellar, rather than like furniture made in the workshop above. And the subjective sensations of the musician himself accord with this view of the essentially subliminal character of the gift with which he deals. In no direction is "genius" or " inspiration " more essential to true success. It is not from careful poring over the mutual relations of musical notes that the masterpieces of melody have been born. They have come as they came to Mozart — whose often-quoted words I need not cite again — in an uprush of unsummoned audition, of unpremeditated and self-revealing joy. They have come, as to Browning's Abt Vogler, with a sense of irrecoverable commingling of depths of soul and heights of heaven.'^ Translating the phrases of poetry into such terms as we here employ, we may say that we have reached a point where the subliminal uprush is felt by the supraliminal personality to be deeper, truer, more permanent than the products of voluntary thought.

Here, too, we must dwell for a moment upon another and higher kind of internal visualisation. I have spoken of the arithmetical prodigy as possessing a kind of internal blackboard, on which he inscribes with ease and permanence his imaginary memoranda. But blackboards are not the only surfaces on which inscriptions can be made. There are other men — prodigies of a different order — whose internal tabula is not of blackened wood, but of canvas or of marble ; whose inscriptions are not rows of Arabic numerals, but living lines of colour, or curves of breathing stone. Even the most realistic art is something more than transcript and calculation ; and for art's higher imaginative achievements there must needs be moments of inward ideahsation when visible beauty seems but the token and symbol of beauty unrevealed ; when Praxiteles must *' draw from his own heart the archetype of the Eros that he made " ; when Tintoret must feel with Heraclitus that " whatsoever we see waking is but deadness, and whatsoever sleeping, is but dream."

327. But when we reach this point we have begun (as I say) to transcend the special province to which, in Chapter I., I assigned the title o{ genius. I there pointed out that the influence of the subliminal on the supraliminal might conveniently be divided under three main heads. When

1 More definite than most of the descriptions of this type in musical literature are the following words of Schumann {Robert Schumann's Early Letters, p. 268): "The piano is getting too limited for me. It is most extraordinary how I write almost everything in canon, and then only detect the imitation afterwards, — and often find inversions, rhythms in contrary motion, &c." And again, p. 271 : "I do not realise all this while I am composing; it only conies to me afterwards ; you who are at the top of the tree will understand what I mean."

the subliminal mentation co-operates with and supplements the supraliminal, without changing the apparent phase of personality, we have genius. When subliminal operations change the apparent phase of personality from the state of waking in the direction of trance, we have hypnotism. When the subliminal mentation forces itself up through the supraliminal, without amalgamation, as in crystal-vision, automatic writing, &c., we have sensory or motor autotnatism. In accordance with this definition, the content of the inspirations of genius is supposed to be of the same general type as the content of ordinary thought. We have regarded genius as crystallising fluid ideas ; or, if you will, as concentrating and throwing upwards in its clear fountain a maze of subterranean streams. But we have not regarded it as modifying, in such operation, the ordinary alert wakefulness of the thinker, nor as providing him with any fresh knowledge, obtainable by supernormal methods alone.

It is plain, however, that such distinctions as those which I have drawn between genius, trance, automatism, cannot possibly be rigid or absolute. They are distinctions made for convenience between different phases of what must really be a continuous process — namely, the influence of the Self below the threshold upon the Self above it. Between each of these definite phases all kinds of connections and intermediate stages must surely exist.

Connections between trance and automatism, indeed, are obvious enough. The difficulty has rather lain in their clear separation. Trance, v/hen habitual, is pretty sure to lead to automatic speech or writing. Automatism, when prolonged, is similarly apt to induce a state of trance.

The hnks between Genius and these cognate states are of a less conspicuous kind. They do, however, exist in such variety as to confirm in marked fashion the analogies suggested above.

328. And first, as to the connection between genius and automatism, one may say that just as anger is a brief madness, so the flash of Genius is essentially a brief automatism.

Wordsworth's moments of inspiration, when, as he says,

" Some lovely image in the song rose up Full-formed, like Venus rising from the sea,"

were in effect moments of automatic utterance ; albeit of utterance held fast in immediate co-operation with the simultaneous workings of the supraliminal self. Such a sudden poetic creation, like the calculating boy's announcement of the product of two numbers, resembles the sudden rush of planchette or pencil, in haste to scrawl some long-wished-for word. Now extend this momentary automatism a little further. We come then to what is called the faculty of improvisation. How much is meant by this term? Is the extempore oration, "the unpremeditated lay," in truth a subliminal product? or have we to do merely with the rapid exercise of ordinary powers?

329] GENIUS 105

In the first place, it is clear that much of what is called improvisation is a matter of memory. The so-called secondary automatism which enables the pianist to play a known piece without conscious attention passes easily into improvisations which the player himself may genuinely accept as original ; but which really consist of remembered fragments united by conventional links of connection. Thus also the orator, " thinking on his legs," trusts himself at first to the automatic repetition of a few stock phrases, but gradually finds that long periods flow unforeseen and unremembered from his tongue.

We thus get beyond the range of stereotyped synergies, of habituations of particular groups of nerve-centres to common action. There is some adaptability and invention ; some new paths are traversed ; adjustments are made for which no mere recurrence to old precedents will suffice.

The problem here resembles that well-known difficulty of explaining what goes on during the restoration or " substitution " of function after an injury to the brain. In that case, the brain-elements which remain uninjured slowly assume functions which they apparently never exercised before, — rearranging paths of cerebral communication in order to get the old efficiency out of the damaged and diminished brain-material. This recovery is not rapid like an extemporisation, but gradual, like a healing or re-growth, and it therefore does not suggest an intelligent control so much as a physiological process, like the re-budding on a certain preordained pattern of the severed claw of a crab. Of course this restoration of brain-functions is inexplicable, as all growth is at present inexplicable. We may call it indeed with some reason the highest process of human growth. So viewed, it forms a kind of middle term between ordinary growth of bone or muscle, always on a predetermined plan, and that sudden creation of new cerebral connections or pathways which is implied in an inspiration of genius. Such a juxtaposition need not weaken my claim that the inspirations of genius represent a co-operant stream of submerged mentation, fully as developed in its own way as the mentation of which we are conscious above the threshold. The nature and degree of subliminal faculty must of course be judged by its highest manifestations. And this analogy between the hidden operations of genius and oi growth would rather support me in regarding organic growth also as controlled by something of intelligence or memory, which under fitting conditions — as in the hypnotic trance — may be induced to co-operate with the waking will.

329. The talent of improvisation, which suggested these analogies, will sometimes act much more persistently than in the case of the orator or the musician. There is reason to believe (both from internal style and from actual statements) that it plays a large part in imaginative literature even of the more commonplace kind. And in one instance at least the itnprovising diathesis, so to term it, has given birth to a mass of literature which formed for a generation one of the most potent emotional elements in European thought. One needs to know George Sand's life and writings

io6 CHAPTER III [330 .

well before one can venture to discriminate in her self-revelations between the ingeniously false and the naively, transparently true. My own belief is that, except in certain cases where she had an urgent motive for falsehood in self-defence, she is almost as veracious an introspective psychologist as Wordsworth himself. Various passages from her life-history, one or two of which represent I believe actual fact, are corroborated, or at least not contradicted, by the statements of other persons familiar with her methods of working. If taken as accurate, they reveal an unusual vigour and fertility of literary outflow going on in an almost dream-like condition ; a condition midway between the actual inventive dreams of R. L. Stevenson and the conscious labour of an ordinary man's composition. Or another parallel would be the day-dreaming habit ; which, as is well known, has led in some morbid cases to a bewildering confusion between the actual and the imaginary life.

George Sand's career was not without moral faults ; but they were the faults, not of a morbid, but of a prepotent organisation ; and they belonged, moreover, almost wholly to her early life. Throughout long years of healthy maturity and age she formed a striking example of the combination of enormous imaginative productiveness with inward tranquillity and meditative calm. What George Sand felt in the act of composition was a continuous and effortless flow of ideas, sometimes with and sometimes without an apparent externalisation of the characters who spoke in her romances. Turning now to another author, as sane and almost as potent as George Sand herself, we find a phenomenon which would have suggested to us actual insanity if observed in a mind less robust and efficient. If the allusions to the apparent independence of Dickens's characters which are scattered through his letters be read with our related facts in view, it will no longer be thought that they are intended as a mystification. Mrs. Gamp, his greatest creation, spoke to him, he tells us (generally in church), as with an inward monitory voice.

330. And note further that as scientific introspection develops we are likely to receive fuller accounts of these concurrent mental processes, these partial externalisations of the creatures of the romancer's brain. One such account, both definite and elaborate, has been published by M. Binet in L'Ann^e Psychologique for 1894, and I summarise it here.^

M. de Curel, a French dramatist of distinction, while apparently quite unaware of the phenomena described either by Dickens or by Stevenson, does nevertheless carry the waking experiences of the one to a point where they closely approach the dream-experiences of the other. M. de Curel's personages, after a period of painful incubation, seem to assume an independent type ; they carry on their conversations independently of his will, nor need he even keep his attention fixed on them. The process of invention thus continues without conscious fatigue. We are here reminded

1 U Annie Psychologique, i. 1894, p. 124, F. de Curel, par A. Binet.

331] GENIUS 107

of certain performances under hypnotic suggestion, where mental or bodily feats, as play-acting, are accomplished without effort or exhaustion.

M. de Curel is an ingenious and refined, if not a widely popular dramatist. His work is of a sufficiently high class to give real interest to his careful and serious analysis of his methods, or rather his experiences while working.

He begins in an ordinary way, or with even more than the usual degree of difficulty and distress in getting into his subject. Then gradually he begins to feel the creation of a number of quasi-personalities within him ; — the characters of his play, who speak to him ; — exactly as Dickens used to describe Mrs. Gamp as speaking to him in church. These personages are not clearly visible, but they seem to move round him in a scene — say a house and garden — which he also dimly perceives, somewhat as we perceive the scene of a dream. He now no longer has the feeling of composition, of creation, but merely of literary revision ; the personages speak and act for themselves, and even if he is interrupted while writing, or when he is asleep at night, the play continues to compose itself in his head. Sometimes while out shooting, &c., and not thinking of the play, he hears sentences rising within him which belong to a part of this play which he has not yet reached. He believes that subliminally the piece has been worked out to that further point already. M. de Curel calls these minor duplications Df personality a bourgeonnement or budding of his primary personality ; — into which they gradually, though not without some painful struggle, re-enter after the play is finished.

It will be seen that this account, — contributed as serious evidence, as M. Binet's long article shows, — is thoroughly concordant with several other cases already known to us. It comes midway between Stevenson's dreams and the hysteric's ide'es fixes.

M. de Curel's insistent ideas are self-suggested. Just that power of crystallising round a nucleus which, when hysterically started, makes the idee obsedante, — makes, when supraliminally started and well directed, the living personage of the play.

331. I have thus far endeavoured to show that Genius represents not only the crystallisation of ideas already existing in floating form in the supraliminal intelligence, but also an independent, although concurrent, stream of mentation, spreading often to wider range, although still concerned with matters in themselves cognisable by the normal intelHgence.

Let us proceed to push the inquiry a step further. It has been claimed in this work for subliminal uprushes generally that they often contain knowledge which no ordinary method of research could acquire. Is this supernormal knowledge — we ought now to ask — ever represented in the uprushes to which we give the name of Genius?

What is the relation, in short, of the man of Genius to the sensitive?

If the man of Genius be, as I have urged, on the whole the corapletest type of humanity, and if the sensitive's special gift be in itself one of the

io8 CHAPTER III [332

most advanced forms of human faculty, ought not the inspirations of genius to bring with them flashes of supernormal knowledge as intimate as those which the sensitive — perhaps in other respects a commonplace person— from time to time is privileged to receive ?

Some remarkable instances of this kind undoubtedly do exist. The most conspicuous and most important of all cannot, from motives of reverence, be here discussed. Nor will I dwell upon other founders of religions, or on certain traditional saints or sages. But among historical characters of the first mark the names of Socrates and of Joan of Arc are enough to cite. I shall try in a later chapter to show that the monitions of the Daemon of Socrates, — the subhminal self of a man of transcendent genius, — have in all probability been described to us with literal truth : and did in fact convey to that great philosopher precisely the kind of telaesthetic or precognitive information which forms the sensitive's privilege to-day. We have thus in Socrates the ideal unification of human powers.

It must, however, be admitted that such complete unification is not the general rule for men of genius ; that their inspirations generally stop short of telepathy or of telsesthesia. I think we may explain this limitation somewhat as follows. The man of genius is what he is by virtue of possessing a readier communication than most men possess between his supraliminal and his subliminal self. From his subliminal self, he can only draw what it already possesses ; and we must not assume as a matter of course that the subliminal region of any one of us possesses that particular sensitivity — that specific transparency — which can receive and register definite facts from the unseen. That may be a gift which stands as much alone — in independence of other gifts or faculties — in the subliminal region, as, say, a perfect musical ear in the supraliminal. The man of genius may draw much from those hidden wells of being without seeing reflected therein any actual physical scene in the universe beyond his ordinary ken.

And yet neither must we hastily assume that because the man of genius gets no definite impression of a world beyond our senses he does not therefore get any true impression, which is all his own.

I believe, on the contrary, that true, though vague, impressions of a world beyond the range of sense are actually received — I do not say by all men of genius, but by men of genius of certain types.

332. Certain very important types .of genius, indeed, — those, for instance, concerned with numbers, forms, and sounds, — do not seem habitually to tend towards the apprehension of deeper aspects of the cosmic mystery. Or perhaps I ought rather to say that the mathematician, on the one hand, is unlikely to give expression to any such supernormal intimations, while the pai7iier and the musician, on the other hand, command acts of expression so subtly and obscurely suggestive, that it is hard for the mere onlooker to infer what the artist's own spiritual attitude may in fact have been. Deeply interesting, therefore, as such discussions may be — discussions as to what was the inward experience of a Raphael or a

333] GENIUS 109

Beethoven — the content of that experience must at present be too uncertain for any psychological analysis, such as we wish to make here, of its veritable truth, — of its trustworthiness as actual insight into a spiritual world.

It would seem, then, that for any valid appreciation of what I may call the vague supernormal content of moments of inspiration, we shall have to examine a very limited group of men of genius. Chiefly, perhaps, of the philosopher and the poet must we needs feel that if any genius reaches out into an interpenetrating spiritual world, theirs must do so ; that they ought to have some message corroborating, even though but in vague general fashion, the results to which sensitives have been led by a plainer, if a narrower, way.

Even among this small class, however, our choice of instructive examples is still further limited. Few philosophers have been men of genius in the sense in which we are using the word in the present chapter ; and few poets have spoken with enough of weight and sincerity to make their testimony to subjective moods worth quoting in serious argument. Yet it must be mainly in the works of poets of pronounced subjective type — rather than in epos or drama — that passages to us instructive are iikely to be found,

333. I shall not attempt an anthology of such passages. We all know that their general tone supports, as far as it goes, the thesis here advanced : — namely, that moments of poetical inspiration are apt to be moments also of some sense of insight or entrance into a supernal world. Most poets have been Platonists ; their influence tends to swell that ancient stream of idealistic thought which lies at the root of all civilised religions.

For our present purposes, however, one single poet — almost one single poem — will practically suffice. In whatever rank Wordsworth may be placed as an artist in language, there can be no doubt as to his conscientious veracity as an introspective psychologist. "The Prelude, or •Growth of a Poet's Mind," has been regarded by some critics as a tedious and egotistical poem. But whether or not it is suited to give wide poetic pleasure, its value as a " human document " is, for our present purposes, I venture to say, unique. In Goethe indeed, in Browning, in Tennyson above all, we find introspective passages of extreme interest and beauty. But no one save Wordsworth — not even Goethe — has treated his own faculties so seriously or on so ample a scale. The " Prelude " is a deliberate, persistent attempt to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, about exactly those emotions and intuitions which differentiate the poet from common men. And it must be added, as a judgment established above the ebb and flow of popular criticism, that Wordsworth had a valid right to deal thus with himself as a kind of typical poet. Whether recognised coldly or enthusiastically, his position is secure.

It must be remembered, too, that Wordsworth was not only particularly

no CHAPTER III [333

anxious to tell the truth about himself, but particularly capable of doing so. His self-esteem never took the form of making him wish to appear other than he was. As he genuinely was, so did he clearly see himself; and although both his experience and his appreciativeness had serious limitations, yet, from a psychological point of view, his limitations were rather advantages. What can we want more than this kind of sworn and unbiassed deposition as to the growth and content of a mind which in sheer force of what we call original genius — as distinguished from subtlety, acquirement, universality, and so forth — has hardly ever been surpassed ? Here was a great motor force in the world of mind ; how was that force worked from inside?

Let us begin with the strictly limited inquiry from which we started, and let us consider merely the description given by this one poet of the apparent contetit of moments of profound inspiration. We find Wordsworth insisting, in the first place, upon the distinctive character of this subliminal uprush.

He speaks of the " haze within," which becomes

" A tempest, a redundant energy Vexing its own creation."

Of " imagination " he says (Book VI.) : —

" That awful Power rose from the mind's abyss, Like an unfathomed vapour that enwraps, At once, some lonely traveller. I was lost ; Halted without an effort to break through ; But to my conscious soul I now can say — ' I recognise thy glory ; ' in such strength Of usurpation, when the light of sense Goes out, but with a flash that has revealed The invisible world, doth greatness make abode."

This passage expresses in the language of poetry, the very relations between the supraliminal and the subliminal on which I have in this chapter dwelt.

The influence rises from no discoverable source ; for a moment it may startle or bewilder the conscious mind ; then it is recognised as a source of knowledge, arriving through inner vision ; while the action of the senses is suspended in a kind of momentary trance. The knowledge gained, however, is simply a perception of "the invisible world " ; there is no claim to any more definite revelation.

Concordant with this passage are other descriptions of " these fleeting moods of shadowy exultation " ; they bear an unmistakable, though hardly a translatable message. Of childish hours the poet says (Book I.) : —

" Even then I felt Gleams like the flashing of a shield ; the earth And common face of Nature spake to me Rememberable things."

335] GENIUS

I II

And since it is mainly by inward vision that these rememberable things are in truth discerned, there is a growing fusion between subjective and objective ; between that which is generated in the seer himself and that of which the visible universe conveys the half-caught intimation (Book II.) :—

" An auxiliar light Came from my mind, which on the setting sun Bestowed new splendour."

Or at a still further stage (Book II.) : —

" Bodily eyes Were utterly forgotten, and what I saw Appeared like something in myself, a dream, A prospect in the mind."

Thus it fares, Wordsworth repeats in a later passage (Book XIV.), with minds sustained by recognition of transcendent power : —

" In a world of life they live, By sensible impressions not enthralled, But by their quickening impulse made more prompt To hold fit converse with the spiritual world."

334. Vague though these passages (and others like them) may be, they nevertheless carry more conviction than do the more definite visions of the saints and illumines of various creeds. The sane simplicity of Wordsworth has been subject to less of prepossession ; he, if any man, has kept his mind, as Bacon advised, concentric to the universe ; and there is nothing in his revelation which any other revelation can invalidate or contradict.

A vague but genuine consciousness of the spiritual environment ; that (it seems) is the degree of revelation which artistic or philosophic genius is capable, of conferring. Subliminal uprushes, in other words, so far as they are intellectual, tend to become telcesthetic. They bring with them indefinite intimations of what I hold to be the great truth that the human spirit is essentially capable of a deeper than sensorial perception, of a direct knowledge of facts of the universe outside the range of any specialised organ or of any planetary view.

335. But this conclusion points the way to a speculation more important still. Telsesthesia is not the only spiritual law, nor are subliminal uprushes affairs of the intellect alone. Beyond and above man's innate power of world-wide perception, there exists also that universal link of spirit with spirit which in its minor earthly manifestations we call telepathy. Our submerged faculty — the subliminal uprushes of genius — can expand in that direction as well as in the direction of telsesthesia. The emotional content, indeed, of those uprushes is even profounder and more important than the intellectual ; — in proportion as Love and Religion are profounder and more important than Science or Art.

That primary passion, I repeat, which binds life to life, which links us both to life near and visible and to life imagined but unseen ; — that is no mere organic, no mere planetary impulse, but the inward aspect of the telepathic law. Love and religion are thus continuous ; — they represent different phases of one all-pervading mutual gravitation of souls. The flesh does not conjoin, but dissever ; although through its very severance it suggests a shadow of the union which it cannot bestow. We have to do here neither with a corporeal nor with a purely human emotion. Love is the energy of integration which makes a Cosmos of the Sum of Things.

But here there is something of controversy to traverse before a revived Platonic conception of love can hope to be treated by the physiologist as more than a pedantic jest. And naturally so ; since there is no emotion subliminal over so wide a range of origin, — fed so obscurely by "all thoughts, all passions, all delights," — and consequently so mysterious even to the percipient himself. At one end of its scale love is based upon an instinct as primitive as the need of nutrition ; even if at the other end it becomes, as Plato has it, the ip/xrjvcvov /cat SiaTropOfxcvov, " the Interpreter and Mediator between God and Man." The controversy as to the planetary or cosmical scope of the passion of Love is in fact central to our whole subject.

336. It will give clearness to the question in dispute if I quote here a strong expression of each view in turn. For the physiological or materialist conception of the passion of love, — where love's subliminal element is held to be of the organic type, — set forth in no light or cynical spirit, but with the moral earnestness of a modern Lucretius, I can turn to no better authority than Professor Pierre Janet. The passage which follows is no mere boutade or paradox ; it is a kind of culminating expression of the theory which regards the supraliminal man as the normal man, and distrusts all deep disturbance of his accustomed psychical routine.

It is commonly said that love is a passion to which man is always liable, and which may surprise him at any moment of his life from 15 to 75. This does not seem to me accurate; and a man is not throughout all his life and at every moment susceptible of falling in love (de devem'r ainouretix). When a man is in good physical and moral health, when he has easy and complete command of all his ideas, he may expose himself to circumstances the most capable of giving rise to a passion, but he will not feel it. His desires will be reasonable and obedient to his will, leading the man only so far as he wishes to go, and disappearing when he wishes to be rid of them. On the other hand if a man is morally below the mark (^inalade an mo?-al), — if in consequence of physical fatigue or excessive intellectual work, or of violent shocks and prolonged sorrow, he is exhausted, melancholy, distracted, timid, incapable of controlHng his ideas, — in a word, depressed, — then he will fall in love, or receive the germ of some kind of passion, on the first and most trivial occasion. . . . The least thing is then enough ; the sight of some face, a gesture, a word, which previously would have left us altogether indifferent, strikes us, and

337] GENIUS 113

becomes the starting point of a long amorous malady. Or more than this, an object which had made no impression on us. at a moment when our mind was healthier and not capable of inoculation, may have left in us some insignificant memory which reappears in a moment of morbid receptivity. That is enough ; the germ is sown in a favourable soil ; it will develop itself and grow.

There is at first, as in every virulent malady, a period of incubation ; the new idea passes and repasses in the vague reveries of the enfeebled consciousness ; then seems for a few days to have disappeared and to leave the mind to recover from its passing trouble. But the idea has done its work below the surface ; it has become strong enough to shake the body ; and to provoke movements whose origin lies outside the primary consciousness. What is the surprise of a sensible man when he finds himself piteously returning beneath the windows of his charmer, whither his wandering feet have taken him without his knowledge ; — or when in the midst of his daily work he hears his lips murmuring perpetually the well-known name ! . . . Such is passion in its reality ; not as idealised by fantastic description, but reduced to its essential psychological characteristics. {V Atitotnatisme Psychologique, p. 466.)

337. On the other side I will appeal to Plato himself, giving a brief sketch merely of one of the leading passages {^Symposium, 192-212) where the Platonic conception of love is set forth.^

Plato begins by recognising, as fully as pessimist or cynic could do, the absolute inadequacy of what is called on earth the satisfaction of this profound desire. Lovers who love aright will feel that no physical nearness can content them, but what will content them they cannot say. " Their soul," says Plato, " is manifestly desiring something else ; and what it is she cannot tell, only she darkly prophesies thereof and guesses it from afar. But if Hephaestus with his forging fire were to stand beside that pair and say : ' Is this what ye desire — to be wholly one ? to be together by night and day? — for I am ready to melt you together and to make you grow in one, so that from two ye shall become one only, and in this life shall be undivided, and dying shall die together, and in the underworld shall be a single soul ; ' — there is no lover who would not eagerly accept the offer, and acknowledge it as the expression of the unknown yearning and the fulfilment of the ancient need." And through the mouth of Diotima, Plato insists that it is an unfailing sign of true love that its desires are for ever-, nay, that love may be even defined as the desire of the everlasting possession of the good. And in all love's acts he finds the impress of man's craving for immortality, — for immortality whose only visible image for us on earth is the birth of children to us as we ourselves decay, — so that when the slow self-renewal of our own everchanging bodies

1 In the passage which follows some use has been made of Jowett's translation. It is noticeable that this utterance, unsurpassed among the utterances of antiquity, has been placed by Plato in the mouth of a woman — the prophetess Diotima — with the express intention, as I think, of generalising it, and of raising it above the region of sexual passion. There is nothing else in antiquity resembling the position thus ascribed to Diotima in reference to Socrates, — the woman being represented as capable of raising the highest and of illumining the wisest soul.

VOL. I. H

has worn out and ceased, we may be renewed in brighter, younger bodies which we desire to be born to us from whomsoever we find most fair. "And then," says Plato, rising, as ever, from visible to invisible things, " if active bodies have so strong a yearning that an endless series of lovely images of themselves may constitute, as it were, an earthly immortality for them when they have worn away, how greatly must creative souls desire that partnership and close communion with other souls as fair as they may bring to birth a brood of lofty thoughts, poems, statutes, institutions, laws, — the fiitting progeny of the soul ?

" And he who in his youth hath the need of these things in him, and grows to be a godlike man, wanders about in search of a noble and wellnurtured soul ; and finding it, and in presence of that beauty which he forgets not night or day, brings forth the beautiful which he conceived long ago ; and the twain together tend that which he hath brought forth, and are bound by a far closer bond than that of earthly children, since the children which are born to them are fairer and more immortal far. Who would not choose to have Homer's offspring rather than any sons or daughters of men ? Who would not choose the offspring which Lycurgus left behind him, to be the very salvation of Lacedaemon and of Greece? or the children of Solon, whom we call Father of our Laws? or of other men like these, whether Greeks or barbarians, who by great deeds that they have done have become the begetters of every kind of virtue ? — ay, and to these men's children have temples been set up, and never to any other progeny of man. ..."

