
In 1853 I was living on a ranche three miles from what is now the city of Santa Cruz. (It was but a village then, though they called it a town.) My family consisted of my husband, myself, and, in a certain sense, of a young English sailor, a healthy, kind-hearted, and very decent, though very ignorant fellow, whom my husband had employed to work on the ranche during the previous year. His name was Thomas Travers, and he had just made his mark (x) to a written agreement for another year's service. As it will be seen,

ISO CHAPTER VIII [852

I had no servant, but Tom stood ready to help me in any way he could. For instance, when, at intervals of weeks, visitors would make their appearance, he would immediately kill and clean some chickens for me. (If you wanted beef-steak in those days you could only have it by killing an ox. The nearest neighbours sometimes combined and took a quarter each.)

On one occasion the two most intelligent men in town came out, a Dr. McLean and the Rev. — Dryden, and they presently asked me if I had a small table 1 could let them have (while I was busy, and my husband a mile off at his tannery), with which they could continue some strange experiments that had lately been made among our mutual friends in town. Spirits tipped the table, and they said sentences were spelled by the use of the alphabet. That A's and B's had in this way heard of their long since departed children, &c., &c.

I listened eagerly. I had left a large circle of friends at the East, and here was not one of the old kind : Lucre tia Mott, Lucy Stone, Garrison, Purvis. A view of the entire bay of Monterey from my sitting-room window did not prevent me from longing continually for a little of the old sympathy. One of my most devoted friends had a few years since passed to the other shore ; my young brother was there too. If I could establish communication with them, what a relief, what a pleasure it would be to me !

My smallest table was in size 3^ ft. by i^ ft. My husband was willing to test the matter, and as we were given to understand that three or four persons together would be more likely to succeed than two (since magnetism or electricity was drawn from them by the invisibles to help in accomplishing their object), Mr. K. went out to Tom's shanty and asked him to come and sit at the table with us.

We had not held our hands one moment on the table before it tipped very decidedly, and I forthwith proceeded to repeat the alphabet. The doing so, however, struck me as worse than ridiculous ; it was very unpleasant, too, and I observed that if spirits were present they could hear me say the letters in my mind as well as if they were uttered from my tongue.

" All right. Go ahead ! " my husband replied, " we will sit and wait for results."

I did so, and the table tipped promptly to the letters, spelling out —

" Mary Howells."

As / knew no such person, I asked if she was a friend of Mr. K.'s? Answer: "No." Of Tom's ? Answer: "Yes." A relation of his ? Answer: "Sister." Are you married ? I questioned. Answer: "No."

"Oh, don't let us waste any more time !" I exclaimed. "It's all falsehood and nonsense. Here is some one professing to be Tom's sister who says her name is Mary Howells, and that she is unmarried. If this were true, of course her name would be Travers."

Tom nodded aside to me and said in a low tone —

" Yes, mum. That's her name. Mary Howells."

He looked extremely confused and astonished.

" Why, what do you mean ? " Mr. K. broke in ; " your name is Travers, how can hers be Howells ? "

" No, sir," Tom replied, looking down, " my name is Howells."

But Mr. K. insisted that it could not be. Had he not made his mark after the Travers only the other day ? Five minutes were taken up in the attempt to convince Tom that he did not know his own name.

852] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 151

" You see, sir," he at length explained, " I ran away from a whale ship in San Francisco, and sailors is so scarce there I was afraid they would hunt me up and take me back, so I just took another name."

Hardly convinced now, Mr. K. advised him to drop the alias at once, assuring him that no one would molest him. This he did, and the second year following married, and he is now the father of twelve girls and three boys who bear the strangely discovered name.

But to return. Finding that the communication had been so far correct, I proposed that we should compose ourselves while I repeated the alphabet as before, still hoping to receive the name of my dear friend. But Tom's sister had not accomplished her purpose, and she proceeded to spell the following words: —

" I — have — a — child — a — girl. — She — is — seven — years — old — and — now — is — in — a — house — of — ill — fame — in — Cat — Street. — I — want — my — brother — to — bring — her — away — from — there."

This was a difficult and painful message to convey, and I told Tom that I did not like to tell him what was spelt.

" She says that she has a little girl seven years old," I began.

Here he removed his hands quickly from the table, and counting on the fingers of one hand by those of the other, looked up and observed : —

" Yes, mum, that's so. She's seven now."

When I gave him the rest of the message he became much excited, and begged me to assure his sister that he would send home 50 dols. the next month, and have the child removed to a better place, and that as soon as the crops were in he would go home and get the child.

I assured him she could hear all he was saying.

" But is it true that there is a street called Cat Street ? " I asked.

" Yes, mum ; and it is the worst in the city," he returned.

The following day he acknowledged to me that his sister was a woman of the town.

I now asked my husband to procure me a smaller and lighter table so that I might sit at it by myself, and in that way be more likely to attract my own friends. This he did, but to my great annoyance, Mary Howells immediately presented herself. This time, however, she came to say that her child was ill. When she left the movements of the table were weak and uncertain.

The following evening, she came to say that the child was much worse, and she thought it would die. A day or two later she reported it dead. I asked if the child were now with her, and she replied by very decided movements, that she was not.

After this, Mary Howells never put in an appearance, and every day I prayed that some one I loved might speak a word to me. They did not. I know now that they could not, for want of the honest sailor's electrical help, which I rejected in my ignorance. Seafaring persons are apt to possess great mediumistic power.

After hearing that the child was dead I wrote a guarded letter to Tom's parents, for him, asking how they all were, including the little girl. In due time I received a reply, or, I should say, Tom did, though he could not read writing. They said they were all well except Mary's little girl, who had died. (They did not say exactly when, but as Tom had not been absent from England much over a year, it must have been within that time, and we had every reason

to believe the mother's statement a true one.) The old people further said that Mary had married a soldier.

I understood from this that the child's mother was not wholly depraved, that she was concerned about the welfare of her little one, and looking about for help in her destitute circumstances her thoughts had turned to her brother, most likely persistently turned to him, and this resulted in her leaving her body temporarily during sleep in search of him. We had assumed that she was, as we say, " dead." She had not asserted the fact. »

I submit this one experience and will write out another as soon as I can. — Very truly yours, GEORGIANA B. KIRBY.

A second letter from Mrs. Kirby, dated Santa Cruz, Cal., October 1 2th, 1886, gave further particulars as follows : —

DEAR SIR, — Yours of September Qth arrived in due season. My reply has been delayed by my ineffectual efforts to ascertain the month when our two friends, McLean and Dryden, visited us on the ranche, because it was within a month after this that Mary Ho wells told me her child was ill, and later that she was dead, and I thought it might not be so difficult to search the death record of one month for the child under the head of " Howells." As it is the gentlemen have proved to me that their visit occurred in 1852, and not in 1853 as I had supposed, but they could not remember if it were the spring or fall of that year. This, our ignorance of the date of the death and of the child's Christian name, is £the most unsatisfactory part of my record. Neither were mentioned in the grandfather's letter, and from Tom never mentioning the name I fancied he did not know it. I saw him recently, but I could not venture to speak to him of his sister's illegitimate child. He has twelve living daughters of his own, and he would be justly offended if I should remind him of how we had gained a knowledge of his sister's life. He told us that his father was still alive and living where they always had lived, at Saltash, which he thought by this time must be a part of Plymouth.

I should explain that neither Dr. McLean nor the Rev. — Dryden were personally cognisant of our doings, so that they could not act as witnesses in the case.

You ask if I can point you to any contemporary record. Thirty-four years ago no Spiritualistic paper was published in the United States, and such a narration given as true in any ordinary journal would have laid us open to the charge of lunacy. And had this been otherwise, we could not have proclaimed the fact that the sister of the honest fellow who was working for us was a disreputable woman.

As to fraud on Tom's part, he could hardly understand why we wanted him to sit with his hands on the table. I repeated the letters in my^ mind. How could he tip the table at the right instant so as to spell words which disclosed his sister's disgrace ? Then he was in no want of money. He had been earning 60 dols. a month (and had spent it all, mostly at Spanish fandangos) ; and the agreement with my husband, to which he had lately placed his X, bound him to work for Mr. K. for one year for the sum of 60 dols. a month and his board and lodging. You, sir, must have read something about the high price of labour in California in those early years of its settlement.

The sittings were held after supper (or dinner, you would call it), between seven and nine o'clock.

853] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 153

Cat Street was in Plymouth, England. If it has given place to another the fact of its former existence could be verified. GEORGIANA B. KIRBY.

The actual existence of the " Cat Street " of the narrative is shown by the following letter : —

POST OFFICE, PLYMOUTH, January 2yd, 1888.

SIR,— In reply to yours of the 2ist instant, I beg to inform you that a few years ago there was a street named Catte Street, but it is now called Stillman Street. — I am, sir, yours obediently,

R. A. LEVERTON (for POSTMASTER).

The regretted death of Mrs. Kirby soon after the date of her last letter put an end to this correspondence.

It will be observed that the communications from the woman at Plymouth were received at an hour which, in England, fell in the middle of the night.

With Mrs. Kirby's case we may compare an old, but carefully evidenced, record which I give in 852 A.

In that case a warning was received by table- tilting of the approaching death of a man who (although the experimenter did not know it) was lying in a state of opium- stupor. The circumstances of his last illness had previously been predicted by a crystal- vision. It is, of course, conceivable that, if indeed it was the sick man's own spirit which gave the message through the table, his own spirit also may have inspired the crystal-vision. Compare with this case the incident described by Mr. Underwood (865 A) where Mrs. Underwood's left hand wrote in "mirror-writing" the name of a person two hundred miles off, who was. as was subsequently learnt, " in an unconscious state at the time, and very near death, which occurred two or three days afterwards." There have been some scattered indications, throughout our evidence of automatisms, of a possible premonitory knowledge, or guardian care, possessed and exercised by a man's own deeper self, without external spiritual intervention.

I add in 852 B the case of Signor Bonatti, where, again, some of the communications through automatic writing are given as coming from living persons, though the usual communicator frankly styles itself " Secondo," as being no more than the automatist's secondary personality.

853. I pass on to a small group of cases which form a curious transition from these communications inter vivos to communications which I shall class as coining from the dead. These are cases where the message professes to come from a deceased person, but shows internal evidence of having come, telepathically, from the mind of some one present. I shall begin with a case such as is often cited as proof (insufficient proof, I think) that a deceased person is communicating.

Our informant, Mr. Lewis, a man of business in Cincinnati, states that an automatist to whom his (Mr. Lewis's) family were absolutely unknown wrote a message, with true name, purporting to come from an infant sister

long deceased. Mr. Lewis, naturally enough, accepts this message, as similar messages have often been accepted, as an indication of his sister's actual presence.

The account is quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 64.

From Mr. S. LEWIS, 347 Baymiller Avenue, Cincinnati.

April gtk, 1888.

On January 28th last I called at the house of some friends ; and on this occasion there was some planchette writing. The friends I called on, I believe, are professed Spiritualists. Some four or five of us (I also did) sat around a table in a full and well-lighted room (lighted the entire evening). The operator of the planchette was a lady; her husband was at the table, also three other friends, including myself. Different communications (so called) were received by different ones at the table, from different friends (as the Spiritualists say), who have passed into the spirit world. I can't give all communications to-day, but one I wish to state. But first let me say that many years since in my father's family the first little one that came to live — a short time — with them was a little girl, named Angeline; she lived only about two years and died; next to this little girl was a brother, named Charles (in after life a clergyman in the Episcopal Church) ; and next to Charles was another little sister also named Angeline, and next to her was another sister named B. Ann; then next to B. Ann appeared, well, your humble servant, myself, to behold many of the beauties of this beautiful world. So that you see that between the two brief years of my first little sister, Angeline (ist), and my own coming on this globe there was born one brother and two sisters ; therefore, my first little sister, Angeline (ist), I never saw; and only heard my mother (in her lifetime) speak of Angeline (ist), and I have also seen her name in the records, &c., in the Bible at my old home.

The operator of the planchette, on the evening of which I am speaking, knew nothing of my father's family (excepting, of course, myself). I never had mentioned one word to the operator (of planchette), or any one else in that little company, anything whatever about my brothers and sisters or even about my father's family in any way or manner ; and besides, we all lived and grew up in the north part of the State, not far distant from Lake Erie, while the operator has (I think) lived in the south part of this State not far distant from the Ohio River ; and there never has been any acquaintance nor any communication between any member of my father's family (or any one else even) to give any history or information of any kind to the operator, and I certainly never gave the operator any information whatever until after the occurrence and the writing on the planchette, which wrote this evening, January 28th last, the following, viz. : " Mr. Lewis, I am his sister, I am glad you came here to-night j come again (signed} Angeline"

Now I want to ask, how could originate in the mind of operator any ideas or thoughts about this little sister Angeline (ist) and myself? I had not for years past even thought of her until the name was written on the evening spoken of.

The operator is not, never has been a paid medium. S. LEWIS.

854. Now let us consider a similar message, which might have produced a similar belief in another informant's mind. But here it so

854] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 155

happened that he tested the alleged fact of death ; and found that the supposed spirit was still alive at the time of the message. The correspondent, Mr. G. E. Long, is known to Dr. Hodgson. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 65.)

JERSEY CITY, N. J., October 22nd, 1888.

... I think I wrote you once that about two years ago I had received what was said to be a most convincing test of spirit-return, convincing to all except myself. A young lady, a Spiritualist and medium, though not a professional, nor one that ever received one cent in pay, by means of a lettered board and toy chair, she holding one leg of the chair and I another, while a third leg of the chair served as a pointer, gave the following by means of the chair : —

First the chair spelt out my name and showed a disposition to get in my lap ; then it spelled out " GARY," and when I asked for the name of the " spirit " it spelt out " George (my name), you ought to know me as I am Jim." But I didn't, and said so. Then, without my looking at the board, it spelt out " Long Island, Jim Rowe," and " Don't you remember I used to carry you when you were a little fellow," or words to that effect. I had to acknowledge the truth of it and also to say that as he was an ignorant man he possibly intended " GARY " for carry. I must own I was puzzled for the moment. To make sure of his power I asked that he count the pickets in the fence outside of the house and I would go out and confirm his statement. Somehow he couldn't agree to this, and even the medium objected. As a last resort I asked how long he had been in the spirit land and the answer came, between thirteen and fourteen years.

Now to the sequel. First it occurred to me a day or two after, that while all the incidents given were correct, the name should have been given as ROE instead of ROWE. Second, I was upon Long Island this summer, and the matter coming to my mind I inquired how long Jim Roe had been dead, and was informed he died last winter ; so when I received this test so convincing to the believers the man was not dead. — Yours truly,

GEO. E. LONG.

On October 26th, 1888, Mr. Long adds : —

I do not think that the medium was fraudulent. Her family consists of Mr. S. and three daughters, she being the youngest. I have found all to be hypnotic subjects, with the exception of the eldest daughter. They are all believers in Spiritualism, the youngest having been the medium. They do not sit now, as it is claimed that the sittings, while rich in spiritualistic satisfaction, were productive of a state of poor health in the medium.

As I myself have obtained information supposed to have been impossible for me to have reached, I cannot say for certainty that she had not obtained information about Jim, but I don't believe she had. As the name Rowe was being spelled I sat with my eyes turned from the board and had in mind the name Scudder, and mentally followed the taps of the chair to S C U D— when the medium said, " The name Rowe is given," &c. This would seem to leave out any involuntary muscular action. Why Rowe should have been given instead of Roe is still another phase. I wonder whether, if any question of the Roe family had arisen, I would have had in mind the name of Rowe? If so, then she produced that which I had long while before been conscious of, but was at the time unconscious of, and had it coupled with an error in spell-

ing that I might have been guilty of had I myself been called upon at that moment to spell it. Had she been fraudulent the probability is she would have spelt it correctly.

It seems to me that the basis of Spiritualism rests mainly upon this phenomenon which men and women in a supernormal condition produce, without understanding it, and credit it to spiritual agencies.

[A general corroboration of Mr. Long's memory of the incident is added from a lady present at the time, who does not now recall the details.]

855. The next case was sent to Professor Barrett by a convinced Spiritualist, as a proof of the reality of intercourse with the departed. The names were stated, but as I am citing the narrative in a sense differing from that which its writer meant it to bear, I will not now give them, and will only say that all three persons concerned are of very good position.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. p. 236.)

One evening, a few years ago, I had with me two young friends,

Mademoiselle de P., now Lady S., and Mademoiselle de P n, her cousin,

who is Grande Gouvernante to the daughters of the Crown Prince of Germany, both complete unbelievers in Spiritualism. To amuse them, however, as I sometimes write under occult influence, I asked Mademoiselle de P. to fix her thoughts on some one I did not know, to see whether my hand would write something true concerning him or her. She did as I requested, and soon my hand wrote, " His life has been overshadowed by the act of another." She looked astonished and said that the person she was thinking of had had a brother to whom he was much attached, who had committed suicide.

She then asked if she could be told where she had met him for the first time. My hand wrote, "It was at the foot of a marble staircase splendidly illuminated by a July sun ; as you went up he gazed after you as one gazes on the track of a dazzling meteor." This was also correct ; she had met him, she said, for the first time at the foot of the staircase of the Ministere de la Guerre, in Paris, and her cousin added that he had been much struck with her. The only inaccuracies were that the staircase was not a marble but a stone one, and that it was a September sun that shone.

When I write in this way the ideas do not come (consciously at least) from my mind, and my hand seems to be gently moved by some external influence.

Now I confess that this description of the staircase, and the meteor, and so forth, suggests to me as its source, not so much a male spirit disembodied as a female spirit still in the flesh, and the romantic tone of the communication seems to reflect the mood of the persons present.

856. In the next case the explanation suggested by Professor Alexander is probably the correct one.

(From the Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 112-115.) The following account of some experiments in table-tilting was sent to us by Professor Alexander, of Rio de Janeiro, in March 1892. He writes : —

Rio DE JANEIRO, March 2\st [1892].

Dr. Barcellos is a gentleman who resides at Botafogo, Rio de Janeiro, where he not only has a considerable practice, but is also generally esteemed

856] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 157

as an honourable and sensible man. Having studied hypnotism, he was desirous of witnessing some of the allied facts to be observed in psychical research. Towards the middle of last year we agreed to hold formal sittings at his house with the purpose of eliciting, if it were possible, physical phenomena. We devoted Monday evenings to our investigations, the circle being composed, with the exception of myself, of members of the doctor's own family. Donna Maria de Villas Boas Barcellos, a school teacher, who acted as medium, has, if table-tilting be no proof to the contrary, arrived at years of mature discretion. She is Dr. Barcellos' sister-in-law, and the mother of five children. The few sittings held began on the 3ist of August 1891, and were discontinued about the end of October of the same year. They were subject to much interruption by children and visitors, and were finally stopped when Donna Maria was appointed to a school at a distance. With the exception of some slight crepitations, more felt than heard, the seances, so far as physical phenomena go, were a failure. The lady, doubtless, moved the table herself, although she did not seem to be aware of it. As for the messages, they were nearly always of a trivial character, and occasionally they were false. There seems, however, to have been a noticeable percentage of verifiable truth in what came through Donna Maria's automatism. Before our sittings began, this lady was seated at the meza fallante (speaking-table) with members of her own family when the presence of her father, then deceased, was announced. He was asked to give the names of the people present. This he did, including that of a boy who was not in the room at the time, with the information that he had just fallen down in the mud. Immediately afterwards the little fellow came into the room crying and confirmed the statement made through the table. The sitters, who were only seeking for amusement, became frightened and abandoned all further experiments. At our own sittings, among much that was wearisome and unprofitable, a few encouraging incidents occurred. On one occasion (October 26th, 1891) Dr. Barcellos asked mentally about the state of a young lady patient who was ill of smallpox. The table replied that she would die on the following morning at eight o'clock. She did not die, but at the hour mentioned she became much worse. On another occasion, after I had retired, details were given about the private life of an individual who lived in Vassouras, up country, which were by no means flattering to him. A Sefihor Lozada, the doctor's brother-in-law, who was standing away from the table, was the only person present who had previously known of these particulars. He declared that the information thus obtained was exact.

So much for the general character of our sittings, of which I give an idea, so that the incident I am about to relate may not have more than its due importance.

On the 2ist September 1891, I was seated at the table with Dr. Barcellos, his niece Sylvia, and Donna Maria Barcellos, when the words came, " The vase is broken." We asked what vase. " (The vase) at your house, the vase of phenic acid." I demanded the hour, and the reply was, " At eight o'clock." Of this an immediate note was taken at my request by one of the children seated at another table. I transferred this note to my pocket-book where it reads as follows : —

" 21 st of September, 1891.— O vaso se quebrou— De sua casa— O vaso de acido phenico — As 8 horas."

I at once looked at my watch. It wanted some four or five minutes to

eight. I knew, however, that it was not going well at the time, and I forgot to compare it afterwards with the right time. When this message had been given Sylvia Barcellos rose from her place, and went into the dining-room, where she told the others what had happened. Some visitors who were there spoke of retiring ; but they were urged to stay, as it was only eight o'clock — the hour then marked by the timepiece on the wall. Thus a lucky chance determined the time of the message, which my carelessness in neglecting to see how much I was out might have left in doubt.

I did not at first suppose that the above words had any more importance than other things that came through the table. It was, therefore, an agreeable surprise when on a subsequent occasion Dr. Barcellos told me that the message had been confirmed. I wrote down a resume of his statement, which I now copy from my note-book : —

" Donna M. on arriving home was being told of fright, when she interrupted them, telling them what had come through table. They had just remarked time (eight o'clock) and went to give food to sick child — when noise of breakage. They exclaimed, ' O vaso de acido phenico se quebrou.' In truth, the jug had been upset by the dog, and had fallen against the vase of phenic acid, making the noise."

Neither the vase in question, which was of porcelain, nor the water-jug was really broken. The cause of the accident was a dog that had got into the room where the sick child lay. The animal had, no doubt, endeavoured to drink out of the jug, which was standing on the floor near a chair.

The house where Donna Maria was then living is situated about a kilometre's distance from Dr. Barcellos' residence, so that the explanation by hyperaesthesia of the hearing — in a person who could hardly be said to be out of her normal condition — seems to me to be absurd. Yet the lady was no clairvoyant, for the vase was not really broken. Even if her character were not above suspicion, she could not have arranged the incident beforehand, for a dog does not take part in a plot. The coincidence in time, and the exact mention of what was supposed to have occurred, renders mere chance an extremely unlikely element. We are therefore limited to one hypothesis — the emotional impression of the girls who exclaimed, " O vaso de acido phenico se quebrou," influenced their mother telepathically, and the table was the means of bringing to the surface the message which her subconsciousness had received.

ALFRED ALEXANDER.

The evidence of the other witnesses was given in Portuguese, of which we print English translations, kindly furnished by Professor Alexander.

It was a little past eight when the visitors who were with me in the diningroom in the evening of the 2ist of September 1891 spoke of retiring.

LUIZA BARCELLOS.

March 2.1st, 1892.

On the 2ist of September 1891, I witnessed a curious fact in telepathy. At that date, at eight o'clock in the evening, various persons in a house in the Rua de Donna Marianna heard a strange noise in the room of a smallpox patient, and ran into it, crying out that in all probability the vase of phenic acid had been broken. Donna Maria Barcellos, my sister-in-law, one of her daughters, Sylvia Barcellos, Senhor Alfredo Alexander, and I were at that

858] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 159

hour seated at a small round table, when it was announced that in the abovementioned house, in the Rua de Donna Marianna, a vase of phenic acid had been broken. Donna Maria Barcellos was much astonished when they told her on her going home to the Rua de Donna Marianna that they had had a great fright at eight o'clock in the evening. She replied that she was already aware that it was a vase of phenic acid which had been broken. Then they explained to her that such had been the general supposition in the house, that when they ran into the room they all exclaimed, " The vase of phenic acid has broken," and that on entering they discovered that a jug of water standing near a chair had fallen against the vase of phenic acid.

These facts passed in the presence of Professor Alexander, who was also at the table with my sister-in-law and Sylvia.

(Signed) DR. ALFREDO BARCELLOS.

Rio DE JANEIRO, September 22nd, 1891.

When Mariquinhas came home I said to her, u You cannot imagine what a fright we had to-day," to which she replied, "You need not tell me; I know all about it. It was the vase of phenic acid that broke." This reply caused us the greatest surprise, when she added that nobody had told her of it, but that she heard of it through the intermedium of the tilting table. Our astonishment was still greater when she said that the fact occurred at eight o'clock in the evening.

Indeed, at that hour, when we were in the back part of the house, we heard a loud noise like that of the fall of some vessel full (of liquid). The door of the bedroom where the child sick of smallpox lay was closed ; but we heard her crying out, and ran to see what was the matter. At the same time the three girls exclaimed, " The vase of phenic acid has broken ! " It was not, however, this vase that broke, but a jug of water which had fallen down. N.B. — This fact happened yesterday, September 2ist, 1891.

(Signed) AMELIA A. CARDIM.

MARIA CARDIM.

PAULINA BARCELLOS.

MARIA VILLAS BOAS.

CARLOTA CARDIM.

AMELIA CARDIM.

857. The next case (857 A) is very remote ; and I should not use it to aid in establishing communication with the dead. But as indicating a possible source of error, it seems worth quoting in an Appendix, as it is vouched for by two informants who, although here anonymous, are distinguished and intelligent men.

858. My next case— given in 858 A— comes from the late Dr. Ermacora, whose untimely death has been a serious loss to our studies. Professor W. James visited Dr. Ermacora at Padua and told me that his experiments were seriously and carefully conducted. Dr. Ermacora himself, for reasons stated in his narrative, regarded this message as probably coming from a disembodied intelligence. But it seems to me that the statement as to the date of the letter's arrival may have emanated from the mind of the Venetian cousin at the time when she

meant to post her letter in the evening. Dr. Ermacora also sent me a case (not for publication) where a message written by the same automatist predicted some remarkable points with regard to her own future health. Such a prediction, however — like the frequently recorded predictions of somnambulists with regard to their own epileptic fits, &c. — seems to me to belong to the province of the subliminal self, which I conceive as more intimately acquainted with the state of the organism than the supraliminal self can be.

859. Thus much for the present with regard to communications from the living, and as to the danger that a message purporting to come from a deceased person may in reality emanate from the mind of one of the living persons present, or, indeed, from some living person at a distance. But this, although a real risk, is by no means the only risk of deception which such messages involve. The communication may conceivably come from some unembodied spirit indeed, but not from the spirit who is claimed as its author. Have we any way of guarding against this deception ; — any hints which may even help us to conceive the nature of a danger which lies so entirely outside our terrene experience ?

The answer to this question cannot be brief, and must for the present be delayed. I can best, perhaps, introduce the reader to this new range of problems by quoting at this point (in 859 A) some extracts from a | record of the varied experiences of automatic writing which have been i intermingled with Miss A.'s crystal-visions, &c., already narrated in ! Chapter VI. (625 C). Such account as can here be produced is, from various causes, very incomplete. It contains, however, specimens of several of the problems of which mention has already been made. I may remind i the reader that this is a case with which I am intimately acquainted, having carefully watched the progress of the phenomena for some years. ! The statements refer largely to facts within my own knowledge, and these j are given without exaggeration.

I should add that the phenomena have continued, whenever invited, up to the present date (December, 1900), and that they have developed | in the direction of recognised identities. I have myself lately had through Miss A. what appear to me convincing messages, given by raps, on private matters from departed friends. That this element exists amid these confused communications, I feel sure ; but the recognised spirits are seldom able to explain much beyond their own actual message, nor to throw light on the strange anonymity in which most of the writings are shrouded. There is now no case that I have watched longer than Miss . A.'SJ — none where I have more absolute assurance of the scrupulous probity of the principal sensitive herself and of the group who share the experiments ; — but none also which leaves me more often baffled as to the unseen source of the information given. There is a knowledge both of the past and of the future, which seems capriciously limited, and is ! mingled with mistakes, yet on the other hand is of a nature which it is

860] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 161

difficult to refer to any individual human mind, incarnate or discarnate. We meet here some of the first indications of a possibility of which more must be said in a later chapter (IX.), that discarnate spirits communicating with us have occasional access to certain sources of knowledge which even to themselves are inscrutably remote and obscure.

The command to bring " C. D." — a command which, as will be seen, I myself obeyed — was especially remarkable in its apparent futility, yet it ultimately resulted in developing the phenomena. C. D., indeed, was a person in whom the soi-disant Chancellor Hardwicke might be expected to take some interest ; — but one is at a loss to imagine what kind of perception could pick him out as the one man whose own faculty would best contribute to Miss A.'s, and would be best developed by hers in return.

The written diagnoses and prognoses given by the so-called " Semirus," often without Miss A.'s even seeing the patient or hearing the nature of his malady, have become more and more remarkable.1 Miss A. and her friends do not wish these private matters to be printed, and I cannot therefore insist upon the phenomena here. Yet in view of the amount of telaesthesia which Miss A.'s various automatisms reveal, it should first be noted that human organisms seem especially pervious to such vue a distance. "Semirus," " Gelalius," &c., are obvious pseudonyms; and neither Semirus' prescriptions nor Gelalius' cosmogony contain enough of indication to enable us to grasp their origin.

860. I pass on to a series of messages which afford an interesting field for the discussion of the rival hypotheses of " cryptomnesia " and spirit-control. The automatist, who must here be called Mrs. R., is a lady well known to me for some years, and to whom I was first introduced by the late Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood (the cousin and brother-in-law of Charles Darwin, and himself a well-known savant}, who reported certain messages obtained in his presence, and partly through his co-operation. Mrs. R., and her sister Mrs. V., now deceased, were for many years among Mr. Wedgwood's most valued friends. There can be no more question in my mind as to Mrs. R.'s scrupulous good faith than as to that of Mr. Wedgwood himself in endeavouring to recall the utmost that they had ever known of the personages who professed to be writing through the help of the two human hands. The question is one of subliminal memory; and as to this it may be remarked that Mr. Wedgwood's reading was wide, — but that he never, so far as I know, showed any automatic gift, nor obtained writing except with one of these two ladies. On the other hand, Mrs. R.'s reading has not been wide in range ; and both Mrs. R. and Mrs. V. had many psychical experiences, — most of them of a private nature,2 — in which Mr. Wedgwood was not concerned. The

1 See a recent case furnished by Sir Lawrence Jones, which I print at the end of the Appendix.

2 See, however,y<?«r«<2/ S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 293, for two experiences of Mrs. V.'s. VOL. II. L

1 62 CHAPTER VIII [861

automatic impulse seems to have come from them; but it may be that Mr. Wedgwood's presence modified the character of the messages obtained. I give first a general account by Mr. Wedgwood of the mode of experiment.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 92.)

My experience in planchette-writing has been mainly acquired in sitting with two sisters, whom I will call Mrs. R. and Mrs. V., of whom the younger, Mrs. V., has far the stronger influence in producing the writing. With her the board in general begins to move much sooner and in a more vivacious way than with her elder sister. When the two sit together the board moves rapidly along, like a person writing as fast as he can drive, while with me and one of the sisters the action is often feeble and labouring. But neither of the sisters can obtain anything whatever when they sit by themselves. The board remains absolutely motionless under the hands of the solitary operator.

When trying for writing we sit opposite each other at a small table, I with my right hand, my partner with her left on the planchette, while the writing produced is upright to me, and upside down to my partner, from whom, however, the effective influence seems to proceed. The precise nature of that influence is not very easy to understand, and is, I think, very commonly misapprehended. Writing by planchette is often called " automatic," and the pencil is conceived as being worked by the muscular action of the sitters, under the guidance of a blind impulse, as little understood by them as the finished result is foreseen by a pair of birds instinctively engaged in the construction of their first nest. But this is directly opposed to the experience of myself and my partners. When I am sitting at planchette with one of them, I know that I am merely following the movement of the board with my hand, and not in any way guiding it, my only difficulty being to avoid interfering with it. It seems to me exactly as if my partner, in whom I have perfect confidence, was purposely moving the board and I allowing my hand to follow her action, interfering with it as little as possible. And she gives to me an exactly corresponding account of her own share in the operation. Thus we give to the outside world our united testimony of a fact which, as far as each of us is concerned, lies within our own direct knowledge, viz., that the writing traced out by the pencil is not produced by the muscular exertion of either of us.

We have, then, in planchette-writing, if our account is to be believed, the manifestation of an agency invisible to us, yet capable of moving the bodily pencil either in mere scribbling or in such a way as to fix an intelligent message on the paper.

861. The first case which I shall give is in the words of Mr. Wedgwood, in the /"<?#;-# 0/S. P. R. for December, 1889 (vol. iv. p. 174).

Whenever I have an opportunity, perhaps once or twice a year, I sit at planchette-writing with my friend, whom I will call Mrs. R., a most observant witness in whom I have entire confidence. We sit opposite each other at a small table, each resting the fingers of one hand lightly upon the board, and when the board begins to move, allow our hand to follow the movement freely without interfering with it in any way.

The following account of our last sitting, on June 26th, is from the journal of Mrs. R., written the same evening, transcribing the part of planchette from

861] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 163

the actual writing, and filling in our share of the investigation from immediate memory.

Extract from journal of Wednesday, June "2.6th, 1889, and copy of planchettewriting with Mr. Wedgwood : —

" A spirit is here to-day who we think will be able to write through the medium. Hold very steady, and he will try first to draw."

We turned the page and a sketch was made, rudely enough of course, but with much apparent care.

" Very sorry can't do better. Was meant for test. Must write for you instead.— J. G."

We do not fully understand the first drawing, taking it for two arms and hands clasped, one coming down from above. Mr. Wedgwood asked the spirit of J. G. to try again, which he did.

Below the drawing he wrote : " Now look." We did, and this time comprehended the arm and sword.

" Now I will write for you if you like."

Mr. W. : " What did the drawing represent? "

" Something that was given me."

I said : " Are you a man or a woman ? "

" Man. John G."

Mr. W. : " How was it given to you ? "

" On paper and other things. . . . My head is bad from the old wound I got there when I try to write through mediums."

Mr. W. : "We don't know J. G. Have you anything to do with us ? "

" No connection."

Mr. W. said he knew a J. Giffard, and wondered if that was the name.

" Not Giffard. Gurwood."

Mr. W. suggested that he had been killed in storming some fort.

" I killed myself on Christmas Day, years ago. I wish I had died fighting."

" Were you a soldier ? "

" I was in the army."

" Can you say what rank? "

" No. ... It was the pen did for me, and not the sword."

The vfordflen was imperfectly written, and I thought it was meant ior fall. I asked if this was right ?

"No."

Mr. W.: "Is the word penf"

"Yes; pen did for me."

We suggested that he was an author who had failed, or had been maligned.

" I did not fail. I was not slandered. Too much for me after . . . pen was too much for me after the wound."

" Where were you wounded, and when did you die ? "

" Peninsula to first question."

We were not sure about the word Peninsula, and asked him to repeat.

" I was wounded in the head in Peninsula. It will be forty-four years next Christmas Day since I killed myself. Oh, my head. ... I killed myself. John Gurwood."

" Where did you die ? "

"I had my wound in 1810. I cannot tell you more about myself. The drawing was a test."

We asked if the device was intended for his crest.

" I had it seal."

" Had it anything to do with your wound ? " (I cannot remember the exact form of this question.)

" It came from that and was given me. Power fails to explain. Remember my name. Stop now." '

The only person besides ourselves present at the sitting was Miss H., an aunt of Mrs. R.'s, and none of us knew anything of Colonel Gurwood beyond the fact of his having edited the despatches .of the Duke of Wellington, not even that his name was John. It is possible that I might have heard of his suicide at the time that it occurred, without its making any impression on me, but I am sure I did not read such an obituary notice as would be published in the Times, and when my attention was directed to his editorial work eighteen or twenty years afterwards I did not know whether he was alive or dead, and was entirely ignorant of his military career. I never read any history of the Peninsular War, and am perfectly certain that I never had an opportunity of seeing Gurwood's crest, or knowing anything about it. — H. W.

The following is the account Mr. Wedgwood wrote of the first stance at the time : —

June 26th, 1889.

Had a sitting at planchette with Mrs. R. this morning. Planchette said there was a spirit there who thought he could draw if we wished it. We said we should be glad if he would try. Accordingly P. made a rude attempt at a hand and arm proceeding from an embattled wall and holding a sword. A second attempt made the subject clearer. P. said it was meant for a test. The spirit signed it " J. G.," no connection of any of ours, he said. We gradually elicited that his name was John Gurwood, who was wounded in the Peninsula, in 1810, and killed himself on Christmas Day, 1845. I* was not the wound, but the pen that did it.

Something like that.

July $fh, 1889.

I made the foregoing memorandum the same day, having very little expec- ; tation that there would be any verification. H. WEDGWOOD.

FURTHER EXTRACTS FROM MRS. R.'s JOURNAL.

Friday ', September 2"jth.

Mr. Wedgwood came, and we had two sittings in the afternoon and evening. I think the same spirit wrote throughout, beginning without signature ; : but when 'we asked the name, writing (after some struggle and illegibility) " John Gurwood."

861] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 165

The effort was at first incoherent, but developed into the following sentences : —

" Sword — when I broke in, on the table with plan of fortress — belonged to my prisoner ; I will tell you his name to-night. It was on the table when I broke in. He did net expect me; I took him unawares. He was in his room, looking at a plan, and the sword was on the table. Will try and let you know how I took the sword to-night."

In the evening after dinner : —

" I fought my way in. His name was Banier " (three times repeated). " The sword was lying on the table by a written scheme of defence. Oh, my head. Banier had a plan written out for the defence of the fortress. It was lying on the table, and his sword was by it."

To a question : —

"Yes; surprised him."

Mr. Wedgwood thinks the name of the Governor of the fortress of Ciudad Rodrigo was Banier ; but he says this would not be a test, as he knew it. He is going to see if he can find anything in Napier's Peninsular War corroborative of what is said about the sword.

" Look. 1 have tried to tell you what you can verify."

Mr. Wedgwood reports his verification as follows : —

When I came to verify the message of planchette I speedily found that Colonel Gurwood, the editor of the Duke's despatches, led the forlorn hope at the storming of Ciudad Rodrigo, in 1812 [note error in date], "and received a wound in the skull from a musket ball which affected him for the remainder of his life." — Annual Register, 1845. In recognition of the bravery shown on that occasion he received a grant of arms in 1812, registered in the College of Arms as having been passed " upon the narrative that he (Captain G.) had led the forlorn hope at Ciudad Rodrigo, and that, after the storming of the fortress, the Earl of Wellington presented him with the sword of the Governor, who had been taken prisoner by Captain Gurwood."1

The services thus specified were symbolised in the crest, " Out of a mural coronet, a castle ruined in the centre, and therefrom an arm in armour embowed, holding a scimitar." 2

It is plainly this crest that is aimed at by planchette in his very rude design, which represents the arm and sword as issuing from the mural coronet alone, omitting the ruined castle as too complex a subject for the powers of the designer. The drawing was given merely as a test, and if it pointed unmistakably to the Gurwood crest it would fulfil its purpose.

In accordance with the assertion of planchette, Colonel Gurwood killed himself on Christmas Day, 1845, and the Annual Register of that year, after narrating the suicide, continues : " It is thought that this laborious undertaking (the editing the despatches) produced a relaxation of the nervous system and consequent depression of spirits. In a fit of despondency the unfortunate gentleman terminated his life." Compare planchette : " Pen was too much for

me after the wound."

I continue the quotation from Mrs. R.'s journal : —

Mr. W. : " Can you tell me where else to look?"

" I have no power to direct you. We have exhausted, but I wished to tell

1 Information received from the College of Arms, July I5th, 1889. 2 The Book of Family Crests, Washbourne, 1856.

1 66 CHAPTER VIII [861

you about poor Quentain ... to tell you a secret of poor Quintain's, which is on my mind. It might once have made a difference ; but not now."

We had a difficulty in reading the name. Mr. W. thought it Quinlon, and asked if this was right ?

" Not quite : a t. . . . Quentain. Not quite [right], but nearer : try again to-morrow."

Mr. W. : " Is power exhausted now, and shall we stop ? "

"Yes." «

Saturday, September 2%tA.

Mr. Wedgwood and I sat again this morning. First came some preliminary scribbling and circling, and then the right spelling of the name at which John Gurwood was trying last night.

" Quentin. I knew him, and a secret of his that might have made a difference, but I was pledged."

Mr. W. : " Tell us what the secret was ? "

" I should like to try."

Mr. W. : " What difference would it have made to you ? "

" Might have done to him : on my mind."

Then followed a word here and there among much that was illegible. I

copy what we succeeded in reading. " in the army scrape the

sake of another very foolish, but nothing wrong for verdict

was unfortunately what there was let me go on, I am trying say that,

but quite mistaken case in all its his commission of second

(company ?) private soldier going out gave to his Colonel very strong feeling about it all."

The above filled four pages. We pondered over it, but could not make out any more. When planchette was put back, the following was volunteered : —

" Tell James I remember him quite well. He will recollect about Quentin's trial."

Mr. Wedgwood's friend, Captain James, of course, was meant. Mr. W. said he would write and ask him ; but did the writer mean that Captain James knew the secret ?

" No one knew it." (Two lines illegible.) "James will tell you, I have not power. He was tried by court-martial."

Mr. W. : " This Quentin was in the army then ? "

" Yes. rest of them would have but I cannot write plainly in

answer, though I try. I wanted to tell you about poor Quentin, but have not power without further practice. I knew a secret of his at the time of his scrape conduct offices . The court-martial 1 did not."

Mr. Wedgwood here suggested we should stop for a time, to see if rest would increase the power. We sat again for a few minutes before lunch, directly after which he left by train ; but the control was then different, and the few words written did not appear to have any special interest or meaning.

Mr. Wedgwood writes on October 3ist, 1889 : —

I find that there was a famous court-martial on Colonel Quentin in October 1814, in consequence of a round robin signed by twenty-four of his officers. I had a vague recollection of the name of Colonel Q. as a friend of George IV., and something must have turned up about the court-martial in the early twenties, when the loth Hussars became notorious, as I found I had heard of the round

863] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 167

robin. The accusation, too, was of a want of proper directions to his subordinates in action, so no reticence of anybody could have made any difference, and he was himself the Colonel of the regiment.

With respect to the capture of Banier, the only chance of verification would be from the family, and Miss Gurwood has not answered my letter.

Captain James writes to me from 10 Hereford Road, London, June 29th, 1891 : —

About the year 1830 my regiment was quartered at Portsmouth, and Colonel Gurwood was then on the staff of the garrison there. The Colonel was an honorary member of our mess, and dined with us nearly every day. I remember I used to be very fond of sitting next to him, and conversing with him about the various events that occurred during the Peninsular War. Of course the Quentin trial must have taken place when I was a mere child, as I was born in 1804.

862. Mr. Wedgwood gave us also another case of a somewhat similar character, which I cite in 862 A.

Finally, a few months before his death, I received from him a third retrocognitive case, which is printed in full in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 99-104. It relates to the execution of Alice Grimbold — a maidservant at an inn at Leicester — who was condemned to be burnt alive for complicity in the murder of her mistress in 1605. A number of names and details were given, all of which were afterwards verified in a History of Leicester. The automatists were confident that they had never heard of any of the facts before.

863. I have given these cases in succession, so that the reader may see the kind of growing difficulty which the theory of forgotten memories here involves. It will be seen that with each automatist of good faith the question may with patience be capable of definite solution. Were Mrs. R. willing and able — which at present she is not — to find some other partner with whom she can write, now that Mr. Wedgwood and her sister have been removed by death, and to record a long series of communications, we might gradually obtain a conviction that the matters therein narrated either could or could not all of them have been previously seen and forgotten. Similar records kept by many other automatists might help to some general conclusion as to the source from which these retrocognitive facts come, if in any cases forgotten memory fails to explain them. One of the most important data for such a decision consists in the account — absolutely trustworthy, as I believe — given by Mr. Stainton Moses in " Spirit Identity," of a series of messages from musical composers, giving the principal dates of their respective lives, as they may be found in any Biographical Dictionary, with hardly anything more. Now were such messages offered to us as coming through an alleged automatist not of known probity or who could bring no proof of other messages not capable of being got up beforehand, we should naturally set them aside. But with Mr. Moses, as

1 68 CHAPTER VIII [864

with Mrs. R. above — and in a still higher degree — there was so considerable an independent history of provably supernormal phenomena that we are bound to consider these musical biographies in their place as a part of that series. Their peculiar nature excited the surprise of Mr. Moses and his friends, who were informed by the " guides " that these were in fact messages from the spirits in question, but that these spirits had refreshed their memory of their earth-lives by consulting printed sources of information. It is obvious that this is to drop the supposed proof of identity altogether. If any given spirit can consult his own printed life, so also presumably can other spirits ; and so perhaps can the still incarnated spirit of the automatist himself. This was of course felt by Mr. Moses, who told me that subjectively also the feeling which accompanied these biographical writings was very different from that which came when, as he held, some spirit was entering with him into real and direct communication.

864. From these remote historical narratives I go on to certain messages avowedly coming from persons more recently departed, and into which something more of definite personality seems to enter. One element of this kind is handwriting; and in the next case it will be seen that resemblance of handwriting is one of the evidential points alleged. Now proof of identity from resemblance of handwriting may conceivably be very strong. But in estimating it we must bear two points in mind. The first is that (like the resemblances of so-called " spirit-photographs " to deceased friends) it is often very loosely asserted. One needs, if not an expert's opinion, at least a careful personal scrutiny of the three scripts — the automatist's voluntary and his automatic script, and the deceased person's script — before one can feel sure that the resemblance is in more than some general scrawliness. This refers to the cases where the automatist has provably never seen the deceased person's handwriting. Where he has seen that handwriting, we have to remember (in the second place) that a hypnotised subject can frequently imitate any known handwriting far more closely than in his waking state ; and that consequently we are bound to credit the subliminal self with a mimetic faculty which may come out of these messages without any supraliminal guidance whatever on the automatist's part. I give in 864 A an abridged account of a series of experiments by Professor Rossi- Pagnoni at Pesaro, into which the question of handwriting enters. The full account illustrates automatic utterance as well as other forms of motor automatism, and possibly also telekinetic phenomena. The critical discussion of the evidence by Mr. H. Babington Smith, to whom we are indebted for the account, shows with what complex considerations we have to deal in the questions now before us.

865. The case of Mrs. Underwood next to be quoted (in 865 A) contains several points of interest besides the alleged resemblance of handwriting. It shows once more, for instance, the great similarity of

866] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 169

ways in which this writing takes its rise with automatists all over the world, and the recurrence of the same puzzles with observers of many different types, and may thus serve as an introduction to the groups of cases which follow.

866. I now cite a few cases where the point of central interest is the announcement of a death unknown to the sitters.

The first is a case which we received from Dr. Lie"beault, of Nancy, and which was first published in Phantasms of the Living (vol. i. p. 293), where it was regarded as an example of a spontaneous telepathic impulse proceeding directly from a dying person. I now regard it as more probably due to the action of the spirit after bodily death. The translation of Dr. Liebeault's narrative is as follows : —

NA.NCY, September tfk, 1885.

I hasten to write to you as to that case of thought-transference of which I spoke to you when you were present at my hypnotic stances at Nancy. The incident occurred in a French family from New Orleans, who had come to stay for some time at Nancy for business reasons. I had become acquainted with this family from the fact that M. G., its head, had brought to me his niece, MUe B., to be treated by hypnotism. She suffered from slight anaemia and from a nervous cough, contracted at Coblentz, in a High School where she was a teacher. I easily induced somnambulism, and she was cured in two sittings. The production of this hypnotic state suggested to the G. family (Mrs. G. was a spirit medium) and to M1!e B. herself that she might easily become a medium. She set herself to the evocation of spirits (in which she firmly believed) by the aid of her pen, and at the end of two months she had become a remarkable writing medium. I have myself seen her rapidly writing page after page of what she called " messages," — all in well-chosen language and with no erasures, — while at the same time she maintained conversation with the people near her. An odd thing was that she had no knowledge whatever of what she was writing. " It must be a spirit," she would say, " which guides my hand ; it is certainly not I."

One day, — it was, I think, February 7th, 1868, about 8 A.M., when just about to seat herself at table for breakfast, she felt a kind of need, an impulse which prompted her to write ; — it was what she called a trance, — and she rushed off at once to her large note-book, where she wrote in pencil, with feverish haste, certain undecipherable words. She wrote the same words again and again on the pages which followed, and at last, as her agitation diminished, it was possible to read that a person called Margue'rite was thus announcing her death. The family at once assumed that a young lady of that name, a friend of Mile B.'s and her companion and colleague in the Coblentz High School, must have just expired. They all came immediately to me, M1Ie B. among them, and we decided to verify the announcement of death that very day. Mlle B. wrote to a young English lady who was also a teacher in that same school. She gave some other reason for writing ; — taking care not to reveal the true motive of the letter. By return of post we received an answer in English, of which they copied for me the essential part. I found this answer in a portfolio hardly a fortnight ago, and have mislaid it again. It expressed the surprise of the English lady at the receipt of Mlle B.'s unexpected and apparently motive-

1 70 CHAPTER VIII [867

less letter. But at the same time the English correspondent made haste to announce to MUe B. that their common friend, Marguerite, had died on February 7th, at about 8 A.M. Moreover, the letter contained a little square piece of printed paper; — the announcement of death sent round to friends.

I need not say that I examined the envelope, and that the letter appeared to me to have veritably come from Coblentz. Yet I have since felt a certain regret. In the interests of science I ought to have asked the G. family to allow me to go with them to the telegraph office to inquire whether they had received a telegram early on February 7th. Science should feel no shame; truth does not dread exposure. My proof of the fact is ultimately a moral one : the honour of the G. family, — which has always appeared to me to be absolutely above suspicion. A. A. LIEBEAULT.

Upon these last sentences Gurney remarks that, apart from the improbability that the whole family would join in a conspiracy to deceive their friend, the nature of the answer received from Coblentz shows that the writer of it cannot have been aware that any telegraphic announcement had been sent. And it is in itself unlikely that the authorities of the school would have felt it necessary instantly to communicate the news to Mdlle. B.

867. I shall next give in 867 A a case of curious complexity received from M. Aksakoff ; — an automatic message written by a Mdlle. Stramm, informing her of the death of a M. Duvanel. The principal incidents may here be disentangled as follows : —

Duvanel dies by his own hand on January i5th, 1887, in a Swiss village, where he lives alone, having no relations except a brother living at a distance, whom Mdlle. Stramm had never seen (as the principal witness, M. Kaigorodoff, informs us in a letter of May 1890).

Mdlle. Stramm's father does not hear of Duvanel's death till two days later, and sends her the news in a letter dated January i8th, 1887.

Five hours after Duvanel's death an automatic message announcing it is written at the house of M. Kaigorodoff, at Wilna in Russia, by Mdlle. Stramm, who had certainly at that time received no news of the event.

From what mind are we to suppose that this information came?

(i) We may first attempt to account for Mdlle. Stramm's message on the theory of latency. We may suppose that the telepathic message came from the dying man, but did not rise into consciousness until an opportunity was afforded by Mdlle. Stramm's sitting down to write automatically.

But to this interpretation there is an objection of a very curious kind. The message written by Mdlle. Stramm was not precisely accurate. Instead of ascribing Duvanel's death to suicide, it ascribed it to a stoppage of blood, " un engorgement de sang."

And when M. Stramm, three days after the death, wrote to his daughter in Russia to tell her of it, he also used the same expression, " un engorgement de sang," thus disguising the actual truth in order to spare the feelings of his daughter, who had formerly refused to marry Duvanel, and who (as her father feared) might receive a painful shock if she learnt the tragic nature of his end. There was, therefore, a singular coincidence between the automatic and the normally-written message as to the death ; — a coincidence which looks as thou<

871] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 171

the same mind had been at work in each instance. But that mind cannot have been M. Stramm's ordinary mind, as he was not supraliminally aware of Duvanel's death at the time when the first message was written. It may, however, be supposed that his subliminal self had received the information of the death telepathically, had transmitted it in a deliberately modified form to his daughter, while it remained latent in himself, and had afterwards influenced his supraliminal self to modify the information in the same way when writing to her.

(2) But we must also consider the explanation of the coincidence given by the intelligence which controlled the automatic writing. That intelligence asserted itself to be a brother of Mdlle. Stramm's, who died some years before. And this " Louis" further asserted that he had himself influenced M. Stramm to make use of the same euphemistic phrase, with the object of avoiding a shock to Mdlle. Stramm; for which purpose it was needful that the two messages should agree in ascribing the death to the same form of sudden illness.

Now if this be true, and the message did indeed come from the deceased " Louis," we have an indication of continued existence, and continued knowledge of earthly affairs, on the part of a person long dead.

But if we consider that the case, as presented to us, contains no proof of " Louis' " identity, so that " Louis " maybe merely one of those arbitrary names which the automatist's subliminal intelligence seems so prone to assume ; then we must suppose that Duvanel was actually operative on two occasions after death, first inspiring in Mdlle. Stramm the automatic message, and then modifying in M. Stramm the message which the father might otherwise have sent.

868. I next give in 868 A and B two cases where certain telekinetic phenomena seem to have been connected with the announcement of a recent death, which in the first case was given by raps, and in the second was accompanied by other physical disturbances. It must be observed, however, that the evidence for the identity of the spirit who was supposed to be communicating in this second case is far from complete. I have already pointed out that the class of motor automatisms seems to lead to telekinetic phenomena, but I shall postpone any discussion of them till the following chapter.

869. I next give in 869 A and B two cases where the supposed communicators had been dead some time, the deaths being known to the automatists, but certain details of the deaths were correctly given, in opposition to the beliefs of the automatists.

870. I add to these in 870 A another curious case where various i details known to the alleged communicator were correctly given, although

unknown to the sitters ; yet where other circumstances were described ' as they were at the time of the communicator's death, although the sitters . were aware that these circumstances had since altered.

871. I know not in what light I should have regarded the next case I give (in 871 A) had I seen it only in a book bearing the somewhat alarming title of The Holy Truth (Arthur Hallah, 1876).

i;2 CHAPTER VIII [872

But the aggressiveness of religious conviction with which Mr. Hugh Junor Browne's experiences have inspired him does not prevent his being, as I have heard from the Hon. Sir W. G. Windeyer, Judge of Supreme Court, Sydney, and have found on personal acquaintance, a man of high standing as to both character and practical capacity. He is a prosperous man of business at Melbourne, and the elder of the two daughters with whose automatism we have to deal is married to one of the foremost men of the Colony of Victoria. I regard him, therefore, as a witness whose strong opinions, indeed, might help a fraudulent medium to deceive him, but who is fully to be trusted as regards easily observed events occurring in his own family circle. I discussed this case with him and Mrs. Browne on October 3rd, 1891. Mrs. Browne seemed tome a good witness, and corroborated the facts so far as immediately known to her, giving me a written confirmation of the writing of the young child, who was present at our interne w as a young lady of about twenty. Miss Browne cannot remember the incident in her fifth year, but told me that she had sometimes written automatically since that date ; — her arm used to feel numb while doing so.

872. I give in 872 A another instance of a little girl, only four years of age, who had no knowledge of her letters, and who wrote several significant words — " Your Aunt Emma."

873. I now quote in full a general account of his experiences in automatic writing by a Mr. W., from whom I have already cited a minor experience, also of a motor type, in 823. Dr. Hodgson visited and had long talks with him, and formed the highest impression of his ability and care. Some of the automatic messages are perhaps best explicable on the hypothesis of subliminal telsesthesia, others by telepathy from living minds, while others are at least primd facie referable to a source in the mind of a departed person, from whom they professed to come. Whether there are in reality so many different origins of a series of messages given to one automatist, or whether any one explanation can be made to cover them all, is a matter to which we shall have to return in the next chapter.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 242-48.)

N.Y., November i$th, 1891.

DR. RICHARD HODGSON,— DEAR SIR,— Recently I learned that you are the Secretary of the American Branch of the Society for Psychical Research. Being interested in the subject, I concluded to write to you, offering a statement of my own experience. As so-called spiritual manifestations are viewed unfavourably here, and as it would be much to my detriment if my connection with the subject were to become known, I ask that my name be withheld from the public.

For the past five years I have been a so-called writing medium. The writing is involuntary on my part, and the thoughts expressed are not mine — that is, as far as I know they are not mine.

873] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 173

Sometimes, instead of writing, off-hand pen work will be done, but it is not of a very high order. In the writing the penmanship is generally very good, and the thoughts expressed are generally good, and are sometimes valuable. As you are undoubtedly familiar with this class of writing, I will not go into details, but will leave you to inquire for such facts as you see fit.

I am anxious to find a satisfactory explanation of this, and I hope the Society may yet be able to furnish one.

As an indication of the trend of my thoughts, I will add that for the past thirteen or fourteen years I have been a student of the works of Herbert Spencer and other great men of liberal views, and that I am an evolutionist, so called.

If you think my experience will be of use, please call for it. You may send questions, or you may state in a general way the outline of what will be of use.

N.Y., December 22nd, 1891.

DR. RICHARD HODGSON, — SIR, — . . . Five years ago I was in Vermont on business, and while there made a visit at the home of a relative. In the evening, for amusement, a planch ette was produced and operated. Pretty soon it was written that I was a writing medium, and I was requested to try with a pencil. I took a pencil in my hand and to my surprise I found I could write some in the " automatic " manner. The writing was not very good and was accompanied with more or less breaks and difficulties. It was written that practice would make it much freer and better. This I found to be so. Persons in the room asked as to dates on pieces of money and other similar tests, and the answers were generally correct. After that I wrote some almost daily for some time and soon became quite a ready writer in this manner.

On one occasion, not long after, a friend, of whose life I had known nothing until about that time, proposed to ask some questions mentally and see if the answers written would be correct. It was written that the spirit of his wife was present. I inquired (mentally) for her name. In reply her name was written out in full, correctly. I did not know her name : I knew that he was a widower, and I knew no more of his wife or the matters inquired about. My friend then asked (mentally) where she died and when ? The answers were correct. He then asked, " What was the cause of her death ? " The answer, " Heart disease," was correct. He then asked for the circumstances of her death. It was written that she died suddenly, at night, by the side of him, in bed, and that the first thing he knew of herfdeath was when he found her dead in the morning. This was correct. He asked for her age, size, and for any particular mark by which she could be identified ? The answer was correct as to age and size, and as to identification it was written that she had a large scar near the knee, caused by a burn. This was also correct.

Many other questions were asked and answered ; and whether he asked the questions aloud, or mentally to himself, the answers were strictly correct in almost every instance. There was no one but us two present.

On another occasion, about the same time, I made inquiry (I was alone) touching a case I was then investigating. Briefly, the facts are these :— A wealthy widow, Mrs. X., had died at her summer cottage with no one present save her sister and a neighbour. She left a will : by its terms this sister was to receive several thousand dollars. Our client, Mrs. Y., was also a legatee and the executrix of the will ; and as such it was her duty to collect in all assets. Our client knew it to be a fact that the deceased had in cash in her possession a short time before her death about $700. After Mrs. X.'s

i/4 CHAPTER VIII [873

death no money was found, and the sister who was with her claimed there was no money; that Mrs. X. had no money at the time of her death about her, except some $15. Our client saw this sister and questioned her closely, but to no purpose. I did not see or know this sister until some time after the writing I am about to give. The question was, what had become of the $700 ? Alone by myself I asked for the facts, which were written out much in detail, but in substance the facts as written were these : That the deceased had on her person at the time of her death about $600; that she had spent the other $100 ; that immediately after her death her sister, Mrs. Z., had stolen the $600 from her dead body ; that she had since spent some of it and deposited the balance, some $500, in a bank in the village of A. In the course of a few days we made inquiry, and learned that Mrs. Z. had made the deposit there, but had recently drawn it out. We then cited her before the Surrogate, and she swore that just before the death of Mrs. X. (the same night she died) Mrs. X. gave her the money, $520, to give to a nephew as a present; that there was only $520; that she had just given it to the nephew. We commenced a suit against her for the money ($520) and recovered it. The jury did not believe her defence and made her pay. I have only stated so much of the case as seems to bear on the " automatic " writing. The question is, where did I get the knowledge of the theft, the amount and the deposit in the bank ? I may add that we afterwards learned she did spend some money about that time that we always thought was some she took in addition to the $526, and it would have made the sum stolen about $600.

About four and a half years ago an aunt of mine, Miss T., learned that she had a cancer growing on her breast. She had it cut out, and soon was apparently in very fair health. After a few months she began to fail very much ; was about the house, but was very generally run down. Cancer did not reappear. She was not said by her doctors to be in any immediate danger; but for some reason I made inquiry, and to my surprise it was written that she was very badly off, and that she would only live a very short time. I inquired the cause, &c., and it was written that her system was poisoned through and through with cancerous matter. I inquired as to when she would die ? The answer was that it was impossible to tell just when, that the most that could be said was that she would live about thirty days, judging from a careful examination of her case made at that time. It was written that she would certainly die, that she could not possibly get better or live much longer than thirty days. Within the next week or so I inquired on several occasions as to the matter, but the answers were always to the same effect and positive. My aunt declined fast and died at the time set within a day, and I think it was just thirty days. She was abed only ten days or so. A post-mortem showed she died from cancerous poisoning.

On many occasions I have made inquiry as to whether certain sick ones would die or recover ; and if die, when ? Generally the answers proved very correct.

About a year ago I was writing (for the spirit of deceased friend, Mr. A. so claimed}. After some writing of a friendly nature, it was written substantially as follows : — " There is one thing that I wish you could do for me, but I don't see how you can, and that is, stop my son " (name fully given) " from drinking." I answered (by thought), " Why, I am surprised. He doesn't drink, does he? that is, not any to speak of, any way ? " A. : " Yes, I am sorry to say he drinks

873] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 175

a good deal too much." O. : " Where does he do his drinking mostly ? " A. : " At the B. Hotel." I said I never heard of his drinking. A. : " Well, you watch and inquire, and you will find out that he does." " I should be very glad to be of some service in' the matter." A. : " If I see a chance where you can I shall certainly call on you."

Upon investigation I found this was all true.

In May 1887, while looking for authorities on an obscure point in a case I was then preparing for trial, it was written in substance : " I know where the authority is that you need." Q. : " Where ? " A. : " In ' Wendell's Reports,' vol. — } page — ." Q. : " Who are you? " A. : " I am A. B." The volume and page, as well as the name, were given in full; the name was that of an old lawyer that I had known well. The case cited was just what I needed. I had never seen or heard of the case before to my best knowledge. There are twenty-six volumes of "Wendell's Reports," of about 700 pages each.

I frequently find as I am examining indexes for judgment-debtors, grantees or grantors, &c., in clerks' offices, and elsewhere, that there is the same manifestation of intelligence in another form. Let me explain : Say I am searching an index under the head of " S," looking for the name of Stearns, John J. By placing my hand or finger on the book, drawing it along down over the names, with no thought of the work in hand, as soon as my finger passes the name desired my finger will stop. My eyes must be directed • towards the book, but no matter how listless or absent-minded I may be, still at such times my finger will stop at the name in question. When contrasted with ordinary searching the unconscious intelligence that seems to be behind this is very marked.

Once, being much in doubt, I asked, "What ails ?" (one of my sons)

' " What shall I do for him ? " The answer was, " You had better not try to do anything for him, but go and get Dr. T. He will know what to do." I called Dr. T. He examined him and immediately gave an emetic. The contents of the stomach showed that digestion had been stopped, or rather, that the food had not digested at all. The boy recovered rapidly. Dr. T. said it was well I called him. The boy had been rather suddenly taken ill a few hours after a hearty meal and soon after a severe fright or mental strain.

In a contested case over a certain clause or bequest in the will of C. we had been defeated and were about to appeal to the Court of Appeals, our highest court. It was my opinion, also my partner's, that we would win on the appeal; but upon inquiry it was written that we should be beaten, and this opinion was expressed on several occasions, with very good reasons assigned. We were advised not to appeal. We brought the appeal and were defeated.

I have made many inquiries as to whether certain sick persons would recover or die. The answers have been very correct, generally. Writing touching the future is generally stated to be but an opinion, based on known facts, and fallibility is freely admitted. When opinions are written the reasons assigned are very frequently not only new to. me, or unthought of, but are generally good reasons.

I have had a good deal of experience and made a good many tests. Those

' I have given are a fair sample, I think, of the writing that proved to be true.

Many statements made were false and many predictions made proved untrue;

of these I have given no illustration, but could if necessary. I have done most

i;6 CHAPTER VIII [873

of my writing when no one was present. Perhaps I should state that it has been repeatedly written not to believe any writing or statement unless my own good judgment approved of it. I have written a good deal touching a future state, political and philosophical matters. Of all this I have not spoken, as it does not seem of much importance for our present purposes. In passing I will say that much of it was apparently very good, and quite reasonable.

• December 2$>th,

On Christmas Eve there was, as you are probably aware, a railway accident near Hastings, a little way out from New York City, in which twelve persons were killed and another has since died from injuries received. This last-mentioned person resided near me. The news of the injury to this person reached me on Christmas Day. Telegrams in the afternoon were favourable, and indicated a recovery. I made inquiry as to the matter, and it was written in substance that the person would not recover. I suggested that telegrams indicated a recovery. The answer was : " Yes ; but we have made an examination, and are of opinion that no recovery will take place." Telegrams the second day were still more favourable, but my writing did not change in opinion. The party died at nine o'clock on the evening of the 26th, . .

January 2gth, 1892.

DR. R. HODGSON, — DEAR SIR, — In reply to your inquiry for such facts as I may be able to give, touching the experiences given you by my husband, as automatic writer, I will state : —

Not long after he began to write, some five years ago, I saw a sheet of paper upon which was written a full account of the robbing of the body of the dead sister. I read the account carefully. My husband said that he had written it automatically ; that he had asked for the facts and that was the answer. The account of it, as written out for you by my husband, is the same in substance as what I saw and read, except it is very much shortened. I had the paper for some time, and, I think, until after the facts as given were proven true ; but it was destroyed long ago. I attended the trial of the suit brought to recover the money. His account given you I believe to be correct.

The lady, Miss T., who had a cancer, was my aunt. The account of her sickness and death are correctly given you by my husband, but I saw no writing, although my husband told me at the time he had written something concerning her, and he stated that it was written that she would die and told when. I do not recall the time set, but I recollect her death occurred at the time predicted.

I recollect the time referred to when our son was sick. I saw my

husband doing some writing on that occasion, and it was written to go and get Dr. T. The account as written out for you by my husband is, as I recollect it, true in every respect.

Concerning the accident of Christmas Eve, I remember that on Christmas Day, after we heard of the accident, my husband did some writing. He said he had inquired as to Mr. E.'s condition, &c., and that it was written that E. would die, that he was internally and dangerously injured. On the next day the answers that he received as to Mr. E.'s condition were to the same effect. The telegrams received during the same time indicated that he would recover — one reported him out of danger. E. died about nine on the night of the 26th.

873] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 177

I have known my husband to write out correctly quite a good many things that were out of the knowledge of ordinary persons, but of the circumstances which he has given to you I do not now recall anything further.

[MRS. W.]

January 29^, 1892.

DR. RICHARD HODGSON, — DEAR SIR, — I recollect the occasion referred to by Mr. W. I think it was about five years ago. We were alone ; he spoke of the queer writing he was doing. After some talk on the subject Mr. W. consented to try his skill. I inquired what spirits were present, and Mr. W.'s hand wrote that my wife was. I inquired for her name, and he wrote Adelia O. B., which was correct. I also inquired [when] she died, and where and under what circumstances, and I asked for a description of her. Mr. W. wrote out answers to all the questions as I asked them. As I recall it, I asked most of the questions by thinking. He wrote that she died of heart disease, and the date of her death was correctly given, as was also her personal appearance. And it was written that she died in bed with me ; that the first I knew of her death was when I awoke in the morning. He also wrote that there was a large scar near the knee on the left leg.

I recollect that the answers were correct, although I don't recollect all the words used, perhaps. I am very certain that Mr. W. did not know anything about my wife. I had not lived within twenty miles of him, neither had I known him until several years after the death of my wife. It puzzled me how he was able to answer as he did, as I have no reason to think he had any knowledge on the subject. I will add that the height, colour of eyes and hair, and the entire personal description given were exceedingly exact and correct.

Mr. W. also wrote on that occasion what purported to come from an old friend of mine — that he went fishing with me to Lake Ontario, that I tipped the boat over near shore and got him wet. This was true, but I hadn't thought of it in a long time. Mr. W. never heard of it, I am confident, until he wrote it out. S. H. BRITTON.

As soon as Mr. Britton called my attention to the tipping over of the boat I recalled that I wrote about it at the time. W.

Mr. W. adds later :—

NEW YORK, February \th, 1892.

I began my automatic writing with my left hand, and have ever since been able to write in that manner with my left hand, but I am naturally righthanded, and I can write more rapidly and readily with my right hand, although the ideas expressed, &c., are of as high an order, as far as I have observed, when written with one hand as when written with the other.

In automatic work, when the mechanical ability to form letters is not re-

, quired, as, for instance, in running the hand down an index, I find my left hand

; is fully the equal of my right. Perhaps I should state that I met with a serious

injury to my right hand many years ago, by which I lost the two first fingers

and greatly crippled my hand otherwise.

The reason that I did my first automatic writing with my left hand was that

» the planchette directed me to do so. I wrote a day or two with my left hand,

and then I tried my right, and since that I have generally written with my

right. I can write some slowly in the natural manner with my left hand, but

have never done so but very little. The special point I wish to call attention to

VOL. II. M

i;8 CHAPTER VIII [874

is, that the ideas automatically written are of as high an order, written with one hand, as with the other. . . .

Another experience of Mr. W.'s is given in 873 A.

It is plain that if we admit that departed spirits can still see and judge of earthly matters, and can impress their knowledge on incarnate minds, we should have a single explanation which would cover all Mr. W.'s experiences as here recorded. It is to be noted, moreover, that the premonitions, of which he gives several instances, are such as might fall within the scope of a discarnate spirit, with intelligence comparable with our own, but able to examine certain diseased organisms more thoroughly than any earthly physician could do. This, it may be observed, was not the case with the premonitions given to Lady Mabel Howard (851 A), which involved a complexity of incident which looks as though it must lie beyond the calculation of an intelligence like our own, however fully informed of existing circumstances.

874. Deferring till the next chapter any further discussion of this problem, I give here in 874 A a well-evidenced case of a prediction by table-tilting of a precise date of death, at a distance of forty days.

875. I next quote a case which illustrates the continued terrene knowledge on the part of the dead of which other instances were given in the last chapter.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 349-53. The narrative is a translation from an article in Psychische Studien^ December 1889, pp. 572-77, by the Editor, the Hon. Alexander Aksakoff.)

The case belongs not to the category of facts which are known only to the deceased, but to the category of those which could only be imparted by the deceased, for it relates to a political secret concerning a living person, which was revealed by an intimate friend of that living person for the purpose of saving him. I shall set forth this case in all possible detail, because I consider it a most convincing one in support of the Spiritualistic hypothesis. I will even express myself still more strongly. I consider that it affords as absolute a proof of identity as it is possible for evidence of this kind to present.

My readers are already acquainted with my sister-in-law, Mrs. A. von Wiesler, from the part she took in the family stances held with me in the years 1880-1883, after the decease of my wife. She has an only daughter, Sophie, who at the time of those stances was completing her studies. She had taken no part, either at our stances or at any others, and she had not read anything about Spiritualism. Her mother also had not joined in any stances except our own. One evening in October 1884, during the visit of a distant relative, the conversation turned upon Spiritualism, and in order to please him a trial with the table was arranged. The sdance, however, gave no satisfactory result. It only showed that the two ladies were able to get something. On Tuesday evening, January ist, 1885, Mrs. von Wiesler being alone with her daughter, in order to divert her mind from some matters which made her anxious, proposed to hold a little se'ance. An alphabet was written out on a sheet of paper, a saucer with a black line as pointer served as a planchette, and, behold, the name Andreas was indicated. This was

875] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 179

quite natural, for Andreas was the name of Sophie's father, the deceased husband of Mrs. von Wiesler. The communication presented nothing remarkable, but it was nevertheless resolved to continue the stances once a week, on every Tuesday. For three weeks the character of the communications remained unchanged. The name Andreas was continually repeated.

But on the fourth Tuesday— January 22nd— in place of the customary name, Andreas, the name " Schura " was spelt out, to the great astonishment of both sitters. Then, by quick and precise movements of the pointer, these words were added : —

" It is given to thee to save Nikolaus."

" What does this mean ? " asked the astonished ladies.

" He is compromised as Michael was, and will like him go to ruin. A band of good-for-nothing fellows are leading him astray."

" What can be done to counteract it ? "

" Thou must go to the Technological Institute before three o'clock, let Nikolaus be called out, and make an appointment with him at his house."

