the problem. According to both, the essential condition is one of mono-ideism. The mind of the subject is concentrated on a single idea. Only one function is active at any one time ; and intensely so, because all the attention is given to it. Other functions are inactive, other sensations unperceived, because the subject has no attention left to give to them. . . .

In reference to this, Gurney says, " the energy of attention is not a fixed quantity, bound to be always in operation in one direction or another ; nor does the human mind, any more truly than Nature, abhor a vacuum. . . . What do we gain, then, by employing a general term to describe such special effects ? When once the chandelier metaphor is abandoned — when once it is recognised that in a multitude of cases the quantity of attention turned on in one direction is in no way connected with the withdrawal from any other — the idea of a common psychic factor seems out of place and misleading." (See Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. pp. 276, 277.)

This theoretical objection is in accordance with observed facts. Doubtless certain hypnotic states exist in which all the attention, so far as it is called into action, is concentrated upon one idea. In order to prove, however, that directing the attention upon a fresh point necessarily withdraws it entirely from another, it must be shown that the phenomenon which resulted from the first concentration inevitably ceased when the second one arose. A cutaneous analgesia of the arm might, with some show of reason, be said to result from attention directed to the muscles during suggested catalepsy, on the ground that no attention was left wherewith to attend to painful sensations. But, while the catalepsy still exists, how — on this theory — can one explain, for example, a cutaneous tactile hyperesthesia of the same limb, by means of which the subject can distinguish the points of the compass at half the normal distance? If the subject is unconscious of painful sensations because his attention is entirely concentrated on his muscular condition, this same lack of attention to the skin ought not only to have prevented abnormal distinctness of tactile impressions, but also to have inhibited the usual ones. The experiment can be still further complicated, for, while still permitting the catalepsy to persist, the cutaneous tactile hyperaesthesia can be associated by suggestion with a cutaneous analgesia over the same area. Now the subject's whole attention cannot be directed to maintaining a condition of muscular rigidity, if he has still enough of it left to suffice, not only for the increased perception of certain tactile sensations, but also for the selection and inhibition of other painful ones. Further, the opposite of these phenomena can be simultaneously evoked on the other side of the body : the patient's muscles be paralysed by suggestion, his tactile sensibility abohshed, and his sensibility to pain increased. The attention is now directed to six different points, and could with equal ease be simultaneously directed to many others. A psychic blindness, for example, could be suggested on one side; a psychic deafness on the other; hyperaesthesia of the sense of smell and taste on one side, and diminished or abolished sensibility on the other, &c., &c. But this is not all, for while the attention is presumably turned in all these different directions, the subject may be engaged in the attempted solution of some intellectual problem. A still further complication is possible. Let us suppose that a fortnight before, in a previous hypnosis, a suggestion to record the time at the expiration of 20,213 minutes had been made ; this will be carried out, despite the existence of the various muscular and sensorial conditions already referred to, and the fact that at the moment of its fulfilment the patient is engaged in some other mental effort.

This picture of the hypnotic state is neither fanciful nor dependent solely on my own personal observation. The fact that numerous and varied hypnotic phenomena can be simultaneously evoked in the same subject has been repeatedly observed and recorded by others, and, strange to say, even by those who attempt to explain hypnosis by the concentration of the attention upon a single point. It is solely the importance of these facts with regard to this particular theory which has hitherto been so largely overlooked.

Granting that hypnotic phenomena are the result of changes in the attention, one is forced to conclude that these are the exact reverse of those stated by Bernheim''as explanatory of the hypnotic state. . . . The hypnotic condition differs from the normal, not because only one phenomenon can be manifested in it at once, but because it may present simultaneously many and more varied phenomena than can be evoked in the normal state at any one time. In one word, hypnosis is a state oi poly-ideism, not of mouo-ideism.

534 A. In some articles in the Revue Philosophique, published in i886 and 1887, Delboeuf described some experiments with two maid-servants of his own, whom he calls M. and J. Both were strong healthy peasant girl's who had frequently been hypnotised and were good somnambules (see also 551 B). The following experiment was made with J. After explaming what he proposed to do and obtaining her consent in the waking state, Delboeuf hypnotised her, extended her arms on a table, and suggested that the right arm should be insensible to pain. Each arm was then burnt with a red-hot bar of iron, 8 mm. in diameter, the extent and duration of its application being the same in both, but pain being felt in the left arm alone. The burns were bandaged and J. was sent to bed. During the night the pain in the left arm continued, and next morning there was a wound on it, 3 cm. in diameter, with an outer circle of inflamed blisters. On the right there was only a defined eschar, the exact size of the iron and without inflammation or redness. The day following the left arm was still more painful and inflamed ; analgesia was then successfully suggested, when the wound soon dried and the inflammation disappeared. Thus in the originally painless wound there was at first much less inflammation and a more rapid healing than in the painful one.

534 B. Delboeuf's experiment suggests that in many of the remarkable hypnotic cures recorded in the Zoist (as well as in modern cases) the removal of pain was probably an important element in the cure ; see e.g. cures of inflammation {Zoist, vol. x. p. 347) ; of neuralgia and chronic rheumatism (vol. ix. pp. 74-79) ; of abdominal pains (vol. ix, p. 155) ; of tic douloureux (vol. viii. p. 185) j of severe headaches (vol. x. p. 369) ; of eczema impetiginodes (vol. x. p. 96).

The general subject of hypnotic analgesia is strikingly illustrated by Esdaile's well-known work in the Indian hospitals ; see his books, Mesmerism in hidia (London, 1846) ; The Introduction of Mesmerism with Sanction of Government into the Public Hospitals of India (2nd edit. London, 1856) ; Natural and Mesmeric Clainwyance (London, 1852);

534 D] TO CHAPTER V 471

and constant references to him in the Zoist. Braid also made extensive use of it.

After their period, the subject sank into oblivion, until the hypnotic revival of the last twenty years, but it is now too well recognised to need discussion. As an instance I may refer to Dr. Bramwell's demonstration in 1890 to the leading doctors and dentists of Leeds of the use of hypnotism as an anaesthetic in extracting the stumps of sixteen teeth at one operation, and in the surgical dressing of a large, deep-seated abscess in the cheek. To some patients who had been often hypnotised, it was sufficient to send a command by letter that they should go to sleep at once and obey the dentist's order during an operation, which was consequently painless. (See British Medical Journal, April 5, 1890, p. 801.) Later, Dr. Bramwell showed a case in which Mr, H. Bendelack Hewetson had performed the surgical operation for correcting a squint under the anaesthesia of hypnotism only ; and Mr. Hewetson stated that he had found such anaesthesia complete in many other surgical operations on the eye. (See British Medical Journal, February 28, 189 1, pp. 460-468.)

Many instances of the use of hypnotism in the relief of pains arising from a variety of causes are given in van Renterghem and van Eeden's Psycho-therapie, pp. 262-280.

534 C. The following case reported by Delboeuf in the Revue de rHyp7iotisme, November 1891, p. 132, shows that suggestion in the normal waking state may be sufficient to suppress pain.

Mr. J., an old man of eighty, had been suffering from facial neuralgia for twenty years. He had had most of his teeth extracted, and besides half an inch of the superorbicular nerve removed. He applied in the last resort to Delboeuf. The Liege professor did not at first wish to hypnotise so old a man, who might have died suddenly in his chair in the absence of any doctor. Some days later, however, Delboeuf, accompanied by a medical friend, visits J. They find him all huddled up in his arm-chair, suffering intensely. J. had a plentiful beard and thick eyebrows. Merely to touch the hairs of his beard and eyebrows caused him intense suffering. J. tells of his martyrdom in detail. Suddenly Delboeuf, turning towards the doctor, says : " You see this man. Well ! all his sufferings are about to cease." Then looking steadily into J.'s eyes, Delboeuf lays violently hold of his beard and pulls it, crying : " You don't feel any more pain ; nor will you in future ! " J. felt no pain. Delboeuf pulls J.'s moustache and eyebrows, presses his fingers upon J.'s paralysed cheek. No sign of suffering. Delboeuf requests the doctor to do the same, with the same result. The neuralgic pains never returned.

See also a paper by Mr. C. M. Barrows, entitled " Suggestion without Hypnotism : an account of experiments in preventing or suppressing pain" in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. p. 21. Fahnestock at an earlier date showed that pain may sometimes be entirely suppressed by self-suggestion.

534 D. Dr. Hamilton Osgood reports four cases of eczema cured by hypnotic suggestion {^Revue de PHypnotisme, 1895, p. 300), and it seems

probable that in the following extraordinary case of the cure of sycosis nienti, the cure was effected by essentially similar means. The sufferer was z. privat docent at the university of Moscow. During the nine months which his disease lasted he consulted the most eminent dermatologists of Germany, Austria, and Russia. They unanimously diagnosed sycosis. No treatment brought him any help. He at last consulted a " wise woman," who declared that his disease could be cured by prayer. He accompanied her to a church, where she prayed for three or four minutes ; the same process was repeated in the evening and on the two following days. Amelioration had set in almost instantly ; on the third day he was so well that he was able to be shaved.

For a discussion of the case from various points of view see Berillon, Revue de V Hypnotisnie, January 1896, p. 195 ; Delboeuf, Revue de VHypjiotisme, February 1896, p. 225 ; Durand (de Gros), Revue de V Hypnotis7)ie, 1896, p. 37. It was also quoted in the British Medical Journal for November i6th, 1895.

634 E. The use of hypnotic analgesia in accouchenients was well known to the early mesmerists. A typical instance will be found in the Zoist, vol. X. p. 91. Fahnestock also practised it (see Statuvolism, p. 315). Among recent cases I may mention that of a girl of about fifteen, recorded by Dr. G. C. Kingsbury in the British Medical Journal, 1891, p. 460. Others have been recorded from time to time in the Revue de V Hypnotisme, e.g. by Mesnet (August 1887) ; by Fanton (November 1890) ; by Delboeuf (April 1891), the patient being "J.," the subject referred to in 534 A, and this being her first confinement; by Dumontpallier (December 1891) ; in this case the patient was awake and fully conscious during the last period of the confinement, but the pain was entirely averted by suggestion; by Voisin (June 1896). In the same Revue (June 1S92), Bourdon reported a case in which by hypnotic suggestion he had arrested contractions which had begun and postponed the confinement for a week.

Joire and Bourdon have applied with success a method of waking suggestion which, they contend, can be used at a moment's notice, without specially training the subject. See Revue de r ffypnotisme, account by Joire (August 1898, pp. 39-59) ; by Bourdon (December 1899, pp. 176-181).

535 A. The following cases (quoted from the Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 209, March 1S94) indicate that the pain suppressed by anaesthetics may under some circumstances be remembered afterwards.

(i) On November 3rd, 1893, a middle-aged woman was operated on for a bony tumour of the upper jaw. She was, of course, under an anassthetic. When she awoke, after completion of the operation, she said she had no recollection whatever of what had occurred. When I called on her, on November 7th, she said she had had severe neuralgia during the night in the situation of the operation. During the continuance of this pain, and while half awake and half asleep, she thought she could follow each step of the operation of November 3rd.

535 B] TO CHAPTER V 473

She described the cutting and slipping of the steel chisel, the blows of the mallet, and scraping back of the gum — in fact, it seemed to her that she underwent the whole operation again.

(2) A lady to whom I told the above said she once took " gas " for a tooth extraction. This was quite successful, for she "felt nothing." But on an occasion subsequent to this she had a return of toothache — some time in the night. She declared that she could then feel all the symptoms of becoming unconscious while inhaling the gas ; then came the digging of the forceps to get a grip on the tooth, the wrench, and awful pain — every detail was " felt " now, although her waking consciousness had been quite unaware of any pain during the actual extraction.

(3) I have many times noted that people while anaesthetised, who do not feel pain in the ordinary sense, and who on coming to themselves declare that they did feel no pain during the operation, have struggled, groaned, spoken, or given some other evidence that some stratum of their consciousness was awake during the anaesthesia, and was being impressed by the pain of the operation.

The above appears to show that the subliminal consciousness does take note of what is going on, while the work-a-day self is oblivious to all external stimuli when under the influence of an anaesthetic; and that the memory of this sub^ liminal self may be brought to the surface by some appropriate stimulus, such as the neuralgia, which, we may note, occurred between sleeping and waking — that is, at a time when the subliminal is more active than the supraliminal stratum of our conscious personality. . . .

Note to Case I. — The patient did not see the operator's instruments at all, nor was she told after the operation how it was done, but merely that the tumour had been cut away entirely and successfully. No one was present at the operation except the patient, operator, and myself. The operation was described by the patient as accurately as a non-medical person was likely to do. It may be thought that she was enabled to describe the operation by her vivid imagination ; but under the circumstances I should regard this " vivid imagination " as only another name for her subliminal memory.

With regard to Case II., as I was not present during the extraction of the teeth, I know none of the details.

In each of these two cases I was, of course, careful not to suggest to the patient the details of the operation — such as " Did you feel this or that.'"' I merely asked them twice over to tell me what they felt. Both the patients were thoroughly under the influence of the anaesthetic — chloroform in the first case, and nitrous oxide gas in the second. C. Theodore Green,

M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., London.

See also Laurent's Des Etats Seconds (p. 37), where the details of an operation under chloroform were recovered in a dream.

535 B. On the other hand, compare the following case recorded by Dr. J. Milne Bramwell in his " Personally observed Hypnotic Phenomena" {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. p, 193).

Miss A. I had frequently hypnotised this patient and could influence by suggestion, not only the voluntary muscles, but also the special senses. On awakening she could always recall what had passed, despite suggestions to the contrary. At a later date I found I could make her analgesic by suggestion.

Touching the cornea, passing needles deeply into the flesh, and probing the nose and vocal chords were unaccompanied by pain or disagreeable sensation. On awaking, despite suggested amnesia, the patient could recall all the tactile sensations associated with these operations, but was unable, even in response to suggestion, to revive any memory of pain. . . .

This case may be taken as a typical one, for amongst the numerous operations performed during hypnosis with which I have had to do, I have in no instance been able to revive any memory of pain.

538 A. Two observations of Dr. Li^beault's show how hypnosis, by improving the faculty of attention, may increase the acuteness of the sense of hearing. (Summarised from Therapeutlque Suggestive, pp. 64 et seq.)

(i) A. Aubry, aged twenty-three, nearly deaf with both ears from birth, goes to school where j-z^;z-language is taught, becomes less able to hear, no longer needing to fix his attention so much on sounds. Hypnotised by Liebeault, recovers at once his previous degree of hearing ; this lasted for four years, when the suggestion of attention became exhausted.

The most noteworthy point is that when Aubry was specially anxious to hear he threw himself into iifie espece d''etat passif, — a kind of self-hypnotisation in which his respiration became slower and his power of hearing was increased.

(2) C. Loue was a deaf-mute, aged fifty, deaf since a year old; very slight hearing of right ear. Hypnotised by Li^beault, he heard better, not only during the light sleep, but after awaking. Heard even with left ear, which had never heard before ; and was able for the first time to pronounce a few words taught to him. Loue found that he had the power of throwing himself almost instantaneously into a light sleep-waking state. This power once gained, it was observed that in his ordinary condition he was as deaf as ever. The fact was that whenever he really wished to hear he threw himself into this selfhypnotised state ; he stood motionless, with eyes fixed and pupils dilated, and loud panting breath. Finding this condition so helpful, he ceased to make the effort to hear in his normal state.

It should be added that his sight was weak; and that when he wanted to execute some delicate piece of work he hypnotised himself in the same way, with the result that he saw objects both more clearly and " larger than life," — macropsy. The same subject, as Lidbeault mentions in an earlier work, was able in this self-induced sleep-waking state to suggest to himself the bodily presence and contact of other persons with hallucinatory vividness. He cured himself almost instantly of staggering intoxication by a similar process.

Lou6 was perhaps born exceptionally capable of self-suggestion. But it looks as though his great stake in the matter had helped him ; — his seclusion from ordinary stimuli rendering it easier for him to evoke his subliminal powers.

On the. question of the bearing of attention on deafness, see Dussaud's '' Mdthode d'education de I'ouie chez les sourds et du toucher chez les aveugles " (^Bulletin de r hisiitut Psychologique International, May 1901), consisting of an apparatus ingeniously contrived to produce various sounds, graduated in loudness, &c., to which the patients practise listening, and thus gradually learn to hear fainter and fainter sounds.

538 B]

538 B. I quote the following observations as to the improvement of muscular powers and of the senses during hypnosis from Dr. Bramwell's " Personally observed Hypnotic Phenomena " (^Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii.

P- 177)-

Closure of the eyes is usually the first phenomenon observed in hypnosis, and as soon as this occurs other alterations in the voluntary muscles can usually be induced by suggestion. In reference to these I have nothing special to report. I, like others, have seen that voluntary muscular power can be increased or diminished to a remarkable extent.

Involuntary Muscles and Special Senses. — The action of the involuntary muscles and the special senses can be influenced in hypnosis. Of this I have seen many striking instances, but will confine myself almost entirely to one case, that of a woman aged forty, in which all the experiments were checked by independent observers.

Pulse. — In this subject the rapidity of the pulse could be quickly increased or diminished by simply suggesting that it should beat faster or slower. These changes, as recorded by the sphygmograph, showed corresponding alterations in tension.

Muscular Seftse. — Differences in weight as small as eight grains could be distinguished in the hypnotic state ; this the patient was quite unable to do in the normal condition.

Thermal Sensibility. — She was able to discriminate between very slight changes in temperature, such as she was unable to appreciate when awake.

Common Cutaneous Sensibility. — The common cutaneous sensibility was nearly double, i.e. the patient could distinguish the points of a compass, applied to different parts of the body, at about half the normal distance. She possessed no increased power when awake.

Heariftg. — The range of hearing could be doubled by suggestion.

Sight. — The variations in this patient's range of vision were recorded for me by Mr. Bendelack Hewetson, Ophthalmic Surgeon to the Leeds Infirmary; and, as they appear to be of considerable interest, I will give them in detail. He first saw her in 1889, long before she had been hypnotised, and reported that she was hypermetropic; that this condition was over-corrected by ciliary spasms ; that she could only read the third line of Snellen's test types, and required a minus glass to enable her to read the bottom line. In hypermetropia, as many of my readers are doubtless aware, the axis of the eye is shorter than normal, and the rays of light, or a certain proportion of them, in passing through the lens, are focussed at a point behind the retina. In this case, as the result of spasm of the muscles of accommodation, the position, and possibly the curvature of the lens was altered, i.e. it was projected further forward and rendered more convex. In consequence of this, the hypermetropia, which was only slight, was not only neutralised, but overcorrected. Thus the patient was rendered virtually myopic ; the axis of the eye had become longer than normal, and the rays of light were focussed at a point in front of, instead of behind, the retina. At this time treatment by glasses failed to relieve the defect, as the patient, who suffered from other nervous affections, was unable to wear them. She was first hypnotised in March 1892, when I observed that I could apparently alter the range of vision by suggestion. In the following July she was again examined by Mr. Hewetson, who found the

physical condition and range of vision identical with what it had been in 1889. Suggestions were then made in his presence, with the view of increasing the range of vision, whereupon the spasm disappeared, and the patient easily read the bottom line of Snellen's test types without a glass. After having shown that the spasm, with its accompanying defective vision, could be restored, I suggested its total disappearance. In June 1893 Mr. Hewetson again examined the patient, and reported that the range of vision was normal, and that there was no return of the spasm.

Cf. the improvement of vision during spontaneous somnambulism in the case of Dr. Dufay's patient, M"*" R. L., referred to in section 416.

Beaunis (Z<? Somnambulisme Provoqtie, pp. 102 et seq.') found in one of his subjects that the sense of hearing was more acute in hypnosis and could then be still further heightened by suggestion. Similarly the reaction-times for touch and hearing were shortened in hypnosis and rendered shorter still by suggestion.

538 C. In the Revue de VHypnotisme, January 1893, Dr. Cullerre records a case of suggestion by motor images. This singular case involves recovery of the use of sight and hearing by suggestion.

M'"'^ X., twenty-eight years old, a hystero-epileptic, suffered from a variety of fits or attacks, convulsive, delirious, and spontaneously somnambulic. Hypnotic somnambulism was easily induced, but quickly degenerated into a hysterical attack.

From the somnambulic accesses a kind of secondary state developed itself, lasting once, with a few minutes' interruption, for a month at a time. On returning to ordinary consciousness she had lost that month from memory.

Both in her primary and in her secondary condition she was from time to time troubled by a hallucinatory figure, which she called Timoleon, and which urged her to suicide. On recovering from these attacks M""= X. was in a pitiable state — blind, deaf, speechless, and unable to swallow.

The religieuae who attended her tried in many ways, to recall the patient's power of sensation, but in vain, until at last she bethought herself of the following plan. She held the patient's hand, and with that hand traced the words: "You will now go to sleep, and will awake in ten seconds, able to hear, see, and speak." After many repetitions of this process, the patient succeeded in grasping the meaning of the written words from the movement of her own hand. She then instantly went to sleep, and awoke in a few seconds able to speak, but not to see or to hear. Further efforts of the same kind gradually brought all the senses back.

538 D. The mystery of the organic effects of hypnotism lies bound up with the mystery of the Restitution of Function. Functions of the brain — motor, sensory, intellectual — which have been destroyed for a time by operations on animals or by disease in man, tend often to re-establish themselves, in part, at least, through the vicarious action of other nervous centres which learn to perform tasks unknown to them before. (See James, Principles of Psychology, vol. i. p. 67.) Here we have the vis reparatrix Natura carried to the highest point to which it will go in man.

539 A] TO CHAPTER V 477

In my view, such substitutions of faculty are subliminally guided, and since hypnotic suggestion is an appeal to and a furtherance of subliminal faculty, it seems to me natural that it should bring about, not only such restitutions of function after mutilation, but also other educations and developments of nervous centres, vifhose result may often involve recovery from some apparently hopeless organic malady.

539 A. In the Revue Philosophique for November 1886 M. Bergson, of Clermont-Ferrand, gives an account of a case of supposed thoughttransference or clairvoyance vi^hich turned out to be much more probably explicable by hypnotic hyperacuity of vision. The following is a summary and discussion of the case which I contributed to Mind for January 1887.

MM. Bergson and Robinet found that a boy, who was supposed to be a clairvoyant, or a telepathic percipient, could read figures and words under the following conditions. One of the observers hypnotised the boy, stood with his back nearly against the light, opened a book at random, held it nearly vertically facing himself, at about four inches from his own eyes, but below him, and looked sometimes at the page and sometimes into the boy's eyes. The book had often to be slightly shifted, but ultimately the boy could generally read the number of the page. Asked where he saw it, he pointed to the back of the book, just opposite the number's true position. Asked where the binding of the book was, he put his hand underneath the book, and indicated the place where the binding would have been had the book faced him.

It occurred to M. Bergson — and he deserves full credit for being the first to insist on this precaution — that, small though the figures were, the boy might really be reading them as reflected on the cornea of the hypnotiser. Experiments with shghtly altered position showed that, in fact, the boy could not read the letters unless adjustment and illumination were carefully made as favourable as possible. The letters were 3 mm. in height — nothing is said of their thickness— and their corneal image would be about o. i mm. in height, as M. Bergson computes, under the conditions employed. This seems a very small image to see distinctly; but Mr. J. N. Langley and Mr. H. E. Wingfield, who have kindly tried some careful experiments to test this point, inform me that they can read on each other's corneae the corneal image of printed letters of about 10 mm. in height. We know from Binet and Fere's experiments, &c., how greatly the hypnotic state does sometimes increase acuity of vision; and we may, I think, conclude that the boy probably did read the letters on his hypnotiser's cornea.

What, then, are we to make of the boy's statement that he saw the words as though in a book facing him ? M. Bergson feels sure that this was the boy's real behef. There was no suspicion of charlatanism, and, in fact, the boy disliked the experiments, and now, as M. Bergson writes to me, refuses to renew them. M. Bergson supposes, and I think justly, that this was a case of simulation inconsciente J the hypnotised subject genuinely referring his sensations to the source to which \\\?, first hypnotiser (a believer in thought-transference) had suggested to him that they were due.

And, in fact, this unconscious simulation which leads the subject to refer his unusual sensations to the special cause which his hypnotiser, or some caprice of his own mind, suggests, is a not uncommon and a very interesting phenomenon. It was observed, for instance, by EUiotson, who pointed out a good

many hypnotic peculiarities which his successors are now gradually rediscovering. It is a hypnotic exaggeration of a familiar phenomenon, namely, of the large infusion of erroneous inference which we most of us import into the account which we render to ourselves of our ordinary sensations.

A particularly curious case is briefly described in the. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, June 1884. A man was brought to us who, when hypnotised, could often name cards held in front of him, although his eyes had been plastered up and bandaged in a most elaborate way. The man's friends took this for clairvoyance, and the man assented, being sure that he could not see the cards in the usual way. They " flashed upon him," as he said. Now, after a good deal of puzzling over the case, Mr. R. Hodgson found that he also could sometimes manage to see over similar bandages, through small chinks between the skin and the paper gummed over the eyes. But he, too, found that he saw fitfully, the power of vision seeming to come and go, — and he actually could not tell with which eye he was seeing, except by covering each eye in turn with his hand. The distorted position of the eyeball, and the minute and oddly-placed channels of vision, produced so much confusion that there seemed no reason to suppose that the hypnotised subject's belief that he was seeing " clairvoyantly " was other than genuine.

The case of M. Bergson's boy seems to have been a similar one. And his idea that he was reading from the book seems to have been a sort of compromise between the feeling that he was reading somewhere and the hypnotiser's suggestion that the words were being transferred supernormally from mind to mind.

Thus far, then, M. Bergson's narration and explanation seem credible enough, and his argument as against thought-transference in this boy's case seems well made out. But he proceeded to further experiments which, as recounted, seem incredible, and which may lead some readers to distrust the accuracy of the whole series.

To explain the difficulty I must first point out that the word hyperaesthesia is loosely used for three different classes of phenomena. It is used (i) for an exaggeration of the familiar action of specialised organs, as when the eye is sensible to very small amounts of light. It is used (2) for alleged perceptions, which would imply a specialisation of what I may term our tindifferentiated fund of nervous sensibility in novel directions. Sensibility to the action of magnets, of metals in contact, of medicaments at a distance, may or may not exist, but should scarcely be called by the same name as (say) the eye's extra sensitiveness to light. And again, the word is used (3) for cases where our non-specialised organs are credited with performing functions which, so far as we can see, demand a definite sense-specialisation, or our specialised organs are credited with functions which, on measurable anatomical grounds, appear to overpass the limits of their specialisation. This last class of cases must be received with extreme caution.

Well, M. Bergson says that he showed the boy a microscopic photograph of twelve men, its longest diameter 2 mm., and that the boy saw and imitated the attitude of each man. Also that he showed the boy a microscopic preparation, involving cells not greater than .06 mm. in diameter, and that the boy saw and drew these cells.

Now I might, in the first place, object that thought-transference was not formally excluded, since M. Bergson himself knew the pliotograph and the look of the cells. I do not press this, for the other experiments seem to me to nega-

540 A] TO CHAPTER V 479

tive thought-transference in this case. I merely point out that if we wish to prove that a subject does not receive an image from our minds, we should present to him an object with which we are ourselves unacquainted.

But the real difficulty is as regards the minimum visibile. It is usually (though not universally) supposed that in order to produce a definite image more than one retinal rod or cone must be stimulated ; and that consequently no object can be separately discernible which does not subtend (say) an angle of 60 seconds, or whose retinal image is less than (say) .004 mm. in diameter. Floating particles, none of them exceeding .0029 mm. in diameter, have, I believe, been seen as a cloud in a ray of electric light sent through a tube of filtered air, but have never been seen separately by the naked eye.

Now, the 7-etinal image of an object itself only .06 mm. in diameter, and placed within the range of distinct vision, will be much less than .004 mm. in diameter. To bring it up to this minimum the retinal image must be -^-^ of the size of the object itself ; and this implies a nearness to the eye involving mere darkness and blur. The microscopic slide was presumably transparent ; but nothing was said as to the transparency of the photograph, and yet the points distinctly visible on the photograph must have been even S7naller than the cells on the slide.

A letter with which M. Bergson has favoured me has done much to remove these difficulties. It seems that the photograph was transparent, and that the boy held it close to his eye. Moreover, after seeing the photograph the boy could not read ordinary print. " C'est trop grand," he said ; and it was some time before the eye (which M. Bergson believes to have been always myopic) resumed its normal state. It seems, then, conceivable that hypnotic suggestion had induced (by spasm of the ciliary muscle ?) some change in the shape of the crystalline lens, which made the eye a microscope for the time being. Mr. George Wherry has kindly communicated to me two somewhat analogous cases, where ciliary spasm (itself induced by microscopic or telescopic work) led to uniocular diplopia, in one case even triplopia. In these cases irregular ciliary spasm apparently turned the lens into a kind of multiplying glass: — is it possible that M. Bergson induced a regular ciliary spasm, which turned the lens into a magnifier f

640 A. The probable course of evolution of early sense-organs is thus described by Prince Kropotkin in an article on " Recent Science " in the Nineteenth Century for August 1896 : —

In order to trace the progressive specialisation of senses in the animal series, ... we only need to admit that the appearance of the more specialised senses of touch, hearing, taste, smell, and vision is preceded by the existence of the less specialised mechanical, chemical, temperature, and light senses; but this is what may have been presumed in advance under the theory of evolution. Another admission, advocated by Nagel,^ namely, the existence of mixed or rather undefined sense-organs — which appears as a mere development of the same idea — would further simplify the comprehension of the facts. At the lowest end of the scale we have what Nagel describes (perhaps not quite exactly) as "the universal organ of senses," which means that the whole protoplasm of the animal's body (or, perhaps, some components of it) acts as an

1 W. Nagel, Bibliotheca Zoologica, xviii. Also his earlier more general work, Die niederen Sinne der Insekien, Tubingen, 1892.

48o APPENDICES [541 A

organ for receiving excitations from various stimuli. And at the other end of the scale there are specialised organs, so specialised that each of them is capable of transmitting one sort of sensations only. Between the two Nagel proposes to place intermediate mixed organs {Wechselsitinesorgane), which, in their normal state, aid the animal in perceiving two or three different sensations, such as taste and smell, or touch, hearing, and taste. Having no such mixed organs, we evidently have a difficulty in understanding the corresponding sensations, and we may ask ourselves whether the animal possessed of one organ for touch and taste, or for taste and smell, receives from it two different sensations, or has one sensation only, which is neither of the two, but lies between them. We may not be able to answer this question, but we fully understand that the world of sensations should grow in complexity, precision, and variety, as the sense-organs become more and more definite.

541 A. The principal inorganic objects alleged to have elicited novel sensations are running water, metals, crystals, and magnets ; — including under this last heading the magnetism of the earth, as claimed to be felt differently by sleepers according as they lie in the north-south or in the east-west positions.

The faculty of finding running water has the interest of being the first subliminal faculty which has been so habitually utilised for public ends as to form for its possessors a recognised and lucrative occupation. From Professor Barrett's monograph " On the So-called Divining Rod " (see next Appendix), and the " dowsers " who have so often discovered water where geologists and engineers have failed, it seems clear that this power of discovery is genuine, and is not dependent on the dowser's conscious knowledge or observation. It forms a subliminal uprush ; but whether it is akin to gejtius, as being a subconscious manipulation of facts accessible through normal sensory channels, or to hetercesthesia (as resting on a specific sensibility to the proximity of running water), is a question which will be variously decided in each special case. The dowser, I should add, is not hypnotised before he finds the water. But (as Professor Barrett has shown) he is often thrown, presumably by self-suggestion, into a state much resembling light hypnotic trance. The perceptivity (we may say) of central organs, in an unfamiliar direction, is stimulated by concentrated attention, involving a certain disturbance or abeyance of perceptivity in other directions.

541 B. An exhaustive and impartial survey of the existing evidence for the faculty of " dowsing " is given in Professor W. F. Barrett's two articles " On the So-called Divining Rod " in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 2-282, and vol. xv. pp. 130-383. From the latter I quote the general conclusions at which Professor Barrett has arrived (p. 313).

(i) For some centuries past certain individuals locally known as dowsers have declared that they can discover the presence of underground water, mineral lodes, coal, building stone, or other buried objects which may be sought for by the apparently spontaneous motion of the so-called divining rod; when their pretensions have been tested, the result, though by no means

541 B] TO CHAPTER V 481

uniformly in their favour, has been so remarkable that chance coincidence appears a wholly inadequate explanation.

(2) Any explanation based upon trickery or unconscious hints from bystanders, or the detection of faint surface indications of the concealed object, or other known cause, is insufficient to cover all the facts.

(3) The 7nove7?tent of the rod or forked twig is only a special case of motor automatism exhibited by a large number of individuals, and arises from a subconscious and involuntary " suggestion " impressed on the mind of the dowser.

(4) Accompanying the involuntary and usually unconscious muscular contraction which causes the motion of the forked twig or rod, many dowsers experience a peculiar malaise and some a violent convulsive spasm. This is a psycho-physiological effect, akin to emotion. Moreover, the state of monoideism of the dowser creates a condition of partial catalepsy when some suggestion causes the idea to culminate.

(5) This subconscious suggestion may arise from a variety of causes ; sometimes it is merely an auto-suggestion, at others it is unconsciously derived through the senses from the environment, but in a certain number of those who exhibit motor automatism the suggestion appears to be due to some kind of transcendental perceptive power.

(6) Such persons appear only able to exercise this transcendental faculty when their normal self-consciousness is more or less in abeyance, or when it is completely submerged, as in profound hypnosis.

(7) This subconscious perceptive power, commonly called " clairvoyance," may provisionally be taken as the explanation of those successes of the dowser which are inexplicable on any grounds at present known to science.

The malaise mentioned above as a frequent accompaniment of the exercise of their art by dowsers is thus described in an earlier part of the same paper (p. 299).

Nearly all dowsers assert that when the rod moves in their hands, or when they believe that underground water is beneath them, they experience a peculiar sensation, which some describe as felt in the limbs like the tingling of an electric shock, others as a shivering or trembling, and others as an unpleasant sensation in the epigastric region. With all there is more or less of a convulsive spasm, sometimes of a violent character. This fnalaise is very marked in some cases, but not experienced in others. That these physiological disturbances have a purely psychological origin is obvious — (i) from the fact that they are not experienced when the dowser is off duty, that is, when he has no suspicion that he is in the neighbourhood of underground water, and (2) that like effects are not produced by the much greater masses of visible water in rivers, lakes, or the sea. The interesting point is that these psycho-physiological phenomena have a real existence; they exist among dowsers in all countries, and can be traced back, as historical investigation shows, for upwards of two centuries. In the preceding Report I devoted an Appendix to this subject. . . . IProceediftgs S. P. K., vol. xiii. -pp. 2^2 el seg. 2

The writer proceeds to give further cases — ancient and modern — of the malaise associated with dowsing, and shows its analogy with the physiological disturbances, arising from psychological causes, that sometimes accompany other phases of automatism.

VOL. I. 2 H

541 C. I next take the case of metallsesthesia, — that alleged reaction to special inetals which has often been asserted both in hypnotic and in hysterical cases. As a definite instance I will take the statement made by certain physicians attending Louis Vive (see 233 A) that while they supported him during a hysterical attack a gold ring on the finger of one of them touched him for some time and left a red mark, as of a burn, of whose origin the patient knew nothing. It is further alleged — and this is a quite separate point, although often confused with the first — that gold is distinguished by some subjects under conditions where no degree of sensitiveness to weight or temperature could have shown them that gold was near.

Now as to the first point, e.g. the Louis Viv6 incident, I can readily believe that the touch of gold, unknown to the subject's supraliminal consciousness, may produce a redness, subsequent pain, &c. All that is needed for this is a capricious self-suggestion, like any other hysterical idea. This self-suggestion might remain completely unknown to the waking self, which might be puzzled as to the cause of the redness and pain. And observe that such a result might even deser\'e the name of heteraesthesia. There might be a whole complex range of specific reactions to substances chemically inert paralleling our reactions to drugs which chemically affect our tissues. The second claim, however, involves much more than this. If gold is recognised through a covering, for instance, or heated to the same point as other metals, so that no sensation of weight or temperature can help observation, this might possibly be by virtue of some sensibility more resembling the attraction of low organisms to specific substances whose chemical action on them we cannot determine, or to particular rays in the spectrum. I am not convinced that this has yet been proved ; but I should not regard it as a priori impossible. I think it probable that our central sensorium may have the capacity of discriminating many sensations which it does not habitually discriminate, and that dermal endorgans may transmit messages which are not habitually interpreted in all their fulness. It is with central rather than with peripheral capacities that such a problem is ultimately concerned.

541 D. Considering in the next place the alleged sensibility of certain persons to crystals and magnets, — known to be absolutely inert in relation to ordinary men, — we should note the alleged connection between the perception of magnets and that of running water. And here we may note in passing a point which in these inquiries should be often remembered. I mean the great irregularity with which sensibilities are distributed in the organic world ; — even sensibility to a stimulus so potent and universal as light itself. The mere fact that sensibility to magnets has not yet been observed is no strong presumption against its being observed before long. The central organs of perception, as yet unexhausted in their manifestation by the external organs, may, for aught we can say, possess this potential sensibility, to be developed in process of time.

541 E] T O C H A P T E R V 483

Some experiments intended to test the reality of the " magnetic sense," and especially of the so-called "magnetic light" — luminous appearances described by Baron Reichenbach as being seen by his sensitives in the neighbourhood of magnets — were carried out by a Committee of the S.P.R. in 1883. After careful and repeated trials with forty-five "subjects" of both sexes and of ages between sixteen and sixty, only three of these professed to see luminous appearances. They were entirely ignorant of Reichenbach's works, and no information was given to them beforehand of the nature of the experiment. The sensations they described were remarkably concordant. The light, they said, took the form of two rounded or blunted cones, apices downwards, one of each being directly over and upon a pole of the magnet. The chief instrument used was an electro-magnet, and the light appeared and disappeared with the making and breaking of the current, unknown to the subject. Two of the subjects and a member of the Committee also experienced peculiar sensations in the face and head when the head was placed in the strongest part of the magnetic field, by which they were able to distinguish accurately whether the magnet was excited or not.

The value of these experiments as evidence of a magnetic sense of course depends primarily on whether the subjects had any means, direct or indirect, of knowing when the current was made or broken. The precautions taken to avoid this and the other conditions of the experiments are described in detail in the report of them in the Proceedings S.P.R. , vol. i. pp. 230-237. See also a further note by the Chairman of the Committee, Professor W. F. Barrett, vol. ii. pp. 56-60.

541 E. And next as to the hetersesthesise alleged to be evoked by dead organic substances, or by Hving organisms. We may begin by observing that some of our senses, at any rate, form the subjective expression of certain chemical reactions. But many kinds of chemical reactions go on in us besides those which, for example, form the basis of our sense of taste. And some persons are much more affected than others by certain special reactions, which from a purely chemical point of view may or may not be precisely the same for all. Some persons have a specific sensibility to certain foods, or to certain drugs ; — the presence of which their stomach detects, and to which it responds with extraordinary delicacy. Now, if it were an important object to discover the presence of a certain drug, such a sensibility would be regarded as a precious gift, and the discovery might be quite as valuable when made by the stomach as it would have been if made by the nose. These are nascent hetersesthesise, which, however, are not fostered either by natural selection or by human care.

Of similar type are the specific sensibilities to the presence of certain plants or animals, — familiar in certain cases of " rose-asthma," " horseasthma," and discomfort felt if a cat is in the room. These feelings have many causes. At one end there is ordinary mechanical irritation by solid

particles. At the other end of the scale there is, of course, mere selfsuggestion. But between the two there seems to be a kind of sensibility which is not purely self-suggestive, and not exactly olfactory, but resembles rather the instincts by which insects or other animals discern each other's neighbourhood.

There seems indeed no reason why the sense still vaguely known as smell should not be divisible into as many specific sensibilities as the sense which till lately was vaguely known as touch. On the one hand, sensibility to effluvia — even assuming all smell to depend on effluvia — is not confined to the nose, and may surely take varied forms as various tracts of mucous membrane are affected. And, on the other hand, the animal kingdom shows us in abundant instances a sense of smell already developed to a point which surpasses the sense of hearing and rivals the sense of sight.

Now, the very fact that the bloodhound can distinguish as he can a given person's traces from all the world beside is enough, I think, to point to the probability that the hypnotised subject, — already hypersesthetic and perhaps hetersesthetic, — may distinguish between one human being and another in a manner, and with an acuteness, to us unknown. A natural direction for heterassthesiae to take would seem to be a revival of primitive powers, till now developed more fully in other animal races than in man.

Returning, then, from this new point of view to the problem of the influence of mesmeric passes, we see that there are now two different lines of observation which point to the probability of their possessing some specific potency. From the supernormal or spiritual side I urge that since telepathy from a distance is a ve7-a causa of hypnosis (see 568), mesmeric passes near at hand may possess some similar hypnogenous value. And from the normal or material side I urge that among the delicate discriminative powers with which hypnotism is found to endow the sensitive subject, it is not unlikely that we shall find some specific sensibility to human proximity per se, and perhaps to the proximity of certain human beings, as distinguished from the rest.

It is perhaps through some such power of discrimination that effects are produced on sensitive subjects by " mesmerised objects," — assuming, of course, that sufficient care has been taken to avoid their discovering by ordinary means that the objects have been specially manipulated in any way. See some experiments recorded in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. i. pp. 260-262, and a description of Esdaile's experiments with mesmerised water in vol. iii. p. 409 ; also cases in the Zoisl, e.g. vol. v. p. 129, and vol. X. p. 99.

541 F. And now I pass on to a ihird concurrent line of inference, derived from a set of experiments which seem in a sense to stand midway between the two classes just mentioned, — the telepathic, namely, and the heteraesthetic. I speak of medical clairvoyance, or the power of diagnosing the present or past state of a living organism either from actual

541 F] TO CHAPTER V 485

contact or even in the absence of the invalid, and from contact with some object which he has himself touched. If impressions of this type are actually conveyed from one organism to another, it can hardly be the case that mesmeric passes are altogether inert. If there is a diffused influence which reveals the state of a distant person by means of an object which he has touched, this specific influence is likely to be felt when he is in close proximity and is fixing his attention on its communication. And the apparent effects of mesmeric passes suggest the possible existence of a so-called " aura," or influence environing each human being, whose limits it is not easy to define.^

The early mesmerists, e.g. Puysegur, Petetin, Despine, and Teste, all had the utmost faith in the faculty of their subjects to see their own disease and prescribe the right remedy. The same attitude of mind can be traced all through the Zoist. Fahnestock was perhaps the first to point out the ambiguity of this alleged introvision. "It is well known to me," he says, " that when a resolution is taken, a belief cherished, or a determination formed by persons while in the somnambulic state, that, when they awake, although they may know nothing about it or relative to it, they always do what has been so resolved or determined upon at the time appointed or specified " {^Statuiwlism, p. 203), and he quotes experiments to prove his point. With the knowledge we now possess of the extraordinary power of self-suggestion in producing all kinds of bodily symptoms, it is obvious that these cases cannot be adduced as evidence of anything more. A typical instance of one of these early observations is to be found in the Zoist, vol. x. p. 347. See also Puysegur, Recherches sur r Homme dans le Somnambulisme (Paris, 181 1), pp. 140 et seq. and pp. 214 et seq. ; Petetin, Electricite Animate (Paris, 1808) ; Despine, Observations de Medecine Pratique (1838) — " Estelle nous a indiqu^ tons les soirs, dans sa crise, ce qu'il y avait a faire pour le lendemain, tant pour le regime alimentaire que pour les moyens medicamentaires " (p. 38).

In addition to the belief that a mesmerised patient was his own best doctor, the mesmerists also held that somnambules were able clairvoyantly to obtain knowledge of the state of diseased organs in other persons. This clairvoyant diagnosis might be performed under a variety of conditions, none of which were really essential. There were somnambules who required contact with the patient ; there were others who required mere proximity ; others must handle some object which belonged to the sufferer. Finally, others could " travel," and diagnose the disease of an absent person who was merely named or merely described.

Puysegur's subject, Agnes Burguet, is alleged by him to have been uniformly successful in prognosis as well as in diagnosis. He emphasises the necessity of the patient's faith in the clairvoyante, and it appears that the prophecies were announced by her to the patient, so that there is no difficulty in attributing their fulfilment, or the success of the remedies she 1 See, however, my discussion of this subject above, in sections 669 and 570.

prescribed, to suggestion. A number of instances are given in the works of Puysegur and Petetin mentioned above ; also in Bertrand's Du Magnetisme en France (Paris, 1826). See the Revue de rHypnoHsme,'i>t^X.&mbQX 1888, p. 81, for references to other sources.

A good case of what may have been clairvoyant diagnosis, in which many of the details mentioned were verified by a post-mortem examination, is given in the Zoist, vol. x. p. 307.

541 G. In an article by Professor Charles Richet, entitled " Relation de diverses Experiences sur la Transmission Mentale, la Lucidit(^, «S:c.," in proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 18-168, one section is devoted to the subject of clairvoyance of maladies. Professor Richet remarks that there are many mediums who habitually give medical consultations. Their usual custom is to go rapidly over the various organs which may be affected, and when they come to the one which actually is affected, the sitter is delighted, and believes in their success. The medium then arrives quickly at the general diagnosis of the case, and describes the illness according to a sort of scheme which is easily made with the help of medical books and the experience gained by practice. The clairvoyants with whom Professor Richet experimented were three subjects of his own, whom he calls Alice, Helena, and Eugenie. Alice had never practised medical consultations, and had never been hypnotised by any one but Professor Richet. Helena had had a little previous experience of the kind, while Eugenie kept a cabinet de consultations, and was much accustomed to patients.

Fifty-three experiments were made, which are recorded in full, and a fair degree of success was attained. This can only be judged of from a study of the complete record, which I have not space here to quote ; Professor Richet's general discussion {loc. cit, pp. 1 31-13 2) is also important as bearing on the proper interpretation of the phenomena.

541 H. The following case was sent to me by Professor Richet, and was first printed in the Journal ?).V.^., vol. iv. p- 91. The sensitive employed was one of the three mentioned in 541 G.

Paris, le 8 Mars, 1889.

J'ai un trfes beau cas de luciditd, que je vais vous raconter avec detail.

Vous ne savez peut-etre pas que men beau-p^re, Mr. F. A., a 6t6 malade assez gravement k partir du mois d'aofit, 1887. (C'est lui dont j'ai eu I'occasion de parler dans les Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 126, Exp. XL.) II a t^t^ de plus en plus malade jusqu'au mois de Janvier, 1888. A ce moment (Janvier et f^vrier, 1888) j'interroge h. plusieurs reprises Alice [a person whom Mr. Richet hypnotised] sur la sante de Mr. F. A. J'avoue que je croyais Mr. F. A. absolument perdu, et un jour entre autres en fdvrier, 18SS, j'ai interrog^ Alice; elle m'a dit, " Ne vous inqui^tez pas." Pour ma part je croyais que Mr. A. ne vivrait plus que huit jours.

De fait, contrairement ce que je pensais et ce que pensaient tous les m^decins, il a k peu pr^s gudri. [Certain symptoms, however, described by Mr. Richet, remained, which necessitated the constant attention of a surgical nurse.]

541J] TO CHAPTER V 487

Quoiqu'il soit agd (76 ans), qu'il s'amaigrisse beaucoup, et que ses forces ne s'amdliorent pas, k partir du mois de f^vrier, 1888 (vers le 9 f^vrier environ) il a 6t6 sans empirer. ...

A diverses reprises (peut-etre trois ou quatre fois) j'ai demand^ k Alice de me parler de lui. EUe m'a dit, " Ne vous inqui^tez pas ; je vous en parlerai."

II y a deux jours, le jeudi, 7 mars, k une heure de I'apr&s-midi, dfes que j'ai endormi Alice, elle me dit (ce sont ses paroles textuelles que je copie d'apr&s la stdnographie que j'ai prise): "J'avais hate de vous voir; je voulais vous voir hier pour vous parler de M. A. Ou il est plus souffrant ou il va avoir une crise ; de la fi^vre, de I'altdration, de la fatigue. Quel mauvais moment ! Le mal s'aggrave ; il est tr^s abattu. II ne faut rien attendre pour cette crise-lk." (Cela signifie que la crise ne se terminera pas par la mort.) " II ne pourra pas bouger ni faire un mouvement. La douleur est surtout dans les reins, k gauche, et tr^s forte. Ce ne sera pas la derniere crise. II la supportera encore. Elle aura lieu avant peu, dans deux ou trois jours. Elle sera plus forte que toutes celles qu'il a eu depuis un an. Le moment approche. II souffrira moins k la fin. II mourra au moment ou vous ne vous y attendrez pas ; ce n'est pas dans une crise qu'il mourra. II ne pourra pas prendre d'aliments, on lui mouille les levres. ... II avait peur de mourir; maintenant c'est bien change, et il est plus indifferent."^

Voilk ce que m'a dit Alice k une heure le jeudi. Ce meme jeudi soir, en rentrant chez moi, je trouve ma femme fort inquiete, et elle me raconte que dans la nuit du mercredi au jeudi, vers une heure du matin — [here Mr. Richet relates in detail how for the first time for thirteen months the attendant had been unable to assist Mr. A., who had been in great agony for three hours, until at length a surgeon was sent for, with whose aid the sufferings of the patient were instantly relieved.] II est Evident, et meme absolument sur, qu'Alice n'a pu savoir cela; moi-meme je I'ignorais absolument k une heure. . . .

II faut noter comme essentiel que depuis un an et un mois jamais Mr. A. n'a eu une crise aussi forte et avec autant d'an goisseque dans la nuit de mercredi k jeudi. [Signed] Ch. Richet.

541 J. It will be found as we proceed that in each direction in turn suggestive dynamogeny leads up to some definite form of supernormal faculty. Thus, to begin with, these hetersesthesise, or new sensibilities to living beings, with which we are for the moment concerned, glide insensibly into "community of sensation" and "medical clairvoyance." The perception, that is to say, of some organic influence from a person in proximity passes on into perception of the sensations which that person is experiencing, and then of the state of his body which gives rise to those sensations. In saying, however, that the narrower and nearer faculties "pass on " into the wider and more remote, I am by no means asserting that there is a real continuity of operation, — as though the same agencies were acting with less or greater power. On the other hand, I believe that each of these apparently gradual series involves a fundamental transition from organic to spiritual faculties ; — from powers developed by natural

Ces details sur les aliments, la secheresse des levres, et I'indiff erence progressive a la mort, sont absolument vrais.

selection on earth, and exercised through the material organism, to powers derived from the metetherial world, and exercised in spite of, rather than by aid of, the material organism. There must, indeed, on such a hypothesis exist somewhere a unity more fundamental even than that division ; since the terrene faculties must needs be derived and narrowed from the cosmical faculties, and the laws of matter must form an incidental case of the more universal laws of spirit. The time, however, has certainly not yet come at which we can attempt any real fusion of that narrower or material scheme of laws — of which we know something already — with that wider or spiritual scheme, whose existence we merely infer from certain residual phenomena which the laws of matter as known to us will not explain.

And therefore in this serial enumeration of the effects of hypnotic suggestion I will not for the moment press these heteraesthesise further, so as to try to lead them on into clairvoyance, but will rather leave the various supernormal powers into which hypnotism introduces us to be dealt with together at a more advanced point in the discussion.

541 K. Medicamentous substances have also been claimed by many different hypnotists as exerting from a little distance, or when in sealed tubes, specific influences on patients. The phenomenon is of the same nature as the alleged specific influences of metals, — all being very possibly explicable as the mere freak of self-suggestion. This explanation was offered long ago by Braid, and I quote the following account of the experiments with which he supported it from an article by Dr. Bramwell, entitled "James Braid; his Work and Writings," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. p. 127 et seq.

In Braid's time the mesmerists held that magnets, certain metals, crystals, &c., possessed a peculiar power and, with sensitive subjects, were capable of producing attraction and other remarkable phenomena. Some experienced an unpleasant sensation like an aura, others got headache, or attacks of fainting or catalepsy, with spasms so violent that they apparently endangered life. Frequently there was hypersesthesia of the special senses. Many also fancied they saw fiery bundles of light stream from the poles of the magnet. All this was said to happen even when the subjects did not see the magnets and did not know what was being done. Braid performed many experiments in order to test these statements, with the following results : the phenomena appeared when the patients had preconceived ideas on the subject, or when these were excited by leading quesdons, but were invariably absent when they were ignorant of what was being done. Pretended magnets also produced the phenomena when the patients knew what was expected to occur. Reichenbach recorded an instance where, by the mere exposure of a sensitive plate in a box with a magnet, an impression had been made, as if it had been exposed to the full influence of the light. Braid repeated the experiment, and also had similar ones performed for him by an expert photographer, and, when all sources of fallacy were guarded against, the results were invariably negative. According to Braid, the mind of the patient alone was sufficient to produce the effects attributed to magnetic or odyllic force, and suggested ideas were capable of exciting a great variety of physical sensations and mental conditions.

541 K] TO CHAPTER V 489

[Here follows an account of an experiment of Braid's to show that suggestion was the true explanation of the supposed mesmeric powers of magnets and certain metals. A physician having demonstrated to him the effects produced by a magnet on a mesmerised patient, Braid in turn showed that he could produce effects of just the same kind on her by means of a key and ring, — all that was necessary being to mention in her presence that certain specified effects would follow from her holding or touching it in specified ways.]

In 1843 Braid referred to Elliotson's belief in the powers of certain metals, and to Wakley's experiments. The latter, operating with a non-mesmerising metal, made the patient believe he was using a mesmerising one, whereupon she fell asleep; and he concluded that all the subjects were impostors. Braid denied this, asserting that the active agent was simply the imagination, and that the metals were neither mesmeric nor non-mesmeric. In the same way he explained the action of the wooden tractors which Dr. Hayarth, in 1799, successfully substituted for the metal ones of Mr. Perkins. The latter consisted of two pieces of metal, one apparently of iron and the other of brass, about three inches long, blunt at one end and pointed at the other. They were invented by Dr. Elisha Perkins, of Norwich, Connecticut, who in 1796 took out a patent for them, and were applied by drawing them lightly over the part affected for about twenty minutes. This method of treatment, which was very fashionable at one time, was termed Perkinism, in honour of its inventor. . . .

The power of imagination and excited attention in producing a specific influence in a healthy person, was beautifully illustrated, he said, in the following case : [Having read an account of certain medicines which could manifest their influence through glass, the patient simply holding the closed phial in his hand, he took a phial and filled it with coloured water. He then stated in the presence of a lady, who was not hypnotised, that it would act as an emetic through the glass, and asked her to hold it in her hand, and try the effect. Almost at once she felt the appropriate sensations, and vomiting was apparently imminent when Braid stopped it by giving her a second phial, which he said would neutralise the effect of the first.]

These views of the specific action of different metals, &c., were revived by the Salpetri^re School and a few other hypnotists ; but tests by more careful observers have again practically proved the results obtained to be due to suggestion. It is not enough merely to abstain from mentioning to the hypnotised subject what substance is being used in the experiment ; it is necessary also to remember his extraordinary acuteness in picking up hints from the voice, gestures, or facial expression of all the persons present with him, — even when he appears to be in a totally unconscious condition. For this reason no experiment of this kind can be considered evidential if the experimenters themselves know what substance is being employed.

The Committee appointed by the Paris Academic de M^decine to test the experiments of Luys — one of the most notorious exponents of the doctrine of specific influences in the present day — found that when the substances were wrapped up so as to be indistinguishable, and the experimenters did not know which they were using — con-

trary to Luys' own practice — no specific results followed. The Report of this Committee was presented by Dujardin-Beaumetz in 1888.

The following passage is from Dr. Bramwell's article just quoted {op. cit, p. 156).

Before Braid appreciated the mental influence in hypnosis, he was inclined to believe in phrenology, and the same cause seems to have led the Salpetriere School into error as to the action of magnets, metals, and medicines in sealed tubes. That all these owed their virtue to suggestion was clearly demonstrated by Braid ; yet, despite this fact, the metallo-therapeutics of Burq were revived by Charcot and his disciples, and Dr. Luys still plays with his india-rubber dolls, and Professor Benedikt with his magnets. An account, by Dr. F. Peterson and others, of Professor Benedikt's theory of the action of magnets, and of the experimental exposure of its fallacious nature, read before the New York Academy of Medicine, closely resembles what was said and done by Braid on the same subject. According to Professor Benedikt, "certain forms of hysteria are better treated by the magnet than by electricity, hydropathy, or drugs. When a magnet is applied to the sensitive vertebrae without removal of the dress, the irritable patient soon becomes quiet and even quasi-paralysed, the muscles gradually relax, the respiration becomes sighing, consciousness slowly disappears ; the resistance to conduction in motor nerves could easily become absolute. The two poles have different effects, the magnet must be employed with caution, patients may be injured by it." These statements were tested in America ; magnets of enormous power were used, and experiments made on human subjects and lower animals. A young dog was subjected to magnetic influence for five hours ; but, instead of being paralj-sed from " increased resistance to conduction in motor nerves," on being liberated, it was more lively than before. The experimenters conclude " that the human organism is in no wise appreciably affected by the most powerful magnets known to modern science; that neither direct nor reversed magnetism exerts any perceptible influence upon the iron contained in the blood, upon the circulation, upon ciliary or protoplasmic movements, upon sensory or motor nerves, or upon the brain. The ordinary magnets used in medicine," they say, " have a purely suggestive or psychic effect, and would in all probability be quite as useful if made of wood."

542 A. We now come to the effects of hypnotic suggestion in producing certain definite changes in the vaso-motor system, in glands and secretions, &c. I give a few examples in this and the two next Appendices. In the Reime de P Hypnotisme, September 189 1, p. 85, De Jong reports a complete cure achieved by suggestion, of a most desperate case of hsemorrhagy in a boy of nine. The symptoms first appeared when he was eighteen months old. One of his sisters had died of the same disease. The loss of blood, through the nose or through the mouth, occurred irregularly, at intervals sometimes of two months, sometimes of two weeks.

Grasset (in Revue de PHypnotisme, November 1S87, p. 141) reports some cases in which, by hypnotic suggestion, he arrested loss of blood through the mouth in hysterical patients.

543 A] TO CHAPTER V 491

542 B. Dr. Burot in the Revue de V Hypnotisme, January 1890, p. 197, reports the case of a patient whose arms were contracted by hysterical attacks, the contracture being accompanied by local asphyxia of the hands, which lasted for several weeks. Both hands were swollen and violet in color, and of a temperature far below the normal. The temperature was raised day by day by hypnotic suggestion, which at length cured the asphyxia. At a later stage it recurred, but was found more amenable to treatment. It also appeared that the temperature could be lowered as well as raised by suggestion. The contracture always recurred when the asphyxia was brought back by suggestion.

Professor Beaunis and Dr. Krafft-Ebing have slowed the pulse by hypnotic suggestion,^ and these savants, as well as Professor Bernheim, M. Focachon and others, have produced redness and blisters by the same means. Drs. Mabille, Ramadier, Bourru, Burot, have produced localised hypersemia, epistaxis, ecchymosis.'^ Dr. Forel and others have restored arrested secretions at a precisely fixed hour.^ Dr. Krafft-Ebing has produced a rise of temperature at moments fixed by himself — a rise, for instance, from 37° to 38.5° C* Burot has lowered the temperature of a hand as much as 10 C. by suggestion.^ He supposes that the mechanism employed is the constriction of the brachial artery, beneath the biceps. " How can it be," he asks, " that when one merely says to the subject, 'your hand will become cold,' the vaso-motor nervous system answers by constricting the artery to the degree necessary to achieve the result desired ? Oest ce qui depasse notre imagination.^''

542 C. The following is a summary of a case of the cure of hyperhydrosis reported by Dr. Bramwell in the British Medical Journal, September loth, 1898 : —

Miss B., aged fifteen, January 1890. On the back of the left arm, just above the wrist, a patch of skin 2^ inches long by i| broad was the seat of constant perspiration. This had existed from early childhood, was always excessive, and invariably rendered more so by exertion or emotion. The forearm was always enveloped in bandages, but these rapidly became saturated, and the perspiration dripped upon the floor. On January loth the patient was hypnotised for the first time, and somnambulism induced. By the following day the perspiration had markedly diminished; the patient was again hypnotised, when the perspiration ceased. Two years later there had been no relapse.

543 A. The best known and in some respects best observed modem

Beaunis, Le Somnambulisme Provoque.

2 See for a brief account, Revue de VHypnotisme, December 1887, p. 183.

* Revue de VHypnotistne, April 1889, p. 298.

* Revue de V Hypitotisme, March 1890, p. 278. Compare the inexplicable rises of temperature in Dr. Teale's case, Lancet, 1875, vol. i. pp. 340, 343, 457 ; vol. ii. p. 107 ; and i88i, vol. i. pp. 797, 842. This apparent isolability of temperature changes, generally so delicately indicative of conditions of the entire organism, is a phenomenon quite as noteworthy as the dissociability of pain from organic injury.

Revue de I'llypnotisme, January 1890, p. 197.

case of stigmatisation is that of Louise Lateau. In spite of Virchow's famous alternative with regard to this case, ou supercherie, ou jtitj-acle, the facts are now thoroughly established and generally accepted by physiologists, and, from the point of view of this book, they fall naturally enough among subliminal responses to self-suggestion. They have an interesting bearing, too, on mediaeval traditions of stigmatisation in St. Francis of Assisi and others.

Louise Lateau was born in January 1850, in the village of Bois d'Haine, Hainault, Belgium. Both her parents were robust and hardy persons, who had never suffered from any form of heemorrhage or of nervous disturbance, and it is further noteworthy that Louise herself had good health up to the age of seventeen, was accustomed to hard work, and had shown a large amount of physical endurance, was noted for her common sense and power of self-control, and bore a good character with all her neighbours and acquaintances, showing no traces, either physical or moral, of any hysterical tendencies.

An illness of an indefinite character, involving intense neuralgic pains, began in 1867, and increased up to March 1868. At that time her appetite was completely gone, and for an entire month she took nothing but water and the medicines prescribed for her. On April i6th she was thought to be dying, and received the Sacrament. From that day she so rapidly improved that on the 2ist she was able to walk to the parish church, a distance of three-quarters of a mile, and her remarkable cure was the first incident that attracted public attention.

Three days later the stigmata first appeared, and thirteen weeks later, on July 17th, she began to exhibit the phenomena of ecstasy, during which there was a complete suspension of the exercise of the senses. This occurred every Friday from July 17th onwards, the attack lasting from about 8.30 a.m. to 6 p.m. She was then entirely unconscious of her surroundings, but on waking had a clear recollection of all that had passed through her mind during the attack.

The first appearance of blood issuing from the skin occurred on Friday, April 24th, 1868, when she saw it flowing from a spot on the left side of her chest. In accordance with her ordinary reserved habits, she kept silence on the subject. The following Friday she again remarked it on the same spot, and also on the upper surface of each foot, and she now mentioned it in confession to the priest, who reassured her, and bade her not to speak of the circumstance. On the third Friday, May 8th, blood began to ooze during the night from the left side and both feet, and by 9 o'clock it also flowed from the palms and backs of both the hands. Finally, on September 28th, the forehead also became moist with blood, and these bleedings recurred regularly every Friday up to April 15th, 1S70, when Dr. Lefebvre published his report, and later, in 1872, when Dr. Warlomont published his.

It was the religious authorities who requested Dr. Lefebvre, an eminent Louvain physician and university professor, and a specialist in nervous diseases, to undertake the examination of the case. She was under his superintendence from August 30th, 1S68, for twenty weeks, during which time he took more than a hund'-ed medical friends to examine the phenomena.

On any day during the week, from Saturday till Thursday morning, there was on the back and palm of each hand an oval spot or patch, redder than the rest of the skin, and about half an inch in its longest diameter ; these patches

543 B] TO CHAPTER V 493

were dry and somewhat glistening on the surface, and the centres of the two exactly corresponded. On the dorsum and sole of each foot there were similar marks, nearly three-quarters of an inch in length. The marks on the forehead were not permanent, and, except on Fridays, the points from which the blood escaped could not be distinguished. The signs announcing the approaching bleeding began to show themselves on Thursday about noon. Bleeding almost always began between midnight and i a.m. on Friday. The stigmata did not all bleed at once, but successively, in no fixed order. On the chest the stigma lay in the space between the fifth and sixth ribs, external to and a little below the left breast, and the blood oozed from a circular spot nearly a quarter of an inch in diameter. On the forehead the blood was seen to issue from twelve or fifteen minute points, arranged in circular form. A band, two fingers in breadth, passing round the head equidistant from the eyebrows and the roots of the hair, would include this bleeding zone, which was puffy and painful on pressure. Dr. Lefebvre estimated the quantity of blood lost on each occasion at about seven-eighths of a quart. The bleeding lasted twenty-four hours. On the Saturday the stigmata were quite dry, with occasional little scales of dried blood on their surface, and quite painless.

The chief authority for this case is Dr. Lefebvre's report, Louise Lateau de Bois cTHaine : sa Vie, ses Extases, ses Stigmates (Louvain, 1870). Dr. Warlomont examined her six years later, and found that the places of the stigmata had become continuously painful, and that there was an additional stigma on the right shoulder.

An excellent and circumstantial English account, based on Lefebvre's report, was published in Macmillan^s Magazine, April 1871 (vol. xxiii. pp. 488 et seq.), and the above summary is chiefly founded on this.

Gorres' Christliche Mystik, translated into French under the title of La Mystique Divine, naturelle et diabolique (1862), and A Letter from the Earl of Shrewsbury, descriptive of the Estatica of Caldarno, &c. (1842) give some earlier cases, the most important of which is that of Maria Mori, the Estatica of Caldarno (18 12-1868).

543 B. Three cases of the production of cruciform marks reported by Dr. Biggs, of Lima, appeared in \k\Q Journal S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 100, and I quote one of them.

October lith, 1885.

. . . Another case . . . was the first of this kind of experiment that I tried; it was in Santa Barbara, California. I was staying there in 1879 with a friend, Mr. G., a long-resident chemist in that town. His wife had a kind of half servant and half companion, a girl of about eighteen, who complained to me one day of a pain through her chest. Without her knowing what I intended to do, I tried magnetism; she fell into a deep magnetic sleep in a few minutes. With this subject I tried many interesting experiments, which I will pass over. One day I magnetised her as usual, and told her in a whisper (I had found her to be more susceptible this way than when I spoke aloud in my usual voice), " You will have a red cross appear on the upper part of your chest, only on every Friday. In the course of some time the words Sancta above the cross, and Crucis underneath it will appear also; at same time a little blood will come from the cross." In my vest pocket I had a cross of rock crystal. I

opened the top button of her dress and placed this cross on the upper part of the manubrium, a point she could not see unless by aid of a looking-glass, saying to her, " This is the spot where the cross will appear." This was on a Tuesday. I asked Mrs. G. to watch the girl and tell me if anything seemed to ail her. Next day Mrs. G. told me she had seen the girl now and again put her left wrist over the top part of her cheet, over the dress ; this was frequently repeated, as if she felt some tickling or slight irritation about the part, but not otherwise noticed ; she seemed to carry her hand up now and then unconsciously. When Friday came I said, after breakfast, " Come, let me magnetise you a Httle ; you have not had a dose for several days." She was always willing to be magnetised, as she always expressed herself as feeling very much rested and comfortable afterwards. In a few minutes she was in a deep sleep. I unbuttoned the top part of her dress, and there, to my complete and utter astonishment, was a pink cross, exactly over the place where I had put the one of crystal. It appeared every Friday, and was invisible on all other days. This was seen by Mr. and Mrs. G., and my old friend and colleague, Dr. B., who had become much interested in my experiments in magnetism, and often suggested the class of experiments he wished to see tried. About six weeks after the cross first appeared I had occasion to take a trip to the Sandwich Islands. Before going I magnetised the girl, told her that the cross would keep on showing itself every Friday for about four months. I intended my trip to the Islands to last about three months. I did this to save the girl from the infliction of this mark so strangely appearing perhaps for a lifetime, in case anything might happen to me and prevent me from seeing her again. I also asked Dr. B. and Mr. G. to write me by every mail to Honolulu, and tell me if the cross kept on appearing every Friday, and to be very careful to note any change, should any take place, such as the surging of blood or any appearance of the words Sancta Cruets. I was rather curious to know if distance between us, the girl and myself, over 2000 miles, made any difference in the apparition of the cross. While I was at the Sandwich Islands I received two letters from Mr. G. and one from Dr. B. by three different mails, each telling that the cross kept on making its appearance as usual ; blood had been noticed once, and also part of the letter S above the cross, nothing more. I returned in a little less than three months. The cross still made its appearance every Friday, and did so for about a month more, but getting paler and paler until it became invisible, as nearly as possible four months from the time I left for the Sandwich Islands. The above-mentioned young woman was a native Californian, of Spanish parentage, about eighteen years of age, of tolerably good health, parents and grandparents alive. She was of fair natural intelligence, but utterly ignorant and uneducated. ... M. H. BiGGS, M.D.

To this account Edmund Gurney adds in a note : —

As to the first two of these cases [the one quoted above and another], it is possible to suppose that the hypnotic suggestion took effect indirectly, by causing the girls to rub a patch of the right shape. The suggestion may have been received as a command, and there would be nothing very surprising in a subject's automatically adopting the right means to fulfil a previous hypnotic command. And even the third case might be so accounted for, if the rubbing took place in sleep. At the same time it would be rash, I think, absolutely to reject the hypothesis of the more direct effect. [The

543 D] TO CHAPTER V 495

writer goes on to quote other cases of the far-reaching effects of hypnotic suggestion in producing organic changes, with which these may be compared ; and points out the difficulties in the way of any precise physiological explanation of the affection of areas of the body that have no definite physiological limit]

543 C. Another remarkable American case of stigmatisation was reported in the Courier-Journal, Louisville, Ky., December 7th, 1891, on the authority of Dr. M. F. Coomes and of several other physicians. According to Dr. Coomes' account, a certain Mrs. Stuckenborg seems to have bled from spontaneously formed stigmata on every Friday since the beginning of June. There are wounds on the hands and feet, a wound on the side (from whence issues a watery exudation tinged with blood), a cross on the forehead, a large cross and a heart on the chest, and the letters I.H.S. on the right shoulder. From three to six every Friday there is profound trance, with superficial anaesthesia, but much convulsive movement and manifestation of inward pain. If we may rely on Dr. Coomes' account, which seems a careful one, simulation is quite out of the question. The patient seems to desire neither money nor notoriety. She is a devout Catholic, but does not talk about religion ; and complains much of the pain and exhaustion due to the wounds and the convulsive trance.

Dr. Hodgson paid two visits to Louisville in the hope of seeing Mrs. Stuckenborg, but was unable to do so owing to the restrictions imposed on her by the Roman Catholic authorities. He made the acquaintance, however, of Dr. Coomes (himself a Catholic), and one or two other medical men who had seen the case, and he reported, after his talks with them, that there seemed no doubt of its genuineness. Dr. Coomes also sent us several photographs of the stigmata, but no further information as to the later developments of the case has been obtainable.

543 D. In the following case the intellectual character, as I have termed it, of the organic process which responds to suggestion is illustrated in a striking and complex way. Mdlle. lima S., a subject observed by Drs. Jendrassik and von Krafft-Ebing (mainly at Gratz), was ultimately cured by hypnotic suggestion (or so Dr. Krafft-Ebing claims in 1888) of a lifelong tendency to hysteria and melancholy, such as had driven her grandfather, father, brother, and sister to suicide. She was therefore on the whole a great gainer ; but her extreme susceptibiUty to blistering by suggestion amounted to a real risk in the absence of careful guardianship. Once at least she was much injured and offended by the culpable act of a medical student who laid a pair of scissors upon her chest, telling her that they were red-hot, and thus created a serious wound,, which took two months to heal. Krafft-Ebing made a humane variation on this risky experiment. Like Dr. Biggs in the case quoted above, he ordered the production of red patches of definite shapes, which were to be formed without

1 " An Experimental Study in Hypnotism," by Dr. R. von Krafft-Ebing, translated by C. G. Chaddock, M.D., New York, 1889.

itching, pain, or inflammation. The history of the process thus set up is a curious one. The organism had to perform, so to say, a novel feat, which took a great deal longer than the rough and ready process of vesication. From February 24th to May 3rd, 1888, a livid red hyperaemic surface corresponding to the letter K was slowly and painlessly developing itself on a selected and protected area between the shoulder-blades. It se£ms doubtful whether this performance was not altogether a new one, — whether any precisely similar trophic changes have ever occurred spontaneously. The support thus given to Dr. Biggs' narrative is most striking ; and one lesson of the experiments of both physicians undoubtedly is that science need not be the loser by a careful adherence to the rules of ordinary humanity.

But it is the incident next to be cited which speaks the most strongly for the educated character — so to say — of the intelligence presiding over these organic suggestions.

Mdlle. lima S. was permanently anaesthetic on the right side, and that side was therefore, in my view, likely to be more immediately subject to subliminal control. At any rate, it appeared that when any object was pressed on her left side, and suggested as hot, no mark followed at the place of contact ; but a corresponding brand appeared, symmetrically and reversed, upon the right side. For example, an initial letter, K, was pressed by Dr. Jendrassik on her left shoulder. In a few hours a K-like blister, "with quite sharp outlines," came on the corresponding spot on the right side. But note that the new K (the letters are figured in Krafft-Ebing's work) was by no means an exact reproduction of the original one. It was of about the same size, but of a different type, in fact a capital K in another person's handwriting. Just as in Dr. Biggs' cases it was the idea of cruciformity which was induced by suggestion, so here it was the idea of K-shape ; and insomuch as this suggested mark corresponded to an intellectual idea, that idea underwent some idiosyncratic modification in the subject's subliminal intelligence, and the resultant mark, though identical in significance, was different in contour. And here again we have confirmation of one of the most curious of Dr. Biggs' phenomena — the tardy appearance of part of an S — an attempt at SANCTA — as the result of suggestion, unaided by the physical contact of any S-shaped object, but in its due position above the suggested cross.

543 E. Dr. Pierre Janet describes similar experiments — in particular the production of red marks by means of imaginary mustard poultices — in the case of his subjects Leonie and Rose (^D Autoniatisme Psychologique, p. 166). The place and form of the marks corresponded closely to the mental conception of the patient. For instance : —

Je dis un jour k Rose, qui souffrait de contractures hyst^riques k I'estomac, que je lui pla^ais un sinapisme sur la region malade pour la gudrir. Je constatais quelques heures plus tard une marque gonflde d'un rouge sombre ayant la forme d'un rectangle allong^, mais, ddtail singulier, dont aucun angle n'^tait

543 F] TO CHAPTER V 497

marqu^, car ils semblaient coupes nettement. Je fis la remarque que son sinapisme avait une forme Strange. " Vous ne savez done pas," me dit-elle, "que Ton coupe toujours les angles des papiers Rigollot pour que les coins ne fassent pas mal." L'idee prdconcue de la forme du sinapisme avait ddtermin^ la dimension et la forme de la rougeur.

J'essayai alors un autre jour (les sinapismes de ce genre enlevaient tres facilement ses contractures et ses points douloureux) de lui suggdrer que je ddcoupais un sinapisme en forme d'dtoile k six branches ; la marque rouge eut exactement la forme que j'avais dite. Je commandai h. Leonie un sinapisme sur la poitrine du c6t6 gauche en forme d'un S pour lui en lever de I'asthme nerveux. Ma suggestion gu^rit parfaitement la maladie et marqua sur la poitrine un grand S tout h. fait net.

Dr. Backman relates the following of one of his clairvoyant subjects, Alma Radberg^ : —

