" He, then, who to this end would strive aright, must begin in youth to seek fair forms, and should learn first to love one fair form only, and therein to engender noble thoughts. And then he will perceive that the beauty of one fair form is to the beauty of another near akin ; and that if it be Beauty's self he seek, it were madness not to account the beauty of all forms as one same thing ; and considering this, he will be the lover of all lovely shapes, and will abate his passion for one shape alone, despising and deeming it but a little thing. And this will lead him on to see that the beauty of the soul is far more precious than any beauty of outward form, so that if he find a fair soul, though it be in a body which hath but little charm, he will be constant thereunto, and bring to birth such thoughts as teach and strengthen, till he lead that soul on to see the beauty of actions and of laws, and how all beauty is in truth akin, and the body's beauty is but a little matter ; and from actions he will lead him on to sciences, that he may see how sciences are fair ; and looking on the abundance of beauty may no longer be as the slave or bondman of one beauty or of one law ; but setting sail into the ocean of beauty, and creating and beholding many fair and glorious thoughts and images in a philosophy without stint or stay, he may thus at last wax strong and grow, and may perceive that there is one science only, the science of infinite beauty.

" For he who hath thus far had intelligence of love, and hath beheld all

338] GENIUS 115

fair things in order and aright,- — he drawing near to the ena of things lovable shall behold a Being marvellously fair ; for whose sake in truth it is that all the previous labours have been undergone : One who is from everlasting, and neither is born nor perisheth, nor can wax nor wane, nor hath change or turning or alteration of foul and fair ; nor can that beauty be imagined after the fashion of face or hands or bodily parts and members, nor in any form of speech or knowledge, nor as dwelling in aught but in itself; neither in beast nor man nor earth nor heaven nor any other creature ; but Beauty only and alone and separate and eternal, which, albeit all other fair things partake thereof and grow and perish, itself without change or increase or diminution endures for everlasting. And whoso being led on and upward by human loves begins to see that Beauty, he is not far, I say, from reaching the end of all. And surely then, O Socrates (said that guest from Mantinea), man's life is worth the living, when he beholds that Primal Fair ; which when thou seest it shall not seem to thee to be made after the fashion of gold or raiment or those forms of earth, — whom now beholding thou art stricken dumb, and fain, if it were possible, without thought of meat or drink, wouldst look and love for ever. What would it be then, were it granted to any man to see Very Beauty clear ; — incorruptible and undefiled, not mingled with colour or flesh of man, or with aught that can consume away, but single and divine? Could man's hfe, in that vision and beatitude, be poor or low? or deemest thou not (said she), that then alone it will be possible for this man, discerning spiritual beauty with those eyes by which it is spiritually discerned, to beget no shadows of virtue, since that is no shadow to which he clings, but virtue in very truth, since he hath the very Truth in his embrace ? and begetting and rearing Virtue as his child, he must needs become the friend of God ; and if there be any man who is immortal, that man is he."

338. Between the aspects of love here expressed in extreme terms, — the planetary aspect, if I may so term it, and the cosmical, — the choice is momentous. I do not indeed say that in our estimate of love is involved our estimate of Religion ; for Religion should mean the sane response of the spirit to all that is known of Cosmic Law. But Religion in the sense in which it is often used, — our emotional and ethical attitude towards Life Unseen ; — this is in reality too closely parallel to Platonic Love to allow the psychologist who denies reality in the one to assume reality in the other. For the Platonic lover the image of the Beloved one, — no longer a matter of conscious summons and imagination, — has become the indwelling and instinctive impulse to noble thought and deed. Even such to a Francis or to a Theresa is the image of the Divinity whom they adore ; and if they claim that sometimes in moments of crisis they feel a sway, a guidance, a cojnmunicatio idiomatum with the Divine, we may point in reply to the humbler, but more tangible, evidence which assures us that even between souls still inhabiting and souls who have quitted the

ii6 CHAPTER III [339-

flesh there may exist a telepathic intercommunication and an impalpable confluence from afar.

339. Brief as this survey has been, it has served to indicate that the psychical type to which we have applied the name of genius may be recognised in every region of thought and emotion. In each direction a man's everyday self may be more or less permeable to subliminal impulses. The man who is in but small degree thus permeable, who acts uniformly on supraliminal considerations, — on ratiocination, as he will say, and not on impulse, — this man is likely to be safe in prudent mediocrity. He subsists upon a part of human nature which has already been thoroughly trained and prepared for this world's work. The man, on the other hand, who is more readily permeable to subliminal uprushes, takes the chance of wider possibilities, and moves through life on a more uncertain way. Nature rears such men from seed and not from cuttings ; she does not simply reproduce the common conformation, but gives a chance to whatever of untried potency may lurk within the germ.

But how much may there be which is thus hidden and undeveloped? Within what hmits of variation may we expect these psychical "sports " to find their play? To help in deciding this question we must go back once more to our simplest and, so to say, diagrammatic examples of genius.

340. If I have dwelt at some length on arithmetical prodigies, this is not, of course, because I regard this gift of subliminal computation as a high form of genius, but because the definiteness of the achievements presents some vague and illusive problems in a comparatively manageable form. Thus it is easier in the case of a Mangiamele than in the case of a Dante to ask oneself with exactness which is the least improbable of the conceivable answers — all of them largely conjectural — to the question, " Whence did the child get his genius? " — a question which the evolutionist, although he cannot solve it, must not ignore.

It appears to me that the answers which have been implicitly or explicitly given to such a question are reducible under four main heads. I shall cite these in the order in which they push the required answer further and further back. But the reader must remember that there is absolutely no difference m point of the jnystery involved between one reply and another. All have to deal with the same ultimately inexplicable facts, and the most Lamarckian of answers is in reality as mystical as the most Platonic.

( I ) First, then, I place what I have called the Lamarckian reply, — according to which the eminent capacity of the individual under discussion was inherited from the acquired capacities of self-improving ancestors. To this we must here answer that even assuming acquired characteristics to be inheritable, there were as a rule no such acquired capacities for our prodigies to inherit. Mangiamele the father, the rough Sicilian peasant, who did not teach his son his letters ; Mondeux the father, the woodcutter of Tours, who did not teach his son the numerals, — these were not

340] GENIUS 117

men who had developed their mathematical gifts as the Lamarckian giraffe developed the bones of his neck. The only case where heredity could be pleaded is that of the younger (not of the elder) Bidder — unless we count under this head the p>'e-?mtal suggestion which Mr. Blyth believes to have been efficacious in his own and his brother's case.

(2) Next comes the reply which I suppose would now be commonly given, and which, to avoid the ambiguities of the word Darwinian, I will call \)!\Q protoplasmic solution. Mangiamele's gift, in this view, was a sport or by-product occurring in the course of evolution, — a new quality derived from old qualities not obviously resembling it. It was one of those favourable spontaneous variations of which natural selection has often been able to take advantage; and whose occasional unpredictable occurrence has raised our race to its present level. Now the cause of such sports, I need not say, Darwin expressly leaves unexplained. All that he says is that to sport in this way is characteristic of living matter. Sudden differentiation in unpredictable directions must, in short, be a latent capacity of protoplasm ; and the explanation of Mangiamele's gift is virtually referred to the nature of the stock of protoplasm with which his earliest ancestors started operations.

This answer has the logical advantage over the Lamarckian answer (which, of course, at bottom is protoplasmic also), that, being hardly more than a mere restatement of the facts, it cannot help being true so far as it goes. But it does not supply, and was not propounded by Darwin as supplying an explanation of the ultimate source of faculty, but only of certain incidents in its terrene development.

(3) In direct contrast to these terrene explanations comes the preterrene explanation of Plato. A man learns geometrical truths easily, Plato said, because in reality he is only remembering them. He is remembering them because he learnt them originally in the ideal world, before his incarnation " in this body, which is our tomb." One wishes that Plato had had the facts now before us to work up into a dialogue, '•' Dase or Inspiration." If he thought his hypothesis of reminiscence necessary in order to explain the mental effort of an intelligent adult mastering such starding novelties as are now contained in the first books of Euclid — what would he have said of Pascal, who Tral? liw aOvpe fxeydXa epya, sported with cosmic laws in childish play ; of Gauss flinging down his slate with the answer alone written upon it — "Da liegt es ! " — the moment that the master had dictated the question which was to occupy the class for an hour ; or above all, as I say, of the crass and stolid Dase, as it were an idiot supported from the Prytaneum, to declare secrets which the gods had hid from men?

(4) Lastly, the view which I am here suggesting is in some sort a renewal of the old Platonic " reminiscence," in the light of that fuller knowledge which is common property to-day. I hold, of course, that in the protoplasm or primary basis of all organic life there must have been

ii8 CHAPTER III [341.

an inherent adaptability to the manifestation of all faculties which organic life has in fact manifested. I hold, of course, that sports or variations occur, which are at present unpredictable, and which reveal in occasional offspring faculties which their parents showed no signs of possessing. But I differ from those who hold that the faculty itself thus manifested is now for the first time initiated in that stock by some chance combination of hereditary elements. I hold that it is not initiated, but only revealed ; that the " sport " has not called a new faculty into being, but has merely raised an existing faculty above the threshold of supraliminal consciousness.

This view, if pushed back far enough, is no doubt inconsistent with the way in which evolution .is generally conceived. For it denies that all human faculties must have been evoked by terrene experience. It assumes a subliminal self, with unknown faculties, originated in some unknown way, and not merely by contact with the needs which the terrene organism has had to meet. It thus seems at first sight to be introducing a new mystery, and to be introducing it in a gratuitous way.

To this I reply in the first place that so far as the origin of man's known powers is concerned, no fresh mystery is in fact introduced. All human powers, to put the thing broadly, have somehow or other to be got into protoplasm and then got out again. You have to explain first how they became implicit in the earliest and lowest living thing, and then how they have become thus far explicit in the latest and highest. All the faculties of that highest being, I repeat, existed virtualiy in the lowest, and in so far as the admitted faculties are concerned the difference between my view and the ordinary view may be said to be little more than a difference as to the sense which that word virtually is here to assume.

341. The real difference between the two views appears when the faculties which I have called unknown come to be considered. If they are held to be real, my view is certainly the better able to embrace them. I hold that telepathy and telsesthesia do in fact exist — telepathy, a communication between incarnate mind and incarnate mind, and perhaps between incarnate minds and minds unembodied ; telassthesia, a knowledge of things terrene which overpasses the limits of ordinary perception, and which perhaps also achieves an insight into some other than terrene world. And these faculties, I say, cannot have been acquired by natural selection, for the preservation of the race, during the process of terrene evolution ; they were (as we may phrase it) the products of extra-terrene evolution. And if they were so, man's other powers may well have been so also. The specialised forms of terrene perception were not real novelties in the universe, but imperfect adaptations of protoplasm to the manifestation of the indwelling general perceptive power. The mathematical faculty, for instance (we may, perhaps, say with Plato), pre-existed. When Dase solved all those sums in his head, his power of solving them was not a fresh development in his ancestral stock, but depended on the accidental adaptation of his organism to the manifestation of the indwelling computative power. I do not indeed

342] GENIUS 119

venture to follow Plato in his ontogenetic argument — his claim that the individual coniputator has had already an individual training in computation. I do not say that Dase himself learnt or divined the multiplication-table in some ideal world. I only say that Dase and all the rest of us are the spawn or output of some unseen world in which the multiplication-table is, so to speak, in the air. Dase trailed it after him, as the poet says of the clouds of glory, when he " descended into generation " in a humble position at Hamburg.

In him and in his ancestors were many faculties which were called out by the struggle for existence, and became supraliminal. But there were many faculties also which were not thus called out, and which consequently remained subliminal. To these faculties, as a rule, his supraliminal self could get no access. But by some chance of evolution — some sport — a vent-hole was opened at this one point between the different strata of his being, and a subliminal uprush carried his computative faculty into the open day.

Two things, of course, are assumed in this argument for which Science offers no guarantee. I assume in the man a soul which can draw strength and grace from a spiritual Universe, and conversely I assume in the Universe a Spirit accessible and responsive to the soul of man. These are familiar postulates. Every religion has claimed them in turn ; although every religion in turn has so narrowed their application as grievously to narrow the evidence available for their support. But that which religions have claimed for their Founders or for their Saints — and what is sanctity but the genius of the ethical realm? — Psychology must claim for every form of spiritual indrawing, every form of spiritual response ; for sleeping vision, for hypnotic rejuvenation, for sensory and motor automatisms, for trance, for ecstasy. The philosopher who has cried with Marcus Aurelius " Either Providence or atoms ! " — who has declared that without this basis in the Unseen, " the moral Cosmos would be reduced to a Chaos " ; — should he not welcome even the humblest line of research which fain would gather from every unsolved problem some hint as to the spiritual law unknown which in time may give the solution of all ?

342. We know not in what directions — directions how definitely predetermined— even physical organisms can vary from the common type. We know not what amount of energy any given plant or animal can absorb and incorporate from earth and air and sun. Still less can we predict or limit the possible variations of the soul, the fulness which it may receive from the World-Soul, its possible heritage of grace and truth. But in genius we can watch at each stage the processes of this celestial nurture. We can imagine the outlook of joyous trustfulness; we can almost seem, with Wordsworth, to remember the child's soul entering into the Kingdom of Heaven. Childhood is genius without capacity ; it makes for most of us our best memory of inspiration, and our truest outlook upon the real, which is the ideal, world.

I20 CHAPTER III [343

343. From a greater distance we can watch the inward stir of mighty thought, the same for ^schylus, for Newton, for Virgil ; — a stir independent of worldly agitation ; like the swing and libration of the tide-wave across the ocean, which takes no note of billow or of storm.

Nay, we can see against the sun " the eagle soaring above the tomb of Plato," and in Paul, as in Plotinus, we can catch that sense of self-fulfilment in self-absorption, of rapture, of deliverance, which the highest minds have bequeathed to us as the heritage of their highest hours.

These our spiritual ancestors are no eccentrics nor degenerates ; they have made for us the sanest and most fruitful experiment yet made by man ; they have endeavoured to exalt the human race in a way in which it can in truth be exalted ; they have drawn on forces which exist, and on a Soul which answers ; they have dwelt on those things " by dwelling on which it is," as Plato has it, " that even God is divine."



Chapter IV. Sleep

oAySt'a 8' aTravres atcra Xvatirovov fxeTavt(rcrovTaL reXeurai'.

Koi <rwju,a /xev TravTwv tTrerai ^avaro) TrepicrOcvei,

oibv 8' €Tt AftTierai aiwvos etSwAov * to yap ecrrt fJLOVOv

£/c Oiwv' ewSci Se TrpacrcrdvTwv /xeXewv, arap evoovreao'iv iv TroAAots ov^ipois

B^iKvvcn TcpTTTcov itpepTTOKTav T^aAcTToiv re Kpucnv.

— Pindar.

400. The preceding chapters have carried us two steps upon our way. In Chapter II. we gained some insight into the structure of human personality by analysing some of the accidents to which it is subject ; — the insistent ideas, the hysterical instabilities, the splits and alternations which seem to destroy that inward unity to the sense of which we instinctively cling. In the third chapter we viewed this personality in its normal waking state, and considered how that norm should be defined, and in what manner certain fortunate persons had extended the grasp of that inward concentration, and had integrated the personality still further by utilising uprushes of subliminal faculty to supplement or to crystallise the products of supraliminal thought.

The review of these two chapters indicates clearly enough what my next step must be. It is obvious that in my review of phases or alternations of personality I have left out of sight the most constant, the most important alternation of all. I have thus far said nothing of s/eep. Yet fhaf change of personality, at least, has been borne in on every one's notice ; — not, certainly, as a morbid curiosity, but as an essential part of life.

Sleep must assuredly now be studied, and from two points of view.

Regarding sleep as an alternating phase of personality, we must consider what are its special characteristics and faculties. Regarding it as an integral factor in our earthly existence, and on an equal footing with the waking state, we must consider how the faculties of sleep, as of waking, can be improved and concentrated in the course of the physical and psychical evolution of man. Such improvement or concentration, however, presupposes a comprehension of the true nature of sleep which we are by no means entitled to take for granted.

401. First, then, let us consider the specific characteristics of sleep.

The definition of sleep is an acknowledged crux in physiology. And I would point out that the increased experience of hypnotic sleep which recent years have afforded has made this difficulty even more striking than before. A physiological explanation must needs assume that some special bodily condition, — such, for instance, as the clogging of the brain by waste-products, — is at least the usual antecedent of sound sleep. But it is certain, on the other hand, that with a large percentage of persons profound and prolonged sleep can be induced, in any bodily condition, by simple suggestion. Hypnosis, indeed (as Wetterstrand and others have shown) may be prolonged, with actual benefit to the sleeper, far beyond the point which the spontaneous sleep of a healthy subject ever reaches. A good subject can be awakened and thrown into hypnosis again almost at pleasure, and independently of any state either of nutrition or of fatigue. Such sleep belongs to those phenomena which we may call nervous if we will, but which we can observe or influence from the psychological side alone.

402. We can hardly hope, from the ordinary data, to arrive at a definition of sleep more satisfactory than others have reached. We must defer that attempt until we have collected something more than the ordinary evidence as to what occurs or does not occur during the abeyance of waking life. One point, however, is plain at once. We cannot treat sleep, — as it has generally been treated, — in its purely negative aspect. We cannot be content merely to dwell, with the common text-books, on the mere absence of waking faculties ; — on the diminution of external perception, the absence of controlling inteUigence. We must treat sleep positively, so far as we can, as a definite phase of our personality, co-ordinate with the waking phase. Each phase, as I believe, has been differentiated alike from a primitive indifference ; — from a condition of lowly organisms which merited the name neither of sleep nor of waking. Nay, if there were to be a contest as to which state should be deemed primary and which secondary, sleep might put forward its claim to be regarded as the more primitive phase. It is sleep rather than vigilance which prenatal and infantile life suggest ; and even for us adults, however much we may associate ourselves in thought with the waking state alone, that state has at least thus much of secondary and adventitious that it is maintained for short periods only, which we cannot artificially lengthen, being plainly unable to sustain itself without frequent recourse to that fuller influx of vitality which slumber brings.

Out of slumber proceeds each fresh arousal and initiation of waking activities. What other activities may in slumber be aroused and initiated the evidence to be set forth in this chapter should help us to say. To some extent at least the abeyance of the supraliminal life must be the liberation of the subliminal. To some extent the obscuration of the noonday glare of man's waking consciousness must reveal the far-reaching faint corona of his unsuspected and impalpable powers.

404] SLEEP 123

403. Entering, then, upon a review of sleeping faculty, thus inevitably imperfect, we may best begin from the red end of our spectrum of consciousness ; — the red end, which represents the deepest power which waking effort can exert upon our physical organism.

Our survey of the efficacy of sleep, indeed, must make its beginning beyond that limit. For assuredly in sleep some agency is at work which far surpasses waking efficacy in this respect. It is a fully admitted, although an absolutely unexplained fact, that the regenerative quality of healthy sleep is something sui generis, which no completeness of waking quiescence can rival or approach. A few moments of sleep — a mere blur across the field of consciousness — will sometimes bring a renovation which hours of lying down in darkness and silence would not yield. A mere bowing of the head on the breast, if consciousness ceases for a second or two, may change a man's outlook on the world. At such moments, — and many persons, like myself, can fully vouch for their reality, — one feels that what has occurred in one's organism, — alteration of blood-pressure, or whatever it be, — has been in some sense discontinuous ; that there has been a break in the inward regime, amounting to much more than a mere brief ignoring of stimuli from without. The break of consciousness is associated in some way with a potent physiological change. That is to say, even in the case of a moment of ordinary sleep we already note the appearance of that special recuperative energy which is familiar in longer periods of sleep, and which, as we shall presently see, reaches a still higher level in hypnotic trance.

404. This recuperative power, then, lies just beyond the red end of our spectrum of waking faculty. In that obscure region we note only added power ; an increased control over organic functions at the foundation of bodily life. But when we pass on within the limits of our spectrum of waking consciousness ; — when we come to control over voluntary muscles, or to sensory capacity, we find that our comparison between sleeping and waking faculty is no longer a simple one. On the one hand, there is of course a general blank and abeyance of control over the realm of waking energies ; — or in partial sleep a mere fantastic parody of those energies in incoherent dream. On the other hand, we find that sleep is capable of strange developments, — and that night can sometimes suddenly outdo the most complex achievements of day.

Take first the degree of control over the voluntary muscles. In ordinary sleep this is neither possessed nor desired ; in nightmare its loss is exaggerated, in quasi- hysterical fashion, into an appalling fear ; while in somnambulism, — a kind of new personality developed ad hoc, — the sleeper (as we shall see later on) walks on perilous ridges with steady feet. I have already said that morbid somnambulism bears to sound sleep a relation something like that which hysteria bears to normal life. But between the healthy somnambuHst and the subject of nightmare we find from another point of view a contrast resembling that between the man of genius and the

hysteric. The somnambuhst, like the man of genius, brings into play resources which are beyond ordinary reach. On the other hand, just as in many hysterics certain ordinary powers of movement have lapsed below voluntary control, so also the dreamer who dimly wishes to move a constrained limb is often unable to send thither a sufficient current of motor energy to effect the desired change of position. That nightmare inability to move, which we thus feel in dream, — " when neither he that fleeth can flee, nor he that pursueth pursue," — that sensation which both Homer and Virgil have selected as the type of paralysing bewilderment,^ — this is just the aboulia of the hysteric ; — the condition when it takes a man half-anhour to put on his hat, or when a woman sits all the morning looking at her knitting, but unable to add a stitch.

"Somnambulism," however, is too vague and undefined a term for our present discussion. It will only be by a comparison with hypnotism, in the next chapter, that we can hope to get some clearer notion of " sleep-waking " states.

405. Let us pass on to consider enteticephalic sensory faculty, — " mind's eye " faculty, — as shown in sleep or dream. Here too we shall find the same rule to prevail as with motor faculty. That is to say, on the whole the sensory faculty is of course dimmed and inhibited by sleep ; but there are nevertheless indications of a power subsisting as vividly as ever, or with even added acuteness.

There seems, of course, at first sight, something of paradox in expecting hypersesthesia from somnolence ; — vivid sensation from a condition usually described as a progressive dulling or subsidence of one sense after another. And, naturally, it will be in the generation of internal rather than in the perception of external imagery that we may expect to find the closed eye active, —

opSiVTa XafiTTpov iv (TKorto voaixoovT ocppvv.

There is in fact a phenomenon, by no means uncommon, and very conspicuous, which, like many other human phenomena whose interest is really scientific rather than therapeutic, remained unnoticed by science until a very recent date. Baillarger in France and Griesinger in Germany (both about 1845) were among the first to call attention to the vivid images which rise before the internal vision of many persons, between sleep and waking. M. Alfred Maury, the well-known Greek scholar and antiquary, gave to these images a few years later the title of illusions hypnagogiques, and published a remarkable series of observations upon himself. Mr. Galton has further treated of them in his Inquiry into Human Faculty ; and cases will be found in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. pp. 390, 473, &;c.

These visions may be hypnopotnpic as well as hypnagogic ; — may appear, that is to say, at the moment when slumber is departing as well as at the

1 Iliad, xxii. 199 ; ^>ieid, xii. 908.

407] SLEEP 125

moment when it is coming on ; — and in either case they are closely related to dreams; the "hypnagogic illusions " or pictures being sometimes repeated in dream (as with Maury), and the hypnopompic pictures consisting generally in the persistence of some dream-image into the first moments of waking. In either case they testify to an intensified power of inward visualisation at a very significant moment ; — a moment which is actually or virtually one of sleep, but which yet admits of definite comparison with adjacent moments of waking. We may call the condition one of cerebral or " mind's eye " hypersesthesia, — an exalted sensibiUty of special brain-centres in response to those unknown internal stimuli which are always giving rise to similar but fainter inward visions even in broadly waking hours.

For those who are already good visualisers such phenomena as these, though striking enough, present no quite unique experience. For bad visualisers, on the other hand, the vividness of these hypnagogic pictures may be absolutely a revelation. For myself, I may say that were it not for an occasional flash of this kind between sleep and waking, I should be unable to conceive what good visualisation really is. The dim, blurred, unstable images which are all that my waking will can summon up are every now and then replaced in a moment of somnolence by a picture — say of a wet hedge in the sun — which seems, to my hurried glance, to be absolutely as clear and brilliant as the object itself could be. The difference is like that between an instantaneous photograph (and in natural colours !) and a dim dissolving view cast by a magic lantern on the point of going out. Many men must have had this experience ; and must have been struck with the unguessed reserve of faculty which for a moment was thus revealed.

406. Equally remarkable are the hypnopompic pictures, as I have termed them ; those, namely, which accompany the departure of sleep. For it often happens (as in the cases cited by Gurney in Phantasms of the Living) that a figure which has formed part of a dream continues to be seen as a hallucination for some moments after waking ; — a strong testimony to the vividness of dream-visualisation. The generation of a hallucinatory figure (however useless an achievement) marks probably the highest point which man's visualising faculty ever reaches ; and it is noteworthy that with most persons this point should be attained in dream alone. Sometimes, it may be, this prolongation of hallucination may best be described as an after-image, sometimes as the result of a " suggestion " inspired by the dream. In these hypnopompic cases the vivid visualisation seems to originate in sleep ; while in illusions hypnagogiques the vividness belongs to an intermediate phase.

407. The degree of acuteness of all the senses in dream is a subject for direct observation, and even — for persons who can at all control their dreams — for direct experiment. I have elsewhere described ' some efforts

1 S.P.R. Proceedings, vol. iv. p. 241.

of my own to test my own power of visualisation in dream ; with the result, as I must confess, that I have not found it superior to my very low waking capacity. Some correspondents, however, report a considerable apparent accession of sensory power in dream. An impressive dream, dreamt by Mrs. A. W. Verrall, of Cambridge, and at once carefully recorded, had for its theme an intensification of each sense in turn. Mrs. Verrall has poor musical perceptions, and when told in her dream that the sense of sound was next to be exalted, she anticipated little pleasure. The sensation came, however, as something entirely new, — as " very harmony, which I had only heard till then in echoes, — in the rhythm of verse, or in the sighing of the wind among the pine-trees. My hearing was purified, not by the fulfilment of desire, but by the creation of desire, which in its very birth attained fruition." (See Dr. Hodgson's experience in 407 A.) Others speak of the increased vividness of dramatic conception, or of what has been called in a hypnotic subject " objectivation of types." "In each of these dreams," writes one lady, "I v/as a man; — in one of them a low brute, in the other a dipsomaniac. I never had the slightest conception of how such persons felt or thought until these experiences." Another correspondent speaks of dreaming two disconnected dreams, — one emotional and one geometrical, — simultaneously, and of consequent sense of confusion and fatigue.

408. The " Chapter on Dreams," in R. L. Stevenson's volume, Across the Plains (already referred to in Section 314), contains a description cf the most successful dream-experiments thus far recorded. By self-suggestion before sleep Stevenson could secure a visual and dramatic intensity of dream-representation which furnished him with the motives for some of his most striking romances. His account, written with admirable psychological insight, is indispensable to students of this subject. I am mentioning these well-known phenomena, as the reader will understand, with a somewhat novel purpose — to show, namely, that the internal sensory perceptions or imaginative faculty of sleep may exceed that of vigilance in something the same way as the recuperative agency of sleep surpasses the vis medicatrix of waking hours.

409. I pass on to a less frequent phenomenon, which shows us at once intense imagination during sleep, and a lasting imprint left by these imaginations upon the waking organism ;' — an unintended self-suggestion which we may compare with Stevenson's voluntary self-suggestion mentioned just above.

The permanent result of a dream, I say, is sometimes such as to show that the dream has not been a mere superficial confusion of past waking experiences, but has had an unexplained potency of its own, — drawn, like the potency of hypnotic suggestion, from some depth in our being which the waking self cannot reach. Two main classes of this kind are conspicuous enough to be easily recognised — those, namely, where the dream has led to a " conversion " or marked religious change, and those where it

410] SLEEP 127

has been the starting-point of an " insistent idea " or of a fit of actual insanity.^ The dreams which convert, reform, change character and creed, have of course a prima facie claim to be considered as something other than ordinary dreams ; and their discussion may be deferred till a later stage of our inquiry. Those, on the other hand, which suddenly generate an insistent idea of an irrational type are closely and obviously analogous to post-hypnotic self-suggestions, which the self that inspired them cannot be induced to countermand. Such is the dream related by M. Taine,^ where a gendarme, impressed by an execution at which he has assisted, dreams that he himself is to be guillotined, and is afterwards so influenced by the dream that he attempts suicide. Several cases of this kind have been collected by Dr. Faure ; and Dr. Tissi^, in his interesting little work, Les Reves, has added some striking instances from his own observation. I quote, in 409 A, one of M. Faure's cases as a sample, showing that in an apparently healthy subject an apparently causeless dream may leave traces quite as persistent as any hypnotic suggestion could implant from without. The dream is in fact a self-suggestion of the most potent kind. The case of Dr. Holbrook (409 B) seems to belong to the same category.

410. A still more striking illustration may be drawn from the following incident in the story of Dr. Krafft-Ebing's patient,* lima S., the genuineness of whose stigmata seems proved by that physician's care in observation, and by the painfulness of certain experiments performed upon her by students as practical jokes and against her will : —

May 6th, 1888. — The patient is disturbed to-day. She complains to the sister of severe pain under the left breast, thinks that the professor has burnt her in the night, and begs the sister to obtain a retreat for her in a convent, where she will be secure against such attacks. The sister's refusal causes a hystero-epileptic attack. [At length, in the hypnotic trance] the patient gives the following explanation of the origin of the pain : " Last night an old man came to me; he looked like a priest and came in company with a Sister of Charity, on whose collet there was a large golden B. I was afraid of her. The old man was amiable and friendly. He dipped a" pen in the sister's pocket, and with it wrote a W and B on my skin under the left breast. Once he dipped his pen badly and made a blot in the middle of the figure. This spot and the B pain me severely, but the W does not. The man explained the W as meaning that I should go to the M church and confess at the W confessional."

After this account the patient cried out and said, " There stands the man again. Now he has chains on his hands."

When the patient woke into ordinary life she was suffering pain in the place indicated, where there were " superficial losses of substance, penetrating

1 See Dr. Fere in Brain for January 1887.

2 De r Intelligence, vol. i. p. 119.

3 Archives de Medecine, vol. i. 1876, p. 554.

* An Experimental Study in Hypnotism, by Dr. R. von Krafft-Ebing, translated by Dr. C. G. Chaddock, p. 91.

to the corium, which have a resemblance to a reversed W and B," with " a hypersmic raised spot between the two." Nowhere in this peculiar neurotrophic alteration of the skin, which is identical with those previously produced experimentally, are there traces of inflammation. The pain and the memory of the dream were removed by the doctor's suggestion ; but the dream self-suggestion to confess at the M church persisted ; and the patient, without knowing why, did actually go and confess to the priest of her vision.

In this last case we have a dream playing the part of a powerful posthypnotic suggestion. The meaning of this vague term " suggestion " we shall have to discuss in a later chapter. It is enough to notice here the great power of a subliminal suggestion which can make an impression so much stronger not only than the usual evanescent touch of dream, but than the actual experiences of waking day.

411. But this case may also serve to lead us on to further reflections as to the connection between dream-memory and hypnotic memory, a connection which points, as we shall presently see, towards the existence of some subliminal continuity of memory, lying deeper down than the evocable memory of common life — the stock of conscious reminiscences on which we can draw at will.

With regard to memory, as with regard to sensation, we seem in waking life to be dealing with a selection made for purposes of earthly use. From the pre-conscious unselective memory which depends on the mere organisation of living matter, it is the task of consciousness, as it dawns in each higher organism, to make its own appropriate selection and to develop into distinctness certain helpful lines of reminiscence. The question of self-preservation, — What must I needs be aware of in order to escape my foes ? — involves the question. What must I needs remember in order to act upon the facts of which I am aware ? The selected currents of memory follow the selected avenues of sensation ; what by disuse I lose the power of noticing at the time, I also lose the power of recalling afterwards.

For simpler organisms this rule may perhaps suffice. Man needs a more complex formula. For it may happen, as we have already seen, that two or more phases of personality in one man may each select from the mass of potential reminiscences a special group of memories of its own. These special groups, moreover, may bear to one another all kinds of relations ; one may include another, or they may alternate and may be apparently co- exclusive.

From these dissociations and alternations of memory there will be many lessons to learn. The lesson which here presents itself is not the least important. What is the relation of the sleeping state to these dissociated, these parallel or concentric memories ? Is it the case that when one memory includes another it is the waking memory — as one might expect from that state's apparently superior vividness — which shows itself the deeper, the more comprehensive record? Or can it be that other states — sleep and its congeners — less finished and effective though they be

412] SLEEP 129

for life's common purposes, may yet show by this test of comparative memory that they embrace and underhe that speciaUsed vigilance which we commonly take for the whole of our intellectual being?

412. The answer of actual experience to these questions is unexpectedly direct and clear. In every recorded instance — so far at least as my memory serves me, where there has been any unification between alternating states, so as to make comparison possible — it is the memory furthest from waking life whose span is the widest, whose grasp of the organism's upstored impressions is the most profound. Inexplicable as this phenomenon has been to observers who have encountered it without the needed key, the independent observations of hundreds of physicians and hypnotists have united in affirming its reality. The commonest instance, of course, is furnished by the ordinary hypnotic trance. The degree of intelligence, indeed, which finds its way to expression in that trance or slumber varies greatly in different subjects and at different times. But whensoever there is enough of alertness to admit of our forming a judgment, we find that in the hypnotic state there is a considerable memory — though not necessarily a complete or a reasoned memory — of the waking state ; whereas with most subjects in the waking state — unless some special command be imposed upon the hypnotic self — there is no memory whatever of the hypnotic state. In many hysterical conditions also the same general rule subsists ; namely, that the further we get from the surface the wider is the expanse of memory which we encounter.

If all this be true, there are several points on which we may form expectations definite enough to suggest inquiry. Ordinary sleep is roughly intermediate between waking Hfe and deep hypnotic trance ; and it seems a priori probable that its memory will have links of almost equal strength with the memory which belongs to waking life and the memory which belongs to the hypnotic trance. And this is in fact the case ; the fragments of dream-memory are interlinked with both these other chains. Thus, for example, without any suggestion to that effect, acts accomplished in the hypnotic trance may be remembered in dream ; and remembered under the illusion which was thrown round them by the hypnotiser. Thus Dr. Auguste Voisin suggested to a hypnotised subject to stab a patient — really a stuffed figure — in the neighbouring bed.^ The subject did so ; and of course knew nothing of it on waking. But three days afterwards he returned to the hospital complaining that his dreams were haunted by the figure of a woman, who accused him of having stabbed and killed her. Appropriate suggestion laid this ghost of a doll.

Conversely, dreams forgotten in waking life may be remembered in the hypnotic trance. Thus Dr. Tissie's patient, Albert, dreamt that he was about to set out on one of his somnambulic " fugues," or aimless journeys, and when hypnotised mentioned to the physician this dream, which in his

■^ Revtte de V Hypnotisme , June 1891, p. 302. VOL. I. I

I30 CHAPTER IV [413

waking state he had forgotten.^ The probable truth of this statement was shown by the fact that he did actually set out on the journey thus dreamt of, and that his journeys were usually preceded and incited by remembered dreams.

I need not dwell on the existence, but at the same time the incompleteness, of our dream-memory of waking life ; nor on the occasional formation of a separate chain of memory, constructed from successive and cohering dreams. It should be added that we do not really know how far our memory in dream of waking life may have extended ; since we can only infer this from our notoriously imperfect waking memory of past dreams.

413. A cognate anticipation to which our theory will point will be that dream-memory will occasionally be found to fill up gaps in waking memory, other than those due to hypnotic trance ; such so-called " ecmnesic" periods, for instance, as sometimes succeed a violent shock to the system, and may even embrace some space of time a?iterior to the shock. These periods themselves resemble prolonged and unremembered dreams. Such accidents, however, are so rare, and such dream-memory so hard to detect, that I mention the point mainly for the sake of theoretical completeness ; and must think myself fortunate in being able to cite a case of M. Charcot's which affords an interesting confirmation of the suggested view.

A certain Madame D., a healthy and sensible woman of thirty-four, was subjected, on August 28th, 1891, to a terrible shock. Some scoundrel who has not been identified entered her cottage and told her brusquely that her husband was dead, and that his corpse was being brought home. This was absolutely false; but the news threw her into a state of profound agitation; and when some indiscreet friend, seeing the husband approach, cried out Le voild / the poor woman, supposing that the corpse was thus announced, fell into a prolonged hysterical attack. After two days of raving she came to herself ; — but had lost the memory of all events since July 14th ; i. e. since a date six weeks before the shock. This kind of retroactive ecmnesia — inexplicable as it is — is known to occur sometimes after a physical concussion. In Madame D.'s case the shock had been wholly a mental one ; yet the forgetfulness continued, and had spread overall the period up to M. Charcot's lecture on the case, December 22nd, 1891. Madame D. was then possessed of full recollection of her life up to July 14th, 1891 ; but she could recall no event whatever which had occurred since that date. She endeavoured to continue her domestic duties ; but if she wished to recollect anything she had to write it down instantly in a note-book to which she constantly referred. For instance, she was bitten by a dog believed to be mad. She instantly made a written note of the fact ; but except

1 Les Khies, p. 135. This remarkable patient afforded examples of many forms of communication of memory between different states of personality. See pp. 192-200 for a conspectus of these complex recollections.

"^ Revue de Mideciue, February 1S92. A full account and discussion of the case of Madame D. is contained in Dr. P. Janet's Nhjroses et Idies fixes, vol. i. pp. 116 et scq.

414] SLEEP 131

when actually referring to her note-book she retained no recollection whatever of the bite or of her subsequent treatment in M. Pasteur's laboratory.

Here, surely, was a case where it might have seemed that there had been some absolute evanescence, absolute abolition of whatsoever traces or tendencies may be held to constitute memory.

But one fact was observed which threw a decisive light upon this puzzling case. The patients in the two beds adjoining Madame D.'s were told to observe her at night. They reported that she was in the habit of talking in her sleep ; and that in the fragments of dreams thus revealed she made frequent allusions to the mad dog's bite, and to other events which had occurred during her ecmnesic period. This hint, of course, was enough for M. Charcot. Classing her ecmnesia as a kind of prolongation of a hystero-epileptic attack, he hypnotised the patient, and found that in the hypnotic trance her memory for the ecmnesic period was absolutely intact. Post-hypnotic suggestions to remember the lost days are now slowly restoring the poor woman to the possession of her whole past.

The fact which interests us here is the accidentally discovered persistence in dream of memories which had vanished from the supraliminal consciousness. This shows that in dream Madame D. had got down — not merely to a stratum of confusion, — but to a state so far deeper than the waking state that the memories of which shock or hysteria had robbed the waking state were there found to be uninjured. This wellobserved case may here stand as representative of the gap-filling dream-memory which I ventured to anticipate. Other cases will be noticeable when spontaneous somnambulism comes under review, — in its complex relations with common dreams, hypnotism, hysteria, and even epilepsy.

414. I pass on to the still more novel and curious questions involved in the apparent existence of a dream-memory which, while accompanying the memory of ordinary life, seems also to have a wider purview, and to indicate that the record of external events which is kept within us is far fuller than we know.

Let us consider what stages such a memory may show. I. It may include events once known to the waking self, but now definitely forgotten.

IL It may include facts which have fallen within the sensory field, but which have never been supraliminally " apperceived " or cognised in any way. And thus also it may indicate that from this wider range of remembered facts &s:&2iXi\-inferences have been drawn ; — which inferences may be retrospective, prospective, or, if I may use a word of Pope's with a new meaning, circumspective, — that is to say, relating not to the past or to the future, but to the present condition of matters beyond the range of ordinary perception. It is plain that inferences of this kind (if they exist) will be liable to be mistaken for direct retrocognition,. direct premonition, direct clairvoyance ; while yet they need not actually prove anything more than a perception on the part of the subliminal self more far-reaching, —

a memory more stable, — than is the perception or the memory of the supraliminal self which we know.

These hyper mnesic dreams, then, may afford a means of drawing our lines of evidence more exactly ; of relegating some marvellous narratives to a realm of lesser marvel, and at the same time of realising more clearly what it is in the most advanced cases which ordinary theories are really powerless to explain.

415. As to the Jirs^ of the above-mentioned categories no one will raise any doubt. It is a familiar fact — or a fact only sufficiently unfamiliar to be noted with slight surprise — that we occasionally recover in sleep a memory which has wholly dropped out of waking consciousness. As an example, we may take the dream of M. Delbceufs, discussed in his interesting book, Le So77imeil et les Reves. In that dream the name of the " Asplenium Ruta Muralis " figured as a familiar phrase. On waking, he puzzled himself in vain to think where he could have learnt that botanical appellation. Long afterwards he discovered the name " Asplenium Ruta Muraria" in his own handwriting, — in a little collection of flowers and ferns to which he had added their designations, under the dictation of a botanical friend.

In this and similar cases the original piece of knowledge had at the time made a definite impress on the mind, — had come well within the span of apprehension of the supraliminal consciousness. Its reappearance after however long an interval is a fact to which there are already plenty of parallels. But the conclusion to which the cases about to be cited seem to me to point is one of a much stranger character. I think that there is evidence to show that many facts or pictures which have never even for a moment come within the apprehension of the supraliminal consciousness are nevertheless retained by the subliminal memory, and are occasionally presented in dreams with what seems a definite purpose.-^

The same point, as we shall hereafter see, is illustrated by the phenomena of crystal-vision. Miss Goodrich-Freer,^ for example, saw in the crystal the announcement of the death of a friend ; — a piece of news which certainly had never been apprehended by her ordinary conscious self. On referring to the Times, it was found that an announcement of the death of some one of the same unusual name was contained in a sheet with which she had screened her face from the fire ; — so that the words may have fallen within her range of vision, although they had not reached what we broadly call her waking mind.

This instance was of value from the strong probability that the news could never have been supraliminally known at all ; — since it was too important to have been merely glanced at and forgotten.

416. I quote another case which raises a somewhat curious point as

1 See cases given in Appendix 415.

2 Frocgedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 507.

416] SLEEP 133

to the relation of what I may call the subliminal gaze to defects of ordinary vision.

From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 389 ; related by Mr. Herbert J. Lewis, 19 Park Place, Cardiff.

In September 1880, I lost the landing order of a large steamer containing a cargo of iron ore, which had arrived in the port of Cardiff. She had to commence discharging at six o'clock the next morning. I received the landing order at four o'clock in the afternoon, and when I arrived at the office at six I found that I had lost it. During all the evening I was doing my utmost to find the oiScials of the Custom House to get a permit, as the loss was of the greatest importance, preventing the ship from discharging. I came home in a great degree of trouble about the matter, as I feared that I should lose my situation in consequence.

That night I dreamed that I saw the lost landing order lying in a crack in the wall under a desk in the Long Room of the Custom House.

At five the next morning I went down to the Custom House and got the keeper to get up and open it. I went to the spot of which I had dreamed, and found the paper in the very place. The ship was not ready to discharge at her proper time, and I went on board at seven and delivered the landing order, saving her from all delay. Herbert J. Lewis.

I can certify to the truth of the above statement.

Thomas Lewis (Herbert Lewis's father),

July \/^th, 1884. H. Wallis.

[Mr. E. J. Newell, of the George and Abbotsford Hotel, Melrose, adds the following corroborative note : — ]

August 14th, 1884.

I made some inquiries about Mr. Herbert Lewis's dream before I left Cardiff. He had been searching throughout the room in which the order was found. His theory as to how the order got in the place in which it was found is that it was probably put there by some one (perhaps with malicious intent), as he does not see how it could have fallen so.

The fact that Mr. H. Lewis is exceedingly short-sighted adds to the probability of the thing which you suggest, that the dream was simply an unconscious act of memory in sleep. On the other hand he does not believe it was there when he searched. E. J. Newell.

Can there have been a momentary unnoticed spasm of the ciliary muscle, with the result of extending the range of vision? It may sufifice here to quote — that my suggestion may not seem too fantastic — a few lines from a personal observation of a somnambule by Dr. Dufay.-^

" It is eight o'clock : several workwomen are busy around a table, on which a lamp is placed. Mdlle. R. L. directs and shares in the work, chatting cheerfully meantime. Suddenly a noise is heard ; it is her head which has fallen sharply on the edge of the table. This is the beginning

Revue Scientifique, y^ serie, xxxii. p. 167.

of the access. She picks herself up in a few seconds, pulls off her spectacles with disgust, and continues the work which she had begun ; — having no further need of the concave glasses which a pronounced myopia renders needful to her in ordinary life ; — and even placing herself so that her work is less exposed to the light of the lamp." Similarly, and yet differently, Miss Goodrich-Freer has had an experience where the title of a book quite unknown to her, which she had vainly endeavoured to read where it lay at some distance from her, presented itself in the crystal. In such a case we can hardly suppose any such spasmodic alteration in ocular conditions as may perhaps occur in trance.

417. In the cases which I have thus far quoted the dream-self has presented a significant scene, — has chosen, so to say, from its gallery of photographs the special picture which the waking mind desired, — but has not needed to draw any more complex inference from the facts presumably at its disposal. I have now to deal with a small group of dreams which reason as well as remember ; — if indeed in some of them there be not something more than mere reasoning on facts already in some way acquired, — something which overpasses the scheme prescribed for the present chapter.

In the first place we cannot doubt that definite data already known may sometimes be treated in somnambulism or ordinary dream with more than waking intelligence. Such are the cases of mathematical problems solved in somnambulism, or of the skeletal arrangement discovered by Agassiz in common sleep for scattered bones which had bafifled his waking skill. I give in Appendices some striking cases. The first case is of old date, but it was reported by the dreamer about a month after its occurrence to Dr. Davey, a physician well known in his day, and was sent by him to Dr. Elliotson, who printed it in the Zoist, where it is published as a case of clairvoyance. But the needed data had passed before the waking eyes, although it was left for dream to interpret them fruitfully. Professor Lamberton's case is about the best of the dream-solutions of mathematical problems which I have seen recorded. And Professor Hilprecht's second case carries dream- intelligence to its highest point. Professor Romaine Newbold (who records these cases) is well versed in the analysis of evidence making for supernormal powers, and his explanation of the vision as the result of " processes of associative reasoning analogous to those of the upper consciousness " must, I think, be taken as correct. But had the incident occurred in a less critical age of the world, — in any generation, one may say, but this, — how majestic a proof would the phantasmal Babylonian's message be held to have afforded of his veritable co-operation with the modern savant in the reconstruction of his remote past !

418. I repeat that with this case of Professor Hilprecht's we seem to have reached the utmost intensity of sleep-faculty within the limits of our ordinary spectrum. In almost every region of that spectrum we

419] SLEEP 135

have found that the sleeper's faculty, under its narrow conditions, shows scattered signs of at least a potential equality with the faculty of waking hours.

We have already seen this as regards muscular movements, as regards inward vision and audition, and as regards memory ; and these last records complete the series by showing us the achievement in sleep of intellectual work of the severest order. Coleridge's Kubla Khan had long ago shown the world that a great poet might owe his masterpiece to the obscuration of waking sense.^ And the very imperfection of Kubla Khan — the memory truncated by an interruption — may again remind us how partial must ever be our waking knowledge of the achievements of sleep.

May I not, then, claim a real analogy between certain of the achievements oi sleep and the achievements oi genius ? In both there is the same triumphant spontaneity, the same sense of drawing no longer upon the narrow and brief endurance of nerves and brain, but upon some unknown source exempt from those limitations.

Thus far, indeed, the sleep-faculties which we have been considering, however strangely intensified, have belonged to the same class as the normal faculties of waking life. We have now to consider whether we can detect in sleep any manifestation of supernormal faculty — any experience which seems to suggest that man is a cosmical spirit as well as a terrestrial organism, and is in some way in relation with a spiritual as well as with a material world. It will seem, in this view, to be natural that this commerce with a spiritual environment should be more perceptible in sleep than in waking. The dogma which my point of view thus renders probable is perhaps, as a mere matter of history, the dogma of all dogmas which has been most universally believed by mankind.

" Quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus " — for how many narrow theological propositions have we not heard this proud claim — that they have been believed everywhere, and by everybody, and in every age? Yet what can approach the antiquity, the ubiquity, the unanimity of man's belief in the wanderings of the spirit in dream? In the Stone Age, the sceptic would have been rash indeed who ventured to contradict it. And though I grant that this "palaeolithic psychology" has gone out of fashion for the last few centuries, I do not think that (in view of the telsesthetic evidence now collected) we can any longer dismiss as a mere bizarrerie of dream-imagery the constant recurrence of the idea of visiting in sleep some distant scene, — with the acquisition thereby of new facts not otherwise accessible.

419. Starting, then, not from savage authority, but from the evidential scrutiny of modern facts, we shall find, I think, that there are coincidences of dream with truth which neither pure chance nor any subconscious mentation of an ordinary kind will adequately explain. We shall find that there is a perception of concealed material objects or of distant scenes,

1 Caedmon's poem was traditionally said to have come to him in like fashion.

and also a perception of or communion with the thoughts and emotions of other minds. Both these phenomena have been noted sporadically in many ages and countries, and were observed with serious attention especially by the early French mesmerists. The first group of phenomena was called clairvoyance or luciditi, and the second commufiication de pensees, or in English, thought-transference . These terms are scarcely comprehensive enough to satisfy a more systematic study. The distant perception is not optical, nor is it confined even to the apparent sense of sight alone. It extends to all the senses, and includes also impressions hardly referable to any special sense. Similarly the communication between distant persons is not a transference of thought alone, but of emotion, of motor impulses, and of many impressions not easy to define. I ventured in 1882 to suggest the wider terms telcesthesia, sensation at a distance, and telepathy, fellowfeeling at a distance, and shall use these words in the present work. But I am far from assuming that these terms correspond with definite and clearly separated groups of phenomena, or comprise the whole field of supernormal faculty. On the contrary, I think it probable that the facts of the metetherial world are far more complex than the facts of the material world ; and that the ways in which spirits perceive and communicate, apart from fleshly organisms, are subtler and more varied than any perception or communication which we know. Just as each organism is in fact a system of forces, influencing and influenced by similar systems of forces in known and unknown ways, so also must we regard human spirits as interacting systems of forces, yet more complex, and yet further beyond our ken. Specially manifest is this when we have to deal with pretnonitions, of which a few instances are given in this chapter, which seem even further away from our ordinary processes of perception than the phenomena of telepathy or telaesthesia.

It follows from what has been said that there is no one logical order in which to arrange these supernormal phenomena. They do not spring one from another in traceable sequence ; rather they are emergent and scattered manifestations of some deeper and more comprehensive law. The distinction suggested above between telepathy and telsesthesia — between supernormal knowledge apparently acquired through another mind, and supernormal knowledge apparently acquired directly, and without another mind's intervention — even this distinction, I say, cannot be made fundamental. We cannot really tell in what cases, and to what extent, some external mind has aided the percipient's perception of the distant scene. We do not even know whether in any supernormal perception one mind alone can be concerned.

420. I have hinted above at another line of demarcation which the dreamer's own sensations suggest, — the distinction between active psychical excursion or invasion and the passive reception of psychical invasion from without. But even here, as was also hinted, a clear line of division is hard to draw. For whether we are dealing with dream-perceptions of distant

422] SLEEP 137

material scenes, or of distant living persons, or of discamate spirits, it is often impossible for the dreamer himself to say either from what point he is himself observing, or where the scene of the vision is laid. Where is he when he is taking part in a scene which is still in the future ? and in what way does his apparent presence in the future scene differ from his apparent presence in an actually existing, although distant, scene ; — in the midst of which his own phantasmal presence may perhaps be discerned by some one of the actors ? Our answers to such questions — imperfect at the best — must be deferred until we have before us not dreams alone, but that whole range of sensory Automatisms which bears throughout such perplexing relations to our current notions of Space and Time.

For the present I must confine myself to a brief sketch of some of the main types of supernormal dreams, arranged in a kind of ascending order. I shall begin with such dreams as primarily suggest a kind of heightening or extension of the dreamer's own innate perceptive powers, as exercised on the world around him. And I shall end with dreams which suggest his entrance into a spiritual world, where commerce with incarnate or discarnate spirits is subject no longer to the conditions of earthly thought.

421. I begin, then, with some dreams which seem to carry perceptive faculty beyond the point at which (as in Mr. Lewis's dream of the landing order. Section 416) some unusual form of common vision can be plausibly suggested in explanation. In the first of these cases (Mr. Squires's) , given in full in 421 A, a young man sees in a dream the place where his friend's watch has fallen in a lonely field. In another case (Mr. Watts's, 421 B) there is a vision of a broken statue, whose injury seems to have been known to no other mind than the dreamer's ; — so that we cannot here invoke — as we still might invoke in Mr. Squires's case — some subliminal knowledge of another man's as possibly suggesting the dream. And similarly in other cases cited in the Appendix, — while telepathy from the living or the dead may be theoretically conceivable, — the simplest hypothesis is that which goes no further than telsesthetic perception by the dreamer's own subliminal self,

422. I will next refer to certain cases where the sleeper by clairvoyant vision discerns a scene of direct interest to a mind other than his own ; — as the danger or death of some near friend. Sometimes there is a flash of vision, which seems to represent correctly the critical scene. Sometimes there is what seems like a longer gaze, accompanied, perhaps, by some sense of communion with the invaded person. And in some few cases — the most interesting of all — the circumstances of a death seem to be symbolically shown to a dreamer, as though by the deceased person, or by some intelligence connected with him (see Section 427) .

One of the best instances of the flash of vision is Canon Warburton's, which I quote from Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 338 — a case whose remoteness is rendered less of a drawback than usual by the character of the narrator and the simplicity and definiteness of the fact attested.

The following is his account : —

The Close, Winchester, _/«/y i6th, 1883.

Somewhere about the year 1848 I went up from Oxford to stay a day or two with my brother, Acton Warburton, then a barrister, living at 10 Fish Street, Lincoln's Inn. When I got to his chambers I found a note on the table apologising for his absence, and saying that he had gone to a dance somewhere in the West End, and intended to be home soon after i o'clock. Instead of going to bed, I dozed in an armchair, but started up wide awake exactly at i, ejaculating " By Jove ! he's down ! " and seeing him coming out of a drawing-room into a brightly illuminated landing, catching his foot in the edge of the top stair, and falling headlong, just saving himself by his elbows and hands. (The house was one which I had never seen, nor did I know where it was.) Thinking very little of the matter, I fell a-doze again for half-an-hour, and was awakened by my brother suddenly coming in and saying, " Oh, there you are ! I have just had as narrow an escape of breaking my neck as I ever had in my life. Coming out of the ballroom, I caught my foot, and tumbled full length down the stairs."

That is all. It may have been " only a dream," but I always thought it must have been something more. W. Warburton.

In a second letter Canon Warburton adds : —

July 20th, 1883.

My brother was hurrying home from his dance, with some little self-reproach in his mind for not having been at his chambers to receive his guest, so the chances are that he was thinking of me. The whole scene was vividly present to me at the moment, but I did not note particulars any more than one would in real life. The general impression was of a narrow landing brilliantly illuminated, and I remember verifying the correctness of this by questions at the time.

This is my sole experience of the kind.

[The last words are in answer to the question whether he had had similar vivid visions which had not corresponded with any real event.]

The impression here produced is as though a jerk were given to some delicate link connecting the two brothers. The brother suffering the crisis thinks vividly of the other ; and one can of course explain the incident, as we did on its first publication, as the endangered man's projection of the scene upon his brother's mind. The passive dozing brother, on the other hand, feels as though he were suddenly present in the scene, — say in response to some sudden call from the brother in danger, — and I am here bringing into relief that aspect of the incident, on account of its analogy with cases soon to be quoted. But the main lesson no doubt may be that no hard and fast line can be drawn between the two explanations. I quote another case, that of Mrs. West, in 422 A.

423. I next quote a case investigated by Edmund Gurney shortly before his death, and printed in S.F.R. Journal, vol. iii. pp. 265, 266.

From Mr. R. V. BoYLE, 3 Stanhope Terrace, W.

July Tpth, 1884.

In India, early on the morning of November 2nd, 1868 (which would be about 10 to II P.M. of November ist in England), I had so clear and striking

423] SLEEP 139

a dream or vision (repeated a second time after a short waking interval) that, on rising as usual between 6 and 7 o'clock, I felt impelled at once to write an entry in my diary, which is now before me.

At the time referred to my wife and I were in Simla, in the Himalayas, the summer seat of the Governor-General, and my father-in-law and mother-in-law were living in Brighton. We had not heard of or from either of them for weeks, nor had I been recently speaking or thinking of them, for there was no reason for anxiety regarding them.^

It seemed in my dream that I stood at the open door of a bedroom in a house in Brighton, and that before me, by candlelight, I saw my father-in-law lying pale upon his bed, while my mother-in-lav/ passed silently across the room in attendance on him. The vision soon passed away, and I slept on for some time. On waking, however, the nature of the impression left upon me unmistakably was that my father-in-law was dead. I at once noted down the dream, after which I broke the news of vt^hat I felt to be a revelation to my wife, when we thought over again and again all that could bear upon the matter, without being able to assign any reason for my being so strongly and thoroughly impressed. The telegraph from England to Simla had been open for some time, but now there was an interruption, which lasted for about a fortnight longer, and on the 17th (fifteen days after my dream) I was neither unprepared nor surprised to receive a telegram from England, saying that my father-in-law had died in Brighton on November ist. Subsequent letters showed that the death occurred on the night of the ist.

Dreams, as a rule, leave little impression on me, and the one above referred to is the only one I ever thought of making a note of, or of looking expectantly for its fulfilment.

I may mention that at a much earlier period of my life I was sitting occupied in a room of a house, from which I could not see the approach to the hall door, when suddenly my thoughts were arrested, and I turned away from my papers, feeling that a person whom I had not been thinking of, nor had seen for years, was at that moment within a few steps of the house, noiselessly, but rapidly, approaching. I listened intently for a knock, which instantly followed. I did not move from my seat, feeling satisfied that what did follow would follow, viz., that a servant immediately afterwards announced the heretofore invisible, but unaccountably sudden, expected visitor. These occurrences I have often thought over, without being able in any way to satisfactorily account for them ; they stand out in relief upon a memory but lightly charged with, though not insensible to, such things. R. Vicary Boyle.

[Mrs. Boyle writes as follows : — ]

dth August 1887.

I well remember my husband telling me one morning, early in November, 1868, when at Simla, in India, that he had had a striking dream (repeated) in which my father, then at Brighton, seemed to be dying. We were both deeply impressed and then anxiously awaited news from home. A telegram first reached us, in about a fortnight, which was afterwards confirmed by letters,

1 It is right, however, to say that my wife's father had gone to Brighton some months before on account of his health, though he was not more delicate than his elder brother, who is (1884) still living.

telling of my father's death having occurred on the same night when my husband had the dream. Eleonore A. Boyle.

[Gurney adds : — ] The following entries were copied by me from Mr. Boyle's diary : —

the night of-" Nov. 2. Dreamed of E.'s F[ather] early this morning. Written before dressing.

"Nov. 17. Got telegram from L[ouis] H[ack] this morning of his father's death on ist Nov. inst."

The following obituary notice of the decease of Mr. Boyle's father-in-law occurred in the Times for 4th November 1868: —

" On 1st Nov., at Brighton, William Hack, late of Dieppe, aged 72."

On September 17th, 1887, I received from Mr. Boyle a copy (made by Miss P. Hack, niece of the deceased) of an entry made by his mother (sister-in-law of deceased) in her journal, on Sunday, November ist, 1868, which shows the hour of death. In this entry, after some details of the last hours, occur the words : " At a few minutes after 2 o'clock [p.m.] he ceased to breathe."

Mr. Boyle informed me that he is a " particularly sound sleeper, and very rarely dreams." This dream was a very unique and impressive experience, apart from the coincidence.

There was a regular correspondence between Mrs. Boyle and her mother, but for several mails the letters had contained no mention of her father, on whose account absolutely no anxiety was felt. E. G.

It will be seen that in this case there is an entry made before the death was known in Mr. Boyle's diary. The vision, which recurred twice, was of a simple kind ; and here again might be interpreted as an impression from the mind of the wife who had been watching beside the dying man, transferred some nine hours later to the sleeping son-in-law. So far as the wife's conscious thought turned to others at that time, it would probably turn to her daughter rather than to her son-in-law. Mr. Boyle's other experience indicates a psychical sensibility which might deflect the message from Mrs. Boyle to himself; although even on that view his special proximity to Mrs. Boyle may have been a necessary factor in his percipience.

424. The single dream which a man has noted down in all his life stands evidentially in almost as good a position as a single waking hallucination. Compare the single dream noted down in all his life by Mr. (now Sir Edward) Hamilton, y"<?7<!r«^/ S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 267, which may fitly be quoted here in illustration, although perhaps not precisely of the same type. It suggests rather the projection of the suffering brother's

1 These three words were added above the line after the subsequent receipt of the letter. But there must apparently have been some misunderstanding ; as the evidence which follows seems conclusive as to the hour of the death.

424] SLEEP 141

conception of himself, especially if he were writing to the brother at home at the time.

Park Lane Chambers, Park Lane, W., April 6th, 1888.

On Tuesday morning, March 20th, 1888, I woke up with the impression of a very vivid dream. I had dreamt tliat my brother, who had long been in Australia, and of whom I had heard nothing for several months, had come home ; that after an absence of twelve years and a half he was very little altered in appearance, but that he had something wrong with one of his arms ; it looked horribly red near the wrist, his hand being bent back.

When I got up that morning the dream recurred constantly to my thoughts, and I at last determined to take a note of it, notwithstanding my natural prejudices against attaching any importance to dreams, to which, indeed, I am not much subject. Accordingly, in the course of the day, I made in my little Letts's Diary a mark thus : X, with my brother's name after it.

On the following Monday morning, the 26th March, I received a letter from my brother, which bore the date of the 21st March, and which had been posted at Naples (where the Orient steamers touch), informing me that he was on his way home, and that he hoped to reach London on or about the 30th March, and adding that he was suffering from a very severe attack of gout in the left arm.

The next day I related to some one this curious incident, and I commented on the extraordinary coincidence of facts with the dream with all but one detail, and that was, that the arm which I had seen in my dream did not look as if it were merely affected with gout : the appearance it had presented to me was more like extremely bad eczema.

My brother duly reached England on the 29th, having disembarked at Plymouth, owing to the painful condition of his arm. It turned out that the doctor on board ship had mistaken the case; it was not gout, but a case of blood-poisoning, resulting in a very bad carbuncle or abscess over the wrist joint.

Since my brother's return, I have endeavoured to ascertain from him the exact hour at which he wrote to me on March 21st. He is not certain whether the letter to me was written before noon or after noon of that day. He remembers writing four short letters in the course of that day — two before luncheon and two after luncheon. Had the note addressed to me been written in the forenoon, it might nearly have coincided in time with my dream, if allowance be made for the difference of time between Greenwich and Naples ; for, having no recollection of the dream when I woke, according to custom, at an early hour on the morning of the 21st, I presume I must have dreamt it very little before eight o'clock, the hour at which I am called.

I may add that, notwithstanding an absence of twelve years and a half, my brother has altered very little in appearance ; and that I have not to my knowledge ever noted a dream before in my life. E. W. Hamilton.

[Gurney adds : — ]

April i2ik, 1888. I have seen the diary with the entry (X, Clem.) under Tuesday, March 2oth, 1888, though, as Mr. Hamilton says, " it was early the next morning that

I had the dream ; for I generally consider all that appertains to bed relates to the day on which one gets into it."

I have seen the letter, signed Clement E. Hamilton, and dated Naples, March 21st, 1888, which says, "Am suffering from very severe attack of gout in left arm." — E. G.

Somewhat similar again, is a case which I give in 424 A, where a little boy of four years old absent from his home, with his father, becomes aware, while asleep, of the unexpected fact that " there is a little baby in bed with mamma." "What makes you think that?" asked the father, to whom, probably, rather than to little Hughie, the mother might have wished to send this information. " Because I saw it laying beside her in the bed," was the ungrammatical, but decisive reply.

Next I quote in 424 B, a case where a wife between sleeping and waking sees her husband carried wounded off the field of battle, and hears his voice saying, "Take this ring off my finger and send it to my wife."

A third case which I also give (in 424 C), exemplifies the communication of an emotional distress from a lady to her distant husband, who was waked by hearing her call him on the night after she had heard of a dangerous accident to her nephew.

425. And here I feel bound to introduce some samples of a certain class of dreams, — more interesting, perhaps, and certainly more perplexing than any others ; — but belonging to a category of phenomena which at present I can make no attempt to explain. I mean precognitive dreams ; — pictures or visions in which future events are foretold or depicted, generally with more or less of symbolism, — and generally also in a mode so remote from the previsions of our earthly sagacity that we shall find ourselves driven, in a later discussion, to speak in vague terms of glimpses into a cosmic picture-gallery ; — or of scenic representations composed and offered to us by intelligences higher and more distant than any spirit whom we have known. I give in the text a thoroughly characteristic example ; — characteristic alike in its definiteness, its purposelessness, its isolated uninteUigibility ; — and others are quoted in Appendices.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 505.)

From Mr. Alfred Cooper, of 9 Henrietta Street, Cavendish Square, W.

[This account was orally confirmed by him to Mr. E. Gurney, June 6th, 1888. It is written by Mr. Cooper, but attested also by the Duchess of Hamilton.]

A fortnight before the death of the late Earl of L , in 1882, I called

upon the Duke of Hamilton, in Hill Street, to see him professionally. After I had finished seeing him we went into the drawing-room, where the Duchess was, and the Duke said to me, " Oh, Cooper; how is the Earl.? "

The Duchess said, " What Earl ? " and on my answering " Lord L ," she

replied, " That is very odd. I have had a most extraordinary vision. I went to bed, but after being in bed a short time, I was not exactly asleep, but

426] SLEEP 143

thought I saw a scene as if from a play before me. The actors in it were Lord

L , in a chair, as if in a fit, with a man standing over him with a red beard.

He was by the side of a bath, over which bath a red lamp was distinctly shown."

I then said, " I am attending Lord L at present ; there is very little the

matter with him ; he is not going to die ; he will be all right very soon."

Well, he got better for a week and was nearly well, but at the end of six or seven days after this I was called to see him suddenly. He had inflammation of both lungs.

I called in Sir William Jenner, but in six days he was a dead man. There were two male nurses attending on him ; one had been taken ill. But when I saw the other the dream of the Duchess was exactly represented. He was standing near a bath over the Earl and, strange to say, his beard was red. There was the bath with the red lamp over it. It is rather rare to find a bath with a red lamp over it, and this brought the story to my mind.

The vision seen by the Duchess was told two weeks before the death of Lord L . It is a most remarkable thing.

This account, written in 1888, has been revised by the [late] Duke of Manchester, father of the Duchess of Hamilton, who heard the vision from his daughter on the morning after she had seen it.

(Signed) Mary Hamilton. Alfred Cooper.

Her Grace had been reading and had just blown out the candle. Her Grace has had many dreams which have come true years after.

Alfred Cooper.

[The Duchess only knew Lord L by sight, and had not heard that he

was ill. She knew she was not asleep, for she opened her eyes to get rid of the vision and, shutting them, saw the same thing again.]

An independent and concordant account has been given to me (F. W. H. M.) orally by a gentleman to whom the Duchess related the dream on the morning after its occurrence.

426. Dr. Bruce's narrative, which I next give in 426 A, written by an intelligent man, while the facts were yet fresh, seems to me of high importance. If we accept the rest of his story, we must, I think, suppose that the sense of spiritual presence with which the incident began was more than a mere subjective fancy. Shall we refer it to the murdered man's sister; — with whom the dreamer seemed afterwards to be in telepathic relation ? Or shall we interpret it as a kind of summons from the dying man, drawing on, as it were, his friend's spirit to witness the actual murder and the subsequent scene? The fact that another friend, in another locality apparently, had a vision of similar nature, tells somewhat in favour of the supposition that the decedent's spirit was operative in both cases ; since we very seldom — if ever — find an agent producing an impression in two separate places at once — or nearly so — except at or just after the moment of death.

In this view, the incident resembles a scene passing in a spiritual

CHAPTER IV [427.

world. The dying man summons his brother-in-law; the brother-in-law visits the scene of murder, and there spiritually communicates with his wife, the sister, who is corporeally in that scene, and then sees further details of the scene, which he does not understand, and which are not explained to him.

Fantastic though this explanation seems, it is not easy to hit on a simpler one which will cover the facts as stated. Could we accept it, we should have a kind of transition between two groups of cases, which although apparently so different may form parts of a continuous series. I mean the cases where the dreamer visits a distant scene, and the cases where another spirit visits the dreamer.

427. Taking, then, Dr. Bruce's case to bridge the interval between these two groups, I go on to a case which properly belongs to the second, though it still has much in common with the/n-/, I shall quote Mrs. Storie's narrative at full length in the text ; because the case is, in my judgment, both evidentially very strong, and also in the naivete of its confusion, extremely suggestive of the way in which these psychical communications are made. Mrs. Storie, who is now dead, was, by the testimony of Edmund Gurney, Professor Sidgwick, and others, a witness eminently deserving of trust ; and, besides a corroboration from her husband of the manifestation of a troubled dream, before the event was known, we have the actual notes written down by her, as she informed us, the day, or the day after, the news of the fatal accident arrived, solely for her own use, and unmistakably reflecting the incoherent impressiveness of the broken vision. These notes form the narrative given in Phantastns of the Living (vol. i. p. 370) which I reproduce here. The fact that the deceased brother was a tivin of Mrs. Storie's adds interest to the case, since one clue (a vague one as yet) to the causes directing and determining telepathic communications lies in what seems their exceptional frequency between twins ; — the closest of all relations.

HoBART Town, July 1874.

On the evening of the i8th July, I felt unusually nervous. This seemed to begin [with the occurrence of a small domestic annoyance] about halfpast 8 o'clock. When I went to my room I even felt as if some one was there. I fancied, as I stepped into bed, that some one in thought tried to stop me. At 2 o'clock I woke from the following dream. It seemed like in dissolving views. In a twinkle of light I saw a railway, and the puff of the engine. I thought, " What's going on up there ? Travelling ? I wonder if any of us are travelling and I dreaming of it." Some one unseen by me answered, "No; something quite different — something wrong." " I don't like to look at these things," I said. Then I saw behind and above my head William's upper half reclining, eyes and mouth half shut ; his chest moved forward convulsively, and he raised his right arm. Then he bent forward, saying, " I suppose I should move out of this." Then I saw him lying, eyes shut, on the ground, flat. The chimney of an engine at his head. I called in excitement, " That will strike him ! " The *' some one " answered " Yes — well, here's what it was " ; and immediately I saw William sitting in the open air — faint moonlight — on a raised

427] SLEEP 145

place sideways. He raised his right arm, shuddered, and said, " I can't go on, or back, No. " Then he seemed lying flat. I cried out, " Oh ! Oh ! " and others seemed to echo, " Oh ! Oh ! " He seemed then upon his elbow, saying, " Now it comes." Then as if struggling to rise, turned twice round quickly, saying, " Is it the train ? the train, the train" his right shoulder reverberating as if struck from behind. He fell back like fainting ; his eyes rolled. A large dark object came between us like panelling of wood, and rather in the dark something rolled over, and like an arm was thrown up, and the whole thing went away with a swish. Close beside me on the ground there seemed a long dark object. I called out, "They've left something behind; it's like a man." It then raised its shoulders and head, and fell down again. The same some one answered, " Yes, sadly."" [.? " Yes," sadly.] After a moment I seemed called on to look up, and said, " Is that thing not away yet ? " Answered, " No." And in front, in light, there was a railway compartment in which sat Rev. Mr. Johnstone, of Echuca. I said, " What's he doing there ? " Answered, " He's there." A railway porter went up

to the window asking, " Have you seen any of ." I caught no more, but I

thought he referred to the thi?ig left behind. Mr. Johnstone seemed to answer "No"; and the man went quickly away — I thought to look for it. After all this the some one said close to me, " Now I'm going." I started, and at once saw (■ a tall dark figure at my head )

I William's back at my side. > He put his right hand (in grief) over his face, and the other almost touching my shoulder, he crossed in front, looking stern and solemn. There was a flash from the eyes, and I caught a glimpse of a fine pale face Hke ushering him along, and indistinctly another. I felt frightened, and called out, " Is he angry ? " " Oh, no." " Is he going away ? " Answered, " Yes," by the same some one, and I woke with a loud sigh, which woke my husband, who said, " What is it ? " I told him I had been dreaming " something unpleasant " — named a " railway," and dismissed it all from my mind as a dream. As I fell asleep again I fancied the " some one " said, " It's all gone," and another answered, " I'll come and remind her."

The news reached me one week afterwards. The accident had happened to my brother on the same night about half-past 9 o'clock. Rev. Mr. Johnstone and his wife were actually in the train which struck him. He was walking along the line, which is raised two feet on a level country. He seemed to have gone 16 miles — must have been tired and sat down to take off his boot, which was beside him, dozed off and was very likely roused by the sound of the train ; 76 sheep-trucks had passed without touching him, but some wooden projection, likely the step, had touched the right side of his head, bruised his right shoulder, and killed him instantaneously. The night was very dark. I believe now that the some one was (from something in the way he spoke) William himself. The face with him was white as alabaster, and something like this [a small sketch pasted on] in profile. There were many other thoughts or words seemed to pass, but they are too many to write down here.

