can lie further outside any known capacity than the power to cause a semblance of oneself to appear at a distance ? What can be a more central action — more manifestly the outcome of whatsoever is deepest and most unitary in man's whole being? Here, indeed, begins the justification of the conception expressed at the beginning of this chapter; — that we should now see the subliminal self no longer as a mere chain of eddies or backwaters, in some way secluded from the main stream of man's being, but rather as itself the central and potent current, the most truly identifiable with the man himself. Other achievements have their manifest limit ; where is the limit here ? The spirit has shown itself in part dissociated from the organism ; to what point may its dissociation go ? It has shown some independence, some intelligence, some permanence. To what degree of intelligence, independence, permanence, may it conceivably attain? Of all vital phenomena, I say, this is the most significant ; this self-projection is the one definite act which it seems as though a man might perform equally well before and after bodily death.

[207 A



Appendices to Chapter II

207 A. Some striking cases of forgotten terrors giving rise to hysterical attacks, which have been cured by the skilful use of hypnotic suggestion, are given in Drs. Raymond and Janet's Nevroses et Idees fixes.

The book contains many examples of "fixed subconscious ideas" at various depths of submergence, the most completely forgotten being often the most potent for mischief. A fixed memory of this kind, removed, so to say, from the general mental circulation, may act in precisely the same way as an actual lesion to motor nerves, inducing definite physical disabilities.

" The contraction persists," says Dr. Janet of one such case (vol. i. p. 344), " because the <?;;2(?A'6'i'Z persists, involving always the same psychological and physiological consequences. It is, so to say, 2i fixed emotion — a variety of fixed idea of which we from outside can see only one exterior manifestation, while the patient herself is unaware of the interior phenomenon which determines it,"

To attempt to cure such patients without first discovering the true cause of mischief by some automatic message (as writing, or crystal vision, or utterance in hypnotic trance) which emanates from subliminal strata oi their being, is like trying to open a secret drawer without having discovered the spring.

But Dr. Janet finds that hypnotic suggestion, — used with great patience and tact, — is able gradually to remove a great number of these mental spasms and insistent memories. It is not, of course, enough to make the suggestion crudely and bluntly. In order to enable it to take, it must be grafted adroitly upon the patient's mental condition of the moment. First of all, one must discover the hidden sources of her trouble — of which sources, strangely enough, she is often herself unaware— and then one must gradually suggest successive slight modifications in the painful memory. " The incident which gave you the shock was not so bad as you think ; it really happened thus and thus," says Dr. Janet, until at last the old horror is forgotten, or transformed into something grotesque or innocuous.

Thus one patient is led to believe that the haunting word " cholera "

207 A] TO CHAPTER II 299

is really the name of a Chinese general; another, who has loved not wisely, but too well, is induced to see the lover of her hallucinatory memories with head transformed into a pig's, and undergoes a revulsion of feeling, a la Titania (vol. ii. p. 135).

Another curious case (vol. ii. p. 256) in which hypnotism first explained the trouble and then did much to amend it, is that of a boy, " Rou," whose short life has been plentifully interspersed with hysterical " fugues " or escapades, of which (like Ansel Bourne, 225 A) he loses all memory when he returns to normal life. He comes to himself suddenly — in a forest, in a convent, in a street-passage — and, as I say, remembers nothing, except an occasional drenchi?ig from rain or river, which has, in fact, for the moment partially awakened him from his somnambulic state. Hypnotisation, however, brings back the memory of the " fugues " (just as it did with Ansel Bourne), and we find that they have all been the working out of an idee fixe — that of going to sea as a cabin-boy. During these " fugues " the lad was anaesthetic, and consequently endured cheerfully extraordinary hardships, allowing himself with perfect insouciance to be treated by rough canal-men like a beast of burden. Hypnotic suggestion was able to avert these " fugues " whenever the boy was dimly conscious that they were coming on, although his brain was too profoundly affected to make the prognosis a hopeful one.

Many of these cases remind us of the narratives of Drs. Breuer and Freud, in their Studien ilber Hysterie (of which accounts are given above, in sections 217 and 218). I give as a sample one case of this type (Janet, vol. ii. p. 234), where hysterical attacks depending on the revival of a scheme of emotion (etat emofif systematique) which has become subconscious are cured by this same process of first discovering, and then gradually removing, the alarming memory.

A girl of eighteen, designated as Lie, has suffered for two years from almost daily convulsive attacks. Each attack constitutes a revival of a past scene, constituting in rudimentary form a secondary state of personality. The attack begins with syncope, and the return to conscious life is a return to a condition of terror, with cries of " Lucien, Lucien," as if appealing to some one for defence ; then she rushes to the window and cries " Thieves ! " and then gradually re-enters her ordinary state. Asked what she can remember of such a scene, the girl can recollect nothing. She thinks that her attacks were originally induced by distress and fear at the sight of her father's drunkenness. She knows no one called Lucien. She came to Paris alone, and there seems to be no external way of supplying any possible defect in her memory.

Hypnotism, however, comes promptly to the physician's aid. Thrown into the hypnotic sleep, the patient recovers at once the details of a tragic story of her childhood — of an insult offered to her, from which a " Lucien " had defended her, and of a theft at the chateau where she worked, which followed a few days later. These terrifying events gave

rise to attacks of syncope, somnambulism, &c., — and those attacks had now, in their turn, obliterated the memory of the events from the patient's waking mind. When she was reminded of them, they gradually recurred to her, and at the same moment the convulsive attacks which had been troubling her more or less ever since the events occurred entirely ceased.

Here is another remarkable case (p. 248) of the efficacy of hypnotic suggestion, first in discovering the nature of a mental confusion, and then in curing it. A young officer, Pk., is brought to the Salpetriere, having fallen down in the Champs Elys^es, and seeming^ entirely bewildered on rising up again. Arrived at the hospital, he holds out his hand to Dr. Janet, and addresses him as Dr. N. — a doctor at a military hospital at Brest. Asked what he means, and where he supposes himself to be, he replies, " We are at the military hospital at Brest, and you are Dr. N. They brought me here a few days ago — in May 1896." As a matter of fact, this occurred on July 6th, 1895. Next day the patient is in a different phase, and knows quite well that he is in Paris, although he remembers nothing about imagining himself to be at Brest. On inquiry it appears that this young man of twenty-eight is suffering from the combined effects of typhoid, dysentery, marsh-fever, sunstroke, an unfortunate marriage, and a tendency to absinthe. These troubles have made him hysterical, so that if he receives any shock or stimulus — as a threat of divorce or a glass of brandy — he is apt to become unconscious, and then to act in all sorts of odd ways, till he wakes up again in surprise, and with no recollection.

Fortunately he can be thrown at once into a somnambulic state which brings back the memory of the spontaneous somnambulisms. He is then able to explain how he came to suppose himself to be in the hospital at Brest, and in the year 1896. He had, in fact, while walking in the Champs Elys^es, been planning to apply for treatment in a military hospital and calculating that by about May 1896 he would be in the hospital, at Brest, where he knew the aforesaid Dr. N. Falling into his secondary state, he had no longer the ability to distinguish between this reverie and reality ; and the continuing reverie substituted itself for the actual surroundings, so that he imagined himself to be already in the Brest hospital, as if his calculation had already worked itself out.

So soon as his excessive modifiability had thus been discovered, it was comparatively easy to give him the suggestions needed to set right his habits and to inspire him with strength for the future. He has since distinguished himself in military service abroad.

221 A. It is well known that a great variety of slight causes — hunger, fatigue, slight poisoning by impure air, a small degree of fever, &c. — are sometimes enough to produce a transient perturbation of personality of the most violent kind. I give as an instance the following account of a feverish experience, sent to me by the late Robert Louis Stevenson, from Samoa, in 1892 (and published in Proceedings S. P. R., vol. ix. p. 9). In

221 A] TO CHAPTER II 301

Stevenson's paper on his own dreams, alluded to in 314, we have one of the most striking examples known to me of that helpful and productive subliminal uprush which I have characterised as the mechanism of genius. It is, therefore, interesting to observe how, under morbid conditions, this temperament of genius — this ready permeability of the psychical diaphragm— transforms what might in others be a mere vague and massive discomfort into a vivid though incoherent message from the subliminal storm and fire. The result is a kind of supraliminal duality, the perception at the same time of two personalities — the one rational and moral, the other belonging to the stratum of dreams and nightmare.

Vailima Plantation, Upoho, Samoan Islands, July Uik, 1892.

Dear Mr. Myers, — I am tempted to communicate to you some experiences of mine which seem to me (ignorant as I am) of a high psychological interest.

I had infamous bad health when I was a child and suffered much from night fears ; but from the age of about thirteen until I was past thirty I did not know what it was to have a high fever or to wander in my mind. So that these experiences, when they were renewed, came upon me with entire freshness ; and either I am a peculiar subject, or I was thus enabled to observe them with unusual closeness.

Experience A. During an illness at Nice I lay awake a whole night in extreme pain. From the beginning of the evening one part of my mind became possessed of a notion so grotesque and shapeless that it may best be described as a form of words. I thought the pain was, or was connected with, a wisp or coil of some sort ; I knew not of what it consisted nor yet where it was, and cared not ; only I thought, if the two ends were brought together, the pain would cease. Now all the time, with another part of my mi?id, which I ventured to think was 7nyself I was fully alive to the absurdity of this idea, knew it to be a mark of impaired sanity, and was engaged with my other self'vsx a perpetual conflict. Myself had nothing more at heart than to keep from my wife, who was nursing me, any hint of this ridiculous hallucination ; the other was bound that she should be told of it and ordered to effect the cure. I believe it must have been well on in the morning before the fever (or the other fellow) triumphed, and I called my wife to my bedside, seized her savagely by the wrist, and looking on her with a face of fury, cried: "Why do you not put the two ends together and put me out of pain ? "

Experience B. The other day in Sydney I was seized on a Saturday with a high fever. Early in the afternoon I began to repeat mechanically the sound usually written "mhn," caught myself in the act, instantly stopped it, and explained to my mother, who was in the room, my reasons for so doing. "That is the beginning of the mind to wander," I said, "and has to be resisted at the outset." I fell asleep and woke, and for the rest of the night repeated to myself mentally a nonsense word which I could not recall next morning. I had been reading the day before the life of Swift, and all night long one part of my mind {the other fellow) kept informing me that I was not repeating the word myself, but was only reading in a book that Swift had so repeated it in his last sickness. The temptation to communicate this

nonsense was again strongly felt by fjiyself, but was on this occasion triumphantly resisted, and my watcher heard from me all night nothing of Dean Swift or the word, nothing but what was rational and to the point. So much for the two consciousnesses when I can disentangle them ; but there is a part of my thoughts that I have more difficulty in attributing. One part of my mind continually bid me remark the transrational fehcity of the word, examined all the syllables, showed me that not one was in itself significant, and yet the whole expressed to a nicety a voluminous distress of one in a high fever and his annoyance at and recoil from the attentions of his nurses. It was probably the same part (and for a guess the other fellow) who bid me compare it with the nonsense words of Lewis Carroll as the invention of a lunatic with those of a sane man. But surely it was j/iyself {and myself in a perfectly clear-headed state) that kept me trying all night to get the word by heart, on the ground that it would afterwards be useful in literature if I wanted to deal with mad folk. It must have been myself, I say, because the other fellow believed (or pretended to believe) he was reading the passage in a book where it could always be found again when wanted.

Experience C. The next night the other fellow had an explanation ready for my sufferings, of which I can only say that it had something to do with the navy, that it was sheer undiluted nonsense, had neither end nor beginning, and was insusceptible of being expressed in words. Myself knew this ; yet I gave way, and my watcher was favoured with some references to the navy. Nor only that ; the other fellow was annoyed — or / was annoyed — on two inconsistent accounts : first, because he had failed to make his meaning comprehensible ; and second, because the nurse displayed no interest. The other fellow would have liked to explain further ; but myself was much hurt at having been got into this false position, and would be led no further.

In cases A and C the illusion was amorphous. I knew it to be so, and yet succumbed to the temptation of trying to communicate it. In case B the idea was coherent, and I managed to hold my peace. Both consciousnesses, in other words, were less affected in case B, and both more affected in cases A and C. It is perhaps not always so : the illusion might be coherent, even practical, and the rationai authority of the mind quite in abeyance. Would not that be lunacy ?

In case A I had an absolute knowledge that I was out of my mind, and that there was no meaning in my words ; these were the very facts that I was anxious to conceal ; and yet when I succumbed to the temptation of speaking, my face was convulsed with anger, and I wrung my watcher's wrist with cruelty. Here is action, unnatural and uncharacteristic action, flowing from an idea in which I had no belief, and which I had been concealing for hours as a plain mark of aberration. Is it not so with lunatics ?

I have called the one person myself and the other the other fellow. It was myself who spoke and acted ; the other fellow seemed to have no control of the body or the tongue ; he could only act through myself, on whom he brought to bear a heavy strain, resisted in one case, triumphant in the two others. Yet I am tempted to think that I know the other fellow ; I am tempted to think he is the dreamer described in my Chapter on Dreams to which you refer. Here at least is a dream belonging to the same period, but this time a pure dream, an illusion, I mean, that disappeared with the return of the sense of sight, not one that persevered during waking moments, and while I was able

222A] TO CHAPTER II 303

to speak and take my medicine. It occurred the day after case B and before case C.

Case D. In the afternoon there sprang up a storm of wind with monstrous clouds of dust ; my room looked on a steep hill of trees whose boughs were all blowing in the same direction ; the world seemed to pass by my windows like a mill-race. By this turmoil and movement I was confused, but not distressed, and surprised not to be distressed ; for even in good health a high wind has often a painful influence on my nerves. In the midst of this I dozed off asleep. I had just been reading Scott's ' Life of Dryden,' had been struck with the fact that Dryden had translated some of the Latin hymns, and had wondered that I had never remarked them in his works. As soon as I was asleep I dreamed a reason why the sound of the wind and the sight of the flying dust had not distressed me. There was no wind, it seemed, no dust ; it was only Dryden singing his translated hymns in one direction, and all those who had blamed and attacked him after the Revolution singing them in another. This point of the two directions is very singular and insane. In part it meant that Dryden was continuously flying past yet never passing my window in the direction of the wind and dust, and all his detractors similarly flying past yet not passing towards the other side. But it applied, besides this, both to the words and to the music in a manner wholly insusceptible of expression.

That was a dream; and yet how exactly it reproduces the method of my other fellow while I was awake. Here is an explanation for a state of mind or body sought, and found, in a tissue of rabid, complicated, and inexpressible folly. — Yours very sincerely, Robert Louis Stevenson.

222 A. A good example of the application of true scientific method to problems which doctors of the old school did not think worth their science is Dr. Janet's treatment of a singular problem which the mistakes of brutal ignorance turned in old times into a veritable scourge of our race. I speak of demoniacal possession, in which affliction Dr. Janet has shown himself a better than ecclesiastical exorcist.

I give here a typical case of pseudo-possession from Ne'vroses et Idees fixes (vol. i. pp. 377-389) : Achille, as Professor Janet calls him, was a timid and rather morbid young man, but he was married to a good wife, and nothing went specially wrong with him until his return from a business journey in 1890. He then became sombre and taciturn — sometimes even seemed unable to speak — then took to his bed and lay murmuring incomprehensible words, and at last said farewell to his wife and children, and stretched himself out motionless for a couple of days, while his family waited for his last breath.

" Suddenly one morning, after two days of apparent death, Achille sat up in bed with his eyes wide open, and burst into a terrible laugh. It was a convulsive laugh which shook all his limbs ; an exaggerated laugh which twisted his mouth; a lugubrious, satanic laugh which went on for more than two hours.

" From this moment everything was changed. Achille leapt from his bed and refused all attentions. To every question he answered, ' There's nothing to be done ! let's have some champagne ; it's the end of the

world ! ' Then he uttered piercing cries, * They are burning me — they are cutting me to pieces ! ' "

After an agitated sleep, Achilla woke up with the conviction that he was possessed with a devil. And in fact his mouth now uttered blasphemies, his limbs were contorted, and he repeatedly made imsuccessful efforts at suicide. Ultimately he was taken to the Salpetriere, and placed under Professor Janet, who recognised at once the classic signs of possession. The poor man kept protesting against the odious outrages on religion, which he attributed to a devil inside him, moving his tongue against his will. " Achille could say, like a celebrated victim of possession, Pere Surin, ' It is as though I had two souls ; one of which has been dispossessed of its body and the use of its organs, and is frantic at the sight of the other soul which has crept in.' "

It was by no means easy to get either at Achille or at his possessing devil. Attempts to hypnotise him failed, and any remonstrance was met with insult. But the wily psychologist was accustomed to such difficulties, and had resort to a plan too insidious for a common devil to suspect. He gently moved the hand of Achille in such a way as to suggest the act of writing, and having thus succeeded in starting automatic script, he got the devil thus to answer questions quietly put while the raving was going on as usual. " I will not believe in your power," said Professor Janet to the malignant intruder, " unless you give me a proof." "What proof?" "Raise the poor man's left arm without his knowing it." This was done — to the astonishment of poor Achille — and a series of suggestions followed, all of which the demon triumphantly and unsuspectingly carried out, to show his power. Then came the suggestion to which Professor Janet had been leading up. It was like getting the djinn into the bottle. " You cannot put Achille soundly to sleep in that arm-chair ! " " Yes, I can ! " No sooner said than done, and no sooner done than Achille was delivered from his tormentor — from his own tormenting self.

For there in that hypnotic sleep he was gently led on to tell all his story ; and such stories, when told to a skilled and kindly auditor, are apt to come to an end in the very act of being told.

Achille had been living in a day-dream ; it was a day-dream which had swollen to these nightmare proportions, and had, as it were, ousted his rational being ; and in the deeper self-knowledge which the somnambulic state brings with it the dream and the interpretation thereof became present to his bewildered mind.

The fact was that on that fateful journey when Achille's troubles began he had committed an act of unfaithfulness to his wife. A gloomy anxiety to conceal this action prompted him to an increasing taciturnity, and morbid fancies as to his health grew on him until at last his daydream led him to imagine himself as actually dead. " His two days' lethargy was but an episode, a chapter in the long dream."

223A] TO CHAPTER II 305

What then was the natural next stage of the dream's development? " He dreamt that, now that he was dead indeed, the devil rose from the abyss and came to take him. The poor man, as in his somnambulic state he retraced the series of his dreams, remembered the precise instant when this lamentable event took place. It was about 1 1 a.m. : a dog barked in the court at the moment, incommoded, no doubt, by the smell of brimstone ; flames filled the room ; numbers of little fiends scourged the unhappy man, or drove nails into his eyes, and through the wounds in his body Satan entered in to take possession of head and heart."

From this point the pseudo-possession may be said to have begun. The fixed idea developed itself into sensory and motor automatisms — visions of devils, uncontrollable utterances, automatic script — ascribed by the automatist to the possessing devil within.

And now came the moment when the veracity, the utility, of this new type of psychological analysis was to be submitted to yet another test. From the point of view of the ordinary physician Achille's condition was almost hopeless. Physical treatment had failed, and death from exhaustion and misery seemed near at hand. Nor could any appeal have been effective which did not go to the hidden root of the evil, which did not lighten the load of morbid remorse from which the whole series of troubles had developed. Fortunately for Achille, he was in the hands of an unsurpassed minister to minds thus diseased. Professor Janet adopted his usual tactics — what he terms the dissociation and the gradual substitution of ideas. The incidents of the miserable memory were modified, were explained away, were slowly dissolved from the brooding brain, and the hallucinatory image of the offended wife was presented to the sufferer at what novelists call the psychological moment, with pardon in her eyes. "Such stuff as dreams are made of!" — but even by such means was Achille restored to physical and moral health ; he leads now the life of normal man ; he no longer " walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain."

Compare with this the mediaeval case of " Sceur Jeanne" (832 B). Professor Flournoy's subject " Helene Smith " (834-842) is another instance of " pseudo-possession," though not by imaginary demons.

223 A. The following is a case of alternating consciousnesses apparently developed out of accesses of " sleep-waking." The account is taken from a paper by Dr. EUiotson on " Instances of Double States of Consciousness independent of Mesmerism" in the Zoist, vol. iv. p. 158, being quoted by him from the Edinburgh Philosophical Transactions of

Dr. Devan read to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, in February 1822, the history of a case observed by Dr. Dyce of Aberdeen, in a girl sixteen years old, which lasted from March 2nd to June nth, 1815. The first symptom was an uncommon propensity to fall asleep in the evenings. This was followed by the habit of talking in her sleep on these occasions. One evening she fell asleep in VOL. I. u

3o6 APPENDICES [223 B

this manner : imagining herself an Episcopal clergyman, she went through the ceremony of baptizing three children, and gave an appropriate prayer. Her mistress shook her by the shoulders, on which she awoke, and appeared unconscious of everything, except that she had fallen asleep, of which she showed herself ashamed. She sometimes dressed herself and the children while in this state . . . answered questions put to her in such a manner as to show that she understood the question. . . . One day, in this state, she sat at breakfast, with perfect correctness, with her eyes shut. She afterwards awoke with the child on her knees, and wondered how she got on her clothes. . . . She sang a hymn delightfully while in this state, and ... it appeared incomparably better done than she could accomplish when awake. . . . The circumstances which occurred during the paroxysm were completely forgotten by her when the paroxysms were over, but were perfectly remarked during subsequent paroxysms. . . . [One] Sunday she was taken to church by her mistress while the paroxysm was on her. She shed tears during the sermon, particularly during the account given of the execution of three young men at Edinburgh who had described, in their dying declarations, the dangerous steps with which their career of infamy and vice took its commencement. When she returned home she recovered in a quarter of an hour, was quite amazed at the questions put to her about the church sermon, and denied that she had been to any such place ; but next night on being taken ill she mentioned that she had been at church, repeated the words of the text, and in Dr. Dyce's hearing gave an accurate account of the tragical narrative of the three young men by which her feelings had been so powerfully affected.

223 B. I give next an early instance of the method of elucidation of the mental condition in the secondary state through suitable experiments in automatic action, — the method which — as we see in other sections of this chapter — has been so successfully developed in the hands of Dr. Janet and other psychologists.

Dr. Mesnet^ records the case of a soldier, F , who received a

gunshot wound in the head at Sedan, and was afterwards subject to periodical attacks, lasting for about a day in each month, of a kind of somnambulism, during which he hears, tastes, and smells nothing ; and hardly sees at all except when the sense of touch calls his attention to objects, which he can then, as it seems, see distinctly.

During these accesses his actions seem purely automatic, and are for the most part an exact repetition of his everyday mode of life at the hospital. But by tactile suggestion the memory can be made to go back to an earlier epoch.

Thus if a cane is put into his hand in a way which suggests a rifle, he goes through the movements, and utters the brief cries, of battle : " Henri ! " " There they are ! at least a score of them ! " " We must try and settle this beween us ! " &c.

Now let us see in what way the act of writing revivified past experience. I abridge Dr. Mesnet's account (p. i8 segq.) which contains several points

1 De r Automatisme de la Mimoire, &c. Par le Dr. Ernest Mesnet. Paris, 1874.

223 B] TO CHAPTER II 307

of interest. " He passed his hands over the table ; felt the handle of a drawer ; opened it and took out a pen, which at once excited in him the idea of writing. He felt in the drawer, and took out some sheets of paper and an ink-bottle. These he placed on the table, sat down, and began a letter addressed to his general, urging his own good conduct and courage, and asking his general to endeavour to procure for him the military medal.

" The faults of speUing, &c., in the letter were neither more nor less numerous than was habitual with the subject in his normal state. The facility with which he wrote, keeping to the true hues, showed that he saw what he was doing. To test this, we repeatedly placed a sheet of iron between his eyes and hand. He continued to write a few words illegibly, then ceased to write, without showing impatience. When the obstacle was removed he finished the imperfect Ime, and began another. The sense of sight was therefore needful to the written expression of the subject's thought.

" The ink in his inkstand was then replaced by water. He perceived the faintness of the letters traced, wiped his pen again and again, but never looked at the ink-bottle. His field of vision, it seemed, was awakened by touch alone, and was limited to objects with which he was actually in contact.

" He was writing on a sheet of paper which lay on a pile of about ten similar sheets. We quickly drew this top sheet away, and his pen continued to write on the second sheet. When he had written about ten words on the second sheet we snatched this also away, and he continued his phrase at exactly the same point on the third sheet. This process was repeated, and on the fifth sheet there was nothing but his signature at the bottom. Nevertheless, he read over and corrected his letter on this blank fifth sheet, scattering stops and corrections over the empty page, each of which corresponded to mistakes made on the co-ordinate points of the pages which had been snatched away from him."

On a later occasion (p. 23) pens were put in his way again; and as soon as he touched them he sat down and began a letter to a friend, this time making an appointment for the evening, after a concert at the cafe ol the Champs Elysees, at which (as he supposed) he had to sing. Some slight change in the surroundings had carried his automatic reminiscence back to this other phase of his past career.

Here, then, we have automatic writings appearing to proceed from the writer's known personality, but projected backwards to an earlier point of time. They may be compared with writings professing to emanate from a personality other than the writer's, but at the present moment of time. We shall find, I think, that this is not necessarily a deep-seated distinction \ rather that the automatic writing, while representing some dislocation or rearrangement — some " allotropic form," as I have elsewhere suggested — of the writer's personality, yet' may sometimes take its super-

ficial colour from some almost accidental circumstance, some suggestion round which the flow of more or less incoherent mentation crystallises into definite shape. The subject is discussed fully in Chapter VIII.

224 A. The following case of involuntary crime committed by a boy named Sorgel, in a state of secondary consciousness, is summarised from an account given in the paper by Dr. Elliotson, already referred to in 223 A {Zoist,vo\. iv. pp. 172-79), being quoted by him from Anselm Ritter von Feuerbach's collection of trials.

" Sorgel (says Dr. Elliotson) was a poor, innocent, industrious youth, subject first to violent epilepsy, and then to paroxysms of second consciousness, in which he had delusions and ungovernable criminal propensities, the whole of which he was ignorant of upon returning to his ordinary state of consciousness, though in his morbid state he remembered the occurrences of his natural state." On September 7th, 1824, in a state of post-epileptic consciousness, Sorgel murdered an old woodcutter in a forest, chopping ofi" his head and both his feet with one of his own axes. Returning from the forest, Sorgel told several people what he had done. He said that he had drunk a felon's blood, and that he was now quite well, as a felon's blood was supposed to be a cure for the falling sickness. He also said that a year ago some one had buried his blood on the hill ; that he had gone there and found the man who had done it and had killed him.

The next day Sorgel was examined by the criminal court, and repeated the same story ; he was taken to see the body, and recognised it without the slightest air of embarrassment or remorse. As an excuse for the murder, he repeatedly said that he killed the man in order to drink his blood and be cured by it.

This state of consciousness lasted a week. He then returned spontaneously to his natural state. On September 15 th the judges found him quiet : his conversation was coherent ; his appearance and manner totally changed. He did not remember anything about the murder, but supposed he must have committed it, since every one told him he had. Nor did he remember having confessed to the crime, or having been shown his victim's body. He admitted having heard that the blood of a felon was a cure for the falling sickness, but observed that the man he killed was no felon. Examined again, September 28th, the axe was laid before him : he did not know it. Nothing new could be elicited. Of the period between September 7th and 15th, he only knew that "his head was very confused, and that he dreamt all manner of nonsense." He did not remember the substance of his dreams ; only one or two circumstances remained with him, as that the judge had visited him in prison, and that some one had

Feuerbach was for ten years President of the Central Criminal Court of a province of Bavaria. It was chiefly owing to his exertions that torture was abolished in the criminal procedure of that state ; and he was the composer of a reformed code which was adopted in 1813, and formed the basis of reforms in other German States.

225 A] TO CHAPTER II 309

written at the table. He was acquitted of the crime, as not being responsible for his action at the time, and died a few months later in a lunatic asylum.

A somewhat similar case of the post-epileptic type was recorded by Elliotson in the Zoist (vol. i. pp. 340-49, and vol. viii. pp. 237—52) as having come under his own observation. The patient, a lad named Thomas Russen, having become blind, deaf, and dumb after an epileptic fit, was cured by " mesmeric " treatment. Three months later he had another seizure— apparently due to a remark casually overheard about deafness, dumbness, and blindness — and was again cured by " mesmerism," by Mr. H. S. Thompson.

Another case of a man whose secondary condition was characterised by violent criminal propensities was given in the Medical News (Philadelphia, U.S.A.), February 21st, 1891, in an article by G. R. Trowbridge, M.D., entitled " A Case of Epilepsy with Double Consciousness." This case is quoted in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 256.

225 A. A full account of the well-known cage of Ansel Bourne was first published in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vii. pp. 221-58, in a paper by Dr. Hodgson, entitled "A Case of Double Consciousness." I give extracts from this paper, as follows : —

The case which I am about to relate has many points of interest. The secondary condition has, so far as can be ascertained, occurred only once in the lifetime of the subject ; and the memory of it, entirely lost during waking hours, is easily, though incompletely, brought back by putting the patient into the hypnotic trance.

Ansel Bourne, at the time of his seizure, was an itinerant preacher sixty-one years old, and residing in the small town of Greene, in the State of Rhode Island. One morning, whilst apparently in his usual state of health, he disappeared, and in spite of the publicity which the newspapers gave to the fact, and the efforts of the police to find him, he remained undiscovered for a period of two months, at the end of which time he turned up at Norristown, Pennsylvania, where for the previous six weeks he had been keeping a small variety store under the name of A. J. Brown, appearing to his neighbours and customers as a normal person, but being, as it would seem, in a somnambulistic condition all the while. As Elder Bourne's life presents at least one other incident of great interest, I shall give a sketch of its entire course, as an introduction to my account of the episode which forms the main subject of this paper.

Ansel Bourne is of New England parentage, and was born in New York city, July 8th, 1826. His maternal grandfather "lost his mind " late in life ("about seventy"), but seems to have had no acute form of insanity. His father " became dissipated," so that Ansel's mother and he separated when Ansel was only seven years old, and the boy's early life was spent in poverty, with little schooling and much work, until at the age of fifteen he was set to learn the carpenter's trade at Olneyville, Rhode Island. From then to the age of thirty-one he worked at his trade at various places in that state. Being of a serious turn of mind, he read and studied a good deal in his leisure moments, and from having become a member of the Baptist Church, changed at last into

3IO APPENDICES [225 A

a convinced atheist, not of the disputatious and aggressive sort, but silent and stubborn, as he is wont to be in other matters which are exclusively " his own business." Meantime he had married, in 1854, and had children, and in 1857 was living at Westerly, Rhode Island, next door to Mr. Taylor, minister of the so-called " Christian " Church, for whom he had come to cherish a decided feeling of enmity. In relating the crisis of that year, I abridge the account given in a pamphlet which has had a wide circulation.

The following is a brief summary of the facts related in the pamphlet, which are given fully in Dr. Hodgson's paper : —

On August 6th, 1857, Ansel Bourne was brought home ill. Thinking himself recovered, he was working again in his garden on August 14th, the hottest day of the season ; in the middle of the day he experienced much pain in his head, but went on working at intervals. On August i6th he suddenly became unconscious, and this lasted for two days. The doctor who attended him put it down to a severe sunstroke. He recovered, but had several relapses.

On Wednesday, October 28th, he went out for a walk, feeling quite well. An unaccountable idea suddenly occurred to him that he ought to go to church; but he said to himself that he would rather be struck deaf and dumb for ever than go there. A few minutes later he felt dizzy, and sat down on a stone by the side of the road. Then, in the words of the pamphlet : " In an instant it seemed as though some powerful hand drew something down over his head, and then over his face, and finally over his whole body ; depriving him of his sight, his hearing, and his speech, and rendering him perfectly helpless. Yet he had as perfect power of thought as at any time in his life. His mind instantly went back to the conflict of his thoughts, some eight or ten minutes before. The terrible decision and choice, ' I would rather be struck deaf and dumb for ever, than go to the Christian Chapel,' came before him with awful significance. It seemed that God had truly taken him at his word, and given him what he had chosen." He was soon found and carried home in a waggon. He was perfectly sensible of everything that happened ; he could feel perfectly, but could not see, hear, or speak, so that he was thought by the doctor and his friends to be entirely unconscious. He remained firmly convinced that this was a judgment on him for his sins. About twenty-six hours after the seizure his sight was suddenly restored, and he was then able to communicate with his friends in writing. He could still neither hear nor speak, though he could use his tongue freely in other ways. On November nth, at his own desire, he was carried to the " Christian Chapel," and wrote a message on his slate to be read to the congregation, announcing his conversion.

On the following Sunday, November 15th, he went again to the chapel and wrote another message to the same effect to be read aloud. As a further sign to them of his state of mind, he wished to stand up before the congregation and

1 " Wonderful Works of God : a narrative of the wonderful facts in the case of Ansel Bourne, of West Shelby, Orleans Co., N.Y., who, in the midst of opposition to the Christian religion, was suddenly struck blind, dumb, and deaf ; and after eighteen days was suddenly and completely restored, in the presence of hundreds of persons, in the Christian Chapel at Westerley, on the 15th of November 1857. Written under his direction." (Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1S58, by Ansel Bourne, in the clerk's office of the District Court for the Southern District of the State of New York.)

225A] TO CHAPTER II 311

hold up his hands. In the general emotional excitement that followed the reading of his message, he stood up in the pulpit and lifted up his hand, and in an instant his hearing and speech were suddenly restored, and from that time onwards he has always had the complete use of his faculties.

The result of these experiences was to make him adopt the career of an itinerant preacher; but finding the hard work and incessant travelling too much for his health, he returned to his former trade of a carpenter. His second wife, whom he married in 18S2, disapproved of his absences from home in the course of his preaching, so that he confined his labours to the immediate vicinity. On this account he became somewhat troubled, thinking that he was not so active in religious work as he ought to be, and he was afterwards inclined to think that if he had been more active and therefore more contented with his work, his subsequent experiences would never have occurred.

At this point I resume Dr. Hodgson's narrative.

January 17th, 1887, he went from his home in Coventry, R.I., to Providence, in order to get money to pay for a farm which he had arranged to buy, leaving his horse at Greene Station, in a stable, expecting to return the same afternoon from the city. He drew out of bank $551, and paid several small bills, after which he went to his nephew's store, 121 Broad Street, and then started to go to his sister's house in Westminster Street. This was the last that was known of his doings at that time. He did not appear at his sister's house, and did not return to Greene, where his horse remained for about three weeks, and was finally taken away by Mrs. Bourne, [The police were communicated with, and the disappearance was announced in the local paper.]

Notwithstanding the publicity given to the fact of his disappearance, no tidings whatever were received of him till March 14th, eight weeks later. The account of the morning of March 14th, as given to us by Mr. Bourne in reply to our inquiries, agrees substantially with that given to Dr. Weir Mitchell (who has taken much interest in the case, and has kindly allowed us to use his notes in the preparation of this paper) a year ago by Mr. Bourne, and with that furnished to Dr. Weir Mitchell by Surgeon-General L. H. Read, who was summoned to examine Mr. Bourne on the morning of March 14th, soon after he regained his ordinary waking consciousness. The contemporary newspaper accounts which we have seen are also in substantial agreement with the results of our recent inquiries.

It appears that Ansel Bourne arrived at Norristown, Pa., about February 1st, 1887, i.e. two weeks after his disappearance from Providence, R.I. Under the name of A. J. Brown he rented a store-room at 252 East Main Street, from Mr. Pinkston Earle, and divided the room into two by means of curtains. The rear portion of the room he filled with furniture and used as a "general living" apartment, not only sleeping there, but preparing his own meals there also. The front portion of the room he stocked with notions, toys, confectionery, &c. These he purchased and paid for in Philadelphia, which he visited each week for the purpose of replenishing his stock. He fastened a sign to his window, reading. /. ^ri'w/z. The room which he rented was part of the house in which the Earle family were dwelling, but although they came in daily contact with " Mr. Brown," there was nothing in his manner or proceedings which suggested anything peculiar. He was quiet in his behaviour,

precise and regular in his habits, and paid his bills promptly. He was especially punctual in the closing of his store at 9 p.m. on ordinary week-days, and at ID P.M. on Saturday. He attended the Methodist church on Sunday, and on one occasion, at a religious meeting, he related an incident which he said he had witnessed on a steamboat years previously on the passage from Albany to New York, and his remarks were thought particularly relevant to the point under consideration. In short, none of the persons who had any dealings with him seem to have conceived any suspicion that he was in any unusual condition or labouring under any form of vagary.

On the morning of Monday, March 14th, about five o'clock, he heard, he says, an explosion like the report of a gun or pistol, and waking, he noticed that there was a ridge in his bed not like the bed he had been accustomed to sleep in. He noticed the electric light opposite his windows. He rose and pulled away the curtains and looked out on the street. He felt very weak, and thought that he had been drugged. His next sensation was that of fear, knowing that he was in a place where he had no business to be. He feared arrest as a burglar, or possibly injury. He says this is the only time in his life he ever feared a policeman.

The last thing he could remember before waking was seeing the Adams express waggons at the corner of Dorrance and Broad Streets, in Providence, on his way from the store of his nephew in Broad Street to his sister's residence in Westminster Street, on January 17th.

He waited to hear some one move, and for two hours he suffered great mental distress. Finally he tried the door, and finding it fastened on the inside, opened it. Hearing some one moving in another room, he rapped at the door. Mr. Earle opened it, and said, " Good-morning, Mr. Brown." Mr. B. : "WhereamI?" Mr. E. : " You're all right," Mr.B. : " I'm all wrong. My name isn't Brown. Where am I ? " Mr. E. : " Norristown." Mr. B. : " Where is that? " Mr. E. : " In Pennsylvania." Mr. B. : " What part of the country ? " Mr. E. : "About seventeen miles west of Philadelphia." Mr. B. : "What time in the month is it?" Mr. E. : "The 14th." Mr. B. : "Does time run backwards here? When I left home it was the 17th." Mr. E. : " 17th of what? " Mr. B.: "17th of January." Mr, E. : "It's the 14th of March."

Mr. Earle thought that " Mr. Brown " was out of his mind, and said that he would send for a doctor. He summoned Dr. Louis H. Read, to whom Mr. Bourne told the story of his doings in Rhode Island on the morning of January 17th, and said that he remembered nothing between the time of seeing the Adams express waggons on Dorrance Street on January 17th and waking up that morning, March 14th. " These persons," he said, " tell me I am in Norristown, Pennsylvania, and that I have been here for six weeks, and that I have lived with them all that time. I have no recollection of ever having seen one of them before this morning." He requested Dr, Read to telegraph to his nephew, Andrew Harris, then at 121 Broad Street, Providence, R.I. Dr. Read telegraphed, " Do you know Ansel Bourne ? Please answer." The reply came, " He is my uncle. Wire me where he is, and if well. Write particulars."

Later, Mr. Harris journeyed to Norristown, sold the goods in the store by auction, and settled up the business affairs of " Mr. Brown," who, as Mr. Bourne, returned with him to Rhode Island. Dr. Read adds, in his account of the case which he furnished to Dr. Weir Mitchell : —

" He said he was a preacher and farmer, and could not conceive why he

225A] TO CHAPTER II 313

sho.uld have engaged in a business he knew nothing about, and never had any desire to engage in it. When asked about his purchasing and paying for goods, and paying freight bills, he said he had no recollection of any such transactions.

" The family with whom he lived say that after the occurrence of that morning he was greatly changed. He was annoyed at any reference to his store, and never entered it afterwards. He became despondent, took no food, was unable to sleep, and became greatly prostrated both physically and mentally, and, from information recently received, those conditions are said to continue.

" There are a number of circumstances connected with and preceding the peculiar dual condition that have satisfied me that he is a sincere man, and not an impostor."

Early in 1890 Professor James heard of the case from one of our Associates, Mr. J. N. Arnold, who was the means of putting him into communication with Mr. Harris and Mr. Bourne, and for whose assistance in this and in other cases we are much indebted.

It will have been observed that no account was forthcoming of Mr. Bourne's doings between the time of his disappearance from Providence and his advent in Norristown two weeks later, and Professor James conceived the idea that if Mr. Bourne could be hypnotised, we might obtain from him while in the hypnotic trance a complete history of the whole incident, and at the same time, by post-hypnotic suggestion, prevent the recurrence of any such episode. The circumstances had naturally left a painful and perplexed impression upon Mr. Bourne ; he was anxious to have any light possible thrown upon his strange experience, and he readily acquiesced in the proposals made for hypnotisation.

Mr. Bourne is still living in Greene, R. I., and in accordance with our arrangement 1 he came to Boston on five consecutive days, May 27th to 31st, and submitted to our investigations, returning each day to Greene. Professor James and myself also visited Mr. Bourne and hypnotised him in his home at Greene, R.I., on June 7th, 1890.

On May 27th we questioned him in detail concerning his past life, and ascertained, inter alia, that he was " mesmerised " once, about forty years previously ; he thinks that he was not " transformed " into any one else by the "mesmerist," but was made to go through various laughable performances. At 1.50 P.M. Professor James began to hypnotise him — using passes — and he proved a sensitive subject, becoming entranced in the course of a few minutes. He was unable to open his eyes, to unclasp his hands, &c. No inquiry was made on this occasion concerning the "Brown" incident; we determined simply that he could be readily entranced and readily waked.

On the next day we endeavoured to obtain a detailed account from him, while in the trance state, of his doings during the eight weeks, January 17th to March 13th, 1887. The following statements were elicited from him after he had been enjoined to go into a deeper sleep and recall everything that happened on January 17th, 1887, and afterwards.

1 Mr. Bourne received his travelling expenses, and in addition the amount which he would have earned by his ordinary work as carpenter. He arrived in Boston about II A.M. and left at 3 p.m.

2 I here give a general summary of the various statements made by Mr. Bourne in trance at our different sittings. The more detailed account of these is given in Appendix A., Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 241.

He said that his name was Albert John Brown, that on January 17th, 1887, he went from Providence to Pawtucket in a horse-car, thence by train to Boston, and thence to New York, where he arrived at 9 p.m., and went to the Grand Union Hotel, registering as A. J. Brown. He left New York on the following morning and went to Newark, N. J., thence to Philadelphia, where he arrived in the evening, and stayed for three or four days in a hotel near the Depot. He then spent a week or so in a boarding-house in Filbert Street, about No. 1 1 15, near the Depot. It was kept by two ladies, but he could not remember their names. He thought of taking a store in a small town, and after looking round at several places, among them Germantown, chose Norristown, about twenty miles from Philadelphia, where he started a little business of five cent goods, confectionery, stationery, &c.

He stated that he was born in Newton, New Hampshire, July 8th, 1826 (he was born in New York city, July 8th, 1826), had passed through a great deal of trouble, losses of friends and property ; loss of his wife was one trouble — she died in 1881 ; three children living— but everything was confused prior to his finding himself in the horse-car on the way to Pawtucket ; he wanted to get away somewhere — he didn't know where — and have rest. He had six or seven hundred dollars with him when he went into the store. He lived very closely, boarded by himself, and did his own cooking. He went to church, and also to one prayer-meeting. At one of these meetings he spoke about a boy who had kneeled down and prayed in the midst of the passengers on a steamboat from Albany to New York.

He had heard of the singular experience of Ansel Bourne, but did not know whether he had ever met Ansel Bourne or not. He had been a professor of religion himself for many years, belonged to the " Christian " denomination, but back there everything was mixed up. He used to keep a store in Newton, New Hampshire, and was engaged in lumber and trading business ; had never previously dealt in the business which he took up at Norristown. He kept the Norristown store for six or eight weeks ; how he got away from there was all confused; since then it has been a blank. The last thing he remembered about the store was going to bed on Sunday night, March 13th, 1887. He went to the Methodist church in the morning, walked out in the afternoon, stayed in his room in the evening and read a book. He did not feel " anything out of the way." Went to bed at eight or nine o'clock, and remembered being in bed, but nothing further.

The statements made by Mr. Bourne in trance concerning his doings in Norristown agree with those made by his landlord there and other persons ; but since Mr. Bourne, in his normal state, has heard of these, they afforded no presumption in favour of the correctness of his statements concerning the first two weeks of his absence, those which immediately preceded his arrival in Norristown. The register-books of the hotels had been destroyed, so that we were unable to trace his travels in detail by finding the name " A. J. Brown" at the hotels which he described himself as having visited. We have, however, through the kindness of Mr. William Romaine Newbold, Lecturer on Psychology in the University of Pennsylvania, ascertained that he boarded for a week or more at "The Kellogg' House," Nos. 1605-7 Filbert Street, Philadelphia. Mr. Newbold's report (see Appendix B) seems to establish the general trustworthiness of Mr. Bourne's account (in trance) of his doings before going to Norristown, although his recollections may be inaccurate as regards such minor points as the number of the boarding-house, &c.

225A] TO CHAPTER II 315

Mr. Newbold thinks ''the reason that Bourne found his way into 'The Kellogg House ' is to be found in the fact that it is the first house in Filbert Street going west from the Pennsylvania Railroad Depot that displays a sign such as would be likely to attract a man of moderate means but staid habits. Indeed, I believe that it is the first house in that direction that has any sign at all, and the hotels directly in view upon coming out of the station all have the general appearance of the ordinary saloon. ' The Kellogg House ' is plain and respectable in appearance."

It may be worth mentioning here that the Grand Union Hotel, where Mr. Bourne in trance states that he stayed in New York, is just across the street from the station, and that, as we learn from Mrs. Bourne, he had stayed there on his honeymoon trip with her in September, 1882, and had previously been there with his sisters.

Additional corroboration of the accuracy of his trance-memory has been furnished by statements which Mr. Bourne (in trance) made concerning the money and other property in his possession at Norristown on the night of the 13th of March, 1887. We have satisfactory reasons for regarding these statements as correct, but the details of the circumstances connected with their verification involve matters which we do not feel justified in publishing. It is enough to say that the money which he took away on January 17th has been, in our opinion, accounted for, though, prior to our inquiries made in consequence of his trance-statements, there was an unexplained deficiency of about

It will be seen from the account which Mr. Newbold obtained of the conversations which " Mr. Brown " had with Mrs. Kellogg and the waiter, Mr. Jackson, that Mr. Bourne in his secondary state recollected certain portions of his past life, and especially the character of his own trade. His memory seems to have been considerably better during his eight weeks' spontaneous " ambulatory trance " than it is now in the artificially produced trance, and it may be worth while adding that it appeared to be, as regards some details of his entire life, more obscure in our latest hypnotisations than in our earliest. Many of our questions were repeated again and again, and we have not recorded all these in full detail, but the result suggests that the " Brown " state is much less coherent now than in its first inception in 1887, and that the personality of "Brown" is slowly disintegrating.

From the tests of the sense organs made upon Mr. Bourne, both waking and entranced, it would seem that the only difference between trance and waking as to sensibility is " a not very pronounced analgesia during the trance." (See Appendix C, Proceediiigs S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 255.)

We made attempts while Mr. Bourne was in his normal state to evoke the " Brown " personality by automatic writing, &c., and similarly, while he was entranced, we endeavoured to " tap " Mr. Bourne, but our efforts were unavailing. So, likewise, were the attempts, by prolonged passes, to produce a deeper trance in which the " Bourne " and " Brown " personalities might be unified. We could get no manifestation of either personality while the other was to the front, not even the fulfilment of post-hypnotic suggestions, and at the end of our experiments Brown and Bourne seemed as far as ever from realising that each belonged to the other.

Taken altogether, the case is not a little perplexing. In the Brown state, while forgetting some of the most important events of his past life, including his own name and his second marriage, and the place of his birth, he remem-

3i6 APPENDICES [225 A

bered the date of his birth correctly, the date of his first wife's death, his trade, &c., and curiously enough, on one occasion related an incident that occurred on a steamboat between Albany and New York, and which in his Bourne state he also well remembers. In trance, on May 28th, he recalled that he had children living, but on June 7th he had no recollection of them. It is difficult to see along what definite channels the temporary obhteration of Bourne's memories proceeded, with, as consequence, his transformation into Brown. We learn from Mr. Bourne that he never knew a Mr. A. J. Brown, and never Hved in Newton, N.H. Neither Mr. Bourne nor his wife could suggest any clue which might lead to any explanation of his adopting A. J. Brown as his name, or Newton, N.H., as his birthplace.^ But, indeed, we could hardly hope to trace the antecedents of his peculiar actions in detail. And it remains now to mention some additional facts which appear to throw some light upon both of his remarkable experiences, at least to the extent of suggesting that his case should be classified in its essentials as belonging to a well-recognised type.

In reply to our inquiries (see also Dr. Hinsdale's report, Appendix C, p. 254), he stated that he injured his eyesight as a young man by too much study, working at night to educate himself. His vision improved after his strange experience in 1857, and remained improved until 1887. He used to have headaches frequently, now seldom. They diminished as he began to lose his hair, which was very thick in 1857. (Of course the loss of his hair may not have been the cause of the diminution of his headaches.)

He stated also that he had been subject to the " blues " since childhood, but these had not been so frequent for a year and a half. When under them he did not want to see anybody or talk to anybody. These would sometimes last a few hours, sometimes a week. Occasionally, at such times, when walking, he would find himself two or three miles away from where he had last noticed himself as being.

Mrs. Bourne informed us that Mr. Bourne had had several "fainting fits " in the course of his life. She knew of four such occurrences. The first of these happened about July 1882, two months before her marriage, in church. Mr. Bourne had gone into the pulpit just before the service. He was not going to preach that day. It was very warm, and, as Mr. Bourne was coming out of the pulpit, he fell down unconscious. The second occurred about December 1882, when he fell off a lounge in the room. On the third occasion he was standing by the side of the carriage after harnessing the horses, when he suddenly fell unconscious. This was in February 1886. The last time occurred soon after his return from Norristown in 1887. He was sitting in a chair under a tree in the shade, and he slid out of the chair to the ground. On these occasions he remained unconscious for several hours, probably two hours at least and six hours at most.

These facts, taken in connection with his experiences in 1857 and 1887, suggest that Mr. Bourne has been subject to some form of epilepsy, and that during his eight weeks' absence in 1887 he was suffering from a post-epileptic partial loss of memory. I suppose that on January 17th, 1887, he may have had a mild epileptic seizure, and that " after the fit, he was a different person,

1 The postmaster at Newton, N.H., in reply to my inquiry, states that he has "asked some of the oldest inhabitants, and none of them ever knew of any A. J. Brown."

226A] TO CHAPTER II 317

although in the same skin ; or, as the popular phrase is, the post-epileptic patient ' was not himself.' "

226 A. This case was reported by Dr. Proust, Professor of Hygiene at the Hotel Dieu of Paris, before the Academic des Sciences Morales et Politiqiies, as an instance of what he called "ambulatory automatism in a hysterical man," or, as it might otherwise be phrased, of double personality with an active second self. I give a brief resume from the Revue de PHypnotisme, March 1890, p. 267.

Emile X., CBt. 33, is a barrister in Paris ; of good ability and education in classical studies, both as a boy and at the university. He was always nervous and over sensitive, with some hysterical attacks and functional derangements of motion and sensation, signs, in fact, of la grande hysteric. He could be hypnotised very easily, and whilst M. Luys had him in charge he could be put to sleep by a loud noise, or any sudden impression. One day in a cafe he saw himself in the looking-glass and at once fell into a hypnotic state which frightened his friends and led them to take him to an hospital, where he recovered without any difficulty. Sometimes his attacks were different; he would seem to his companions to undergo no loss of consciousness, but would lose the memory of all his past life during a few minutes or a few days, and in this condition of secondary consciousness would lead an active and apparently normal life on foot or on horseback, in his friends' houses or in shops. From such a state he woke suddenly, and was entirely without memory of what had happened to him in this secondary state. An instance of this occurred on September 23rd, 1888. He had had a quarrel with his stepfather in Paris, which had excited him considerably, and he fell into his second state. Three weeks later he woke after his usual fashion, without any memory whatever of what had been happening, and found himself at Villars-Saint-Marcelin, in the Haute Marne, more than 100 miles from Paris. He picked up from various sources a little knowledge of what he had done. He was told he had visited the priest of the village, who had thought him " odd" ; that he had also stayed with one of his uncles, who was a bishop in the Haute Marne, and at his house had broken various things, and torn up some MSS. of his uncle; that he had run into debt to the extent of ^20, and that he had been summoned before the Court at Vassy on some charge of petty theft, and in his absence judgment had been given against him. Again, on May nth, 1889, he was breakfasting at a restaurant in Paris, and two days later found himself at Troyes. Of what had happened during these two days he could remember nothing. He recollected that before losing his consciousness he had had a great-coat and a purse in it containing 226 fr.

These facts reminded Professor Proust of the well-known case of Felida X. [231 A], and of the more recent case of Louis V. [233 A], in which the memory of the secondary personality was recalled by hypnotism. Emile X. was easily hypnotised, and in that state could give a full account of what had happened to him in his states of secondary personality. In his first of these two attacks he described how he had lost some of the ;^2o at cards, and told the complete

1 " The Croonian Lectures on Evolution and Dissolution of the Nervous System" {1884), by J. Hughlings Jackson, M.D. See also, by the same author, " Ophthalmology and Diseases of the Nervous System" (1885), and " Temporary Mental Disorders after Epileptic Paroxysms," in The West Riding Lunatic Asylum Reports, vol. v.

3i8 APPENDICES [226 B

story of what he had done when staying with his uncle the bishop, and afterwards with the priest. In the same way as to his visit to Troyes, he told the details of his journey, of the friends he had dined with there, and where he had left his overcoat and purse. Notes were taken of his hypnotic account, and on the strength of these he wrote to the hotel-keeper at Troyes asking for his coat and purse, and describing where he had left them. Two days later, to his great astonishment, he received them both, and the 226 fr. in the purse. The Court at Vassy also, when his true condition had become known, reversed the judgment given against him.

226 B. The following case of " Automatisme Somnarabulique avec d^doublement de la personnalite " was reported by J. M. Boeteau, Interne des Asiles de la Seine, in the Annates Medico-psychologiques for January, 1892. It has some resemblance to the Ansel Bourne case, insomuch as the lost memory of an escapade is recovered under hypnotisation, but differs from it in the presence of marked hysteria. There seemed to be no suspicion of epilepsy. I abbreviate M. Boeteau's very full and clear account : —

Marie M., now aged twenty-two, has been subject to hysterical attacks since she was twelve years old. She became an out-patient at the Hopital Andral for these attacks ; and on April 24th, 1891, the house physician there advised her to enter the surgical ward at the Hotel-Dieu, as she would probably need an operation for an internal trouble. Greatly shocked by this news, she left the hospital at 10 a.m., and lost consciousness. When she recovered consciousness she found herself in quite another hospital — that of Ste. Anne — at 6 a.m. on April 27th. She had been found wandering in the streets of Paris, with haggard aspect, worn-out boots, and lacerated feet, in the evening of the day on which she left the HSpital Andral, under the shock of painful api^rehension. On returning to herself, she could recollect absolutely nothing of what had passed in the interval. While she was thus perplexed at her unexplained fatigue and footsoreness, and at the gap in her memory, M. Boeteau hj'pnotised her. Like Ansel Bourne, she passed with ease into the hypnotic state, although she had never before been hypnotised, and like him she at once remembered the events which filled at least the earlier part of the gap in her primary consciousness.

It appears that when she left the Hopital Andral she set out at first for the Hotel-Dieu, as recommended ; but that the horror of the impending operation upset her balance of mind, and suddenly transformed itself into a conviction that her baby, which had died at the Assistance Publique, was being kept from her by the nurse to whom she had entrusted it at Chaville. She had walked to Chaville, and then on to Versailles, whither the nurse had removed. She could learn nothing of her baby, and walked back to Paris. During this long walk, which wore out her boots and wounded her feet, she was insensible to fatigue or hunger. But on regaining Paris she began to be haunted by spectral surgeons, endeavouring to perform operations on her. She was found in an increasing state of maniacal excitation, and was taken to a police infirmary on the 25th and to the Hospital of Ste. Anne on the 26th April.

The patient's account of her adventures was found to be correct. The novel point here is the recovery by hypnotism of the memory of a state resembling a sudden access of mania. There seems to have been some fragmentary recollec-

228A] TO CHAPTER II 319

tion of the primary state during the secondary state, inasmuch as the poor woman recollected the fact that she had a baby, and the name and address of the nurse. But there was so httle of such memory that Dr. Boeteau feels justified in saying that "for a time she had had a real mental life differing from the normal life, with a recurrence to her normal life after three days ; thus presenting a clear example of alternating and divided personality, with complete separation between the two psychical existences."

One further point should be noted. If the patient is hypnotised and told to write the day of the month, she writes April 25th, 1891. This is one of the days during \^tx fugue — the day, as it appears, on which she sank from coherent into incoherent deHrium. It thus appears that some kind of secondary personality, identified with the earlier part of the _/7^_^z/^, still exists subliminally, although the patient has apparently quite recovered her mental balance.

228 A. The next case is taken from an article entitled " Duplex Personality: Report of a Case," by William F. Drewry, M.D., of Petersburg, Virginia, U.S.A., in the Medico- Legal Journal for June

The following case, which came under my observation within the past year, and the details of which were kindly given me by an eminent practitioner of Virginia, who was the family physician of the patient, typifies the peculiar phases of duplex personality and periodic extinction of memory, and is interesting from a psychologic, as well as clinical point of view. It is also of interest as regards forensic medicine.

Mr. K. was a man fifty years old, of splendid physique, in good health, in fairly comfortable circumstances, doing a mercantile business, sober, moral and industrious, of affable disposition, popular with a large circle of friends, member of several secret benevolent orders, and happy and contented in his domestic relations. He was born and reared in the State ; had resided and conducted

business in for twenty or more years, and deservedly bore the reputation

of being a correct, straightforward man in every particular. He had for years been one of the town officials.

One of his near relatives (an uncle, I think) at about the age of fifty, without any apparent reason whatever, went out West, leaving his wife and children, and was not heard of for many years. Finally he came back on a visit, and remained a short time with his family and old acquaintances. No explanation was given of his strange conduct. It was thought that he had some form of mental disease. I mention this case to show that Mr. K. might have inherited some neuropathic taint or eccentricity.

One day, while apparently in perfect health, without any premonitory symptoms of mental derangement, Mr. K. went to a northern city to purchase goods for his store. While there two days he transacted a great deal of business, met many old friends, and exhibited no indication of aberration of mind. Starting homeward, he registered as a passenger on a certain steamer ; feeling very tired he secured a state-room, to which at once he repaired, changed his linen, &c. When tickets were collected he was missing. He had suddenly and mysteriously disappeared. No one had seen him leave the boat, jump or fall overboard. An acquaintance, however, said that he was reasonably certain that he saw Mr. K. several hours after the boat had left in one of the depots in the city.

1 Dr. H. G. Leigh, Sr., of Petersburg, Va.

He was sitting down, hat pulled over his face, and seemed to be in a " deep study," so he was not disturbed. Mr. K.'s open valise and all his clothes, except those he wore, were found in his state-room. The room door was open, but the key had been taken away.

Some suspected he had been robbed and thrown overboard ; others thought he had (suddenly) become insane, or had had a fit and fallen into the sea ; the suicide theory was also indulged in, and the opinion was entertained by some that he had absconded. But what had become of him, why, when, and how he disappeared were mysteries. He had, unobserved, simply " stepped out into the great unknown." A vigorous search was made to find him, dead or alive, detectives were employed, the newspapers teemed with accounts of the strange and unaccountable going away of this well-known man, but no clue was to be had that would throw any light whatever upon his mysterious disappearance.

Finally search was abandoned, the theory that he was dead accepted, and the court appointed an administrator of his estate and a guardian for his children. His business was purchased by his son, and everything was moving along smoothly, when, six mo7iths after he was last heard of, he suddenly and unexpectedly appeared at the home of a relative in a distant southern city. He was brought home in a composed, but partially dazed condition, able to recognise but few of his friends. He was an entirely changed man — the physical and psychical metamorphoses were quite complete. He was hardly recognised by his friends. He had reduced in weight from 250 to 150 pounds, and was very feeble. He wore the same suit of clothes he had on at the time he disappeared, and had in his pocket the check and key which were given him on the boat.

He was at once put under treatment, and in four weeks he recovered his previous bodily and mental health, and has since conducted his same old business with his accustomed skill and industry. A day or two after his return home an abscess, deep down in the auditory canal, broke and discharged a large quantity of sanguino-purulent matter. Immediately thereupon improvement began and went on rapidly. This was a retnarkable fact, and is, I think, worthy of special note.

Hear Mr. K.'s own account of his strange case: " I was feeling very tired — thoroughly fatigued — after a very busy day in the city, so went to my stateroom immediately upon going aboard the boat and changed my clothes. Up to that time I was thoroughly conscious, but after that I recall nothing — all was oblivion — till six months later when ' I came suddenly to myself in a distant city in the South, where I knew no one. I found myself driving a fruit-waggon on the street. I was utterly astounded. Why I was there, how and when I got there, where I came from, what I had been doing, were puzzling questions to me. Upon inquiry I learned that I had been there, and at work, for some time. My life since I was in that state-room had been an absolute blank to me. I can give no account of myself during that period of time. I started at once for Virginia, but on the way I again lost consciousness, though only for a day or two. When further on my way home, I felt so utterly worn out, I stopped in a certain town and went to the house of a very near relative. From there I was taken home. I was in a half-dazed, vonfused condition, and remained so some days longer. I am now feeling well and all right."

This case bears many striking resemblances to others that have been from time to time reported, but there are two points of special interest. First, the inherited tendency to eccentricity, if not to insanity. His mysterious dis-

229A] TO CHAPTER II 321

appearance occurred at the same age at which his progenitor so strangely disappeared. Second, the abscess in the ear, the discharge of which was followed by a rapid return to normal mentality. Is it not probable that this abscess had some etiologic connection with the mental trouble, by producing a maladjustment of the cerebral functions, a disturbance of the circulation, an endarteritis, which would induce a condition of encephalic anaemia, or a suppression of suppuration, which would effect a hypersemia?

" Loss of memory," says Rosse, "following organic lesion, dynamic trouble, or any sudden metabolic disturbance of the brain, may recover rapidly." Certainly Mr. K. made a rapid, uninterrupted recovery after the abscess had discharged. His physician said that there was a perceptible change for the better just as soon as the ear was relieved.

229 A. The following case is taken from the paper by Dr. Elliotson referred to in 223 A and 224 A {Zoist,\o\. iv. p. 185), being quoted by him from the Northern Journal of Medicine for June 1845. The case was there reported by Dr. David Skae.

The patient was an unmarried man, in the prime of life, connected "with the legal profession, regular and temperate in his habits. His complaint began with the usual symptoms of dyspepsia, passing into hypochondria and ultimately into a state between hypochondria and mental alienation. The dyspeptic symptoms had become a subject of complaint and solicitude to the patient about ten or twelve years earlier. There generally succeeded a train of morbid feelings and finally of illusions founded upon them, the sensations felt being imagined to be sufferings of a mysterious and unparalleled kind. Feelings of gloom and despondency were at the same time developed ; the most trifling errors were magnified into unpardonable crimes. He began a system of reading the Bible with great zeal and rapidity ; by quickly scanning the pages and turning over the leaves, he grew to believe that he read through the whole Bible once and all the metrical psalms once or twice daily. He sat up most of the night and lay in bed all day, surrounded with Bibles and Psalm-books. He also developed suicidal tendencies, but these were restrained by his natural timidity and conscientiousness.

Dr. Skae writes : —

From an early period in the history of this case it was observed that the symptoms displayed an aggravation every alternate day. This gradually became more and more marked ; and for the last eighteen months the symptoms described have become distinctly periodic. On each alternate day the patient is affected in the manner just described and will neither eat, sleep, nor walk, but continues incessantly turning over the leaves of a Bible, and complaining piteously of his misery. On the intermediate days he is, comparatively speaking, quite well, enters into the domestic duties of his family, eats heartily, walks out, transacts business, assures every one he is quite well, and appears to entertain no apprehension of a return of his complaints. What is chiefly remarkable ... is the sort of double existence which the individual appears to have. On those days on which he is affected with his malady, he VOL. I. X

appears to have no remembrance whatever of the previous or of any former day on which he was comparatively well, nor of any of the engagements of those days ; he cannot tell whether he was out, nor what he did, nor whom he saw, nor any transaction in which he was occupied. Neither does he anticipate any amendment on the succeeding day. . . , On the intermediate days . . . he distinctly remembers the transactions of previous days on which he was well, but appears to have little or no recollection of the occurrences of the days on which he was ill. He appears in short to have a . . . sort of two-fold existence, one half of which he spends in the rational enjoyment of life and discharge of its duties, and the other in a state of hopeless hypochondriacism, amounting almost to complete mental aberration.

230 A. We next come to cases of factitious secondary personalities, developed apparently from self-suggestions in the hypnotic state. I give first the classic case of Professor Pierre Janet's patient, Mme. B. (or Leonie), the subject of the experiments in telepathic hypnotisation described in 568 A. The summary here given is founded on a paper by Professor Janet, entitled " Les Actes Inconscients dans le Somnambulisme," in the Revue Philosophique, March i888, with comments of my own. The case is also constantly referred to in Professor Janet's D Automatisme Psychologiqtie (1889).

I may begin with a trivial incident, containing nothing new to students of hypnotism, but well illustrating the concurrent action of the supraliminal and the hypnotic personality — the hidden criticism which the subliminal self seems to be ever exercising upon the words and actions which our supraliminal selves fondly suppose to be the full expression of what we are.

In these researches Mme. 13. in her everyday condition is known by the name of Leonie. In the hypnotic trance she has chosen for herself the name of Ldontine, which thus represents her secondary personahty. Behind these two, this triple personality is completed by a mysterious Ldonore, who may for the present be taken as non-existent. A post-hypnotic suggestion was given to Leontine, that is to say, Ldonie was hypnotised and straightway became Ldontine, and Ldontine was told by Professor Janet that after the trance was over, and Ldonie had resumed her ordinary life, she, Leontine, was to take o£E her apron — the joint apron of Ldonie and Ldontine — and then to tie it on again. The trance was stopped, Ldonie was awakened, and conducted Professor Janet to the door, talking with her usual respectful gravity on ordinary topics. Meantime her hands — the joint hands of Ldonie and Leontine — untied her apron, the joint apron, and took it off. Professor Janet called Ldonie's attention to the loosened apron. "Why, my apron is coming off!" Ldonie exclaimed, and with full consciousness and intention she tied it on again. She then continued to talk, and for her — for Ldonie — the incident was over. The apron, she supposed, had somehow come untied, and she had retied it. This, however, was not enough for Ldontine. At L^ontine's prompting the joint hands again began thei*" work, and the apron was taken off again and again

1 In this work and in most of the later references to the case by other writers, the three stages of personality are designated : I.eonie i, Leonie z, Leonie 3. I use here the corresponding nomenclature of Dr. Janet's earlier report — Leonie, Leontine, and Leonore.

230 AJ TO CHAPTER II 323

replaced, this time without Ldonie's attention having been directed to the matter at all.

Next day Professor Janet hypnotised Leonie again, and presently Ldontine, as usual, assumed control of the joint personality. " Well," she said, " I did what you told me yesterday ! How stupid the other one looked " — Ldontine always calls Ldonie " the other one " — " while I took her apron o£E ! Why did you tell her that her apron was falling off? I was obliged to begin the job over again."

This trifling incident well illustrates the important point which M. Janet in France and Gurney in England have largely helped to establish, namely, the persistence of the hypnotic self, as a remembering and reasoning entity, during the reign of the ordinary self.

Thus far we have dealt with a secondary personality summoned into being, so to say, by our own experiments, and taking its orders entirely from us. It seems, however, that, when once set up, this new personality can occasionally assume the initiative, and can say what it wants to say without any prompting. This is curiously illustrated by what may be termed a conjoint epistle addressed to Professor Janet by Mme. B., and her secondary personality, Leontine. " She had left Havre more than two months when I received from her a very curious letter. On the first page was a short note, written in a serious and respectful style. She was unwell, she said, worse on some days than on others, and she signed her true name, Mme. B. But over the page began another letter in a quite different style, and which I may quote as a curiosity, ' My dear good sir, I must tell you that B. really, really makes me suffer very much ; she cannot sleep, she spits blood, she hurts me ; I am going to demolish her, she bores me, I am ill also, this is from your devoted Leontine.' When Mme. B. returned to Havre I naturally questioned her about this singular missive. She remembered the first letter very distinctly, . . . but had not the slightest recollection of the second. ... I at first thought that there must have been an attack of spontaneous somnambulism between the moment when she finished the first letter and the moment when she closed the envelope. . . . But afterwards these unconscious, spontaneous letters became common, and I was better able to study their mode of production. I was fortunately able to watch Mme. B. on one occasion while she went through this curious performance. She was seated at a table, and held in her left hand the piece of knitting at which she had been working. Her face was calm, her eyes looked into space with a certain fixity, but she was not cataleptic, for she was humming a rustic air ; her right hand wrote quickly, and, as it were, surreptitiously. I removed the paper without her noticing me, and then spoke to her; she turned round, wide awake, but surprised to see me, for in her state of distraction she had not noticed my approach. Of the letter which she was writing she knew nothing whatever."

Ldontine's independent action is not entirely confined to writing letters. She observed (apparently) that when her primary self, Ldonie, discovered these letters, she (Ldonie) tore them up. So Ldontine hit on the plan of placing them in a photographic album into which Leonie could not look without falling into catalepsy (on account of an association of ideas with Dr. Gibert, whose portrait had been in the album). In order to accomplish an act like this Ldontine has to wait for a moment when Ldonie is distracted, or, as we say, absent-minded. If she can catch her in this state Ldontine can direct Leonie's

walks, for instance, or make her start on a railway journey without luggage, in order to get to Havre as quickly as possible.

It will be observed that Leontine has now arrived at a point midway between the vciQve stages — which cannot be called personalities — through which Gurney's hypnotic subjects could be led backwards and forwards at pleasure (see 523 A), and, on the other hand, the fully-developed alternating personalities of such a case as Fdlida X. (see 231 A). If Leontine were habitually encouraged, if a large part of Mme. B.'s life were passed in that hypnotic stage in which Leontine holds unchecked dominion, we must suppose that Ldontine would acquire more and more power of intervening in Mme. B.'s waking state — her Leonie state — also ; until perhaps the relapses from Leontine into Ldonie, — from the secondary into the primary personality, — might become as brief and rare as they have become in the often-cited case of Fdida X. And thus the whole personage might undergo profound alteration by gradual steps leading on from what was at first a mere momentarj' experiment.

There are, however, even now striking differences between the characters of Ldonie and Leontine.

" This poor peasant," says Professor Janet, " is in her normal state a serious and somewhat melancholy woman, calm and slow, very gentle and extremely timid. No one would suspect the existence of the personage whom she includes within her. Hardly is she entranced when she is metamorphosed : her face is no longer the same ; her eyes indeed remain closed, but the acuteness of her other senses compensates for the absence of sight. She becomes gay, noisy, and restless to an insupportable degree ; she continues good-natured, but she has acquired a singular tendency to irony and bitter jests. ... In this state she does not recognise her identity with her waking self. ' That good woman is not I,' she says, 'she is too stupid!'"

Besides these differences of character, Leontine is in another way also a remarkable hypnotic personality. Mme. B. has been so often hypnotised, and during so many years (for she was hypnotised by other physicians as long ago as i860), that Ldontine has by this time acquired a very considerable stock of memories which Mme. B. does not share. Leontine, therefore, counts, as properly belonging to her own history and not to Mme. B.'s, all the events which have taken place while Mme. B.'s normal self was hypnotised into unconsciousness. It was not always easy at first to understand this partition of past experiences.

" Mme. B., in the normal state," says Professor Janet, " has a husband and children. Leontine, speaking in the somnambulic trance, attributes the husband to 'the other' (Mme. B.), but attributes the children to herself. ... At last I learnt that her former mesmerisers, as bold in their practice as certain hypnotisers of to-day, had induced somnambulism at the time of her accouchemettts j Leontine, therefore, was quite right in attributing the children to herself ; the rule of partition was unbroken, and the somnambulism was characterised by a duplication of the subject's existence." There surely could hardly be a more striking illustration of the remark made (^Proceedings, vol. iv. p. 225) that " when once a second mnemonic chain is woven, the emergence of a second personality is only a matter of degree."

We now come to consider the third personality, L^onore. Although Ldonie's unconscious acts are sometimes (not always) coincident with L^ontine's conscious ones, Ldontine's unconscious acts are never included in Ldonie's

230A] TO CHAPTER II 325

memory, any more than in Ldontine's own. They belong to some other, to some profounder manifestation of personaHty, to which M. Janet has given the name of Ldonore. And observe that just as Ldontine can sometimes by her own motion and without suggestion write a letter during Ldonie's waking state and give advice which Leonie might do well to follow, so also Ldonore can occasionally intervene of her own motion during L^ontine's dominance and give advice which L^ontine might with advantage obey.

"The spontaneous acts of the unconscious self," says M. Janet, here meaning by Pinconscient the entity to which he has given the name of Leonore, " may also assume a very reasonable form, a form which, were it better understood, might perhaps serve to explain certain cases of insanity. Mme. B., during her somnambulism {i.e. L^ontine), had had a sort of hysterical crisis; she was restless and noisy, and I could not calm her. Suddenly she stopped and said to me with terror, 'Oh, who is talking to me like that? it frightens me.' ' No one is talking to you.' ' Yes ! there on the left ! ' And she got up and tried to open a wardrobe on her left hand, to see if some one was hidden there. 'What is it that you hear?' I asked. ' I hear on the left a voice which repeats, "Enough! enough! be quiet; you are a nuisance."' Assuredly the voice which thus spoke was a reasonable one, for Leontine v/as insupportable; but I had suggested nothing of the kind, and had had no idea of inspiring a hallucination of hearing. Another day Ldontine was quite calm, but obstinately refused to answer a question which I asked. Again she heard with terror the same voice to her left, saying, ' Come, be sensible, you must answer.' Thus the unconscious sometimes gave her excellent advice."

And in effect, so soon as Leonore, in her turn, was summoned into communication, she accepted the responsibility of this counsel. " What was it that happened," asked M. Janet, "when Leontine was so frightened?" "Oh, nothing; it was I who told her to keep quiet; I saw that she was annoying you; I don't know why she was so frightened."

Note the significance of this incident. Here we have got at the root of a hallucination. We have not merely inferential but direct evidence that the imaginary voice which terrified Leontine proceeded from a profounder stratum of consciousness in the same individual.

