"In the middle of an experiment I put a drop of water on her arm, suggesting to her that it was a drop of burning sealing-wax, and that it would produce a blister, which would, however, be healed after the third day. During the progress of the experiment I accidentally touched the water, making it spread on her skin, whereupon I hastened to wipe it away. The blister, which appeared the next day, extended as far as the water had run, just as if it had been a corroding acid, and the wound healed on the night of the third day."

Somewhat similar is a case recorded by Dr. J. Rybalkin in the Revue de rHypnofisme, June 1890 (p. 361), in which a post-hypnotic suggestion to the subject to burn his arm at a stove — really unlighted — produced blisters as of a burn.

Haemorrhage and bleeding stigmata were several times produced in the famous subject, Louis Vive (whose life-history is given in 233 A), by verbal suggestion alone.

Professor Beaunis (^Recherches Expe'rwientales, &c., Paris, 1886, p. 29) produced redness and cutaneous congestion in his subject, M"^- A. E., by suggestion, and the experiment was repeated on the same subject by the present writer and Edmund Gurney in September 1885 (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 167).

It appears that there is at present at the Salpetriere a stigmatisee, the development of whose stigmata has been watched by Dr. Janet under copper shields with glass windows inserted in them (^Revue de PHypnotisnie, December 1900, p. 190).

543 F. The following is an abstract of Dr. Levillain's account of an experiment performed by Professor Charcot before a large class at the Salpetriere 3 ; —

1 From "Experiments in Clairvoyance," by Dr. Alfred Backman, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 204.

2 See Drs. Bourru and Burot, Comptes Rendus de la Societe de Biologie, July 12th, 1885; and Dr. Mabille, Progres Medical, August 29th, 1885.

Revue de r Hypnotistne, June 1890 (p. 353), Progres Medical, October i ith and i8th, VOL. I. 2 I

Some few hysterical patients, it appears, suffer from a swelling with local cyanosis and low surface temperature, styled by Professor Charcot "blue oedema." Professor Charcot, indeed, claims to have been the first to describe, in June 1889, this exceedingly rare hysterical abnormality. It then occurred to him to try whether he could produce the condition by hypnotic suggestion. "On April 26th, 1890, a hysterical woman was deeply hypnotised, and it was suggested to her that her right hand and wrist would swell and become cyanosed. After she was woke this suggestion gradually realised itself, and in four days the right hand was in the condition of that of the patients who had had spontaneous attacks. There was a smooth surface, hardly any pitting on pressure, but much dull-blue mottled swelling (which had obliged her to discontinue wearing her rings) and anesthesia. A bright red patch was produced by touch. . . . M. Charcot re-hypnotised the patient, and assured her that her hand was quite natural again, helping his suggestion with a little massage. After a quarter of an hour the anaesthesia, venous colour, and swelling were gone."

543 G. A case vi^as described by Professor Artigalas in the Revue de rHyp7iotis7ne, February 1892 (p. 251), of a hysterical hospital patient with a tendency to apparently causeless hemorrhage, which appeared first in the ear and afterwards as tears of blood in the eye, which was quite healthy. Hypnotic suggestion failed at first to cure this symptom, but caused it to occur only at stated times. Next it was suggested that instead of the ocular haemorrhage the patient should bleed at the palm of the left hand ; this occurred, the skin, however, remaining intact, and the blood appearing to ooze through it like perspiration. After further hypnotic suggestion these symptoms entirely ceased.

543 H. Dr. von Schrenck-Notzing (in the Zeitschrift fiir Hypnotismus , Band iv., Heft. 4, p. 209), criticises the recorded experiments in blistering by suggestion on the ground that in some cases the patients may have had specially sensitive skins, and that in other cases the supervision exercised over them was inadequate. He describes three test experiments carried out by several doctors on the maid-servant of one of them (in October 1895 and January 1896), he himself taking part on the last two occasions. On the first occasion, blistering was produced on the left arm, as suggested, within twenty-four hours. The arm had been carefully bandaged, and the bandage appeared not to have been moved. Next time the arm was enclosed in a shield made of three thin boards, and completely bandaged, and the patient was watched continuously. A rudimentary blister appeared, but not in the place suggested, and where she might have caused it by rubbing, and there was some evidence that she had tried to scratch her arm with a hairpin. Once more the arm was enclosed in plaster of Paris and the patient was watched continuously, and no blisters were formed.

1890, and see Practitioner, January 1S91 (p. 50). It would be well to lie able to state explicitly in experiments of this class that theconsent of the subject had been previously obtained.

546 A] TO CHAPTER V 499

These results seem to confirm what had previously been pointed out by other writers, — that the subject may deliberately try to produce stigmata on herself in response to the hypnotic suggestion. But it must be noticed that in this case the experimenters deliberately suggested that she should feel the irritation and pain that would accompany an actual burn, as well as that blisters should be formed. She complained much of the pain, and may have tried to rub her arm merely to relieve it,

546 A. The following experiments on the re\a.tion of poimfs de repere to negative hallucinations were tried by Mrs. H. Sidgwick in the course of her experiments on thought-transference quoted below (573 A). P. was the subject, and was hypnotised, as usual, by Mr. G. A. Smith. The account is written by Miss Johnson, who was present, and is based on her notes made at the time, March 25th, 1890 : —

P. being hypnotised, eight plain cards marked with the numbers 2-9 were placed on a chair by his side, and he was told that those marked with odd numbers would be invisible. On being then asked how many cards he saw, he said " six." When the cards were held so as to hide the numbers, and he was made- to count them by feeling their corners, his counting varied, but once came to eight. It appeared, therefore, that the failure of the suggestion of invisibility depended, partially at least, on the hiding of the numbers, i.e. of the points de repere with whicli the invisibility was associated.

Mr. Smith then took the card with the number 5 marked on it ; when this was turned with the mark towards P. he could not see it, but when the other side was turned towards him he could. He was much puzzled at seeing the card disappear and reappear several times in Mr. Smith's hand by a slight twist of his fingers, but concluded that it was done by sleight-of-hand, that Mr. Smith somehow got it up his sleeve, or otherwise concealed it. He was then made to take the card into his own hand and turn it backwards and forwards himself, and was very much astonished at its continuing — as he did so — to disappear and reappear when no one but himself was touching it. He asked to be allowed to keep it as an entertaining puzzle to show off to his friends, and, on leave being given, pocketed it. Soon after he took it out again, and the invisible side being uppermost, saw nothing and dropped it. It dropped with the visible side upwards, so he found it again, and again made it appear and disappear.

A similar experiment was tried with the Knave of Hearts, and this was at first invisible on both sides, but soon he was able to see the back side, though not the front.

He then took the card marked 5 out of his pocket again, and found it still invisible on the marked side, though he had been twice awakened and rehypnotised since looking at it. This, however, only held as long as the mark was uncovered, and soon the effect wore off altogether, and both sides became equally visible to him.

A good deal of variety was observed in the behaviour of different subjects with regard to negative hallucinations ; Miss B., for instance, did not appear to make use oi points de repere in the way that P. did ; a card made invisible to her was equally invisible on both sides, and she exhibited no sort of interest or alarm in the mysterious disappearances which so strongly excited P.'s curiosity and sometimes caused him alarm.

549 A. In the so-called " transposition of the senses" it is claimed that stimuli which normally affect only one particular sense-organ affect some other part of the body ; e.g. when letters are said to be read by the skin the part of the skin concerned is supposed to be stimulated by the light rays.

Pet^tin, a famous doctor of Lyons, first gave currency to this notion in his Electricit'e Atiimale, Paris, 1808. Thus' the sense of hearing was alleged to be transposed sometimes to the pit of the stomach (p. 7), and sometimes to the tips of the fingers or the toes (p. 10) ; the sense of taste to the same regions (p. 25) ; and the sense of sight to the stomach (p. 45). These phenomena were observed in several different subjects.

The most obvious explanation of them is that the sensations received through one organ were referred to some other part of the body arbitrarily associated with them through some chance suggestion of the subject's own or of the operator's. Thus Fahnestock (^Statuvolism, p. 174), in criticising Durand's account of a patient whose five senses were transposed to the pit of the stomach, attributes it " to the manner in which the doctor proceeded. . . . He succeeded in drawing the patient's attention to her stomach. . . . She could have answered his questions quite as well had he applied his lips to any other part of her body ; ... for I have seen transposition effected at the will of the subject in many cases of artificial somnambulism by simply requesting them to throw their minds to the stomach or any other part of the body." Similarly in the case of a hysterical patient reported by Dr. Niccolo Cervello,^ it was significant that immediately after the doctor had spoken in her hearing of a case he had recently witnessed of " transposition of the senses " to the hands and feet, the patient proceeded to exhibit the same phenomenon.

In the case of hearing, it is clearly impossible to prove transposition, since no sound made near any part of the body can be out of ear-shot. In the cases of sight and taste, since the early mesmerists were unaware of the extreme acuteness of hypnotised subjects in picking up hints, it must remain doubtful whether sufficient precautions were taken to guard against their discovering the nature of the objects presented to them by the ordinary use of the senses. Even if this was guarded against, they might have acquired their knowledge of the objects by thought-transference from the operators, who knew what they were.

See the works of P^t^tin, Durand, Foissac, and Despine, especially Observations de Me'decine Pratique, pp. 45, 62, and Etude Scientifique sur Somnanibulisme, p. 167. One of Despine's patients apparently read through the sole of her foot, and another by the tips of her fingers.

The phenomenon called by De Rochas " exteriorisation of sensibility," is an extravagant version of the theory of transposition of the senses, the sense being supposed to be transferred to some object outside

1 Storia di un Caso cTIsterismo cott Sos^nazione Spontanea, Palermo, 1853. A summary of this case was given in th& /otcrnal S.P.R., for December 1900 (vol. ix. p. 333).

549 B]

the organism, such as a glass of water or the shadow of the hypnotised person ; any stimulus applied to these objects is then felt by the person, who becomes anaesthetic meanwhile. These experiments were repeated and extended by Dr. Joire of Lille. Since the accounts show that suggestion was freely exercised, it is unnecessary to criticise them in detail.

549 B. Perhaps the best evidence for transposition of the senses is to be found in some experiments made by Professor Fontan of Toulon, and described in his paper on Hystero-epilepsie Masculine : Suggestion, Inhibition, Ti'ansposition des Se?is, in the Revue Philosophique, August 1887. A full account of this is given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 263-268 ; but I have space here for a short extract only.

The subject, B., is a sailor, aged twenty-two, apparently robust, but suffering from hysteria, with attacks of catalepsy — the result, apparently, of a sojourn in Madagascar. When he came under Dr. Fontan's care his left side was wholly devoid of feeling, and the sense of smell was absent on that side ; sight and hearing diminished ; taste normal. A hysterogenous zone on the right side remained unaffected by any treatment. Hypnotic suggestion suspended the anaesthesia for a few hours at a time, but the magnet, and the magnet only, removed it permanently, and practically cured the patient.

[Transpositions of hearing, taste and smell are next described.]

Transposition of sight is, of course, the most bewildering of these supernormalities. We seem here to be overriding the lack not only of physiological but of physical adaptation, dispensing not only with the specially percipient retina, but with the letts, indispensable for the mere purpose of refracting the incident rays, so that they may meet in a focus and give a distinct image. Dr. Fontan, indeed, says that he would not have thought of trying these visual experiments at all had it not been for the fumbling of B.'s fingers on the printed letters, as already described. It was suggested to the subject that he could only see with his fingers, and the psychical blindness was reinforced by placing a screen close to the subject's face, so that he could not see his own hands, nor the objects offered, nor the faces or gestures of the bystanders.

Printed letters were first tried ; and the subject, who could scarcely read in his normal state, deciphered a few of these with difficulty. A number of skeins of coloured wool, which he had never seen, were then placed before him, and he was told to choose the red ones. He felt the wools, rejected unhesitatingly the colours not asked for, and arranged the red in a series. He did this also with the green and with the blue wools. The wools were again mixed, and he was told to put the red ones on the right, the green on the left. But he was now exhausted, and recognised nothing.

The same experiments were repeated next day with fresh specimens of wool. And next the room was completely darkened, B.'s hand was placed in a box containing various patterns of wool, which he had never either seen or touched, and he was told to choose the blue ones. " He seized them," says Dr. Fontan, in a letter rather more detailed than the printed account, "with such rapidity, such force, tossing aside all those which he did not want, that we supposed that the experiment had failed. Shut up in a dark room, where we could not see each other, we did not know what was going on, and fearing some access of frenzy, I precipitated myself on the subject and hypnotised him strongly, by pressing the globes of his eyes. He had had time enough during

this scene, which did not last five seconds, to choose the wools, and to hide them in his bosom. At no other time did he show such eagerness for the suggested colour." He had, in fact, selected four blue skeins, which he clutched so closely that he had to be altogether inhibited before they could be taken from him.

The next experiment was perhaps the best of all. The wools were placed on a table under a strotig sheet of glass. B. (psychically blinded and with the screen interposed) placed his hand on the glass, and was ordered to indicate the red wool. He resisted for a time, but " ended by consenting to search for the red wools, whose position he indicated by a tap on the glass, which left no room for doubt." He repeated this process several times with the green, the blue, and the yellow wools, and always with complete success.

Once more. Five photographs, of which one only was of a child, were placed on the table, and he was told to find the child's photograph. " He felt the faces, turned them with head upwards, felt over the child's figure carefully, and gave the photograph to me correctly."

551 A. The following examples of post-hypnotic suggestions involving calculations are quoted from Gurney's paper, " Peculiarities of certain Post- Hypnotic States," in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iv. pp. 268-323 (1887). The paper treats generally of the mental state of the subject, as exhibited especially by means of automatic writing, while carrying out suggestions. Speaking of commands to be executed at a certain future time, Gurney says (p. 287) : —

A distinction must first be made between cases where a date is named — especially if the date be a marked one, such as January ist, or the anniversary of the day of the command — and cases where simply a le^igth of time is named, not immediately suggestive of a particular date, as in the direction to do such and such a thing "on the sixty-ninth day from this." In the former case the impression of the date might be immediately registered in the brain, in association with that of the order, and the mere arrival of the date might thus sufiice to revive the order. But how is a length of time to be so registered.-^ Its further end, till reckoned out by the aid of the calendar, is perfectly indefinite ; and there is nothing in the mere arrival of the day calculated to revive the terms of the order — it carries no more sixty-ninthness about it than any other day. . . . Though " a day " may be a sufficiently familiar and definite unit to present a concrete character, it does not follow that this is the case with " sixtynine days." And the organic conditions [suggested by Professor Beaunis^ as the means used for making the calculation], which are just what the measurement of established physiological periods ipso facto has, are just what the measurement of periods suddenly and arbitrarily fixed by human volition has not. The vital processes will no more work out such a measurement as this than a schoolboy's digestion will work out a proposition of Euclid. However carried through, it is at least not a function of animal life. It issues in a perfectly needless act, not in an inevitable bodily state ; and it depends, not on

It is unfortunate that in some of the best known cases of commands <J lotigtte icheance, such dates have been selected ; but the proof of the phenomenon does not depend on these cases.

2 Le Sonmambulisme ProvoquS, pp. 139-41.

551 A] TO CHAPTER V 503

progressive changes in the stomach or the blood, but on a quite original course of cerebration, proceeding, we cannot doubt, in the higher tracts of the brain, having been initiated by an impression — that of the command — which had a distinct psychical side. Now looking at the brain-side alone, we should conclude, I think, that the passage of time must be registered, not by any general gradual change, but by a series of specific changes, corresponding probably to the days or units of measuremetit. We should conclude, that is, that cerebral events of the sort normally correlated with the ideas "sixty," "sixty-one," " sixty-two," &c., really take place ; for how otherwise could the gulf be spanned with precision ? how would any other sort of change know when to stop, or associate some point that it had reached with the order given weeks before? Such a cerebral process alone would wholly differentiate the case from that of ordinary physiological time-reckoning. But if the specific brain-changes take place, does it not seem at least a reasonable surmise that their mental correlate may exist, though hidden from our view — that there may further be an actual watching of the course of time? [Then] the "unknown faculty" would simply be a known faculty, working in a normal way, but below the surface of normal consciousness. . . .

[In some cases] the watching is of a wholly interior kind, and is not only forgotten afterwards, but is accompanied by no consciousness of which the normal waking subject can render any account ; but which still, I believe, involves mental action of a sort.

Here are a couple of instances of this extremer kind. My "subject,"

W s, was one day told that on the thirty-ninth day from then, at 9.30 P.M.,

he was to come and call on a gentleman resident in the house where I was lodging, with whom he had no acquaintance. He of course had no memory of this direction when awake. No reference was made to the command till March 19th, when he was suddenly asked, in the trance, how many days had elapsed since it was given. He ifistantly ?,?aA sixteen, and added that there were twentythree more to run, and that the day when he was due was Easter Monday. All these statements were correct. But the odd thing was that, on further questioning, he misdated both the day of the order and the day of fulfilment, calling the former March ist and the latter April 12th, whereas they were respectively March 3rd and April nth. This makes it tolerably clear that he did not originally arrive at the date of fulfilment by immediate reckoning from the date of command, and then fix it in his mind simply as a date. (Easter Monday, when so near as twenty-three days, might be arrived at in a moment by remarking the day of the week.) Moreover, if he made March ist his terminus a quo, he ought to have said eighteen instead of sixteen, and would probably have had to pause to reckon. The reasonable interpretation of the result is surely that he was in some way actually counting the days as they passed.

In the next case, which occurred after the above remarks were written, I got

an actual account of the process, which singularly confirms them. P 11 was

told, on March 26th, that on the one hundred and twenty-third day from then he was to put a blank sheet of paper in an envelope, and send it to a friend of mine whose name and residence he knew, but whom he had never seen. The subject was not referred to again till April i8th, when he was hypnotised and asked if

1 Unfortunately the accident of the echeance on Easter Monday prevented the execution of the order, as W s went off on a holiday excursion for the whole day.

he remembered anything in connection with this gentleman. He at once repeated the order, and said, " This is the twenty-third day ; a hundred more."

S. " How do you know? Have you noted each day ? "

P LL. "No ; it seemed natural."

S. " Have you thought of it often ? "

P LL. " It generally strikes me in the morning, early. Something seems

to say to me, ' You've got to count.' "

S. " Does that happen every day ? "

P LL. " No, not every day — perhaps more like every other day. It goes

from my mind ; I never think of it during the day. I only know it's got to be done."

Questioned further, he made it clear that the interval between these impressions was never long enough to be doubtful. He " may not think of it for two or three days; then something seems to tell him." He was questioned again on April 20th, and at once said, " That's going on all right — twenty-five daj's ; " and on April 22nd, when in the trance, he spontaneously recalled the subject, and added, "Twenty-seven days." After he was woke on April i8th, I asked him if he knew the gentleman in question, or had been thinking about him. He was clearly surprised at the question, said he fancied he had once seen him in my room (which, however, was not the case), and that the idea of him had never since crossed his mind.

But there is another way in which the moment for the performance of the action can be fixed. The " subject " can be told to perform it when some signal is given — as when some one gives a cough or pokes the fire. . . [And] we can arrange the conditions in such a way as again to involve reckoning of a certain kind, and of a kind which it is hard to conceive as having no mentation of any sort associated with it. For instance, the direction may be to perform the act when some one coughs for the third time, or pokes the fire for the fourth time. ... If the " subject " be re-hypnotised before the final cough — say the fourth — has been given, and questioned as to what has passed, he shows clearly that he remembers being in the attitude of expectancy for the coming signal. Sometimes the hidden mental condition during the time of waiting has been a very curious

one. Thus W s, who had been told that at my fifth cough the candles

would go out, then woke, and then hypnotised again before the final cough had been given, disowned all memory of the four coughs which had been actually given, but knew that the next would be the fifth, " because then the candles would go out." At other times the signals have been clearly and correctly counted. , . .

[In other experiments the mental condition of the subject in the interval between the suggestion and its fulfilment was tested by automatic writing instead of by re-hypnotising and asking him questions. Thus: — ]

On March 21st [W s] was told that on the morrow, a quarter of an hour

after his arrival, he was to pull up the blind and look out of the window. He arrived next evening at 7.10, and was soon set to the planchette ; but as the instrument did not move, he was hypnotised, told that I wanted to know how the time was going, and immediately awakened. The writing

7 iniiintcs and 8 i)io7'e

was now produced. The process began at just 7-17, so that at that moment the reckoning was exactly right; but, owing to a wheel coming off the instrument and having to be replaced, the writing itself was spread over four minutes. . . .

551 A] TO CHAPTER V 505

On April 20th [P 11] was told that hal£-an-hour after his next arrival he

was to wind up a ball of string, and to let me know how the time was going. He arrived next evening at 8.30, and was set to the planchette at 8.43. He wrote,

13 inijiett has passed and 17 7no7'e ininetts to pass.

Some more experiments followed, and it so happened that at 9, the exact time when the fulfilment was due, he was in the trance. He suddenly said " Oh ! " as if recollecting something, but did not move ; he was then woke, and at 9.2 he walked across the room to where some string was lying, and wound it up. On April iSth an exactly similar order was given, except that the thing to be done was to take off his coat. He arrived at 9. 10 on April 20th, and was set to the planchette at 9.15, and while reading a newspaper aloud with intelligence and complete comprehension, he wrote,

5 niinett has passed 25 niinuett hass goi passed and then I shas take off my coat. The order, however, was fulfilled at 9.21, almost immediately after the conclusion of the writing. . . .

Another day the same " subject" was told that when I coughed for the sixth time he was to look out of the window. He was woke, and I gave at intervals five coughs — one of which, however, was a failure, owing to its obvious artificiality. He was set to the planchette, and the words produced were,

When Mr. Gurtiey cough 6 times I atn to look out.

At this point I read the writing, and stopped it. I asked if he had noticed my coughing, and he said, " No, sir ; " but this, of course, showed no more than [that] he had heard without attending. He was now hypnotised, told that I wanted to know how often I had coughed, and at once woke. The writing recommenced,

4 times he has cough and 2 times mor'e he has to cough.

I coughed twice more, and he went to the window, drew aside the blind, and looked out. Two minutes afterwards I asked him what sort of a night it was. He said, " Fine when I came in." I said I thought I had seen him looking out just now, but he absolutely denied it. . . .

Later, P 11 was told that when I spoke the thirtieth word he was to walk

to the door and come back again, and was then woke. I made natural remarks at intervals, taking care to count the words I used. The thirtieth produced no result. I added one, and then told him to come and write. The writing was,

Mr. Gurney spoke 30 words Mr. Smith I think I am right don't you think so ? He then returned to his former seat, and sat down for a second ; then got up, walked to the door, looked at it, and came back again. Re-hypnotised, and questioned as to the words I had used, he remembered most of them, but not all.

In Gurney's paper, " Recent Experiments in Hypnotism," in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. V. pp. 3-17 (1888), are recorded a number of other ingenious experiments showing the intelligence of subliminal mentation in carrying out post-hypnotic suggestions. These were executed automatically while the supraliminal intelligence of the subject was closely engaged in some other task ; e.g. he would, while reading aloud, automatically work sums or write a second line to a couplet rhyming with the first,

5o6 APPENDICES' [551 B

which had been given him. On one occasion a subject " correctly multipUed I2S. 3|d. by 8, repeating 'God save the Queen' meanwhile, with every other word left out."

551 B. Professor Delboeufs experiments, recorded in the paper entitled " De I'Appre'ciation du Temps par les Somnambules," in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 414-421, were directed simply towards testing the power of calculating the lapse of time. His subjects were two sisters, whom he calls M. and J., country girls of twenty and twenty-three, servants in his family, with whom many of his most famous hypnotic experiments had been made (see 534 A and E) , He made suggestions to them to perform various trivial actions in a certain number of minutes from the time the suggestion was given. Eleven experiments were made, the suggestions to take effect after intervals varying from 350 to 3300 minutes. Two experiments (with intervals of 900 and 1500 minutes) succeeded completely; in three others the idea of the action suggested occurred to the subject at the right time, but was not carried out ] in four cases the action was performed at the wrong time, the errors varying from 25 to 95 minutes; in the two experiments with intervals of 3300 minutes, the impulse to do the action arose, but at the wrong time, and was not carried out. It must be noted that M. and J. were quite uneducated, could hardly tell the time by the clock, and constantly made mistakes in the simplest sums. Delboeuf also found that J. could apparently calculate no better when hypnotised than when awake.

551 C. The results obtained by Professor Delboeuf led Dr. J. M. Bramwell to try a much longer series of experiments on the appreciation of time by somnambules, which are by far the best observed and most instructive of any yet recorded. The account of them appeared first in Dr. Bramwell's paper on " Personally Observed Hypnotic Phenomena " in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. pp. 176—203 (1S96), and a further account, with additional details and a discussion of cognate mental phenomena — hypnotic and other — was published in Brain, Summer Number, 1900, under the title of " Hypnotic and Post-Hypnotic Appreciation of Time : Secondary and Multiplex Personalities." I give extracts from both these sources. Full details are given in the original papers of the numerous precautions devised to guard against errors or deceptions, and other details, which are omitted here for want of space.

Miss A., the patient in question, aged nineteen, was first hypnotised by me on September 2nd, 1895. . . . The patient is intelligent and fairly well educated, but possesses no extraordinary calculating powers either in the normal state or in hypnosis. According to her motlier, she has always been remarkably truthful and well-conducted, rather grave in disposition, and inclined to take the duties of life seriously. She is a dressmaker. . . . She never spontaneously recalled in the waking state anything that occurred in hypnosis. . . .

The experiments were all of the same character. On each occasion I

551 C] TO CHAPTER V 507

suggested to her, during hypnosis, that at the expiration of a varying number of minutes she should feel impelled to make a cross on a piece of paper with a pencil, and also, without looking at clock or watch, write down what time she believed it to be, and then immediately compare this with the actual time and, if possible, obtain corroborative testimony from her friends.

Experiment No. i. — November 5th, 1895, 4 P.M. Suggestion to be realised in five hours and twenty minutes, i.e. at the expiration of that time the patient was to make a cross and put down the time in the manner just described. Result. — Correct.

Remarks. — On this occasion I did not say anything to the patient about the experiment, either before or after hypnosis. I told her mother its nature, but not the time at which the suggestion should be fulfilled. At 9.15 the same evening her mother noticed that the patient was restless, and asked her what was the matter. She replied, " I feel I must do something, but cannot tell what." At 9.20 P.M. she rapidly made a cross with a pencil and wrote twenty minutes past nine on apiece of paper, at the same time saying, " It's all silliness." There was no clock in the room, but her mother went into the next room where there was one, and found that the time was 9.20. When I again saw the patient I explained the nature of the experiments I proposed making to her, and instructed her always to carry a pencil and paper with her during the day, and to put one by her bedside at night. I told her I should make these experimental suggestions from time to time, but not on each occasion when she visited me. In many instances I did not calculate when the suggestions fell due, and in others the calculations I made at the time were proved to be erroneous, and the results of the experiments were in these cases only determined when the series was completed. . . .

Experiment No. 5. — Wednesday, December i8th, 3.45 p.m. Suggestion in 24 hours, 2880 minutes. Result. — 3.45 p.m., Saturday, December 21st. Correct. . . .

Experiment No. 9. — December 31st, 1895, 4 p.m. Suggestion in 11,525 minutes. Result. — 1 1.5 a.m., Wednesday, January 8th. Wrong.

Remarks. — The result ought to have been 4.5 p.m., January 8th. I re-hypnotised her on that day, and asked her to recall the suggestion I had made on December 31st. She said it was to be executed in 11,225 minutes. The supposed suggestion of 11,225 nainutes had been carried out correctly.

I now attempted to find out during hypnosis the patient's mental condition in reference to these suggestions. In reply to my questions she informed me : I. That when the suggestions were made in hypnosis she did not calculate when they fell due. 2. That she did not calculate them at any time afterwards. 3. That she had no recollection of them when awakened. 4. That no memory of them ever arose in the waking state. 5. That shortly before their fulfilment she always experienced a motor impulse, that her fingers moved as if to grasp a pencil and to perform the act of writing. 6. That this impulse was immediately followed by the idea of making a cross, and of the time. 7. That she never looked at clock or watch until after she had written the figures.

Experiments. — Wednesday, January 8th, 1896.

No. 10. — 4.5 P.M. Suggestion in 4417 minutes.

No. II. — 4.5 P.M. Suggestion in 11,470 minutes.

No. 12. — 4.30. P.M. Suggestion in 10,070 minutes.

Results. — No. 10. — 5.42 P.M., Saturday, January nth.

No. II. — 3.15 P.M., Thursday, January i6th.

5o8 APPENDICES [551 C

No. 12. — 4.20 P.M., Wednesday, January 15th. — All were correct. Remarks. — As the patient had stated in hypnosis that she made no calculations in reference to the suggestions, in order to vary the experiments I asked her as soon as I had made them, and before awakening her, to calculate mentally when they would fall due, and to tell me the result. She replied as follows : —

" No. ID in 3 days, 37 minutes, or twenty-three minutes to five next Saturday afternoon.

*' No. II in 187 hours, 50 minutes, or 7 days, 9 hours, 50 minutes. Next Wednesday morning at five minutes to twelve.

"No. 12 in 1067 hours, 40 minutes, or 6 days, 23 hours, and 40 minutes. 4.20 P.M. next Wednesday."

[All these answers were wrong, except No. 12, in which the answer was right, but the calculation wrong. In spite of this, the suggestions were all carried out at the right time.]

When I made the patient calculate when the suggestions would fall due, and found that her calculations were wrong, I naturally concluded that, as she had fixed the date at which the suggestions were to be fulfilled in her own mind, in the hypnotic state, they would be carried out at the erroneous times. My astonishment was great when I found they were executed correctly. I rehypnotised the patient and said to her, '' You have not carried out these suggestions at the time you told me they would fall due. Why is this ? " She replied, " What I told you was all wrong." " How do you know the others are right ? " "I can't tell you, I only feel that they are." I was not able to elicit by questioning any memory of the processes by which the original mistakes were corrected. The patient assured me that from the time the suggestions were made she had never again thought of them, and that at the time of their fulfilment she had suddenly had the impulse to put down the figures. When doing so she had no recollection of her original calculations.

From this time I usually made a number of suggestions to the patient at each seance. Sometimes these started from the same hour, sometimes from different hours. In the latter case, the starting-points were usually imaginary. . . . [From three to six suggestions were made in rapid succession on each occasion, to be fulfilled at intervals varying from 720 to 21,434 minutes. These series of suggestions were never read over to the patient more than twice, and sometimes only once, and that quickly. The last two series were the most complicated of all, as follows : — ]

Experiments. — Thursday, May 7th, 3 p.m. No. 50. — Suggestion in 8650 minutes. No. 51. — Suggestion in 8680 minutes. No. 52. — Suggestion in 8700 minutes.

I still further complicated these by suggesting as follows : — " No. 50 is to be fulfilled in the waking state. Five minutes before 51 comes due you are to fall asleep. No. 51 is to be fulfilled while you are asleep, and five minutes afterwards you are to awake and remain so until after the fulfilment of No. 52. Eight minutes after 52 falls due you are again to fall asleep."

Result. — These suggestions were carried out correctly, with the exception that she fell asleep at 3.31 instead of 3.35.

Experiments. — Wednesday, May 13th, 4.30 p.m.

On this occasion I said to the patient, " You are to carry out all the suggestions made last Thursday, but to-day you are to start from 2.55 instead of

551 C] TO CHAPTER V 509

from 3 P.M., and to each of them you are to add 1440 minutes." As I was much pressed for time, these suggestions were made very hurriedly, and without explanation, and I was not at all certain whether the patient understood them.

Restdts. — Correct, with the exception of slight differences between the correctly estimated time and the moment at which the suggestion was fulfilled.

Siivwiary . — Fifty-five experiments are cited ; of these one, apparently, was either not carried out by Miss A., or unrecorded by me, while in another (No. 9) she mistook the original suggestion, but fulfilled it correctly in accordance with what she thought it had been. Forty-five were completely successful, i.e. not only did Miss A. write down the correct terminal time, but this was done, also, at the moment the experiment fell due. Eight were partially successful. In these the terminal time was correctly recorded in every instance, but there were minute differences, never exceeding five minutes, between the patient's correct estimate of when the suggestion fell due and the moment at which she carried it out. The proportion which these errors bear to their respective intervals varies between i to 2028 and i to 21,420.

On twenty-four occasions Miss A. was asked to calculate [in hypnosis] when the suggestions fell due ; she was wrong in the first nine instances, but in the remaining fifteen right in eleven and wrong in four. As the experiments advanced, not only the frequency, but also the extent of Miss A.'s errors in calculation decreased, and the answers were given much more rapidly. Sometimes the correct replies were almost instantaneous, and in these instances no conscious calculation could be traced. It is to be noted that Miss A.'s mistaken calculations had no effect on the correctness of her results. . . .

On [all occasions but one] when Miss A. was questioned in hypnosis as to the unfulfilled suggestions, she . . . recalled the fact that these had been made, but rarely remembered their exact terms. She always asserted that she had never thought of them, did not know how much time had elapsed since they had been given, nor when they were due. This was so even in cases where she had calculated the terminal time. . . . When Miss A. was questioned in hypnosis, after the execution of the suggestions, her memory on certain points was very clear. She could recall in every detail the terms of all experiments that had recently been carried out, i.e. she remembered the hours at which they had been made, the number of minutes suggested, her own calculations, if any, and the moment and circumstances under which the suggestions had been fulfilled. Putting aside the calculations she made at the time, in response to suggestion, she was unable to recall having made any others, or to give any information as to the methods by means of which she had correctly fulfilled the experiments. . . .

[Similar experiments, more or less successful, but not so striking as those with Miss A., were made with other somnambules, and details are given of some v/ith Miss B. In her case], when a simple suggestion was given. Miss B. sometimes spontaneously calculated when it would fall due. Miss A., on the other hand, never made any spontaneous calculations at all. Apparently Miss B. did not spontaneously calculate the more complicated arithmetical problems. When she did so, in response to suggestion, her results were invariably correct, but, despite this, the experiments were not always fulfilled at their appropriate time. Miss A., on the contrary, was often wrong in her calculations, while the suggestions themselves were carried out with phenomenal accuracy.

The most fundamental difference between these cases and those of Gurney's given above seems to be that the method of estimation of time

5IO APPENDICES [552 A

really used by Dr. Bramwell's subjects could not be discovered by questioning during hypnosis, but appeared to belong to some stratum of consciousness more profound than the hypnotic (suggesting an analogy with the " inspirations of genius " or the feats of " calculating boys ") ; whereas Gumey's subjects, when hypnotised again before a suggestion was fulfilled, were conscious of keeping count of the lapse of time.

552 A. The following case of improvement of dramatic faculty in hypnosis is recorded by Dr. Dufay in a paper in the Revue Philosophique for September 1888, a translation of which appeared \n Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 407-427. The subject was a hysterical young actress, whom he had hypnotised several times previously. The special interest of this case is that hypnosis was produced apparently without the subject's knowledge, or suspicion that it was being attempted. (Other instances of the apparently telepathic production of hypnosis are given in the Appendices to Section 568.)

I said just now that I had managed to hypnotise Mdlle. B. by a word or a look, but I did not think that without real contact it could succeed unless I was close to her at the time. Having always noticed that intelligence is much more highly developed in the somnambulic state, I had sometimes hypnotised this very indifferent httle actress by merely telling her, just as she was about to make her appearance on the scene, that she was going to sleep, which always procured her a great success with the public. It is a circumstance of this nature which introduces her into my present subject.

One evening I arrived late at the theatre. The manager was waiting anxiously for me in his office; he had changed the order of the pieces, and put the " Caprice " at the end of the entertainment, because he had just been informed by telegram that his grande coquette had missed the train, which was to have brought her from Tours to Blois. But he was relying on my assistance to substitute Mdlle. B. without damaging the performance.

" Does she so much as know her part.'"" I asked him.

" She has seen it played several times, but she has not rehearsed it."

" Have you expressed any hope that I might come to her assistance ? "

" I took care not to do that : any doubt as to her talents would have been sufficient to have produced one of her attacks."

" Very well, do not let her know I am here. I will take advantage of this opportunity to make a very interesting experiment."

I did not show myself on the stage, but took my place in a close box at the far end of the house, which happened to be unoccupied, and the grating closed. Then, drawing myself together, I willed intently that Mdlle. B. might fall asleep.

It was then half-past ten. I learned at the end of the performance that at this same time the young artiste, stopping in the middle of her toilette, suddenly sank down on the sofa in her room, begging the dresser to let her rest a little. After a few minutes of drowsiness she got up, finished dressing herself, and went down to the stage. When the curtain rose I was not very confident of the success of my experiment, not then knowing what had taken place in the actress's dressing-room ; but I was not long in satisfying myself, merely by seeing the action and attitude of my subject. She had retained in her memory this part

552 C] TOCHAPTERV 511

which she had not learnt, but had only seen played, and acquitted herself marvellously. There was, however, another suggestion that I must unconsciously have given her, when mentally ordering her to play the comedy, and that was to put herself en rapport with the other characters in the piece, since without that somnambulists only see and hear the person who- has put them to sleep. However that may be, I was obliged to awaken Mdlle. B. in order that she might take part in the supper which was given by the delighted manager.

She then remembered having thrown herself on the sofa, just as she had put on one of her gloves, and, finding herself seated there again, she imagined that we had come to tell her that the curtain was rising for the " Caprice." It was only on seeing her companions surrounding her, and congratulating her on her progress, that she understood what had taken place^ and thanked me with a glance.

If it be objected that she had expected my arrival, then suspected my presence, or at least my influence, which had been so favourable to her talent on other occasions, and that self-suggestion had even in this case produced somnambulism— I have no reply to make.

In the same paper Dr, Dufay gives several other instances of the Improvement of memory in hypnosis. Thus, a lady, after reading once a poem of a hundred and two lines, was hypnotised, and reproduced it correctly in automatic writing. The same lady, who was an excellent musician, when hypnotised, played from memory with perfect execution an overture of eight or ten pages to a new opera, which she had played through only once the day before.

552 B. From Dr. J. Milne Bramwell's " Personally Observed Hypnotic Phenomena" {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. p. 194).

In response to suggestion the subject may recall the events of waking life to a greater extent than he could do in the normal condition, as well as what has taken place during previous hypnoses ; and, on awaking, may have lost all recollection of what has occurred. The lost memory can be restored to a greater or lesser extent by suggestion. The improvement in memory extends to remote as well as recent incidents, and I have noticed numerous examples of both. One patient, whose natural memory was unusually bad, was able to recall on awaking some verses with which she was previously unacquainted, and which were only read over to her twice during hypnosis. Another, who could play a few dance tunes upon the piano, but who could only do so with the music before her when awake, was able, when hypnotised and blindfolded, to play the same tunes much more brilliantly. I have found that subjects who could not remember events which happened at an earlier age than six or seven were able, when hypnotised, to recall those which had occurred at the age of two and a half years. In many of these instances I have obtained confirmatory evidence, at all events as regards the occurrence of the facts themselves, from the testimony of older relatives.

552 C. It is possible not only to improve memory by hypnosis, but also to recover memories that have lapsed from the normal consciousness, e.g. — as Dr. Bramwell has shown — those relating to the events of early childhood. Further, the memory of events occurring during secondary

states of consciousness, which the primary consciousness has never been aware of at all, may sometimes be recovered by hypnosis. The best known instance of this is the case of Ansel Bourne (225 A). Dr. Dufay records another case as follows : —

With respect to the forgetfulness of what had taken place during an attack of somnambulism, I have pubhshed in the Revue Scientijique of December ist, 1883, the case of a young servant girl, who, thinking that her mistress's jewels were not safe in the drawer where she had put them, hid them in another piece of furniture, where they seemed to her to be safer. Accused of having stolen them, and despite her denials (which were quite sincere), she was put in prison. One day, in paying a professional visit at the prison, I recognised her, having seen her serving at the house of one of my colleagues. Knowing her to be somnambulic, I put her to sleep, and she then related to me what she had done, and was much distressed at having no recollection of it when awake. I made her repeat her declaration before the examining magistrate, who, after verification, had her set at liberty.

Many cases of the effects of hypnotism on memory are given in the Revue de r Hyptiotisme, e.g. a case recorded by Dr. Pitres (vol. ix., 1895, p. 164) of a patient who for several days in succession remembered when hypnotised her dreams of the previous night, which she could not recollect while awake.

553 A. The following is a striking instance of the utilisation of hypnotic suggestion to avoid waste of energy in a responsible and exhausting occupation. Dr. A. Forel, in a paper on " Quelques Suggestions " in the Revue de V Hyp7iotis7ne, vol. vi. p. 357 (1892), writes : —

At the Burgholzli Asylum, in order to watch the patients with suicidal tendencies during the night, we employ warders who have received appropriate hypnotic suggestions. The nurse's bed is placed at the side of the patient's, and the suggestion is given that she shall sleep well and hear nothing except any unusual sound the patient may make. If the latter attempts to get out of bed, or to do herself any harm, the nurse awakes at once, otherwise she sleeps soundly, despite the unimportant noises and movements made by the patient.

This system succeeds admirably, provided we select suggestible warders for it. The inappreciable advantage is that the nurse does not get tired (I have sometimes continued this sleeping watch with the same nurse for more than six months without her suffering the slightest fatigue), and that the danger of ordinary watching — that of falling asleep, despite every precaution — does not exist.

I have not had a single accident to report, with regard to patients watched in this manner, for four years. It is curious to observe the surprise sustained by the said patients — melancholies — to see themselves so well watched in this way.

553 B. An interesting case of intelligent mental action, which was apparently beyond the subject's normal powers, and the origin of which was only traced to the hypnotic condition by accident, is recorded by Dr. Bramwell in one of the papers above referred to {^Brain, Summer Number,

555 A] TO CHAPTER V 513

1900, p. 207). The subject was the Miss A. of his time experiments (551 C). She sometimes remained undisturbed for an hour or two in his room in the hypnotic condition while he was treating other patients. On being questioned in hypnosis as to her mental life under these conditions, she replied as follows : —

" When you do not speak to me, and nothing occurs that interests me directly, I generally think of nothing, and pass into a condition of profound restfulness. Once, however, I had an important dress to make and was puzzled how to do it. After you had hypnotised me and left me resting quietly, I planned the dress. When I awoke I did not know I had done so, and was still troubled about it. On my way home I suddenly thought how the dress ought to be made, and afterwards successfully carried out my ideas. I believed I had found the way out of the difficulty there and then, in the waking state ; I now know I did so some hours previously when hypnotised." When the subject was aroused she had no recollection of what she had said, and still believed she had planned the dress when awake.

Dr. Liebeault, in a paper in the Revue de PHypnotisme, January 1889 (already referred to in 527 A), gives several cases of the use of hypnotism in education, — the schoolboys on whom suggestion was practised for the purpose acquiring a greater power of concentrating their attention on their lessons. See also the references to papers by Dr. B^rillon and others in the same Appendix, and in 528 A.

555 A. The question of " hypnotic crimes " was thoroughly discussed by Dr. Liebeault in his book, Du Sommeil et des Etats Afialogues (1866). Later, Dr. Liegeois, whose speciality is medical jurisprudence, made many experiments with Dr. Liebeault's patients to test the practicability of criminal suggestion. He suggested to them fictitious crimes, such as murder, theft, perjury, &c., and made them give him receipts for money which he had never really lent them. One subject was induced to fire a revolver, which she was told was loaded, at a magistrate ; another at her own mother; the latter subject was also made to accuse herself before a magistrate of having committed a murder. A young man dissolved in water a powder which he was told was arsenic, and gave it to his aunt to drink ; afterwards he completely forgot this act. These experiments were published in 1884 in a memoir entitled La Suggestio7i Hypnotique dans ses Rapports avec le Droit Civil et le Droit Crijninel, which was expanded in 1889 into a book, De la Siiggestion et du Somnambulisme dans leurs Rapports avec la Jurisprudence et la Medecitie Legale.

Dr. von Schrenck-Notzing, in Die gerichtlich medicinische Bedeutung der Suggestion (published in the Archivfur Kriininal-Afithropo logic und Kriminalistik, Leipzig, 1900), distinguishes three classes of crimes which might be aided by suggestion : (i) crimes against a hypnotised person, of which a few instances have been known to occur; (2) crimes committed by means of hypnotised persons ; and (3) crimes incited by suggestion in the waking state. About the possibility of the second class, there is much difiference VOL. I. 2 K

of opinion ; some authors, as Fuchs and Benedikt, denying it completely, wliile others, as Lie'beault and Liegeois, think it sufficiently important to be taken account of in the administration of justice ; Bernheim and Forel, again, take an intermediate view. Lie'beault, as quoted by Schrenck-Notzing, instances a boy who had often been made to commit small thefts by way of experiment, and who afterwards developed kleptomania.

Under the head of crimes caused by suggestion in the waking state, Schrenck-Notzing quotes the Sauter case (1S99), in which a woman was accused of attempts to commit several murders by unlawful means (black magic) . The evidence showed that she had been incited to these attempts by a fortune-teller playing on her superstitious and hysterical temperament. Falsification of evidence by suggestion comes under the same head, e.g. in the trial of Berchtold for murder at Munich in 1896, newspaper reports of the case excited the public mind, and produced a crop of false witnesses, who made on oath a number of contradictory statements, all apparently in good faith.

Bernheim, in " Les Hallucinations retroactives sugger^es dans le sommeil naturel ou artificiel " {Revue de V Hypnotisme, December 1S89, p. 168), describes how he made a roomful of eleven patients believe that they had witnessed an assault on one of the hospital attendants, the supposed culprit himself sharing in the delusion.

It must be observed, however, that most of the subjects used in the " laboratory " experiments of Lie'beault, Liegeois, and Bernheim seem to have been in a feeble state of body or mind, with little power of moral resistance — sometimes, perhaps, with positive criminal tendencies ; and the false witnesses in the Berchtold trial were obviously ill-balanced and hysterical. Such cases, therefore, afford no evidence of the possibility of undermining settled moral principles by hypnotic suggestion. Further, it has been pointed out that Liegeois' subjects probably knew, in spite of his precautions, that the crimes suggested to them were fictitious, and would have refused to commit real crimes.

Other investigators, such as Delbceuf, have found that their subjects resist improper or immoral suggestions, and the ability of the subject to resist anything opposed to his waking conscience is also maintained by Dr. J. M. Creed, of Sydney (see " My Experience of Hypnotic Suggestion as a Therapeutic Agent," in The Australian Medical Gazelle of January 20th, 1899). These views are strongly supported by the experience of Dr. Bramwell, quoted below.

On the subject of hypnotic crimes, see also Gilles de la Tourette, L' Hypnotisme el les Etats Afialogues au point de vue viedico-ldgal, and V. Bentivegni, Die Uypnose und Hire civilrechtliche Bedetilung (Leipzig, 1890). A useful general discussion of the subject, with numerous references to authorities, is given in the chapter on " The Legal Aspects of Hypnotism " in Moll's Hypnotism.

555 B. Dr. Bramwell points out (see "What is Hypnotism?" in

555B] TO CHAPTER V 515

Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. pp. 204-58) that his own views as to the complete independence of the hypnotised subject's will had been long ago maintained by Braid, who considered that the subject had acquired new and varied powers, but had not at the same time lost his volition or moral sense. Braid asserted that he had proved that no one could be affected by hypnotism at any stage of the process unless by voluntary compliance. His subjects were docile and obliging ; but despite this, they refused all criminal suggestions, and even developed a higher sense of propriety than characterised their normal condition.-"- Against the view of Bernheim, Dr. Bramwell maintains that the so-called hypnotic crimes have no analogy with the simple automatic actions which subjects may easily be trained to perform. He goes on (p. 233) : —

When I commenced hypnotic work some seven years ago, I, like Delboeuf, believed that the hypnotic subject was entirely at the mercy of the operator. I was soon aroused from this dream, however, not by the result of experiments made to test the condition, but from the constantly recurring facts which spontaneously arose in opposition to my preconceived theories. In the paper printed [in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. pp. 176-203] under the heading "So-called Hypnotic Automatism," I cited a number of cases in which suggestions had been refused by hypnotic subjects. I also mentioned two subjects who had rejected certain suggestions and accepted others. Miss F., for example, recited a poem, but would not help herself to a glass of water from my sideboard, while Mr. G. would play one part, but not others, and committed an imaginary crime.

These subjects accepted suggestions which were apparently in opposition to their normal character. For instance, Miss F., who was extremely nervous and shy about singing or reading aloud, not only before strangers, but also before certain members of her own family, recited a poem in the waking state which I had read to her during hypnosis. Her mother told me that, under ordinary circumstances, she would rather have died than have done so. While Mr. G., who refused the roles of dissenting minister and hawker, accepted that of showman. He also, without the least hesitation, promptly put a piece of sugar in a friend's tea-cup, after having been assured it was arsenic. When asked why he had poisoned his friend, he replied, laughing, " Oh, that's all right, he has lived long enough ! " I made no attempt to ascertain G.'s mental condition in reference to the supposed crime, but I think one can, without much difficulty, imagine it. G. was a respectable tradesman and a somewhat devout Dissenter, and it is not unnatural to suppose he refused the part of fish-hawker as this was not in keeping with his social position, and that of minister as it offended his religious susceptibilities, and accepted that of showman because it contained nothing objectionable to him. Would it be reasonable to suppose that he should at the same time be capable of weighing fine distinctions between the suggested alterations in personality and unable to understand the experimental nature of the crime ? He, by the way, affords the only instance in which an imaginary crime has been carried out by one of my own patients. All others, without exception, have absolutely refused such suggestions.

Why should Miss F. have recited the poem and refused to take a glass of

1 See also as to Braid's views on this point, " James Braid ; his Work and Writings," by Dr. Bramwell, in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. pp. 127-66.

5i6 APPENDICES [555 B

water from my sideboard ? The answer to the first question is obvious. She was extremely anxious to get rid of the nervous embarrassment from which she suffered, and thus the suggestion contained nothing opposed to her volition. She herself explained the second; after leaving my house her mother re-hypnotised her, and asked why she had refused my suggestion, whereupon she replied, " I do not know Dr. Bramwell well enough to help myself unasked to a glass of water.'' . . .

[Other illustrative cases are given, and Dr. Bramwell continues: — ] These, and many similar facts, have forced me to abandon all belief in so-called automatism or helpless obedience ; still, I must refer to some of the arguments in support of it before attempting to analyse further the mental condition in hypnosis.

(i) When subjects successfully resist suggestion, it is usual to explain this by assuming that they have not been so deeply hypnotised as those in whom no resistance has manifested itself. I cannot admit the correctness of this in my cases. During the last seven years I have had frequent opportunities of examining hypnotic subjects, at home and abroad, and have nowhere observed more profound somnambules than amongst my own patients, rarely, in fact, seeing cases to equal them. All to whom I have referred not only exhibited the phenomena of profoundest somnambulism, but nearly all had been subjects of painless operations in the hypnotic state.

(2) The personality of the operator, and his method of training his subjects, is supposed to play an important part in the acceptance or rejection of suggestions. Granting that this be true, it does not explain the resistance which I encountered. I commenced by believing that the subjects were entirely at my mercy, and did my best to develop their supposed obedience.

(3) The existence of one class of phenomena is considered as necessarily implying the existence of another and totally differing class. Durand le Gros asks : " Is it possible that suggestion should have the power of producing extraordinary physical changes and yet be without this particular effect upon the moral state ? " The facts I have already cited answer this question in the affirmative. . . .

(4) Evidence in favour of obedience afforded by cases in which the subjects are alleged to have accepted criminal and analogous suggestions. These are important. The fact that the phenomenon of helpless obedience was invariably absent in my patients does not justify me in concluding that it did not sometimes occur in those of others. These cases of so-called automatism fall into two classes: (a) where an imaginary crime has been suggested; (d) where a real act has been performed, which it is assumed the patient would not have submitted to in the normal state.

(a) First, as regards imaginary crime. ... A somnambule puts a piece of sugar into her mother's tea-cup, while her medical man makes various absurd and untruthful assertions as to its composition. Bernheim and Lidbeault assert that the subject accepted these absurd statements as true, because, being hypnotised, she was unable to distinguish between truth and falsehood, while DelbcEuf claims that she had sufficient sense left to know exactly what she was doing. To neither does it seem to have occurred to ask the subject during hypnosis what she thought about the matter herself. If they had done so, she would promptly have solved the difficulty, and told them that while they were gravely discussing probabilities, she was quietly laughing in her sleeve at the grotesque absurdity of the whole performance. [In his paper referred to above,

566 A] TO CHAPTER V 517

pp. 197-202, Dr. Bramwell gives instances showing that his patients when hypnotised fully understood the nature of the suggestions made to them.] . . .

{b) Where a real act has been performed, which it is assumed the patient would not have submitted to in the normal state. . . . Before this can be used as an argument in favour of the helpless obedience of the hypnotised subject, one is justified in demanding that it should be clearly proved that under similar circumstances the patient would have objected to [it] in the waking condition. . . .

Strangely enough, the most marked case of resistance to suggestion that I have observed was shown by Liebeault's celebrated somnambule, Camille. To this I have already referred {op. cit., p. 197), but I wish to emphasise the fact that the classic hypnotic automaton, the one who was supposed to carry out a suggestion with the fatality of a falling stone, refused one, not on moral grounds, but apparently from pure caprice.

The difference between the hj^pnotised and the normal subject, as it appears to me from a long series of observed facts, is not so much in conduct as in increased mental and physical powers. Any changes in the moral sense, I have noticed, have invariably been for the better, the hypnotised subject evincing superior refinement. As regards obedience to suggestion, there is apparently little to choose between the two. A hypnotised subject, who has acquired the power of 'manifesting various physical and mental phenomena, will do so in response to suggestion, for much the same reasons as one in the normal condition. In the normal state we are usually pleased to show off our various gifts and attainments, more especially if we think they are superior to those of others, and in this respect the hypnotised subject does not differ from the normal. Both will refuse what is disagreeable; in both this refusal may be modified or overcome by appeals to the reason, or to the usual motives which influence conduct. When the act demanded is contrary to the moral sense, it is usually refused by the normal subject, and invariably by the hynotised one.

556 A. Some of the most striking cases of moral reforms produced by hypnotic suggestion are those recorded by Dr. Auguste Voisin. For instance : —

In the summer of 1884 there was at the Salpetriere a young woman of a

deplorable type.^ Jeanne Sch was a criminal lunatic, filthy in habits,

violent in demeanour, and with a lifelong history of impurity and theft. M. Voisin, who was one of the physicians on the staff, undertook to hypnotise her on May 31st, at a time when she could only be kept quiet by the strait jacket and bonnet d' irrigation, or perpetual cold douche to the head. She would not — indeed, she could not — look steadily at the operator, but raved and spat at him. M. Voisin kept his face close to hers, and followed her eyes wherever she moved them. In about ten minutes a stertorous sleep ensued, and in five minutes more she passed into a sleep-waking state, and began to talk incoherently. The process was repeated on many days, and gradually she became sane when in the trance, though she still raved when awake. Gradually, too, she became able to obey in waking hours commands impressed on her in the trance — first trivial orders (to sweep the room and so forth), then orders involving a marked change of behaviour. Nay more ; in the hypnotic state she

1 Annales Medico- Psychologiques, 1884, vol. ii. p. 289 seqq.

5i8 APPENDICES [557 A

voluntarily expressed repentance for her past life, made a confession which involved more evil than the police were cognisant of (though it agreed with facts otherwise known), and finally of her own impulse made good resolves for the future. Two years later, M. Voisin wrote to me (July 31st, 1886) that she was then a nurse in a Paris hospital, and that her conduct was irreproachable. It appeared, then, that this poor woman, whose history since the age of thirteen had been one of reckless folly and vice, had become capable of the steady, selfcontrolled work of a nurse at a hospital, the reformed character having first manifested itself in the hypnotic state, partly in obedience to suggestion, and partly as the natural result of the tranquilisation of morbid passions.

M. Dufour, the medical head of another asylum,^ has adopted hypnotic suggestion as a regular element in his treatment. " Des h present," he says, " notre opinion est faite : sans crainte de nous tromper, nous affirmons que I'hypnotisme pent rendre service dans le traitement des maladies mentales." As was to be expected, he finds that only a small proportion of lunatics are hypnotisable ; but the effect produced on these, whether by entrancement or suggestion, is uniformly good. His best subject is a depraved young man, who after many convictions for crimes (including attempted murder) has become a violent lunatic. " T.," says Dr. Dufour, " a 6te un assez mauvais sujet. Nous n'avons plus k parler au present, tellement ses sentiments moraux ont 6t6 amdliores par I'hypnotisme." This change and amelioration of character (over and above the simple recovery of sanity) has been a marked feature in some of Dr. Voisin's cases as well.

See also a case given by Dr. Voisin in the Revue de rUypnotisme, vol. ill., 1889, p. 130, and Appendices to sections 527-530.

557 A. A case in which jealousy had produced actual insanity is given in the Revue de rHypnotisme for May 1889, p. 345, by Dr. A. Dorez. In the same Revue, for November 1893, p. 141, Dr. Bourdon records a case of morbid jealousy cured by hypnotic suggestion, of which the following is a summary : —

Mme. X., twenty-four years old, anaemic, irritable, ha;d under the influence of an ungovernable jealousy become violent, subject to fits of unreasonable temper. She could no longer eat nor sleep ; had reached an extreme degree of emaciation ; she coughed, and her breathing was irregular and hard. Her life appeared to be in danger, and Dr. Bourdon was consulted. Mme. X. was hypnotised with tolerable ease, after fifteen minutes' fixation of the eyes and suggestion of the idea of sleep. Dr. Bourdon suggests to her in a state of light hypnosis that she is not jealous, and knows she has no reason to be ; that she will yield no more to bad temper, and will be amiable towards her husband; finally, that she feels the need of sleep, and food, and calm. On waking she has no recollection of the hypnotic suggestions. This first stance is followed by amelioration, and the suggestions are repeated on seven consecutive days. After the seventh day she feels quite well, and wishes to go back home and to see her husband. Her affection for him has returned. Finally, harmony and happiness were restored in the home, and her jealousy was completely

Dr. E. Dufour, medecin en chef de I'asile Saint-Robert (Isere). See Annales Mfdico-Psychologiqnes, September i8S6, p. 238, and Contridutioii (iVltude de I'hypnotisme, par le Dr. Dufour, Grenoble, 1887.

564 A] TO CHAPTER V 519

cured. Dr. Bourdon states that at the time of writing, eight months after the treatment, there had been no relapse.

563 A. Rachel Baker,^ one of the most noted " sleeping preachers," was born at Pelham, in Massachusetts, in 1794. Her parents were Presbyterians of limited means, and the chief element in her education, which was otherwise limited to seven months' regular schooling, was religious instruction. She is said to have been a child " of a serious make, of few words, timorous, and much given to melancholy, . . . [her] mental faculties, in the opinion of all those best acquainted with her, are far from being beyond what is common to females." In June 181 1, at the age of seventeen, she fell into a state of religious melancholy, which gradually became more acute till November of the same year, when the somnambulic condition first appeared ; being apparently asleep in a chair in the evening, she talked incoherently of her fears of hell, &c. The fit or trance, with the same kind of talk, constantly recurred till January 27th, 18 12, when a mental crisis occurred in the waking state — a climax of terror and despair, succeeded by a kind of " conversion," which produced a happy and calming eifect on her mind. From this time onwards the trances continued, but her talk became much more regular and rational, and manypersons used to come and listen to it.^ It consisted of prayers and religious addresses, and those who knew her well declared that her intellectual faculties were increased to an extraordinary degree while in the trance. It was observed " that all that Rachel expresses in her state of somniloquism is the result of preconceived ideas and opinions, but delivered with a readiness and a fluency which is very far above her waking state," and the specimens quoted bear out this view. The so-called " fits," which occurred almost every evening, lasted about forty-five minutes, beginning and ending with slight epileptiform symptoms, and passing off into natural sleep for the rest of the night. In her waking state she knew nothing of what had happened in the " fit," except from the information of others. No other morbid symptoms of any kind were detected in her by the doctors who report on the case ; the " fits " ceased during temporary ill-health, and returned as soon as she recovered.

Two other cases of " sleeping preachers " are recorded in the same book — that of Job Cooper, a Pennsylvanian weaver, in 1774, and Joseph Payne, a boy of about sixteen, at Reading in England, in 1759, whose case is described in The Gentleman' s Magazine for May 1760. See also the case of " X+Y=Z " in Chapter IX.

564 A. Besides the references given in 541 F to hypnotised and

See " Remarkable Sermons of Rachel Baker, and Pious Ejaculations, delivered during Sleep," by Dr. Mitchill, M.D., Professor of Physic, the late Dr. Priestley, LL.D., and Dr. Douglass (London, 1815).

2 " Several hundreds every evening flock to hear this most wonderful Preacher, who is instrumental in converting more persons to Christianity, when asleep, than all the other Ministers together, whilst awake." {Op. cit. title page.)

somnambulic subjects foreseeing and successfully prescribing for the symptoms of their diseases, see also the remarkable case of Anna Winsor (237 A), and that of Elizabeth Squirrell, referred to below (565 A).

A case in which symptoms of a markedly hysterical type followed accurately the predictions of the patient, ending in her complete recovery, was given by Dr. N. Cervello, in his Storia di un Caso d'Jsterisono con Sognazione Spontanea (Palermo, 1S53), and is summarised in \he Journal S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 333.

Another curious case of prevision of the details of an illness — exercised not in spontaneous somnambulism, but in hypnosis — was given in Dr. Alphonse Teste's Manuel Pratique du Magnetisme Animal (1841), and recently reprinted in the Revue des Etudes Fsychigues, January, February, and March, 1901, p. 74, from which I summarise it.

The subject, Mme. M., was a patient of Dr. Teste's, who had often proved clairvoyant. On a certain Friday, being alone with her and her husband, Dr. Teste hypnotised her and tried to find out how far she could foretell the future. She proceeded to tell them what would happen, but o?ily in relation to herself. She said that on the following Tuesday, between 3 and 3.30, something — she could not tell what or where — would frighten her ; she would have a fall, which would cause a miscarriage ; at 3.30 she would faint for eight minutes, and would be very ill for the rest of the day and night. On Wednesday there would be considerable haemorrhage ; on Thursday she would be much better, and would get up, but at 5.30 p.m. the hemorrhage would come on again and be followed by delirium ; she would then have a good night, but would lose her reason on Friday evening. This state would last for three days, after which she would recover. In answer to questions, she declared that no precautions could possibly avert the accident. On awaking she ignored, as usual, everything that had happened in her trance. Dr. Teste impressed on her anxious husband the necessity of keeping her in complete ignorance of the prediction, and himself took careful notes of all the details of it, which he showed the next day to a medical friend of his, Dr. Latour. ,

On the Tuesday he came to Mme. M.'s house, and found her lunching with her husband, apparently in the best of health and spirits. He said that he wished to spend the day with them. Soon afterwards he hypnotised her for a few minutes, when she repeated her prediction exactly, saying as before that she could not tell what would frighten her, nor where it would be. On waking she again knew nothing of the prediction.

Dr. Teste and her husband determined to take all possible precautions against the accident, and, as the hour approached, not to let her out of their sight for a moment. Nevertheless, a few minutes after 3.30 she went out of the room, accompanied by her husband, suddenly saw a rat — an animal to which she had an intense antipathy ; the shock of seeing it caused her to fall, and the results of the accident followed exactly as she had predicted.

This case — though a remarkable instance of self-suggestion — obviously affords no clear evidence of anything further, since Mme. M.'s

565A] TO CHAPTER V 521

prevision related simply to her own actions. She could not tell beforehand what would be the cause of her fright; the rat — if it was a real, and not a hallucinatory one — seems to have acted as a mere point de repere for the suggestion to attach itself to. If there had been no rat, Mme. M.'s subUminal self would probably have conjured up some other cause of fright, real or imaginary, and the effects would have followed in due course.

It will be noted that many, if not all, these cases of self-suggestion relate to hysterical symptoms, which are probably caused, as well as cured, by the subliminal self.

565 A. The following case of clairvoyance during spontaneous somnambulism was published by Dr. Dufay in a paper in the Revue Philosophique for February 1889, a translation of which appeared in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 415-27. The writer of the account was M. Badaire, formerly director of the Ecole Normale at Gueret, the subject, Theophile Janicaud, having been one of his pupil-teachers. Janicaud had been subject to frequent attacks of somnambulism from about the age of eight to ten ; afterwards they ceased almost entirely till he was nineteen. M. Badaire writes : —

Gu^RET, February tjth, i860.

. . . During the first year that he was at school we noticed nothing unusual in him; but during the excessive heat in the months of June and July 1859 the condition of young Janicaud completely changed, and attacks of somnambulism occurred every night, v/ith a frequency which soon gave cause for anxiety as to his health. In a few weeks he was so much altered as to be hardly recognisable even to the members of his family. His eyes were sunken, tired, and haggard, and an extreme thinness took the place of robust health.

Every evening he got up, walked about the dormitory, descended to the study to work in the dark, or wandered about the gardens for hours at a time, after which he went back to bed. . . .

One evening about 1 1 o'clock Janicaud, having escaped from the dormitory [in spite of all the precautions taken to avoid the risks of his nocturnal expeditions] knocked at the door of my bedroom.

" I have just arrived from Vendome," he said, " and have come to give you the news of your family. M. and Mme. Arnault are well, and your little son has four teeth."

" As you have seen them at Vendome, could you go back again and tell me where they are at present ? "

" Wait ... I am there . . . They are sleeping in a room on the first floor ; their bed is at the farther end of the room, to the left. The nurse's bed is to the right, and Henry's cradle close to it."

The description of the room and the position of the beds were perfectly exact, and the following day I received a letter from my father-in-law telling me that my child had cut his fourth tooth.

A few days later Janicaud came to me at about the same time, telling me that he had again come from VendSme, and that an accident had happened to the child during the day. My wife, being much startled, anxiously inquired what the accident was.

" Oh ! do not be frightened, Madame, reassure yourself, there will be no serious consequences, whatever the doctor, who is now with the child, may think. If I had known that I should have caused you so much alarm, I should not have spoken of it. It will be nothing."

The next morning I wrote to my father-in-law to tell him what Janicaud had said, and begged for news of the child by return of post. The answer was that he was perfectly well, and that no accident had taken place.

But in the month of September, when I went home for the holidays, I learnt the whole truth, which my father-in-law, on the advice of the doctor, had hidden from me. He told me that at the time when Janicaud came to tell me that an accident had happened, the doctor did not expect the child to live through the night. During the day the nurse, having got hold of the key of the cellar, had become completely intoxicated, and the child having been fed by her when in this condition, was seized with violent sickness, which endangered his life for several days.

One night Janicaud suddenly jumped up in bed, and turning to one of his companions, said —

" See, RouUet, how careless you are. I certainly told you to shut the door of the bookbinding workshop, but you did not do it, and a cat, in eating the paste, has just knocked over the dish, which is broken into five pieces."

Some one went down at once to the workshop, and it was found that what the somnambulist had said was perfectly correct.

The following night he related how he saw on the Gldny road the body of a man, who had been drowned while bathing in the Creuse, and that he was being brought to Gu^ret in a carriage. Next day I made inquiries, and heard that an inhabitant of the town had really been drowned the previous day at GMny, and that his body had been brought to Gudret during the night. But nobody in the house, not even in the town, had known of the accident the day before.^

M. Simonet, the assistant master, and Janicaud's brother-in-law, once consulted him, when in the somnambulic state, about his child, who had been suffering for some months from a cyst behind the ear, which the doctors feared might result in decay of the bone. Janicaud pronounced their fears groundless, and recommended the use of a certain herb, which grew in the garden, and which he undertook to gather for them.'^

But the somnambulist, walking barefoot, accidentally stepped upon a thorn, and the shock woke him before the plant was secured.^

The child recovered soon after, as Janicaud had said it would, . . .

His health now giving cause for alarm, he was sent home for change and exercise, and while away suffered very few attacks, and these only during the first few days. One which took place two days after joining his family deserves some notice. He rose up during the night with the fixed determination of going fishing. M. Simonet decided to accompany him, and before starting succeeded in inducing him to alter the nature of his excursion, and go and visit a relative

1 Facts of the same description are reported by Dr. Macario (Dusommeil,des rkies, et du somnambulisme, 1857), who borrowed them from F. Lebeuf. Here also it is a case of spontaneous somnambulism. (Dr. D.)

2 Possibly comfrey, of whose astringent properties Janicaud may have heard. (Dr. D.)

8 When he got up in the sleeping state he always dressed himself completely, with the exception of his feet.

565A] TO CHAPTER V - 523

residing some distance off. This was done, Janicaud being undisturbed from his sleeping condition either by the noise of barking dogs or by the fatigues of the walk. At last he decided upon going home, and on the way, having come to a narrow and dangerous path by the river, his brother-in-law begged him to be careful as to where he put his foot. Janicaud, however, assured him that he could see the better of the two, and as a proof asked his companion whether he saw the match which was under his left foot. M. Simonet at once felt under his foot, and sure enough found a match there. Not only was it very dark, but Janicaud wifh his night-cap drawn over his face was some thirty paces ahead.

Noteworthy, too, were the means which he used to take to free himself from his chain at night. Once with a penknife he cut off a small portion of a windowsash close at hand, and from it modelled a key, with which he easily undid his padlock.

[M. Badaire concludes : — ]

It may not be useless to make an observation of possible interest from a scientific point of view, which is, that during an attack of somnambulism Janicaud is perfectly conscious of the state in which he finds himself. Indeed, he is generally very well pleased at his condition, and if attempts are made to awaken him, begs that it may not be done, as he is so much happier than in his waking state. Nevertheless, after each attack he suffers greatly from fatigue, and his appearance is noticeably altered. Ought this fatigue to be attributed to the extraordinary activities of his faculties during somnambulism, or may it be the result of the shock which he sustains in passing from one state to another?

Once awake, Janicaud has not the least recollection of what has taken place in his somnambulic state. But in each attack he remembers perfectly all that has been said and done in the preceding ones.

In his natural state Janicaud has an uncertain memory, and retains what he learns with difficulty ; but on several occasions when he has been studying his history lessons in bed the assistant master has taken the book from his hand, and the somnambulist has then repeated the five or six pages which he had just read without omitting a syllable. Awakened immediately after, he had no recollection of what he had just read and repeated. Badaire.

[Before forwarding his report, M. Badaire had called together the teachers and pupils of the Ecole Normale and had read it aloud to them, asking them if they had any observations to make. All declared it to be scrupulously accurate.]

Dr. Petetin, in his Electricite Animale (Paris, 1808), describes a cataleptic patient of his, with remarkable powers of thought-transference. His account (pp. 55-57, and 62-65) of some experiments in which this lady was able to specify objects held in his hand, or inside his coat, or in the pockets of the bystanders, &c., is quoted in Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 345.

Serjeant Cox, in his" Mechanism of Man," vol. ii. pp. 175-77 (quoted in Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 347), gives an account of similar experiments performed by him with his sister when she was in a semiconscious, trance-like state, which used to succeed the cataleptic fits from which she suffered.

In the case of Elizabeth Squirrell there was some indications of clair-

voyance (see The Autobiography of Elizabeth Squirrell of Shottishatn and Selections from her Writings : together with an examination and defence of her statements relative to her sufferings, blindness, deafness, enti^'e abstetition from food and drink during twenty-five weeks, and other extraordinary phenomena : also facts and opinions illustrative and suggestive. By one of her Watchers. London, 1853).

In the case of Jane Rider (see An Account of Jane C. Rider, the Springfield Somna?fibulist. By L. W. Belden, M.D., Springfield, Mass., 1834), the phenomena, which seem to have been carefully observed and recorded, do not go clearly beyond hypersesthesia. Her frequent attacks of spontaneous somnambulism were accompanied by an extraordinary increase in her power of vision, so that she could carry on domestic work, cooking, needlework, &c., rapidly and easily in a quite dark room, and could read fluently, as well as write, with thick bandages over her eyes and on both sides of her nose. But she could only read words within what would have been her field of vision had her eyes been opened and unbandaged ; and she could not read through an opaque obstacle, such as brown paper. Dr. Belden concludes from these facts that she actually saw through the bandages, and puts down her special power of vision to an increased sensibihty of the retina, combined with " a high degree of excitement in the brain itself, enabling the mind to perceive even a confused image of the object." He gives in an Appendix the case of Caspar Hauser, of Nuremburg (date about 1828), as recorded by Professor Daumer, in whom not only sight, but all the senses, were heightened to an almost incredible degree. {Cf. 539 A.)

568 A. The subject of these experiments in telepathic hypnotisation was Professor Pierre Janet's well-known subject, Madame B. (" Leonie " — see 230 A, &c.) and the first experiments were carried out with her at Havre, by Professor Janet and Dr. Gibert, a leading physician there, and described in the Bulletins d~e la Soci^te de Psychologie Fhysiologigue, Tome I., p. 24, and in the Revue Philosophique, August i8S6.^ I summarise those relating to hypnotisation at a distance.

October 3, 1885. — M. Gibert tries to put her to sleep from distance of half a mile; M. Janet finds her awake; puts her to sleep; she says, "I know very well that M. Gibert tried to put me to sleep, but when I felt him I looked for some water, and put my hands in cold water. I don't want people to put me to sleep in that way; it puts me out, and makes me look silly." She had, in fact, held her hands in water at the time when M. Gibert willed her to sleep.

October g. — M. Gibert succeeds in a similar attempt; she says in trance, "Why does M. Gibert put me to sleep from his house? I had not time to put my hands in my basin." That the sleep was of M. Gibert's induction was shown by M. Janet's inability to wake her. M. Gibert had to be sent for.

It is observable, however, that MM. Janet and Gibert can now (April 1886) operate interchangeably on the subject; her familiarity with both seems to enable either to wake her from a trance which the other has induced.

1 See also Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. pp. 679-83.

568 A] TO CHAPTER V 525

October 14. — Dr. Gibert again succeeded in inducing the trance, from a distance of two-thirds of a mile, at an hour suggested by a third person, and not known to M. Janet, who watched the patient.

In February and in April, 1886, Madame B. was again brought to Havre, and some successful experiments (tabulated below) were made before my arrival on April 20th.

I give next extracts from my own notes of experiments, April 20th to 24th, 1886, taken at the time in conjunction with Dr. A. T. Myers, and forming the bulk of a paper presented to the Soci6t6 de Psychologie Physiologique on May 24th (also published in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iv. pp. 131-37)-

Dr. A. T. Myers was present at the experiments throughout. Other observers were Dr. Gibert, Professor Paul Janet, Professor Pierre Janet, Dr. Jules Janet, Dr. Ochorowicz, and M. Marillier.

In order that the phenomenon of som?neil a distance may be satisfactory, we have to guard against three possible sources of error, namely, fraud, accidental coincidence, and suggestion by word or gesture.

The hypothesis oi fraud on. the part of operators or subject may here be set aside. The operators were Dr. Gibert and Professor Pierre Janet, and the detailed observations of Professor Pierre Janet, elsewhere published, sufficiently prove the genuineness of Madame B.'s somnambulic sleep.

