It follows that when we have to explain very strange perceptions we must be on the look-out, not only for the hypersesthesia of known senses, but also for that more generalised form of hypersesthesia which may involve senses (peripheral or central) as yet incipient and unrecognised, although still depending on the material world, — a wider selection from the potential pansesthesia of the primal germ. There may — there must — be evolution still going on in us in relation to our material as well as to our transcendental environment, and we must not claim phenomena for the latter without taking account of the former as well.

Once more, we must remember that the assumed new sensitivities, physical and transcendental, may be linked together in ways quite unknown

2/0 CHAPTER IX [984

to us. The synaesthesiae, which have only of late years been noted between the ordinary senses — of which " coloured audition," or soundseeing, is the accepted type — may be carried yet further, and may connect in unlooked-for ways man's responses to his physical and to his transcendental environments. There will be nothing to surprise us if the same percipient should receive a number of subliminal intimations, of which some are to be referred to hyperaesthesia and some to telaesthesia, or to telepathy from the living or from the dead.

I have said that hyperaesthesia may be peripheral or central ; — that is to say, that it may consist in the heightened perception of sensations coming from outside our organism, or from within the brain. I have already given (820-823) some cases of apparent telaesthesia, or of apparent prevision, which may possibly, though by no means certainly, be referable to an extension of the external senses.

From these cases of possible hyperaesthesia of the external senses we may make our transition to central hyperaesthesia, a heightening of inner sensations to a point where the future history of the organisation can be guessed or divined with unusual distinctness. This is virtually but another aspect of the knowledge of intimate processes which self-suggestion has so often shown. If the subliminal self can induce or arrest changes in the organism, it may well be able also to foresee such changes when they are approaching through natural causes. In whatever direction we have seen suggestion operate, in that direction may we expect to see organic prediction operate also. Thus, for instance, suggestion has produced fainting, and also bleeding at the nose, and we have cases of precisely similar predictions (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 339 ; and vol. xi. p. 426), or even predictions of death (see 425 A).

984. This seems to show that a man's subliminal self may sometimes perceive his own approaching death, and may transmit this knowledge to the empirical self, sometimes by aid of a hallucination. Now we know that the subliminal self may sometimes communicate to other persons knowledge which it cannot or does not communicate to its own empirical self. This is familiar enough in hypnotic experiments, or in spontaneous automatic script, which script may be (for instance) written in a position turned away from the automatist, and may remain unknown to him, although its content must have come from, or passed through, his own deeper being. We know also that an agent has sometimes succeeded in transmitting a phantasmal image of himself to a percipient at a distance, without knowing whether he has, in fact, been successful or no.

It is natural, therefore, to ask whether there is anything to show that the subliminal self ever reveals the approach of death, not to its own empirical self, but to other persons ; — showing, perhaps, by a phantasmal image, the source from which the information comes.

To this question we have some ground for returning an affirmative answer, for my readers will remember that there are various cases where

985] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 271

the phantom of a person destined soon to die has been seen by a percipient at a distance ; nor does it seem that such an apparition depends upon the decedent's own supraliminal effort. On the contrary, it often appears while he is asleep or in a comatose condition (see, e.g., cases in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 440-454).

While there are thus many precognitions which are in various ways explicable without postulating any direct knowledge of the future, since they may be due only to some kind of inference from a knowledge of existing facts wider than our own, it is possible that other cases may be due to inference of some supernormal kind, — some perception of the future more direct than any which our ordinary minds enjoy. Such are some of the dream-predictions quoted in the Appendices to section 425 (see vol. i. pp. 402-413). It is conceivable that predictions of these and other types may be communicated by disembodied spirits, to whom may also be attributed the cases that suggest an unseen guidance or protection (see 824 and the cases given at the end of 663 A).

985. Finally, we must admit the possibility of a knowledge which comes to a man from no individuated, or at least from no human source ; which is no longer inference but the reflection of Reality itself; of the World-Soul as the Future ; of a pre-existent Cosmorama of infinite fates.

But before turning to this last line of reflection, I must say a few words as to the relation of our evidence to the problem of Free Will. Here I have a suggestion to make which even in this time-worn controversy is, I think, absolutely novel. It is that we have now a possibility of making the question between liberty and determination a matter of actual experiment.

Let us put that old question in this specific form : " Is there evidence that any power can show me a picture involving my own (so-called) voluntary actions in the future, which picture I cannot by any effort in the smallest degree hinder from becoming actual fact? "

For mere ordinary prevision this would of course be impossible. But we have here certain foreshadowings which depend on no ordinary prevision, and which are more wholly outside ourselves than any information of equally definite character which we can otherwise receive. The scenes or statements thus given in complete detail seem sometimes to be fulfilled with equal completeness. But must they, or must any of them, inevitably be thus fulfilled? Here it is that a possibility of experiment comes in. The experiment indeed cannot be conclusive either way. But suppose that — as in some folklore story — we were to make vigorous effort to avert some incident, and were yet to find that incident fulfil itself, perhaps by dint of that very effort, exactly after the dreaded fashion, — should we not then have some reason to infer that earth-life was not really modifiable by anything which we feel as free-will ?

Assuming such a result of our experiment, analogy would at once suggest a further possibility. For our life on earth would then be seen to

2/2 CHAPTER IX [985

resemble the experience of the hypnotised subject, fulfilling unwittingly in waking hours the suggestions previously made to him in the trance. We should ask whether in our own history some epoch may have existed in which a self-suggestion may have been given which could similarly dominate our earthly career. Our complex organism, the result of a long previous history, is felt to restrict our so-called voluntary action within narrow limits ; and if we possess also a soul independent of the body, it is surely likely that the soul's previous history also — for some previous history any entity so highly specialised as a man's soul must have had — may exercise a determining influence, even more profound than the organism's influence, upon the thoughts and actions of this incarnation. There may, in short, be a kind of alternating personality, expressing itself first in an incorporeal and then in a corporeal state, in such a way that the incorporeal state is the deeper and the more permanent, and that suggestions thence derived influence corporeal life, although the empirical consciousness which governs that life may never know it.

This idea, of course, is not new to religion or to philosophy, in East or West, and it has long since been suggested that our earthly existence may be the inevitable sequel of our past eternity ; a predestined pilgrimage on which our true soul looks with calm content, since not one of earth's phantom sorrows can find her unwilling or strike her unaware. The soul foretaught, the body forewrought, — these will move onwards as they must and may ; but meanwhile the problem of Liberty and Necessity will no longer be one for earthly experience to discuss ; it will be lifted into a pre-natal region, among the secrets of the transcendental world.

All this must be conceived as possible ; yet I do not think that our evidence thus far collected does in fact make for this view of pre-determined earthly fates. Rather we have seen that in many cases monitions have averted incidents which would doubtless have occurred had the percipient received no warning. And where dangers have been foreshown and yet not averted, this seems often to have been because no adequate effort was made to avert them. The problem which our narratives more urgently suggest is how to reconcile so much foreknowledge with so much freedom. I have suggested elsewhere that this problem of free human wills amid the predictable operations of unchanging law may resemble the problem of molecular motion amid molar calm. Clear and stable is for us the diamond ; the dewdrop is clear and still ; yet within their tranquil clarity a myriad molecules jostle in narrow orbits, or speed on an uncomputed way. So to " the spectator of all Time and of all Existence " may the Cosmos be " as one entire and perfect chrysolite " ; and yet man's petty hopes and passions may make endless turmoil among its minutest elements and in its infinitesimal grains. Those movements, too, must be ruled by unknown law ; yet on a wide view they will average out, and will admit of predictions fulfilled immutably, and overriding the small Wills of men.

986] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 273

986. Once more, and from a different standpoint. Few men have pondered long on these problems of Past and Future without wondering whether Past or Future be in very truth more than a name — whether we may not be apprehending as a stream of sequence that which is an ocean of co-existence, and slicing our subjective years and centuries from timeless and absolute things. The precognitions dealt with here, indeed, hardly overpass the life of the individual percipient. Let us keep to that small span, and let us imagine that a whole earth-life is in reality an absolutely instantaneous although an infinitely complex phenomenon. Let us suppose that my transcendental self discerns with equal directness and immediacy every element of this phenomenon ; but that my empirical self receives each element mediately and through media involving different rates of retardation ; just as I receive the lightning more quickly than the thunder. May not then seventy years intervene between my perceptions of birth and death as easily as seven seconds between my perceptions of the flash and peal? And may not some inter-communication of consciousness enable the wider self to call to the narrower, the more central to the more external, " At such an hour this shock will reach you ! Listen for the nearing roar ! "

And thinking thus of the Universe as no mere congeries of individual experiences, but as a plenum of infinite knowledge of which all souls form part, we come to count less and less upon having to deal exclusively with intelligences individualised like our own. Our limitations of personality may less and less apply to spirits drawing more directly upon the essential reality of things. The definite intelligences which have crystallised, so to say, out of the psychical vapour may even for us become again partly sublimated, may again be diffused for a moment amid such knowledge as our organisations cannot receive except in ecstasy and bewilderment, or retain except in vanishing symbol and obscure and earthly sign.

If then all these phenomena form part of one great effort by which man's soul is striving to know his spiritual environment, and his spiritual environment is striving to become known, how little can it matter what the special incident foretold or foreshadowed may be ! What signifies it whether this or that earthly peril be averted, or earthly benefit secured, — whether through this or that petty channel shall flow some stream of mortal things? The prime need of man is to know more fully, that he may obey more unhesitatingly, the laws of the world unseen. And how can this great end be attained save by the unfoldment from within, in whatsoever fashion it may be possible, of man's transcendental faculty; —by his recognition of himself as a cosmic being and not a planetary, as not a body but a soul ? Surely even that special premonition which is sometimes spoken of as a thing of terror, — the warning or the promise of earthly death, — should to the wise man sound as a friendly summons, and as a welcome home. Let him remember the Vision which came to Socrates in the prison-house ; — then, and then only, showing in an angel's simili-VOL. ii. s

tude the Providence which till that hour had been but as an impersonal and invisible Voice ; — but now the " fair and white-robed woman," while friends offered escape from death, had already spoken of better hope than this, and had given to Achilles' words a more sacred meaning, — " On the third day hence thou comest to Phthia's fertile shore."

987. We have reached at last a position very remote from that from which we started. Yet it will not be easy to say exactly at what point we could have paused in our gradual sequence of evidence. In the first place, it now seems clear that a serious inquiry, whenever undertaken, was destined to afford ample proof of the inadequacy of the current material synthesis ; to demonstrate the existence of faculties and operations which imply a spiritual environment, acted upon by a spirit in man. Telepathy and telaesthesia, as we now see, indisputably imply this enlarged conception of the universe as intelligible by man ; and so soon as man is steadily conceived as dwelling in this wider range of powers, his survival of death becomes an almost inevitable corollary. With this survival his field of view broadens again. If we once admit discarnate spirits as actors in human affairs, we must expect them to act in some ways with greater scope and freedom than is possible to the incarnate spirits which we already know.

We cannot simply admit the existence of discarnate spirits as inert or subsidiary phenomena; we must expect to have to deal with them as agents on their own account — agents in unexpected ways, and with novel capacities. If they are concerned with us at all, the part which they will play is not likely to be a subordinate one.

We are standing then, on this view, at a crisis of enormous importance in the history of life on earth. The spiritual world is just beginning to act systematically upon the material world. Action of the spiritual world upon our own there must always have been ; action both profound, universal, and so to say automatic, and very probably also irregular action with specific moral purport, such as has been assumed to accompany the rise of religions.

But a change seems to be impending, and the kind of action which now seems likely to be transmitted from the one world to the other is of a type which in the natural course of historic evolution has scarcely been likely to show itself until now. For it depends, as I conceive, on the attainment of a certain scientific level by spirits incarnate and excarnate alike.

A few words will suffice to sum up broadly the general situation as it at present seems to me to stand. The dwellers on this earth, themselves spirits, are an object of love and care to spirits higher than they. The most important boon that can possibly be bestowed on them is knowledge as to their position in the universe, the assurance that their existence is a cosmic and not merely a planetary, a spiritual and not

987] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 275

merely a corporeal, phenomenon. I conceive that this knowledge has in effect been apprehended from time to time by embodied spirits of high inward perceptive power, and has also been communicated by higher spirits, either affecting individual minds or even (as is believed especially of Jesus Christ) voluntarily incarnating themselves on earth for the purpose of teaching what they could recollect of that spiritual world from which they came. In those ages it would have been useless to attempt a scientific basis for such teaching. What could best be done was to enforce some few great truths — as the soul's long upward progress, or the Fatherhood of God — in such revelations as East and West could understand. Gradually Science arose, uniting the beliefs of all peoples in one scheme of organised truth, and suggesting — as has been said — that religion must be the spirit's subjective reaction to all the truths we know.

But when once this point was reached it must have become plain to wise spirits that the communications from their world which hitherto had had somewhat the character of inspirations of genius ought now to be based upon something of organised and definite observation, — something which would work in with the great structure of Truth which organised observation has already established. Here, then, new difficulties must have arisen, just as they arise on earth when we endeavour to reduce to rules practicable for the many the results achieved by the extraordinary gifts of the few. Now it is that we are forced on both sides of the gulf to recognise how rare and specific is that capacity for intercommunication on which our messages must depend. Now it is that we feel the difficulty of being definite without being trivial ; how little of earthly memory persists ; how little of heavenly experience can be expressed in terms of earth ; how long and arduous must be the way, how many must be the experiments, and how many the failures, before any systematised body of new truth can be established. But a sound beginning has been made, and whatever may be possible hereafter need not be wasted on a fresh start ; it may be added to a growing structure of extra- terrene verities such as our race has never known till now.

It is not we who are in reality the discoverers here. The experiments which are being made are not the work of earthly skill. All that we can contribute to the new result is an attitude of patience, attention, care; an honest readiness to receive and weigh whatever may be given into our keeping by intelligences beyond our own. Experiments, I say, there are, probably experiments of a complexity and difficulty which surpass our imagination ; but they are made from the other side of the gulf, by the efforts of spirits who discern pathways and possibilities which for us are impenetrably dark. We should not be going beyond the truth if we described our sensitives as merely the instruments, our researchers as merely the registrars, of a movement which we neither initiated nor can in any degree comprehend.

988. The true discoverers, however, show no wish to be thus sharply distinguished from ourselves. Their aim is a collaboration with us as close as may be possible. Some of them were on earth our own familiar friends ; we have spoken with them in old days of this great enterprise ; they have promised that they would call to us, if it were possible, with the message of their undying love. It may be that ^he most useful thing that some of us have done on earth has been to interest in this inquiry some spirit more potent than himself, who has passed into that world of unguessed adventure, not forgetful of his friend.

The very faintness and incoherence of such a spirit's message, besides being a kind of indication that we are dealing with the imperfections of actual reality rather than with the smoothly finished products of mere imagination, does also in itself constitute a strong appeal to our gratitude and reverence. Not easily and carelessly do these spirits come to us, but after strenuous preparation, and with difficult fulfilment of desire. So came Tennyson's Persephone : —

" Faint as a climate-changing bird that flies All night across the darkness, and at dawn Falls on the threshold of her native land, And can no more. ..."

They commune with us, like Persephone, willing and eager, but "dazed and dumb with passing through at once from state to state." They cannot satisfy themselves with their trammelled utterance ; they complain of the strange brain, the alien voice. What they are doing, indeed, they desire to do — this is their willing contribution to that universal scheme by which the higher helps the lower, and the stronger the weaker, through all the ideal relationships of the world of Life. But we on our part ought to remember that there may be a dignity in this very confusion, — a proof of persistent strong affection in the very hesitancies and bewilderments of some well-loved soul.

"After the tempest a still small voice." One may have listened perhaps, to the echoing pomp of some CEcumenical Council, thundering its damnations Urbi et Orbi from an Infallible Chair ; and yet one may find a more Christlike sanctity in the fragmentary whisper of one true soul, descending painfully from unimaginable brightness to bring strength and hope to kindred souls still prisoned in the flesh.

Vicit iter durum pietas. But here the effort has been, so to say, on the part of Anchises, not of y£neas ; the piety of heaven towards earth rather than of earth towards heaven. It is some enfranchised soul — some soul, like George Eliot's, filled to the brim with loving pity for struggling lives on "the dark globe" — which has penetrated the world-old secret, and has piloted the innavigable way.

Beyond us still is mystery ; but it is mystery lit and mellowed with an infinite hope. We ride in darkness at the haven's mouth ; but sometimes

988] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 277

through rifted clouds we see the desires and needs of many generations floating and melting upwards into a distant glow, " up through the light of the seas by the moon's long-silvering ray."

The high possibilities that lie before us, should be grasped once for all, in order that the dignity of the quest may help to carry the inquirer through many disappointments, deceptions, delays. But he must remember that this inquiry must be extended over many generations ; nor must he allow himself to be persuaded that there are byways to mastery. I will not say that there cannot possibly be any such thing as occult wisdom, or dominion over the secrets of nature ascetically or magically acquired. But I will say that every claim of this kind which my colleagues or I have been able to examine has proved deserving of complete mistrust ; and that we have no confidence here any more than elsewhere in any methods except the open, candid, straightforward methods which the spirit of modern science demands.

All omens point towards the steady continuance of just such labour as has already taught us all we know. Perhaps, indeed, in this complex of interpenetrating spirits our own effort is no individual, no transitory thing. That which lies at the root of each of us lies at the root of the Cosmos too. Our struggle is the struggle of the Universe itself ; and the very Godhead finds fulfilment through our upward-striving souls.



Chapter X. Epilogue

E8oK€t TI'S fiOL yvvr} irpocreXOoixra KaA/») /cat euetS^s, Aev/ca t/x,ana e^outra, /caXecrai ft€ KCU ciTm^, Q Sco/c/aares, "H/xart KCI/ Tptrara) <&6ir)v epi'/JcoAov

tKOtO. IIAaTWVOS Kp6TCDV.

1000. The task which I proposed to myself at the beginning of this work is now, after a fashion, accomplished. Following the successive steps of my programme, I have presented, — not indeed all the evidence which I possess, and which I would willingly present, — but enough at least to illustrate a continuous exposition, and as much as can be compressed into two volumes, with any hope that these volumes will be read at all. I have indicated also the principal inferences which that evidence immediately suggests. Such wider generalisations as I may now add must needs be dangerously speculative ; they must run the risk of alienating still further from this research many of the scientific minds which I am most anxious to influence.

This risk, nevertheless, I feel bound to face. For two reasons, — or, I should perhaps say, for one main reason seen under two aspects, — I cannot leave this obscure and unfamiliar mass of observation and experiment without some words of wider generalisation, some epilogue which may place these new discoveries in clearer relation to the existing schemes of civilised thought and belief.

In the first place, I feel that some such attempt at synthesis is needful for the practical purpose of enlisting help in our long inquiry. As has been hinted more than once, the real drag upon its progress has been not opposition but indifference. Or if indifference be too strong a word, at any rate the interest evoked has not been such as to inspire to steady independent work anything like the number of coadjutors who would have responded to a new departure in one of the sciences which all men have learnt to respect. The inquiry falls between the two stools of religion and science ; it cannot claim support either from the " religious world " or from the Royal Society. Yet even apart from the instinct of pure scientific curiosity (which surely has seldom seen such a field opening before it), the mighty issues depending on these phenomena ought, I think, to constitute in themselves a strong, an exceptional appeal. I desire in this book to emphasise that appeal; — not only to produce

1002] EPILOGUE 279

conviction, but also to attract co-operation. And actual converse with many persons has led me to believe that in order to attract such help, even from scientific men, some general view of the moral upshot of all the phenomena is needed ; — speculative and uncertain though such a general view must be.

1001. Again, — and here the practical reason already given expands into a wider scope, — it would be unfair to the evidence itself were I to close this work without touching more directly than hitherto on some of the deepest faiths of men. The influence of the evidence set forth in this book should not be limited to the conclusions, however weighty, which that evidence may be thought to establish. Rather these discoveries should prompt, as nothing else could have prompted, towards the ultimate achievement of that programme of scientific dominance which the Instauratio Magna proclaimed for mankind. Bacon foresaw the gradual victory of observation and experiment — the triumph of actual analysed fact — in every department of human study ; — in every department save one. The realm of " Divine things " he left to Authority and Faith. I here urge that that great exemption need be no longer made. I claim that there now exists an incipient method of getting at this Divine knowledge also, with the same certainty, the same calm assurance, with which we make our steady progress in the knowledge of terrene things. The authority of creeds and Churches will thus be replaced by the authority of observation and experiment. The impulse of faith will resolve itself into a reasoned and resolute imagination, bent upon raising even higher than now the highest ideals of man.

Most readers of the preceding pages will have been prepared for the point of view thus frankly avowed. Yet to few readers can that point of view at first present itself otherwise than as alien and repellent. Philosophy and orthodoxy will alike resent it as presumptuous ; nor will science readily accept the unauthorised transfer to herself of regions of which she has long been wont either to deny the existence, or at any rate to disclaim the rule. Nevertheless, I think that it will appear on reflection that some such change of standpoint as this was urgently needed, — nay, was ultimately inevitable.

1002. I need not here describe at length the deep disquiet of our time. Never, perhaps, did man's spiritual satisfaction bear a smaller proportion to his needs. The old-world sustenance, however earnestly administered, is too unsubstantial for the modern cravings. And thus through our civilised societies two conflicting currents run. On the one hand health, intelligence, morality, — all such boons as the steady progress of planetary evolution can win for man, — are being achieved in increasing measure. On the other hand this very sanity, this very prosperity, do but bring out in stronger relief the underlying Welt-Schmerz, the decline of any real belief in the dignity, the meaning, the endlessness of life.

28o CHAPTER X [1003

There are many, of course, who readily accept this limitation of view ; who are willing to let earthly activities and pleasures gradually dissipate and obscure the larger hope. But others cannot thus be easily satisfied. They rather resemble children who are growing too old for their games ;— whose amusement sinks into an indifference and discontent for which the fitting remedy is an initiation into the serious work of men.

A similar crisis has passed over Europe once before. There came a time when the joyful naivete, the unquestioning impulse of the early world had passed away ; when the worship of Greeks no more was beauty, nor the religion of Romans Rome. Alexandrian decadence, Byzantine despair, found utterance in many an epigram which might have been written to-day. Then came a great uprush or incursion from the spiritual world, and with new races and new ideals Europe regained its youth.

The unique effect of that great Christian impulse begins, perhaps, to wear away. But more grace may yet be attainable from the region whence that grace came. Our age's restlessness, as I believe, is the restlessness not of senility but of adolescence ; it resembles the approach of puberty rather than the approach of death.

1003. What the age needs is not an abandonment of effort, but an increase ; the time is ripe for a study of unseen things as strenuous and sincere as that which Science has made familiar for the problems of earth. For now the scientific instinct, — so newly developed in mankind, — seems likely to spread until it becomes as dominant as was in time past the religious ; and if there be even the narrowest chink through which man can look forth from his planetary cage, our descendants will not leave that chink neglected or unwidened. The scheme of knowledge which can commend itself to such seekers must be a scheme which, while it transcends our present knowledge, steadily continues it; — a scheme not catastrophic, but evolutionary ; not promulgated and closed in a moment, but gradually unfolding itself to progressive inquiry.

Must there not also be a continuous change, an unending advance in the human ideal itself? so that Faith must shift her standpoint from the brief Past to the endless Future, not so much caring to supply the lacunae of tradition as to intensify the conviction that there is still a higher life to work for, a holiness which may be some day reached by grace and effort as yet unknown.

It may be that for some generations to come the truest faith will lie in the patient attempt to unravel from confused phenomena some trace of the supernal world ; — to find thus at last " the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." I confess, indeed, that I have often felt as though this present age were even unduly favoured ; — as though no future revelation and calm could equal the joy of this great struggle from doubt into certainty ; — from the materialism or agnosticism which accompany the first advance of Science into the deeper scientific conviction that there is a deathless soul in man. I can imagine no other

1004] EPILOGUE 281

crisis of such deep delight. But after all this is but like the starving child's inability to imagine anything sweeter than his first bite at the crust. Give him but that, and he can hardly care for the moment whether he is fated to be Prime Minister or ploughboy.

Equally transitory, equally dependent on our special place in the story of man's upward effort, is another shade of feeling which many men have known. They have felt that uncertainty gave scope to faith and courage in a way which scientific assurance could never do. There has been a stern delight in the choice of virtue, — even though virtue might bring no reward. This joy, like the joy of Columbus sailing westward from Hierro, can hardly recur in precisely the same form. But neither (to descend to a humbler comparison) can we grown men again give ourselves up to learning in the same spirit of pure faith, without prefigurement of result, as when we learnt the alphabet at our mother's knees. Have we therefore relaxed since then our intellectual effort? Have we felt that there was no longer need to struggle against idleness when once we knew that knowledge brought a sure reward ?

Endless are the varieties of lofty joy. In the age of Thales, Greece knew the delight of the first dim notion of cosmic unity and law. In the age of Christ, Europe felt the first high authentic message from a world beyond our own. In our own age we reach the perception that such messages may become continuous and progressive ; — that between seen and unseen there is a channel and fairway which future generations may learn to widen and to clarify. Our own age may seem the best to us ; so will their mightier ages seem to them.

" ' Talia saecla' suis dixerunt * currite ' fusis Concordes stabili Fatorum numine Parcae."

Spiritual evolution : — that, then, is our destiny, in this and other worlds; — an evolution gradual with many gradations, and rising to no assignable close. And the passion for Life is no selfish weakness, it is a factor in the universal energy. It should keep its strength unbroken even when our weariness longs to fold the hands in endless slumber ; it should outlast and annihilate the " pangs that conquer trust." If to the Greeks it seemed a AtTrora^ta — a desertion of one's post in battle — to quit by suicide the life of earth, how much more craven were the desire to desert the Cosmos, — the despair, not of this planet only, but of the Sum of Things !

Nay, in the infinite Universe man may now feel, for the first time, at home. The worst fear is over ; the true security is won. The worst fear was the fear of spiritual extinction or spiritual solitude ; the true security is in the telepathic law.

1004. Let me draw out my meaning at somewhat greater length.

As we have dwelt successively on various aspects of telepathy, we have gradually felt the conception enlarge and deepen under our study. It

began as a quasi-mechanical transference of ideas and images from one to another brain. Presently we found it assuming a more varied and potent form, as though it were the veritable ingruence or invasion of a distant mind. Again, its action was traced across a gulf greater than any space of earth or ocean, and it bridged the interval between spirits incarnate and discarnate, between the visible and the invisible world. There seemed no limit to the distance of its operation, or to the intimacy of its appeal.

€V OfjpCTW €V j3pOTOl<TW €V 0€OtS ttJ/O).

This Love, then, which (as Sophocles has it) rules " beasts and men and gods" with equal sway, is no matter of carnal impulse or of emotional caprice. Rather it is now possible to define Love (as we have already defined Genius) in terms which convey for us some new meaning in connection with phenomena described in this work. Genius, as has been already said, is a kind of exalted but undeveloped clairvoyance. The subliminal uprush which inspires the poet or the musician, presents to him a deep, but vague perception of that world unseen, through which the seer or the sensitive projects a narrower but an exacter gaze. Somewhat similarly, Love is a kind of exalted, but unspecialised telepathy ; — the simplest and most universal expression of that mutual gravitation or kinship of spirits which is the foundation of the telepathic law.

This is the answer to the ancient fear ; the fear lest man's fellowships be the outward and his solitude the inward thing ; the fear lest all close linking with our fellows be the mere product of the struggle for existence, — of the tribal need of strength and cohesion ; — the fear that if love and virtue thus arose, love and virtue may thus likewise perish. It is an answer to the dread that separate centres of conscious life must be always strangers, and often foes; their leagues and fellowships interested and illusory ; their love the truce of a moment amid infinite inevitable war.

Such fears, I say, vanish when we learn that it is the soul in man which links him with other souls ; the body which dissevers even while it seems to unite ; so that " no man liveth to himself nor dieth to himself," but in a sense which goes deeper than metaphor, " We are every one members one of another." Like atoms, like suns, like galaxies, our spirits are systems of forces which vibrate continually to each other's attractive power.

All this as yet is dimly adumbrated ; it is a first hint of a scheme of thought which it may well take centuries to develop. But can we suppose that, when once this conception of the bond between all souls has taken root, men will turn back from it to the old exclusiveness, the old controversy? Will they not see that this world-widening knowledge is both old and new, that die Geisterwelt ist nicht verschlossen ? that always have such revelations been given, but develop now into a mightier meaning, — with the growth of wisdom in those who send them, and in us who receive ?

Surely we have here a conception, at once wider and exacter than ever

1005] EPILOGUE 283

before, of that " religious education of the world " on which theologians have been fain to dwell. We need assume no " supernatural interference," no " plan of redemption." We need suppose only that the same process which we observe to-day has been operating for ages between this world and the next.

1005. Let us suppose that whilst incarnate men have risen from savagery into intelligence, discarnate men have made on their part a like advance. Let us suppose that they have become more eager and more able to use, for communication with earth, the standing laws of relation between the spiritual and the material Universe.

At first, on such a hypothesis, certain automatic phenomena will occur, but will not be purposely modified by spirit power. Already and always there must have been points of contact where unseen things impinged upon the seen. Always there would be " clairvoyant wanderings," where the spirit of shaman or of medicine-man discerned things distant upon earth by the spirit's excursive power. Always there would be apparitions at death, — conscious or unconscious effects of the shock which separated soul from body; and always " hauntings," — where the spirit, already discarnate, revisited, as in a dream perceptible by others, the scenes which once he knew.

From this groundwork of phenomena developed (to take civilised Europe alone) the oracular religion first, the Christian later. The golden gifts of Croesus to Delphi attested the clairvoyance of the Pythia as strongly, perhaps, as can be expected of any tradition which comes to us from the morning of history.

And furthermore, do we not better understand at once the uniqueness and the reality of the Christian revelation itself, when we regard it as a culmination rather than an exception, — as destined not to destroy the cosmic law, but to fulfil it? Then first in human history came from the unseen a message such as the whole heart desired ; — a message adequate in its response to fundamental emotional needs not in that age only, but in all ages that should follow. Intellectually adequate for all coming ages that revelation could not be ; — given the laws of mind, incarnate alike and discarnate, — the evolution, on either side of the gulf of death, of knowledge and power.

No one at the date of that revelation suspected that uniformity, that continuity of the Universe which long experience has now made for us almost axiomatic. No one foresaw the day when the demand for miracle would be merged in the demand for higher law.

This newer scientific temper is not confined, as I believe, to the denizens of this earth alone. The spiritual world meets it, as I think our evidence has shown, with eager and strenuous response. But that response is made, and must be made, along the lines of our normal evolution. It must rest upon the education, the disentanglement, of that within us mortals which exists in the Invisible, a partaker of the undying world. And on our side and on theirs alike, the process must be steady

and continuous. We have no longer to deal with some isolated series of events in the past, — interpretable this way or that, but in no way renewable,— but rather with a world- wide and actual condition of things, recognisable every year in greater clearness, and changing in directions which we can better and better foresee. This new aspect of things needs something of new generalisation, of new forecast, — it points to a provisional synthesis of religious belief which may fitly conclude the present work.

PROVISIONAL SKETCH OF A RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS.

oX/3io? oans idav eKflva

vno "\66va ' oldev p.ev /St'ov K€ Ivos de dtoaftoTOv a^dv. — PlNDAR.

1006. I see ground for hoping that we are within sight of a religious synthesis, which, although as yet provisional and rudimentary, may in the end meet more adequately than any previous synthesis the reasonable needs of men. Such a synthesis cannot, I think, be reached by a mere predominance of any one existing creed, nor by any eclectic or syncretic process. Its prerequisite is the actual acquisition of new knowledge, whether by discovery or by revelation — knowledge discerned from without the veil or from within — yet so realised that the main forms of religious thought, by harmonious expansion and development, shall find place severally as elements in a more comprehensive whole. And enough of such knowledge has, I think, been now attained to make it desirable to submit to my readers the religious results which seem likely to follow.

1007. With such a purpose, our conception of religion should be both profound and comprehensive. I will use here the definition already adopted of religion as the sane and normal response of the human spirit to all that we know of cosmic law ; that is, to the known phenomena of the universe, regarded as an intelligible whole. For on the one hand I cannot confine the term to any single definite view or tradition of things unseen. On the other hand, I am not content to define religion as " morality tinged with emotion," lest morality per se should seem to hang in air, so that we should be merely gilding the tortoise which supports the earth. Yet my definition needs some further guarding if it is to correspond with our habitual use of language. Most men's subjective response to their environment falls below the level of true religious thought. It is scattered into cravings, or embittered by resentment, or distorted by superstitious fear. But of such men I do not speak ; rather of men in whom the great pageant has inspired at least some vague out-reaching toward the Source of All ; men for whom knowledge has ripened into meditation, and has prompted high desire. I would have Science first sublimed into Philosophy, and then kindled by Religion into a burning flame. For, from my point of view, man cannot be too religious.

1009] EPILOGUE 285

desire that the environing, the interpenetrating universe,— its energy, its life, its love,— should illume in us, in our low degree, that which we ascribe to the World-Soul, saying, " God is Love," "God is Light." The World-Soul's infinite energy of omniscient benevolence should become in us an enthusiasm of adoring co-operation, — an eager obedience to whatsoever with our best pains we can discern as the justly ruling principle — TO rjyefjioviKov — without us and within.

1008. Yet if we form so high an ideal of religion, — raising it so far above any blind obedience or self-seeking fear that its submission is wholly willing, and its demand is for spiritual response alone, — we are bound to ask ourselves whether it is right and reasonable to be religious, to regard with this full devotion a universe apparently imperfect and irresponsive, and a Ruling Principle which so many men have doubted or ignored.

The pessimist holds the view that sentient existence has been a deplorable blunder in the scheme of things. The egotist at least acts upon the view that the universe has no moral coherence, and that " each for himself" is the only indisputable law. I am sanguine enough to think that the answer to the pessimist and the egotist has by our new knowledge been made complete. There remains, indeed, a difficulty of subtler type, but instinctive in generous souls. "The world," such an one may say, " is a mixed place, and I am plainly bound to do my best to improve it. But am I bound to feel — can any bribe of personal happiness justify me in feeling — religious enthusiasm for a universe in which even one being may have been summoned into a sentiency destined to inescapable pain?"

The answer to this ethical scruple must be a matter largely of faith. If indeed we knew that this earthly life was all, or (far worse) that it was followed for any one soul by endless pain, we could not without some moral jugglery ascribe perfection of both power and goodness to a personal or impersonal First Cause of such a doom. But if we believe that endless life exists for all, with infinite possibilities of human redress and of divine justification, then it seems right to assume that the universe is either already (in some inscrutable fashion) wholly good, or is at least in course of becoming so ; since it may be becoming so in part through the very ardour of our own faith and hope.

I do but mention these initial difficulties ; I shall not dwell on them here. I speak to men who have determined, whether at the bidding of instinct or of reason, that it is well to be religious ; well to approach in self-devoted reverence an infinite Power and Love. Our desire is simply to find the least unworthy way of thinking of matters which inevitably transcend and baffle our finite thought.

1009. And here, for the broad purpose of our present survey, we may divide the best religious emotion of the world in triple fashion ; tracing three main streams of thought, — streams which on the whole run parallel,

and which all rise, as I believe, from some source in the reality of things.

First, then, I place that obscure consensus of independent thinkers in many ages and countries which, to avoid any disputable title, I will here call simply the Religion of the Ancient Sage. Under that title (though Lao Tzu is hardly more than a name) it has been set forth to us in brief summary by the great sage and poet of our own time ; and such words as Natural Religion, Pantheism, Platonism, Mysticism, do but express or intensify varying aspects of its main underlying conception. That conception is the co-existence and interpenetration of a real or spiritual with this material or phenomenal world : a belief driven home to many minds by experiences both more weighty and more concordant than the percipients themselves have always known. More weighty, I say, for they have implied the veritable nascency and operation of a " last and largest sense " ; a faculty for apprehending, not God, indeed (for what finite faculty can apprehend the Infinite?), but at least some dim and scattered tokens and prefigurements of a true world of Life and Love. More concordant also ; and this for a reason which till recently would have seemed a paradox. For the mutual corroboration of these signs and messages lies not only in their fundamental agreement up to a certain point, but in their inevitable divergence beyond it ; — as they pass from things felt into things imagined ; from actual experience into dogmatic creed.

The Religion of the Ancient Sage is of unknown antiquity. Of unknown antiquity also are various Oriental types of religion, culminating in historical times in the Religion of Buddha. For Buddhism all interpenetrating universes make the steps upon man's upward way; until deliverance from illusion leaves the spirit merged ineffably in the impersonal All. But the teaching of Buddha has lost touch with reality ; it rests on no basis of observed or of reproducible fact.

On a basis of observed facts, on the other hand, Christianity, the youngest of the great types of religion, does assuredly rest. Assuredly those facts, so far as tradition has made them known to us, do tend to prove the superhuman character of its Founder, and His triumph over death ; and thus the existence and influence of a spiritual world, where men's true citizenship lies. These ideas, by common consent, lay at the origin of the Faith. Since those first days, however, Christianity has been elaborated into codes of ethic and ritual adapted to Western civilisation ; — has gained (some think) as a rule of life what it has lost as a simplicity of spirit.

From the unfettered standpoint of the Ancient Sage the deep concordance of these and other schemes of religious thought may well outweigh their formal oppositions. And yet I repeat that it is not from any mere welding of these schemes together, nor from any choice of the best points in existing syntheses, that the new synthesis for which I hope must be born. It must be born from new-dawning knowledge ;

1010] EPILOGUE 287

and in that new knowledge I believe that each great form of religious thought will find its indispensable — I may almost say its predicted — development. Our race from its very infancy has stumbled along a guarded way ; and now the first lessons of its early childhood reveal the root in reality of much that it has instinctively believed.

1010. What I think I know, therefore, I am bound to tell ; I must give the religious upshot of observation and experiment in such brief announcement as an audience like this l has a right to hear, even before our discoveries can be laid in full before the courts of science for definite approval.

The religious upshot, I repeat : — for I cannot here reproduce the mass of evidence which has been published in full elsewhere. Its general character is by this time widely known. Observation, experiment, inference, have led many inquirers, of whom I am one, to a belief in direct or telepathic intercommunication, not only between the minds of men still on earth, but between minds or spirits still on earth and spirits departed. Such a discovery opens the door also to revelation. By discovery and by revelation — by observation from without the veil, and by utterance from within — certain theses have been provisionally established with regard to such departed souls as we have been able to encounter. First and chiefly, I at least see ground to believe that their state is one of endless evolution in wisdom and in love. Their loves of earth persist ; and most of all those highest loves which seek their outlet in adoration and worship. We do not find, indeed, that support is given by souls in bliss to any special scheme of terrene theology. Thereon they know less than we mortal men have often fancied that we knew. Yet from their step of vantage-ground in the Universe, at least, they see that it is good. I do not mean that they know either of an end or of an explanation of evil. Yet evil to them seems less a terrible than a slavish thing. It is embodied in no mighty Potentate ; rather it forms an isolating madness from which higher spirits strive to free the distorted soul. There needs no chastisement of fire ; self-knowledge is man's punishment and his reward ; self-knowledge, and the nearness or the aloofness of companion souls. For in that world love is actually self-preservation ; the Communion of Saints not only adorns but constitutes the Life Everlasting. Nay, from the law of telepathy it follows that that communion is valid for us here and now. Even now the love of souls departed makes answer to our invocations. Even now our loving memory — love is itself a prayer — supports and strengthens those delivered spirits upon their upward way. No wonder ; since we are to them but as fellow-travellers shrouded in a mist; "neither death, nor life, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature " can bar us from the hearth-fire of the universe, or hide for more than a moment the inconceivable oneness of souls.

1 The Synthetic Society, before which these sections were first read as a paper in March 1899.— EDITORS.

1011. And is not this a fresh instalment, or a precursory adumbration, of that Truth into which the Paraclete should lead? Has any worldscheme yet been suggested so profoundly corroborative of the very core of the Christian revelation? Jesus Christ "brought life and immortality to light." By His appearance after bodily death He proved the deathlessness of the spirit. By His character and His teaching He testified to the Fatherhood of God. So far, then, as His unique message admitted of evidential support, it is here supported. So far as He promised things improvable, that promise is here renewed.

I venture now on a bold saying ; for I predict that, in consequence of the new evidence, all reasonable men, a century hence, will believe the Resurrection of Christ, whereas, in default of the new evidence, no reasonable men, a century hence, would have believed it. The ground of this forecast is plain enough. Our ever-growing recognition of the continuity, the uniformity of cosmic law has gradually made of the alleged uniqueness of any incident its almost inevitable refutation. Ever more clearly must our age of science realise that any relation between a material and a spiritual world cannot be an ethical or emotional relation alone ; that it must needs be a great structural fact of the Universe, involving laws at least as persistent, as identical from age to age, as our known laws of Energy or of Motion. And especially as to that central claim, of the soul's life manifested after the body's death, it is plain that this can less and less be supported by remote tradition alone ; that it must more and more be tested by modern experience and inquiry. Suppose, for instance, that we collect many such histories, recorded on first-hand evidence in our critical age ; and suppose that all these narratives break down on analysis ; that they can all be traced to hallucination, misdescription, and other persistent sources of error; — can we then expect reasonable men to believe that this marvellous phenomenon, always vanishing into nothingness when closely scrutinised in a modern English scene, must yet compel adoring credence when alleged to have occurred in an Oriental country, and in a remote and superstitious age ? Had the results (in short) of " psychical research " been purely negative, would not Christian evidence — I do not say Christian emotion, but Christian evidence — have received an overwhelming blow?

As a matter of fact, — or, if you prefer the phrase, in my own personal opinion, — our research has led us to results of a quite different type. They have not been negative only, but largely positive. We have shown that amid much deception and self-deception, fraud and illusion, veritable manifestations do reach us from beyond the grave. The central claim of Christianity is thus confirmed, as never before. If our own friends, men like ourselves, can sometimes return to tell us of love and hope, a mightier Spirit may well have used the eternal laws with a more commanding power. There is nothing to hinder the reverent faith that, though we be all "the Children of the Most Highest," He came nearer

1012] EPILOGUE 289

than we, by some space by us immeasurable, to That which is infinitely far. There is nothing to hinder the devout conviction that He of His own act " took upon Him the form of a servant," and was made flesh for our salvation, foreseeing the earthly travail and the eternal crown. "Surely before this descent into generation," says Plotinus,1 "we existed in the intelligible world ; being other men than now we are, and some of us Gods ; clear souls, and minds immixed with all existence ; parts of the Intelligible, nor severed thence ; nor are we severed even now."

1012. It is not thus to less of reverence that man is summoned, but to more. Let him keep hold of early sanctities ; but let him remember also that once again " a great sheet has been let down out of heaven ; " and lo ! neither Buddha nor Plato is found common or unclean.

Nay, as to our own soul's future, when that first shock of death is past, it is in Buddhism that we find the more inspiring, the truer view. That Western conception of an instant and unchangeable bliss or woe — a bliss or woe determined largely by a man's beliefs, in this earthly ignorance, on matters which " the angels desire to look into " — is the bequest of a pre-Copernican era of speculative thought. In its Mahomedan travesty, we see the same scheme with outlines coarsened into grotesqueness ; — we see it degrade the cosmic march and profluence into a manner of children's play.

Meantime the immemorial musings of unnumbered men have dreamt of a consummation so far removed that he who gazed has scarcely known whether it were Nothingness or Deity. With profoundest fantasy, the East has pondered on the vastness of the world that now is, of the worlds that are to be. What rest or pasture for the mind in the seven days of Creation, the four rivers of Paradise, the stars " made also " ? The farther East has reached blindly forth towards astronomical epochs, sidereal spaces, galactic congregations of inconceivable Being. Pressed by the incumbency of ancestral gods (as the Chinese legend tells us), it has " created by one sweep of the imagination a thousand Universes, to be the Buddha's realm."

The sacred tale of Buddha, developed from its earlier simplicity by the shaping stress of many generations, opens to us the whole range and majesty of human fate. "The destined Buddha has desired to be a Buddha through an almost unimaginable series of worlds." No soul need ever be without that hope. "The spirit-worlds are even now announcing the advent of future Buddhas, in epochs too remote for the computation of men." No obstacles without us can arrest our way. "The rocks that were thrown at Buddha were changed into flowers." Not our own worst misdoings need beget despair. " Buddha, too, had often been to hell for his sins." The vast complexity of the Sum of Things need not appal us. "Beneath the bottomless whirlpool of existences, behind the illusion of Form and Name," we, too, like

1 Enn. vi. 4, 14. VOL. II. T

2QO CHAPTER X [1013

Buddha, may discover and reveal "the perfection of the Eternal Law." Us, too, like Buddha, the cosmic welcome may await ; as when " Earth itself and the laws of all worlds " trembled with joy " as Buddha attained the Supreme Intelligence, and entered into the Endless Calm."

1013. I believe that some of those who once were near to us are already mounting swiftly upon this heavenly way. And when from that cloud encompassing of unforgetful souls some voice is heard, — as long ago, — there needs no heroism, no sanctity, to inspire the apostle's €7rt0u/Ata ets TO di/aXvcrat, the desire to lift our anchor, and to sail out beyond the bar. What fitter summons for man than rtie wish to live in the memory of the highest soul that he has known, now risen higher ; — to lift into an immortal security the yearning passion of his love ? " As the soul hasteneth," says Plotinus,1 " to the things that are above, she will ever forget the more; unless all her life on earth leave a memory of things done well. For even here may man do well, if he stand clear of the cares of earth. And he must stand clear of their memories too ; so that one may rightly speak of a noble soul as forgetting those things that are behind. And the shade of Herakles, indeed, may talk of his own valour to the shades, but the true Herakles in the true world will deem all that of little worth ; being transported into a more sacred place, and strenuously engaging, even above his strength, in those battles in which the wise engage." Can we men now on earth claim more of sustainment than lies in the incipient communion with those enfranchised souls? What day of hope, of exaltation, has dawned like this, since the message of Pentecost ?

1014. Yet a durable religious synthesis should do more than satisfy man's immediate aspiration. It should be in. itself progressive and evolutionary ; it should bear a promise of ever deeper holiness, to answer to the long ages of heightening wisdom during which our race may be destined to inhabit the earth. This condition has never yet been met. No scheme, indeed, could meet it which was not based upon recurrent and developing facts. To such facts we now appeal. We look, not backward to fading tradition, but onward to dawning experience. We hope that the intercourse, now at last consciously begun — although as through the mouth of babes and sucklings, and in confused and stammering speech — between discarnate and incarnate souls, may through long effort clarify into a directer communion, so that they shall teach us all they will.

Science, then, need be no longer fettered by the limitations of this planetary standpoint ; nor ethics by the narrow experience of a single life. Evolution will no longer appear as a truncated process, an ever-arrested movement upon an unknown goal. Rather we may gain a glimpse of an ultimate incandescence where science and religion fuse in one ; a cosmic evolution of Energy into Life, and of Life into Love, which is Joy.

1 Enn. iv. 3, 27.

1015] EPILOGUE 291

Love, which is Joy at once and Wisdom ; — we can do no more than ring the changes on terms like these, whether we imagine the transfigurement and apotheosis of conquering souls, or the lower, but still sacred, destiny which may be some day possible for souls still tarrying here. We picture the perfected soul as the Buddha, the Saviour, the aurai simplicis ignem, dwelling on one or other aspect of that trinal conception of Wisdom, Love, and Joy. For souls not yet perfected but still held on earth I have foretold a growth in holiness. By this I mean no unreal opposition or forced divorcement of sacred and secular, of flesh and spirit. Rather I define holiness as the joy too high as yet for our enjoyment ; the wisdom just beyond our learning; the rapture of love which we still strive to attain. Inevitably, as our link with other spirits strengthens, as the life of the organism pours more fully through the individual cell, we shall feel love more ardent, wider wisdom, higher joy ; perceiving that this organic unity of Soul, which forms the inward aspect of the telepathic law, is in itself the Order of the Cosmos, the Summation of Things. And such devotion may find its flower in no vain self- martyrdom, no cloistered resignation, but rather in such pervading ecstasy as already the elect have known ; the Vision which dissolves for a moment the corporeal prisonhouse ; " the flight of the One to the One."

" So let the soul that is not unworthy of that Vision contemplate the Great Soul; freed from deceit and every witchery, and collected into calm. Calmed be the body for her in that hour, and the tumult of the flesh ; ay, all that is about her, calm ; calm be the earth, the sea, the air, and let Heaven itself be still. Then let her feel how into that silent heaven the Great Soul floweth in. . . And so may man's soul be sure of Vision, when suddenly she is filled with light ; for this light is from Him and is He ; and then surely shall one know His presence when, like a god of old time, He entered into the house of one that calleth Him, and maketh it full of light." "And how," concludes Plotinus, "may this thing be for us? Let all else go." *

1015. These heights, I confess, are above the stature of my spirit. Yet for each of us is a fit ingress into the Unseen ; and for some lesser man the memory of one vanished soul may be beatific as of old for Plotinus the flooding immensity of Heaven. And albeit no historical religion can persist as a logical halting-place upon the endless mounting way — that way which leads unbroken from the first germ of love in the heart to an inconceivable union with the Divine — yet many a creed in turn may well be close inwrought and inwoven with our eternal hope. What wonder, if in the soul's long battle, some Captain of our Salvation shall sometimes seem to tower unrivalled and alone? — oTos yap epvero

1 Enn. v. 2-3. The World-Soul is supra grammaticam ; and Plotinus sometimes uses a personal, sometimes an impersonal, locution to express what is infinitely beyond the conception of personality, as it is infinitely beyond any human conception whatsoever.

KTwp. And yet in no single act or passion can that salvation stand; far hence, beyond Orion and Andromeda, the cosmic process works and shall work for ever through unbegotten souls. And even as it was not in truth the great ghost of Hector only, but the whole nascent race of Rome, which bore from the Trojan altar the hallowing fire, so is it not one Saviour only, but the whole nascent race of man — nay, all the immeasurable progeny and population of the heavens — which issues continually from behind the veil of Being, and forth from the Sanctuary of the Universe carries the ever-burning flame: Aeternumque adytis effert penetralibus ignem.



Appendix A. The Function of a Society for Psychical Research

THE FUNCTION OF A SOCIETY FOR PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

[The following formed originally a Presidential Address to the Society for Psychical Research, delivered in May, 1900. Hence the allusion to the personal position occupied by the author in that Society during that year. — EDITORS.]

When I heard, in absence from England, that the Council of this Society had done me the honour of electing me as its President for the current year, I felt that a certain definite stage in the Society's evolution had been reached at an earlier date than I should originally have expected.

My predecessors in this Chair, I need not say, have, without exception, been men of the highest distinction. The list has included men whose leadership would confer honour on any body of men whatever ;— on such bodies, for instance, as the British Association or the House of Commons. We have been grateful to these eminent persons for lending the sanction of their names to our early beginnings. And we have other names in reserve of similar distinction ; — destined, I hope, some day to adorn our list of Presidents. Yet for the current year the Council have preferred to choose a man who has little claim to such a distinction, beyond the fact that he has worked for the objects which our Society seeks, from days even before the Society's formation;— and that he is determined to go on thus working so long as his faculties may allow. So have our friends chosen; and if a man may speak thus of his own election, I think that the choice is appropriate enough. For the time has come when we may fairly indicate to the world that we believe our Society can stand on its own bottom ; that it carries on a branch of scientific work which, although novel and tentative, is legitimate and honourable; and therefore that we do not need to put forward in its prominent positions only those names which have been made independently illustrious by good work of other

App. A] APPENDIX A 293

kinds performed elsewhere. As representing the principle that the plain, unadorned Psychical Researcher is just as respectable in his own way as anybody else, I am proud indeed to see my humbler name inscribed after the names of Henry Sidgwick, Balfour Stewart, Arthur Balfour, William James, and William Crookes.

But here one thought must rise— must rise for all who knew the early days of this research, but most of all for me — Would that Edmund Gurney were standing where I stand now ! For us who knew him best the years since he left us have but, served to illustrate his uniqueness and to deepen his memory ; have made us feel how much of the humorous adventure, the sympathetic fellowship, the deep delight of this research of ours has with him passed irrevocably away. On the lighter side of things, we can never renew the intellectual enjoyment of those years of our small beginnings spent at his side ; — watching how his flashing irony, his fearless dialectic, dealt with the attacks which then poured in from every quarter ; — with the floundering platitudes of obscurantist orthodoxy, or with the smug sneers of popular science, belittling what it will not try to understand. On the graver side, we shall hardly see another example of just that attitude of mind with which Gurney entered on this research, — and which made for us so deep an element in his incomparable charm.

For in that many-chorded nature sympathy was the deepest strain ; — sympathy which flowed forth indeed to those he loved in such penetrating and intimate tenderness as few mortals have had the happiness to know, — but which expended itself more widely in a profound compassion for the multiform sorrows of men. And thus, as needs must happen in those responsive minds which hear, in the Apostle's words, the whole creation groaning and travailing until now, there came to him the conviction that the question of life after death was the only test which we could really apply to the existence of a Providence; — nay, that it was no mere articulus stantis aut cadentis Ecclesice, but in sombre earnest, for all humankind, the articulus stantis aut cadentis Dei. Strangely enough, it was for others rather than for himself that Gurney desired this great possibility; his own mournful and stoic temper dwelt little on any personal hope. But he felt that if the First Cause has summoned into life on earth, though it were but one single man alone, miserable amid all the happy ; — one single soul foredoomed to eternal protest and inescapable woe ; — then that First Cause is not a God to whom a good man can offer love, or a just man worship. Alas ! how many theologies does this clear moral axiom shrivel as with burning fire ! how many philosophies does it scatter to the winds ! — philosophies of men walking delicately on wordy bridges across the grim abyss of things, — satisfied that the world is well enough, while round them wronged, degraded lives by millions are perishing in agony and for ever. It was in response to such easy optimism that Gurney 's logic was the most

intolerably trenchant, his sombre silence the fullest of sad scorn; — for in truth this contented blindness of sealed spirits is in itself the vilest woe of man. He could not avert his eyes, and disport himself in a fool's Paradise. He could not weave a web of words, and stifle in a philosopher's dream. Suffer me to apply to my friend for a moment even those lofty lines in which a great poet has invoked the greatest : —

" Thou that seest universal Nature moved by universal Mind ; Thou, majestic in thy sadness at the doubtful doom of humankind."

It is well that this noble figure should stand at the entrance of our research; — should show how unselfish may be the impulse which has prompted to eager labour, — eager even beyond the limit which physical powers allowed. But assuredly the mass of us Psychical Researchers have no need whatever of heroic virtue. We have enough and to spare of such motives as appeal to ordinary men. We have the stimulus of intellectual curiosity, — more richly satisfied, I think, in ours than in any other quest ; — and beyond this most of us, I think, have the healthful, primary desire for the prolongation — the endless prolongation — of life and happiness. I know, indeed, that for various reasons some men of strong and high nature, as well as many men of feebler nature, do fail to feel this desire ; but on the whole one must regard that form of Welt-Schmerz as but a passing mood of our race's immaturity, — as what physicians call a neurosis of development -, — one must admit that usually when a man cares little for existence this is because existence cares little for him, and that it has been doubt as to the value of life and love which has made the decadence of almost all civilisations. Life is the final aim of life; the mission of the highest Teacher was that we might have it the more abundantly ; and the universe strives best towards its ultimate purpose through the normal, vigorous spirit to whom to live itself is joy.

The danger, then, for our research will lie not in lack but in excess of motive ; our minds may be biassed in their judgment of evidence by a deep instinctive desire. For my own part, I certainly cannot claim such impartiality as indifference might bring. From my earliest childhood — from my very first recollections — the desire for eternal life has immeasurably eclipsed for me every other wish or hope. Yet desire is not necessarily bias; and my personal history has convinced myself — though I cannot claim that it shall convince others also — that my wishes do not strongly warp my judgment, — nay, that sometimes the very keenness of personal anxiety may make one afraid to believe, as readily as other men, that which one most longs for.

For when, after deriving much happiness from Christian faith, I felt myself forced by growing knowledge to recognise that the evidence for that culminant instance of spirit return was not adequate, as standing

App. A] APPENDIX A 295

alone, to justify conviction, I did honestly surrender that great joy ; although its loss was more grievous to me than anything else which has happened to me in life.

Then with little hope— nay, almost with reluctant scorn — but with the feeling that no last and least chance of the great discovery should be thrown aside, I turned to such poor efforts at psychical research as were at that time possible ; and now it is only after thirty years of such study as I have been able to give that I say to myself at last, Habes tota quod mente petisti — "Thou hast what thine whole heart desired;" — that I recognise that for me this fresh evidence, — while raising that great historic incident of the Resurrection into new credibility, — has also filled me with a sense of insight and of thankfulness such as even my first ardent Christianity did not bestow.

Yet if I thus find the happiness which sprang from far-reaching Tradition and Intuition surpassed by the happiness which springs from a narrower, but a more stable range of demonstrated fact, I nevertheless speak in no spirit of reaction or of ingratitude towards traditions and intuitions which must yet, for many a century, be potent for the salvation of men. I by no means take for granted that any scientific inquiry, any induction from empirical facts, can afford to man his only or his deepest insight into the meaning of the Universe. I have no controversy with those who say that contemplation, revelation, ecstasy, may carry deep into certain hearts an even profounder truth. I recognise also that our Science is a conventional structure ; that it rests on assumptions which we cannot fully prove ; or which even indicate, by their apparent inconsistency, that they can be at best but narrow aspects of some underlying law imperfectly discerned. All this we may all admit ; just as we admit the inadequacy, the conventionality, of human speech itself. Speech cannot match the meaning which looks in an hour of emotion from the eyes of a friend. But what we learn from that gaze is indefinable and incommunicable. Our race needed the spoken and written word, with all its baldness, if they were to understand each other and to grow to be men. So with Science as opposed to Intuition. Science forms a language common to all mankind ; she can explain herself when she is misunderstood and right herself when she goes wrong ; nor has humanity yet found, at any rate, since that great wedding between Reason and Experience, which immortalises the name of Galileo, — that the methods of Science, intelligently and honestly followed, have led us in the end astray.

It is only in the region of inquiry into a spiritual world — I mean a world of immaterial and yet individual realities — that these truisms are still in danger of being taken for paradoxes, At once the intimate interest and the extreme obscurity of that investigation have long prevented it from being kept fully and fairly in that scientific field where man's attempts at all other knowledge are now collected and appraised.

In their rude beginnings, no doubt, Religion and Science were indistin- j guishable. The savage observed such scanty facts as he could get at, \ and tried to shape both his practical and his spiritual life upon that obser- ! vation. But his need of a theory of the unseen world (to put his vague hopes and terrors into our own phraseology) went far beyond what his i scraps of experience could teach him. " What must I do to be saved ? " i was a question to which he could not find, yet would not wait for an ! answer. He fell into grotesque fancies, which his experience did not really support ; and the divorce of Religion from Science at once began.

The spiritual need which thus acted on the savage continues to act on the civilised man. He too is impelled to build his faith on grounds outside his sphere of observation, to enlarge the safe, general, and permanent formula for religion in various more or less unsafe, specialised, and transitory ways. For it is — as already said — a safe, general, and permanent formula for religion if we regard it as man's normal subjective response to the sum of known cosmic phenomena taken as an intelligible whole. Under the title of Natural Religion this forms at least an element in all the higher forms of faith. Nevertheless it is felt to be inadequate ; because the observable phenomena of the Universe, so far at least as they have yet been observed, have not been such as to evoke (save in some few minds) the full hope, the full devotion which our developed nature yearns to feel. To live by Natural Religion alone has been like living on turnips in the field. Most men demand their spiritual nutriment in a more assimilable form. The philosophical or the poetical contemplation of Nature has not satisfied them in the past ; nor can they hope that the scientific contemplation of Nature will satisfy them any better now. They turn aside from the ambiguous pageant, the circumspect scrutiny ; they specialise the name of Religion upon some clear, swift, extra-scientific knowledge as to the dealings of unseen Powers with mankind.

On such knowledge, or supposed knowledge, the peoples of East and West have stayed in many fashions their soul's desire ; but, nevertheless, we all know too well that even yet there is no spiritual food attainable in the precise condition in which it will meet all healthy needs. We are all forced to feel that in the present divided and unstable condition of beliefs there is plausibility in the Agnostic's appeal to us to halt and mark time ; in his insistence that we have not really evidence, up to modern standards, which can support any definite creed in matters remote from ordinary methods of proof. Some men, indeed, have ventured explicitly to reply that Christian Faith need not be founded on the same kind of demonstration as Science ; that Tradition and Intuition can well supply her outward form and her inward glow. Urged among those who have much of consecrated tradition, of noble intuition in common, this high claim may seem convincing as the gaze of a friend. But it has the inevitable weakness already indicated. Introduce other persons of different race but equally sincere, the Buddhist, the Parsee, the Jew— nay, the saint of science, like

App. A] APPENDIX A 297

Darwin — and you can meet these men no longer on the ground of Christian Tradition or Intuition — you can meet them on the ground of Science alone. Thus even among spiritually-minded men we seem forced back into the view that Science can be the only world-philosophy or world-religion ; — the only synthesis of the Universe which, however imperfect, is believed in semper, ubique, et ab omnibus, by all who can understand it.

This conclusion, however, as already implied, at present satisfies nobody. The Christian says that it is mere mockery to pretend that Science can be the base of Religion ; for it tells us nothing of the spiritual world. " Naturally," replies the Agnostic, hardening into Materialism ; " since there is no spiritual world of which to tell." " The Universe," cried Clifford triumphantly, "is made of ether and atoms, and there is no room for ghosts."

So soon, however, as the man of science takes this tone — so soon as he passes, so to say, from Huxley to Clifford — he loses his strong position, the Agnostic's raison d'etre. Clifford had not really turned over his atoms thoroughly enough to make sure that no ghost was hidden among them. As indisputably as any worshipper of Mumbo-Jumbo had that eager truthlover framed an emotional synthesis which outran his Science.

Is, then, the passivity of pure Agnosticism the attitude with which we ought to be content? Ignoramus et ignorabimus — should this be the single clause of our creed ? Surely that were too tame a surrender to the Sphinx and her riddle ; which, in the old story, turned out after all to be rather easy to guess. Why should we not simply try to find out new facts here, as we have found out new facts everywhere else where we have looked for them ? Just here we have not looked for them yet, because neither the priests of our religions nor their critics have till now been disposed for the quest. The priests have thought it safest to defend their own traditions, their own intuitions, without going afield in search of independent evidence of a spiritual world. Their assailants have kept their powder and shot for the orthodox ramparts, ignoring any isolated strongholds which formed no part of the main line of defence.

This search for new facts is precisely what our Society undertakes. Starting from various standpoints, we endeavour to carry the newer, the intellectual virtues into regions where dispassionate tranquillity has seldom yet been known. As compared with the claims of Theologians, we set before ourselves a humbler, yet a difficult task. We do not seek to shape the clauses of the great Act of Faith, but merely to prove its preamble. To prove the preamble of all religions ; to be able to say to theologian or to philosopher : " Thus and thus we demonstrate that a spiritual world exists — a world of independent and abiding realities, not a mere ' epiphenomenon ' or transitory effect of the material world — a world of things, concrete and living, not a mere system of abstract ideas ; now, therefore, reason on that world or feel towards it as you will." This

would indeed, in my view, be the weightiest service which any research could render to the deep disquiet of our time ; — nay, to the desiderium orbis catholici, the world-old and world-wide desire.

First, thjsn, we adopt the ancient belief — implied in all monotheistic religion, and conspicuously confirmed by the progress of modern science — that the world as a whole, spiritual and material together, has in some way a systematic unity; and on this we base the novel presumption that there should be a unity of method in the investigation of all fact. We hold therefore that the attitude, the habits of mind, the methods, by aid of which physical science has grown deep and wide, should be applied also to the spiritual world. We endeavour to approach the problems of that world by careful collection, scrutiny, testing, of particular facts ; and we account no unexplained fact too trivial for our attention. Seeking knowledge before edification, we aim not at what we should most like to learn, but at what we have the best chance of learning ; we dabble among beggarly elements ; we begin at the beginning.

Into this frame of mind the long habit of our race in matters religious has made it difficult fully to enter. I have found it helpful to imagine what would be the procedure of some extraneous inquirer into the nature and fate of men — some inquirer exempt from their hopes, their fears, their presuppositions.

Let us suppose, then, that " a spectator of all time and all existence," a kind of minor Cosmotheorus, as Plato might call him, were speculating from the standpoint of this planet, as to what was likely to be the true position of the human race in the scheme of the Universe. Such an observer would be compelled to start from the facts before him. He would begin his investigation, therefore, not with God but with man. He would analyse the faculties of which he found man possessed, and would infer in what environment they were designed to operate ; — of what system, that is to say, of cosmic laws, expressing a special modification of the ultimate energy, the energy contained in the human race formed an integral element. His first discovery would be that the obvious material environment, which is all that most men know, does not exhaust the faculties nor cover the phenomena of human life. Most of man's senses, indeed, he could explain as concerned solely with matter. Sight he could not thus explain ; and the study of light would lead him to discover the etherial environment, — a system of laws, that is to say, which, while fundamentally continuous with the laws of matter, does yet supply a new conception of the Cosmos, at once more generalised and more profound. But still the central problem of man's being would remain unsolved. Life and thought could not be referred to the working either of aggregated molecules or of etherial undulations. To explain Life by these two environments would be as impossible as it had been to explain Light by the material environment alone. Might there not be yet another environment,— metetherial, spiritual, what you will? Was there any way of

App. A] APPENDIX A 299

reducing this vast and vague problem of Life to manageable definiteness ? Were there measurable traces of human faculty working in apparent independence of material or etherial law? Such traces, if he sought long enough, I maintain that he would assuredly find. He would find (as we have found) instances of telaesthesia, or perception beyond the sensory range ; instances of telepathy, or direct communication from mind to mind; — nay, telepathic messages from the so-called dead; — signs and apparitions by which minds discarnate impressed themselves upon minds still robed in flesh. How far the ether, in some of its unknown properties, may be concerned in these operations, our Cosmotheorus might be better able to guess than we. To him, perhaps, no environment would seem discontinuous with any other environment. But, at any rate, here would be definite traces of a new environment of Life and Thought ; traces of the mutual action of minds, embodied and unembodied, in apparent independence of matter.

I must not here follow our imagined inquirer further ; but surely we leave him launched upon a series of observations and experiments which have no inherent flaw in their basis, and no assignable limit to their scope.

I have dwelt at some length upon this line of argument, because I think that, in some form or other, it is our duty to have it always forthcoming, our duty to set it before the world in varying expression, until our age is really convinced that this great branch of knowledge, which deals with things unseen, can form no exception to those rules by which experience shows us that all valid knowledge has hitherto been won. So confident, indeed, do I feel in this gradual but certain method of approach —in this open, unfrequented way — that even if it had thus far failed to lead us to any discovery, I should feel bound to pursue it still. But it has not failed. This persistent analysis of unexplored faculty has revealed to us already far more than I, for one, had ever dared to hope. I may surely say with no more than the licensed exaggeration of epigram, that our method has revealed to us a hidden world within us, and that this hidden world within us has revealed to us an invisible world without.

Within each man, I say, there is a world of thought and of perception which lies outside the margin, beneath the threshold, deeper than the surface-tension of his conscious being.

" We were the first that ever burst Into that silent sea."

We at any rate were among the earliest to attempt to explore and map out that strange, submerged region — half lumber-room and half king'streasury — where amid things outworn lie things unborn, and possibilities of our unimaginable Future lurk among the exuviae of our immemorable Past. And yet in this confusion all is implicitly congruous and consecutive ; each trace of faculty, whether it lie behind our actual stage of

progress or before, belongs to a series of developments of personality whose terms have no assignable limit ;— a series which carries us onward without a break, from dream and hallucination and bewilderment, up to the utterances of discarnate spirits and the visions of ecstasy.

For, in truth, from the mind's inward vision we may learn more than from the seeing of the eye; from inward audition more than from the hearing of the ear. The automatisms which steal their way upward from hidden depths to manifestation amid man's sensory perceptions and voluntary acts are found on analysis to contain elements of knowledge not attainable in any normal fashion. Such knowledge is shown in telepathic messages between living men, and in apparitions which tell of men dying, and in evidential messages from men whom we call dead. All this — in Phantasms of the Living and in fourteen volumes of Proceedings — I claim that we have adequately shown. And of late years we have advanced and consolidated these fragmentary and fugitive indications of the spirit's survival by certain records of trance-phenomena and spirit-possession ; — records as yet inchoate and imperfect, yet which must needs be faced and dealt with by all serious men.

But here I must needs stay a moment to prevent any misunderstanding. Throughout this address, of course, I am speaking for myself alone. I am not giving utterance to any collective view, but to my own view of the general drift and result of our collective action. But at this point I know that most even of those who may have gone with me thus far will — and quite justifiably — suspend their adhesion. Few even of my own colleagues have had full reason to believe that matter of real importance has yet been received from behind the veil, and in the world at large the general impression that even those messages which look evidentially as though they had come from discarnate spirits are yet practically futile and incoherent is strongly and naturally operative in checking public interest in what seems so strangely baffling a research.

I will not now protest, as I might protest, against the accuracy of this general impression of the actual facts. Accepting it for the sake of argument, I will confine myself to one simple line of a priori reasoning, which seems to me sufficient to show what, in the supposed case, is our plain, scientific duty. I say, then, that if once it be admitted, — as we are now assuming, for argument's sake, that it is admitted, — that it is evidentially probable that some of these messages do indeed, in however indirect or confused a manner, emanate from an unseen world, — then it is a blasphemy against the faith of Science to doubt that they must ultimately prove to be of serious, of supreme importance.

The faith to which Science is sworn is a faith in the uniformity, the coherence, the intelligibility of, at any rate, the material universe. Science herself is but the practical development of this mighty postulate. And if any phenomenon on which she chances on her onward way seems arbitrary, or incoherent, or unintelligible, she does not therefore suppose

App. A] APPENDIX A 301

that she has come upon an unravelled end in the texture of things ; but rather takes for granted that a rational answer to the new problem must somewhere exist ; — an answer which will be all the more instructive because it will involve facts of which that first question must have failed to take due account.

This faith in the uniformity of material Nature formulates itself in two great dogmas, — for such they are ; — the dogma of the Conservation of Matter, and the dogma of the Conservation of Energy. Of the Conservation of Matter, within earthly limits, we are fairly well assured ; but of the Conservation of Energy the proof is far less complete, simply because Energy is a conception which does not belong to the material world alone. Life is to us the most important of all forms of activity ;— of energy, I would say, — except that we cannot transform other energies into Life, nor measure in foot-pounds that directive force which has changed the face of the world. Life comes we know not whence ; it vanishes we know not whither ; it is interlocked with a moving system vaster than that we know. To grasp the whole of its manifestation we should have to follow it into an unseen world. Yet scientific faith bids us believe that there, too, there is continuity ; and that the past and the future of that force which we discern for a moment are still subject to universal Law.

