512 A. It has been maintained by Rifat (see Revue de PHypnotisme, 1888, p. 297) that during the process of narcotisation, whether by chloroform, choral, morphia, or any other narcotic, there is a period in which the patient is as suggestible as if he were in the hypnotic state. This assertion is repeated by Herrero, of Valladolid {Revue de I ^Hypnotisme, January 1890, p. 195). The suggestible period in chloroformic sleep is, however, very short, unless the chloroformisation is but slight. In one case Herrero found that five or six inhalations of the narcotic sufficed to put the subject into a somnabulic state which lasted as long as he wished. This subject had been refractory until then to ordinary methods of hypnotisation ; but the suggestion now given that in future simple fixation of the attention would suffice to produce sleep, was obeyed. A similar result was obtained in three other cases of refractory subjects. Yet another case, in which the resistance to suggested sleep was voluntary and intentional, deserves more detailed notice, as it throws some light on the probable nature of this method of inducing somnambulism. It is the case of a lady who looked upon hypnotism as a work of the devil, and whose objection to this therapeutic means had the strength of a monomania. Herrero proposed chloroform as the only remedy possible — breathing not a word more of hypnotism. Fifteen grams of chloroform were sufficient to induce, in less than five minutes, the suggestible period of the anaesthetic sleep. The next day only three grams were needed ; and on the following day, the inhalator, empty of chloroform, and applied to the nostrils, produced the requisite effect. After the fourth day the patient acknowledged her mistake, and allowed Herrero to hypnotise her without the superfluous apparatus. The chloroform itself had here apparently acted less as a drug than as a suggestion.

612 B. Compare with this last case those reported by Dr. Auguste Voisin {Revue de PHypnotisine, October 1891, pp. 1 14-16). He has obtained hypnotic sleep in cases of acute mania and obsession by means of slight chloroformisation. " Patients (he says) who throw themselves violently about and struggle and scream, fall after a few seconds into a deep sleep, and answer my questions and my orders in a subdued tone. This sudden calm after the storm is a very impressive sight. A few drops of chloroform are sufficient to bring this about. // cannot be said that chloroformic sleep has been induced. Moreover, this sleep may last several days, and suggestion may put an end to it. Under the same conditions it

513A] TO CHAPTER V 441

has been possible to obtain hypnotic sleep ; it is identical with the other, and lasts as long as I like." Voisin's conclusion is that the narcotic diminishes the agitation of the maniac, or lowers the intensity of the obsession, thus permitting the patient to fix his attention upon the idea of sleep. See also Schrenck-Notzing : Die Bedeutungnarcotischer Mittel fiir den Hypnotis7nus (1891). He recommends the use of narcotics in extreme cases ; and thinks that the hypnosis induced by means of a narcotic is deeper than that which ordinary hypnotic methods applied for the first time generally produce.

512 C. The following is a somewhat similar case of self-suggestion where the suggestibility was apparently heightened under the influence of opium, which at the same time developed a monitory hallucination. The narrator is Dr. D. J. Parsons, and the account is taken from the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 427.

Sixteen years ago I was a little sick ; took half a grain of opium, and lay down upon the bed. Soon as I began to feel the tranquillising effect of the opium, I saw three men approaching me ; the one in front said : " You smoke too much tobacco." I replied : " I know I do." He then said : " Why don't you quit it?" I answered by saying: " I have been thinking about it, but I am afraid I can't." He extended his right arm, and, placing his forefinger very near my face, gave it a few very significant shakes, said, in a very impressive and emphatic manner : " You will never want to use tobacco any more as long as you live." He continued, by saying : " You swear sometimes." I answered : "Yes." He said: "Will you promise to quit?" I intended to say yes, but just as I was about to utter the word yes, instantly a change came over me, and I felt like I had been held under some unknown influence, which was suddenly withdrawn or exhausted. I had been a constant smoker for more than twenty years.

Since the occurrence of the above incident, I have not touched tobacco; have felt ever since like it would poison me, and I now feel like one draw at the pipe would kill me instantly. My desire for tobacco was suddenly and effectually torn out by the roots, but perhaps I shall never know just how it was done. D. J. Parsons, M.D.

Sweet Springs, Mo.

513 A. Dr. Bramwell describes the differences between the so-called hypnosis in animals and true hypnosis in human beings in his article "What is Hypnotism?" in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. p. 213, as follows : —

Mr. [Ernest] Hart believes that animals, such as guinea-pigs, rabbits, frogs, birds, crayfish, and even young alligators can be hypnotised by methods similar to those employed with the human subject, and that they present like phenomena. The only argument in favor of this is drawn from the fact that these animals, after certain physical stimuli have been applied to them, present the phenomenon of catalepsy. Is this catalepsy invariably a genuine one? I am inclined to think that in many instances it is a conscious simulation of death, adopted by the animal from the instinctive knowledge of the fact that certain birds and beasts of prey, except under pressure of extreme hunger, will not

attack what is dead. If, for example, you turn a beetle over on its back it will remain motionless and apparently cataleptic, with its legs sticking rigidly in the air. The moment you turn away, however, it scrambles to its feet and resumes its journey. Here death or catalepsy was in all probability only shammed, and doubtless the insect was keenly watching your every movement and anxiously waiting for your departure. Again, catalepsy is only one, and a comparatively unimportant, phenomenon of hypnosis. One of the main characteristics of the hypnotic state is the rapidity with which one phenomenon can be changed into its opposite. Have we any evidence of this in the so-called hypnosis of animals? I think not. Again, is it logical to conclude similarity of cause from identity of effect? In order to induce hypnotic catalepsy in the human subject, a clear idea of the suggested act is necessary. What evidence have we for concluding that a crayfish becomes cataleptic from a clear idea that the operator has suggested this condition ? It is possible that in some instances the phenomenon is genuine, and then, according to Preyer, the condition is one of paralysis resulting from fright. Now fear is not necessary for the induction of hypnosis ; and, before concluding that the condition is a hypnotic one, it would be wise to exclude this factor from the equation. To do this experimentally would not be difficult ; it would only be necessary to get rid of the disproportion between the size and strength of the operator and the animal, a disproportion which, in the experiments referred to, has always existed in favour of the hypnotiser. Instead of a young alligator, let one of greater age and larger growth be chosen and the experiment repeated. I am inclined to think that in such a case the rSles would be reversed, the operator would become cataleptic, and the subject uncommonly and disagreeably mobile.

See also W. Preyer, Die Cataplexie unci der thierische Hyp7iotisinus.

Also a paper by Dr. J. N. Langley " On the Physiological Aspect of Mesmerism," read before the Royal Institution, March 14, 1884; and Vervvorn's Die sogenannte Hypnose der Tiere.

513 B. It used to be claimed by the mesmerists that the possibility of affecting animals mesmerically afforded a crucial test of the reality of the mesmeric effluence, since effects on animals could not be put down to the power of their imagination. The various phenomena obtained, however, do not seem really all to belong to the same category. Thus the comatose condition produced in sparrows, in savage dogs, in a young bear, in a furious bull (Zm/, vol. viii. pp. 156, 297-99), by the fixed gaze of the mesmerist or by his passes, was no doubt analogous to the "fascination" exercised by snakes on their prey, or by tigers on human beings (^Zoist, vol. ix. pp. 7-9), and is equivalent to the catalepsy described by Dr. Bramwell.

On the other hand, the so-called "mesmeric cures" of animals reported in the Zoist seem to have been generally effected by something like massage. Thus in the once celebrated case of Harriet Martineau's cow {Zoist, vol. viii. p. 301), which had been given up as incurable by the cow doctor, relief was obtained by passes along the spine and across the chest. Two cures of lock-jaw in horses by similar means are reported — one by Mr. H. S. Thompson — in the Zoist, vol. ix. pp. 49-51, the passes being made daily for some hours, and the recovery being gradual.

513 C] TO CHAPTER V 443

Two other cases of the cure of inflammation in horses, reported by Mr. Thompson {op. cit., vol. viii. p. 300), were much more striking, in that the passes were made without contact, and the effect was produced very rapidly. In the first case passes were made for half-an-hour over the injured organ — the eye — at a distance of a few inches, and " the inflammation was considerably abated." In the second case the injury was in the leg, and passes made for half-an-hour at the distance of about an inch from it reduced the inflammation considerably.

See also some curious recent accounts of the cure of warts in horses and cows by " charming," printed in the Journal S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 100.

513 C. Some experiments on young children, designed to test the reality of the alleged mesmeric efiluence, were carried out by Dr. Li^beault, as described in the chapter on " Zoomagnetism " in his The'rapeutique Suggestive, 1891 (pp. 246-68). Having heard in 1882 from a mesmerist — a M. Longpretz — that he had cured a number of maladies in children less than 2\ years old by merely laying his hands on them for a few minutes morning and evening, Lit^beault tried the plan on his own young patients with the most satisfactory results. The children were sometimes asleep at the time ; in any case they showed none of the usual symptoms of hypnosis, and gave no indication of understanding his remedial intentions. From these results he maintained in his Etude sur le Zoomagnetisme (1883) the probable existence of a nervous energy, transmissible from one human being to another, the essential characteristic of which was its curative power.

In reply to this paper, Dr. Bernheim argued that the intelligence, comprehension, and will of infants are much more developed than is ordinarily supposed, and that they probably are accessible to mental influence. Li^beault himself had been inclined to attribute the effects he had found from the use of " mesmerised water " to some form of suggestion, since, — like hypnotism, and unlike therapeutic remedies, — the same remedial agent was used for many different maladies. He therefore carried out a fresh series of control experiments, using ordinary unmesmerised spring water, combined with suggestion, as a means of cure.

He placed a bottle of water in full view in the room where he received his patients. After examining the infants brought to him, he pointed out the bottle to their mothers, announcing that he had there a potent remedy which would certainly cure them. He took care to keep them in the room some time, so as to impress the idea strongly on the children and their parents, and create a general atmosphere of faith in the remedy. Details are given of twenty-six cases of children with various infantile maladies, varying in age from 19 days to 2-| years, except one of five years old ; in these cases there were nineteen cures, six ameliorations, and one failure. In several cases previous treatment of the ordinary medical kind had failed to give relief. In four of the nineteen successful cases he

had added the method of laying on of hands to the use of the water, and in three cases of catarrhal ophthalmia the water had been used to bathe the eyelids as well as taken internally, so that the general suggestive effect might be reinforced by the local suggestion.

These results led Dr. Liebeault to abandon his provisional belief in the mesmeric effluence, and to conclude that in all the cases he had studied suggestion alone was at work. The experiments not only proved the potency of mental influence, even in a non-hypnotised condition, but also — by exhibiting this influence in action at a stage apparently so rudimentary— showed how early the intelligence of infants is developed.

518 A. Dr. W. B. Fahnestock, in Statuvolism, or Artificial Somnambulism (Chicago, 1871), maintained (p. 77), "That this state was a peculiar one {somnus a voluntate') . . . and was entered by the subject at pleasure. That it was a state into which any person could throw themselves and awaken themselves, either in part or the whole body at once, slowly or otherwise, independent of any one else, or subject to any one's control." (P. 78), "I have had over three hundred different individuals to enter this state under my care, and have found by innumerable experiments that they are entirely independent of me. . . . They can throw the whole or any part of the body into this state at pleasure. ... I have had them to throw in a single finger, a hand, an arm, the whole brain, or even a single organ (or portion), and awake them at pleasure. ... I have had many to fall into this sleep — and some who were seemingly determined not to do so — by simply stating that at a certain time I would magnetise all in the room, although I was thinking of other things, and did nothing but walk up and down."

See also a case recorded by Delboeuf {Revue de VHypnotisme, May 1889, p. 339), where a sufferer from toothache, angry at the dentist's refusal to hypnotise her for a trifling operation, " sends herself off" triumphantly in his chair, and eludes his twinges in spite of him.

518 B. Dr. Milne Bramwell has often taught subjects to hypnotise themselves without his intervention. The following statement is from his paper on "What is Hypnotism?" in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. pp. 240-41 : —

Some six years ago I commenced to instruct patients to hypnotise themselves. This was done by suggesting in hypnosis that they should be able to reinduce the state at a given signal, as for example, by counting "One, two, three." These subjects could afterwards evoke the condition at will. I also found that the use of suggestion during hypnosis was not necessary for the induction of its phenomena. On the contrary, the suggestions could be made equally well beforehand in the waking state. The subject was able to suggest to himself when hypnosis should appear and terminate, and also the phenomena which he wished to obtain during and after it. This training was at first a limited one; the patients, for example, were instructed how to get sleep at night or relief from pain. They did not, however, always confine themselves

518 D] TO CHAPTER V 445

to my suggestions, but originated others, and widely varying ones, regarding their health, comfort, or work. Some, trained in this way six years ago, still retain the power of hypnotising themselves.

It is true that the same author declares {Joe. ciL, p. 202) that he has never met with an instance in which a subject had succeeded in hypnotising himself, without having previously been hypnotised by others, and Fahnestock also lays stress upon the practical advisability of preliminary training : '* By observing carefully the instructions which I have given, it is possible for any person to throw themselves into this state at pleasure, independent of any one ; but it might not always be prudent to do so for \\i^ first time.'' But he insists that the "operator" or "instructor" is merely useful, not essential, in the production of the " state." So of his cataleptic patient Estelle, Dr. Despine writes that during the third period of her cure at Aix-les- Bains, she was able to bring about the crise herself by means oi fornndes tnagnetiques . In like manner she could make it cease, and at will she could deepen or lighten her sleep. {Observations de Medecine Pratique, pp. 61-2.) Dr. Wingfield's experiments quoted below confirm these results.

518 C. Professor Forel, in " Un cas d'Auto-hypnotisation " {Revue de VHypnotisme, March 1889), records that he has himself been several times in a cataleptoid state, which — in his own view — is clearly due to selfsuggestion. He was able to open his eyes and to slightly move one arm or his head ; but more extended movements remained for some time impossible in spite of all his efforts. He had the greatest difficulty in rousing himself from this state. There was no anaesthesia in it. Sometimes strange hallucinations occurred, and it was difficult to distinguish between reality and illusion, especially with regard to the sound of footsteps.

518 D. From a paper on " The Connection of Hypnotism with the Subjective Phenomena of Spiritualism," by Dr. Hugh Wingfield, in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 2 79 et seq.

The facts of self-suggestion adduced in this paper were not, I would expressly state, the subject of a series of experiments. The cases occurred quite unexpectedly during a series of experiments on other points ; but owing to the possible danger of such phenomena if carried too far, I did not feel justified in attempting to work out the subject. Hence the chain of experiments is necessarily very incomplete. The experiments adduced were all made on subjects in the waking state. Muscular rigidity, though the most general form of phenomenon produced by self-suggestion, was not by any means the only one met with. Inhibition of voluntary movements, local aneesthesia, even delusions were produced by it in some cases. No subject however, in whom I could produce delusions was allowed to experiment on himself, as it was considered unsafe, so that the most interesting field of experiment in this direction had to be left untouched. All the subjects referred to were men between the ages of eighteen and twenty-four, and all healthy. In no case, except when specially mentioned, had the hypnotic sleep ever been induced, but merely waking phenomena, e.g.

susceptibility to inhibitory and imperative suggestions, muscular rigidity, and, in some cases, local anaesthesia.

We will first take the case of muscular rigidity and anaesthesia,

N., by means of stroking his arm and looking at it, could render it rigid. He could not do so, however, if unable to see his arm.

Fi. could make his arm rigid by stroking only ; this he could do whether he could see his arm or not.

F. could also make his arm rigid by merely looking at it.

E. could make his arm rigid by an effort of mind without seeing it or stroking it.

In all cases they were able at once to remove the rigidity by reverse strokes. These instances serve to show how the degree in which subjects possess this power varies.

F. when he rendered his arm rigid also made it anaesthetic ; the anaesthesia was removed at the same time as the rigidity.

In N. (who had afterwards been sent to sleep), I succeeded eventually in producing anaesthesia. He could then do it himself.

The case of E. was very striking : his power of producing muscular rigidity was astonishing. He was able by an effort of mind to throw his whole body into a state of cataleptic rigidity, so that he could rest with his heels on one chair and head on another, and remain supported in that condition. When he made his hand rigid and attempted to relax it again by an effort of will, he was unable to do so as long as he attempted to bend his hand. If, however, he did not attempt to bend it, he was able gradually to relax the muscles. Those who could produce rigidity of the arm and who tried to produce rigidity of the leg were, at any rate in most instances, successful. Unfortunately, the notes which were made at the time of the experiments on this point were mislaid, so I cannot give the percentage of successes.

Other phenomena of the waking state were also produced by self-suggestion. T. and L. could both close their own eyes so that they were unable to open them. T. used to shut his eyes and stroke the lids downwards. He was then unable to open them. Several other subjects showed the same phenomenon. T. could iix his hand to the table by a few passes ; this also was done by several others.

Other subjects could fix their hands together. The following experiment was tried : Five subjects were taken, two of whom had been previously hypnotised ; none had been sent to sleep. They were asked to put their hands together, and imagine that they could not part them. They closed their eyes, put their hands together, and tried. One could not part his hands, the others could. They were then told to shut their eyes and imagine the operator gazing at them, and saying, " You cannot part your hands." Not one was able to do so. They were able after this to produce the same phenomena in themselves, quite apart from the operator, in their own rooms. They found at first that they were obliged to imagine the operator giving the suggestion, but afterwards were able to do it without imagining him at all.

T., who was one of the five, presents one interesting feature. He gave up experimenting with himself very soon after this. I did not see him again for nearly three months, and then asked him to close his eyes as he used to. He tried, but could not. I then closed his eyes myself so that he could not open them. He then found that he could close them himself.

The case of G, who could fix his hands together, close his own eyes, &c.,

522 A] TO CHAPTER V 447

was also interesting, as showing that suggestions given to the subject by himself may act more powerfully than those given him by the operator. I could only fix his hands together with some difficulty, and then not for long. He could do so himself for a considerable time, and the muscular power exerted to keep them together, if an attempt was made by some one else to part them, was far greater if he fixed them together himself than if I did so for him, and certainly far greater than he could exert by his own will.

The case of P. will serve to show that it is not only the hypnotic subject who is susceptible to self-suggestion. P. had never been hypnotised, or even tried by any one. He was able to fix his hand on his knee by simply stroking it, and it took him about half a minute or so to get it off again if he simply tried to do so. If, however, he made upward strokes he was able at once to remove it. I afterwards tried to hypnotise him and failed. Doubtless had I gone on long enough I might have succeeded, but he was obviously not a good subject.

As regards delusions I can only give one instance. Doubtless many subjects could produce them in themselves if they tried, but I have never allowed them to do so. In the case of C, however, we have proof that they can be produced by self-suggestion. He could by a simple effort of mind make himself beheve almost any delusion, e.g. that he was riding on horseback, that he was a dog, or anything else, or that he saw snakes, &c. If left to himself the delusion vanished slowly. Any one else could remove it at once by a countersuggestion. He made these experiments without my consent, as I consider them unsafe.

[Further experiments recorded in the same paper demonstrate the influence of self-suggestion in automatic writing and trance-utterance.]

522 A. The artificial character of Charcot's " three stages " of hypnotism is well shown by the further development of one of his best known subjects in the hands of Dr. Jules Janet — brother of Professor Pierre Janet and nephew of Professor Paul Janet — as described in a paper contributed by him to the Revue Scientifique, May 19th, 1888, under the title " L'Hyst^rie et 1' Hypnotisme, d'apres la Th^orie de la double Personnalite," which I summarise as follows : —

Blanche Wittmann is one of the best known personalities — or groups of personalities— in Paris. A hystero-epileptic of the most pronounced type, she has never been able for long together to meet the stresses of ordinary life. She has long been an inmate of the Salpetriere; and has often been exhibited there as the type — I may almost say the prototype — of the celebrated "three stages" of lethargy, catalepsy, and somnambulism, of which she realised every characteristic detail with marvellous precision. Arrived at somnambulism, her state could be no further changed by the various means employed, — closing or opening the eyes, rubbing the top of the head, startling with lights or sounds, &c. — and she was led back to waking life through the stages in inverse order.

In all her states she was without feeling of contact, feeling of position, or feeling of pain. When her eyes were closed (in the waking state) she could not stand upright, nor close her hands completely, nor hold a heavy object. She could not hear with the left ear, nor see colours with the left eye, whose visual field, moreover, was greatly restricted.

Such was her condition when she came under Dr. DumontpaUier's charge at another hospital, — the H6tel Dieu, — and was hypnotised by M. Jules Janet.

She passed as usual through the three "classical" stages. But M. Janet, instead of opening the subject's eyes in the lethargic stage — the regular method for inducing the cataleptic stage — continued to make passes, and presently found that she passed into an absolutely inert state, — "the deep state" of Gurney's experiments (see below, 522 B), in which no muscular contraction could be obtained by pressure, nor did opening of the eyes induce catalepsy. After some further passes the subject re-awakened into what seemed at first sight simply a more alert somnambulism than ever before.

But on examining this new condition it was found that Blanche Wittmann was now perfectly possessed of the senses of touch, — capable of perceiving contact, position, heat, and pain. She could now close her hands perfectly, and compress the dynamometer with normal power. She heard perfectly with her left ear, previously deaf, and saw normally with both eyes. It was no longer possible to inspire in her any hallucination.

In this second state, " Blanche 2 " had a full remembrance of the Hfe of "Blanche i," while Blanche i knew nothing of Blanche 2. But when the subject was in her first or ordinary somnambulism, her memory extended over the fully-developed state of Blanche 2, so that we may consider the " three classical stages " as incomplete manifestations of Blanche 2, who had never till now been able to come fully to the front.

Furthermore, it was not difficult to show that Blanche 2 really existed throughout the whole life of Blanche i. If colours were shown to Blanche i (with her right eye blinded) and she failed to distinguish them, Blanche 2 nevertheless saw them perfectly, with the same eye and at the same moment, and, when summoned, could describe what she had seen. Or if Blanche i were pinched or pricked, to demonstrate her insensibility, Blanche 2 felt everything, and, when summoned, began to complain. It is strange to reflect for how many years the dumbly-raging Blanche 2 has thus assisted at experiments to which Blanche i submitted with easy complaisance.

Blanche 2 could also remember what had happened during the chloroformed condition, and could recount ordinary dreams of which Blanche i had no knowledge.

On the whole, then, we may say that Blanche 2 represents, not, indeed, the cojtiplete personality, for that is never represented by any state of any of us, but at least a pretty complete group or co-ordination of the various elements which go to make up a normal human being. Blanche i, on the other hand, is scantily supplied with these elements ; she has only just enough to get on with, namely, motility, speech, vision of one eye, and hearing of one ear. Blanche 2 adds to these vision of the other eye, hearing of the other ear, and general and muscular sensibility.

M. Janet tells me that he has kept Blanche Wittmann for months together in her second state, with much comfort to her ; and that now, though he has ceased to attend her, he understands that her condition in the first state is much better than of old.

522 B. The following are extracts, slightly abridged, from a paper by Edmund Gurney on " The Stages of Hypnotism " in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. pp. 6 1 et seq.

Before the hypnotised subject reaches the profound sleep in which his mental condition is a mere blank, there lie before him two, and only two,

522 B] TO CHAPTER V 449

markedly distinct states or stages, each of which, however, may present within itself a very large amount of variety. We may conveniently designate them as the alert state or stage and the deep state or stage.

The alert state is that in which a "subject" is when after hypnotisation and the usual involuntary closure of his eyes, the strain on his eyelids is released by a few touches and words, and he is restored to what may look quite like his natural waking condition. Sometimes, it is true, the difference is very marked, and he will sit with a vacant air, irresponsive to every voice except that of the operator, and clearly not in possession of his ordinary faculties. He may be made to perform imitative actions, and to obey commands in a mechanical way ; but his consciousness may be at a very low ebb, or (as some have held) may have lapsed altogether. But in any case the "subject's" eyes will be open and capable of seeing; and he will (almost invariably) prove sensitive to pain if he be pinched or pricked. Often he will be found to converse with perfect comprehension, memory, and even humour.

But though perfectly capable of sustaining a conversation, he does not originate remarks. If not spoken to he will sit quiet, and if simply asked what he is thinking about, he will almost always answer " Nothing." The essential difference between this condition and the waking one lies in two possibilities attaching to it, either of which demands appropriate treatment to become a reality. In the first place, if the "subject" be left completely to himself, he will rapidly sink into the deeper state, and thence into hypnotic sleep, in either of which he will prove insensitive to any moderate amount of torture. The passage into these deeper conditions, it should be observed, is often so rapid that the fact of their being reached through the alert stage may be wholly unnoticed.

The alert state is characterised, in the second place, by the possibility of obtaining, while it lasts, certain special phenomena of an active sort. The " subject " can be made to do, and to continue doing, any action which the operator commands, although he may be perfectly conscious of making a fool of himself, and may strongly desire to resist the command. He can also be put under the influence of delusions.

Passing now to the deep stage, we find that this in turn is liable to be confounded with a contiguous condition, namely, the genuine hypnotic sleep into which it tends to merge. It resembles that condition in the fact that the eyelids are closed ; that, if one of them be forcibly raised, the eyeball is found to be rolled upwards ; in the general insensibility to pain and to ordinary modes of stimulation. And there exists here precisely the same chance as we noted in the former case, that the particular stage will escape detection. If the "subject" be left to himself, he will have no opportunity to manifest its characteristics, but, passing rapidly through the period during which these might be evoked, will soon lose consciousness and individuality in profound slumber. With some " subjects," moreover, the invasion of mental torpor is so rapid that it might be hard to fix and retain them in the genuine deep stage, even if the proper means were adopted. But many others, if taken in time, after their eyes are closed and they have become insensible to pain, but before sleep has intervened, will prove quite capable of rational conversation ; they are mentally awake, even when their bodies are almost past movement, and when even a simple command is obeyed in the most languid and imperfect manner. The state is, however, harder to sustain at an even level than the VOL, I. 2 F

alert one, owing to a stronger and more continuous tendency to lapse into a deeper condition.

[The writer goes on to give many instances of variability of characteristics In the two stages.]

523 A. In the paper just quoted Gurney maintained that the phenomena needed to establish the distinction between his " alert " and " deep " stages were to be found in the domain of tneniory, much of the alert state being remembered after waking, but nothing of the deep state. Within the hypnotic condition itself, says Gurney : —

Facts of the " subject 's " general knowledge, his address, business, recent employments, and so on, are remembered even in the deep state.

With a favourable "subject," something that has happened during one of the hypnotic states will often recur to the memory on the next occasion when that state is produced, though in the interval of normality — amounting, it may be, to several days and nights — which has intervened between the two occasions, it has been com.pletely forgotten.

The chief interest of this induced phenomenon of alternating memory lies in its resemblance to what occurs in s^ojitaneous conditions, especially the spontaneous alternations in cases of dotible consciousness , where a single individual lives in turn two (or more) separate existences. The same alternation of memory occurs when a deep hypnotic state intervenes between two alert, or an alert between two deep states. I have then found that (with certain well-marked exceptions to be mentioned hereafter) the ideas impressed in the one sort of state are invariably forgotten in the other, and are as invariably again remembered when the former state recurs. Occasionally I have succeeded in hitting a transitional moment at which both things were remembered; but it was a sort of knife-edge, and the slightest manipulation or pause tending to deepen the condition brought about the customary separation and oblivion of the thing told in the alert state.

The subject was continued, and some experiments illustrating it were given in detail in a later paper, under the title " Stages of Hypnotic Memory," in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iv. pp. 515 et seq., from which I quote, with abridgments, the following passages : —

I made the trials with a considerable number of "subjects," in different parts of England, employing three different hypnotisers, to each of whom the results were as new and surprising as they were at first to myself; there seems reason to think, therefore, that the results are tolerably normal, and not due to any special idiosyncrasies of operator or " subject" ; as they certainly were not due to any guidance, or any interference with the free play of the " subject's" mind, in the remarks addressed to him during the progress of the experiment. The mode of effecting the passage from one stage to another has usually consisted in gentle passes over the face, without contact. It is most impressive to find that a few noiseless movements of one person's fingers, at a short distance from another person's face, have completely obliterated that with which the latter's attention two or three seconds ago was entirely engrossed, and have brought back within his mental horizon that which no other means in the world — no other physical operation, not the clearest verbal reminder, not the

523 A] TO CHAPTER V 451

fear of death, nor the offer of ^1000 reward — could have induced or enabled him to recall.

With the assistance of Mr. G. A. Smith (whom I will in future call S.), I have lately made a fresh series of experiments in hypnotic memory, in which some further points have been observed ; and it may make the matter more intelligible to give the details of a few cases. The great point, of course, is to use the right means for ascertaining whether the thing told is or is not remembered, and to avoid reminding the subject of it.

As I have said, the rule is to obtain two states or stages. [Some instances of this are given in the paper.] If the attempt is made to carry the trancecondition beyond state B, the effect is either to bring the "subject" into an apparently deep sleep, in which he is incapable of answering, and probably of hearing ; or to create such a desire for sleep, and aversion to being questioned, that he becomes more or less intractable. With one " subject " I have found that even the second stage, on one or two occasions, could not be obtained. But there are other cases where the course of the trance allows a distinct? third stage of memory to manifest itself before unconsciousness sets in. The following instance will make this clear.

In state A, S 1 was hypnotised ; and the fact of his being in state A was

ascertained by his remembering an incident previously told him when in that state — that a balloon had been seen passing over the King's Road — and forgetting two incidents previously told him when in state B, — that an engine-boiler had burst at Brighton station, and that two large dogs had been having a fight in the Western Road. He was now told that a foreign flag had been seen floating over the Pavihon, and was then carried on into state B, when S. said, " People may well complain."

S T. "Yes."

S. "Why?"

S T. "Why, the nuisance — those dogs fighting in the Western Road."

(The idea proper to state B is revived.)

S. " No, I meant about the flag."

S T. " What flag? There are plenty of flags about." (The idea proper

to state A is forgotten.)

S. " No, I meant that cart running away in Montpelier Road" — a new idea, which will belong henceforth to the B class.

S T. " What cart ? " Then, scornfully, " Cart running away ! It's the

horse that runs away."

He was then informed more particularly that a horse with a cart had bolted in Montpelier Road ; and the deepening passes were continued.

S. " So they found it bottom upwards."

There was no answer ; the " subject " had lapsed into sleep. He was called by name, and a few reverse passes were made, when he woke with an Eh?"

S. " They found it bottom upwards."

S T. "What? When?"

S. " A boat, I mean." He was then told that a very high tide had washed away a boat on the beach ; but that after a time it had drifted ashore. This idea was suggested in what proved to be a separate and third stage, C, when he was on the very verge of lapsing into unconsciousness ; and he did lapse immediately afterwards. He was roused, and S. said, " That's the effect of not tying it securely." S t's answers now showed that the rousing had carried

him over stage C, and that he was once more in stage B. He said, " Tied ? They never tie them."

S. " No wonder it was washed away then."

S T. " Washed away ! Did it go over the cliff ? "

S. " No ; what do you mean ? "

S T. " That horse and cart you were talking about."

Here, then, was the stage B idea, the boat of stage C being forgotten. It remained to ascertain that what I have called stage C was not identical with stage A — that there had been a real progression beyond stage B, and not a mere oscillation between the A and B states. Accordingly, some reverse passes were made, with the view of bringing the subject into the A state ; and S. said, " I dare say it will get knocked about on the beach."

S T. " What knocked about ? "

S. " What I was telling you about."

S T. " Why, have they taken it on the beach now, then ? "

S. " It was on the beach."

S T. " Why, you said it was on the Pavilion."

S. " What do you mean ? "

S T. " That large flag."

Here, then, was the stage A idea, and the memory of the boat of stage C

proved as unrevivable as it had been in stage B. S 1 was now carried

down without pause into the state of deep sleep — the most certain way of lighting on stage C being to go beyond it in this way, and then to revive the "subject" just enough to enable him to understand and answer. He was called by name several times, and a few reverse passes were made before he answered, " Eh? what?" S. replied in words which would apply equally to carts or boats ; but, as I expected, they were understood as applying to boats — the stage C idea.

S. " Is it customary to tie them ? "

S T. "Yes."

S. ''I thought you said it wasn't." (He had said before that it was not customary to tie carts.')

S T. " Oh yes ; sometimes they tie them to capstans, sometimes to

larger vessels."

He was now questioned about the cart, but had no remembrance of it; also about the dog fight (which, the reader will recall, was another stage B idea), with the same result. Some upward passes were now made, and S. said, " Did you say they tie them to a capstan ? "

S T. " No ; they throw the reins loose over the horse's back."

S. "A lot of people saw it coming down."

S T. " What, the horse and cart ? "

Here is evidently the reappearance of stage B ; and proceeding again on the upward or lightening course, we found the A idea, the flag on the Pavihon, duly remembered. This was on February 28th. On March 2nd the same process was briefly repeated, and it was found that the subject still remembered each of the topics already mentioned when its appropriate stage was reached, and at that stage alone.

523 B. Gurney's experiments, quoted above, on stages of memory in the hypnotic trance were several times repeated by Mrs. Sidgwick and

523 B] TO CHAPTER V 453

Miss Johnson in the course of their experiments on thought-transference with hypnotised subjects at Brighton, the hypnotiser being again Mr. G. A. Smith. Miss Johnson informs me that it was generally found possible to obtain three stages ; but the memories did not always remain distinct. Thus one subject who kept the recollections of the three stages distinct one day, when re-hypnotised on the next day, succeeded with some effort in remembering the topics belonging to all th7-ee stages of the day before, and these recollections persisted through the three stages induced on this day, although the fresh topics suggested for each of these stages remained distinct. This probably indicates that there is a stratum of consciousness in which all the recollections are retained.

The most interesting experiments, however, occurred with another subject, T., who on one occasion exhibited eight different stages with distinct memories.

It must be understood that the test of distinctness of these memories does not consist in each statement made to the subject being forgotten as each deeper stage of hypnosis (produced by downward passes) was reached, — which might be due merely to a general forgetfulness or inattention, — but in the spontaneous recrudescence of each memory in its corresponding stage when the operation was reversed and a lighter and lighter stage continually produced by upward passes.

The following account of the occasion referred to is written by Miss Johnson, from her notes taken at the time, July 9th, 1891. The only other persons present were Mrs. Sidgwick, Mr. Smith, and T.

T. was hypnotised by Mr. Smith, and told that Mrs. Sidgwick was going to talk to him, — Mr. Smith meanwhile, at the intervals between her statements, making passes over him — downwards or upwards, according to whether it was desired to make the hypnotic state more or less deep— but saying nothing.

Stage A. Mrs. Sidgwick told T. that the Hotel M^tropole had been burnt down that afternoon ; all the people had escaped, but great damage had been done.

[After downward passes] Stage B. T. told that the coach was upset coming into Brighton — the Comet — one or two people were rather hurt ; the horses ran away, and turning round a corner too quickly upset the coach.

[After downward passes] Stage C. Told that the Emperor of Germany had to go back to Germany to-morrow, on account of the death of one of his relations.

[After downward passes] Stage D. T., in answer to a question whether he 'remembered anything, said he only remembered that Mr. Smith had said Mrs. Sidgwick was going to talk to him; he could not remember that she had said anything.

He was then told that there had been a railway accident on the Brighton line near Hayward's Heath — a bad accident — the train had run off the line. He remarked that it was probably a false report.

[After downward passes] Stage E. T. was told that the lights went out at the theatre last night and everything was left in darkness, but it only lasted for a few moments.

[After downward passes] Stage F. He was told that the key of the theatre door had been lost and no one could get in for a long time ; the people were all kept waiting outside.

He seemed rather drowsy, expressed no interest in what he was told, and only spoke in answer to questions as briefly as possible. Mrs. Sidgwick asked him once or twice what she had been telling him ; at last he said sleepily, "Key lost."

[After upward passes] Return of Stage E. In answer to the question what he had been told, he replied that the lights went out at the theatre.

[After downward passes] Stage F. In answer to the same question, replied that the key had been lost.

[After downward passes] Stage G. He was told that two goat carriages racing along the front had run into one another, and were smashed. He seemed still more drowsy, and could hardly be got by questions to repeat this story.

[After downward passes] Stage H. He was told that Mr. Smith had been playing a guitar and all the strings broke at once. He repeated this story after being asked what Mrs. Sidgwick had said, and even volunteered the remark that Mr. Smith could get fresh strings.

[After downward passes] Stage K. Mrs. Sidgwick asked several times, " Can you hear me ? " T. at last said, " Yes." Mrs. Sidgwick asked, " Do you think Mr. Smith will ever get that put right ? " No answer, though the question was repeated many times. At length she said, " Mr. Smith dropped his watch into the sea." No answer or remark could be elicited from T.

[After upward passes] Stage H. In answer to the question what Mr. Smith had better do, T. replied, "Strings, — I don't know anything about strings."

[After upward passes] Stage G. In answer to a similar vague question, he showed that he remembered about the goat carriages.

[After upward passes] Stage F. In answer to the question whether it was not funny, he replied, "What? the people standing outside and getting wet ? No, that wasn't amusing."

[After upward passes] Stage E. He remarked, " Ask Mr. Smith who put the lights out — several fellows who were there never told me — funny thing." At this point he began to talk spontaneously in a lively way. (Mrs. Sidgwick notes : " I independently noted that it was at this stage he became comparatively lively, and I did not notice any special increase of liveliness afterwards.")

[After upward passes] Stage D. He said, " They'll have to pay a lot of money. But it was better than a bridge breaking down, or being in a tunnel."

[After upward passes] Stage C. T. remarked, " I suppose the Queen will be put out, but the papers say it's inconvenient to her his coming to England. You don't know who died ?"

[After upward passes] Stage B. He said, " It's a sharp turn round that corner, if you come down that hill. The horses got frightened at the corner, I suppose. Coaching must be very nice." Further spontaneous remarks of the same kind followed, and when Mrs. Sidgwick asked him what else they were talking about besides that coach, he only repeated the coach story in detail and said he knew of nothing else.

[After upward passes] Stage A. He said, " You'd think I might have heard of it — a fire at a large place like that."

After more upward passes T. awoke or very nearly awoke, opening his eyes. Mrs. Sidgwick asked him what they were talking about; he said he had an

526B] TO CHAPTER V 455

idea it was " Something about the Mdtropole ; I was dreaming ; I dreamt it was on fire or something."

He was rehypnotised almost at once ; Mr. Smith made a good many downward passes, then woke him suddenly and asked if he could remember dreaming about anything. After making an effort to remember, he said he had a confused idea of Mr. Smith sitting in a fire, — " Mr. Smith sitting here — three of you sitting here, and something about a fire." All the experimenters thought that this referred to the last time he had been awake, not to what he had been told during the previous hypnosis.

Mrs. Sidgwick revised Miss Johnson's notes immediately after the sitting, and added the following note of her own : —

"The above notes give a brief account of T.'s answers, &c., the questions put by Mrs. Sidgwick being generally omitted; but on each occasion going up the scale, the subject was started by her after the passes with questions carefully selected so as not to hint what subject he was expected to speak about. Going down the scale, she first asked a question which he might have answered in connection with the subject of the previous stage, and asked him whether he remembered nothing, then told him the new story.

" In going up, he always remembered the subject appropriate to that stage at once, and without the effort that Whybrew [the hypnotic subject referred to in the first paragraph of this Appendix] seemed to have to bring to bear."

526 A. The foUowiflg is a case of apparent pre-natal suggestion recorded by Dr. Li^beault in the Revue de rHypnotis7?ie, August 1891, p. 53.

The child in question is a girl of eleven. On her left cheek and neck she has a "port-wine mark," twelve centimetres wide and twenty centimetres long, extending from the collar-bone to above the ear. The mother, Mrs. L., in the course of gestation suddenly one day in a street at Nancy came face to face with a woman, one whole side of whose face was claret colour. Scared out of composure, Mrs. L., who was just then suffering from toothache, and wore a cotton-wool bandage on her left cheek, put her hand up to her bandage ; whereupon, to her astonishment, she saw that most of the people in the street had claret-coloured spots on their faces very similar to the one which had frightened her. This hallucination occurred in the first month of pregnancy, and persisted until her child was born. No effort of hers, no argument or admonition of her husband's, could avail against this strange illusion. However, it did not occur to her that the unborn child might be marked with the very same stigmata which she constantly saw on the faces of passers-by. But upon her delivery, as the child was not shown to her immediately, she became anxious, wondered whether it might not have a claret-coloured mark on the face, and expressed her fears spontaneously.

Liebeault supposes that Mrs. L. caused this mark to appear upon her unborn infant by unconscious suggestion. He found that Mrs. L. was very suggestible, and fell in less than one minute into a state of light somnambulism,

526 B. The following case was recorded by Mr. Francis Galton, in Nature (vol. liv., p. 76, May 28th, 1896), under the title, "A Curious Idiosyncrasy."

4S6 APPENDICES [526 C

A strongly-marked idiosyncrasy has lately come to my notice, which should be recorded. A lady of my acquaintance was walking with a relative, Colonel M., when the wife of a tenant addressed her, and described how the hand of her own child had been pinched in a door. Overhearing her story, Colonel M. became quite unwell, so much so as to lead to particular inquiry, which resulted m showing that allusions to any accidents of that kind affected him at once in a very perceptible way. Finally, at the request of the lady, he wrote an account of his peculiarity, which she forwarded to me. Thereupon I corresponded with Colonel M., who slightly revised what he had written, and sanctioned its publication. It is as follows : —

" From my earliest remembrance, and still up to now, any sight of an injured nail in any person, even if a total stranger, or any injury, however slight, to one of my own nails, causes me to break into a deadly cold perspiration, with feeling of sick faintness. But still further; if I chance to hear any one else narrating in casual conversation any injury of this particular sort to themselves or others, it brings on me exactly the same feeling I have described above. So much is this the case, that many years ago, when I was in the prime of life, at a large dinner-party, when one of the guests near me persistently chanced to go on talking minutely of some such little accidental injury that had befallen him, I turned very faint, tried all I knew to shake it off, but could not, and presently slid right under the table, quite unconscious for the moment. This is the more singular because on no other poinf am I in the least squeamish. In old days I have seen soldiers flogged before breakfast without its affecting me, though some of the rank and file would be very much upset, and in cases of death, illness, or wounds I have never experienced, as an onlooker, the sensations I have alluded to above."

I may mention that the mother of Colonel M. had pinched her own fingernail badly shortly before his birth, and, as is not uncommon in coincidences of that kind, she believed her accident to have been the cause of her son's peculiarity. He writes to me: —

" As a boy I was conscious of this repugnance of mine, but was ashamed of it, and never used to mention it to any one. When I became a young man I one day mentioned it privately to my mother, who it appeared had already noticed it in me as a child. She then told me the incident about her own finger, and she and I being both utterly unscientific persons, assumed then and there that my squeamish feelings about injuries to finger-tips must be connected with her little accident."

In reply to further questions, I learn that the injury to the mother, however painful at the time, was not so severe as to leave a permanent mark. Also, that no analogous peculiarity is known to exist among the near relations of Colonel M., of whom he specifies his father, brother, three sisters, nephews and nieces. He has no children. ...

526 C. The next case is taken from an article entitled " Maternal Impressions and their Influence upon the Foetus in Utero," by Claudius Henry Maston, M.D., of Mobile, Ala., in The Medical Nexus, vol. Ixxii., January — June 1898 (New York).

[I here] present a brief history of a case of very great interest, and since it has occurred under my own immediate observation, I can vouch for its truth. William Y., aged twenty-two years, was shot on the morning of September

526C] TO CHAPTER V 457

24th, 1894. The ball, a 38-calibre, was fired from a Winchester rifle, and entered the rear of the chest on the left side, just below and to the outer side of the angle of the scapula ; at this point it penetrated the chest between the seventh and eighth ribs, and passing through the entire chest, emerged from the intercostal space between the fourth and fifth ribs, two and a quarter inches from the left nipple on the inner side. The exact measurement of the man's chest shows that the distance from the midsternal line in a transverse direction to the centre of the left nipple is four and a quarter inches ; a line drawn from the wound of entrance to that of exit passes directly through the location of the right ventricle ; and it is upon this anatomic fact that I diagnosed the case to be one of direct heart penetration.

I shall not consume time with a detail of the case, which has been the subject of a paper upon " Gunshot Wounds of the Heart," which was read before the American Surgical Association at its New York Meeting in 1895, and published in vol. xiii. of its Transactions. At the time when this man was shot his wife was near by, and reached him very soon afterwards. In attempting to render what assistance was in her power, her hands were stained with blood, and she also had her face covered with blood. When I saw the patient late that afternoon, I found her very much agitated, and seemingly as much exercised on account of her condition as she was for her husband's safety. She then informed me that she was pregnant, and felt certain that her child would be born with a " bloody face." I asked her — " Why a bloody face ? " and she said—" Because I put my bloody hands to my face and covered it with blood, and I know my child will be born with a bloody face." She was an ignorant country woman, and filled with superstitious notions. I calmed her fears as much as I possibly could, and dismissed the subject from my mind. After a long and tedious convalescence her husband was able to be taken home in the country, and I thought no more of the case beyond the remarkable recovery from a severe wound.

During the succeeding spring, 1895, the man and his wife came to the city and called at my office, bringing with them a new-born infant. She said to me — " Doctor, my baby has not got a bloody face, but it has got the holes where the ball went through Bill's breast." Upon examination of the child I did not find " the holes " which she said were there, but in place of them I discovered bright red marks, clearly shown upon the chest of the child ; they were not simply discoloured spots, but elevated nasvi, and bright carmine-coloured spots easily to be seen at a distance of a hundred feet. There they were on the left side of the chest, and although not in the exact anatomic location of the wound on the father's chest, still so near the spot that they are easily recognised as resulting therefrom. The mother had seen the wounds in her husband's chest, and had told me during his illness that they made her sick every time she looked at them.

Interested now in the condition of the case, I made accurate inquiries as to her pregnancy and the date of her delivery. She informed me that her pregnancy had passed as usual in former ones, with the exception that she had been very nervous, and that the motions of the child had been more violent, and were brought on by any noise or excitement. Her labour took place on May loth, 1895 ; was about as previous deliveries. Assuming the term of gestation to be 280 days, and this child being born on May loth, 1895, it is fair to calculate that her conception took place about August 3rd, 1894, and from that date to September 24th, the date on which the father was shot, gives

us 52 days. The question is, — Was the maternal excitement at the sight of the wound in her husband's chest the cause of the marks upon the child with which she was then pregnant? I present the facts and leave the reader to answer.

527 A. According to Dr. Edgar B^rillon, who was the first systematically to apply the hypnotic method to the education of children (see his paper, " De la Suggestion envisag^e au point de vue pedagogique " in the Revue de rHyp7iotisme, vol. i. 1887, p. 84), the percentage of those who can be hypnotised is more than 80, and he asserts that suggestibility varies directly as the intellectual development of the subject. He classes under four heads the affections which can be successfully treated by hypnotic suggestion. (See the Revue de P Hypnotisme, July 1895.)

( 1 ) Psychical derangements caused by acute diseases : in particular, insomnia, restlessness, nocturnal delirium, incontroUable vomiting, incontinence of urine and of faeces.

(2) Functional affections connected with nervous disease : chorea, tics, convulsions, ansesthesiae, contractures and hysterical paresis, hysterical hiccough, blepharospasm.

(3) Psychical derangements, such as habit of biting nails, precocious impulsive tendencies, nocturnal terrors, speaking in sleep, kleptomania, nervousness, shyness.

(4) Chorea, hysteria, epilepsy, or mental derangements considered as resulting from the combination of several nervous diseases.

One of Dr. B^rillon's most characteristic instances may be described. (It is given in full in the Revue de V Hypnotisme, July 1893, p. 11.)

Emile P., eleven years old, had acquired, when he was about one year of age, the habit of constantly keeping in his mouth two fingers of his left hand, the first and second fingers up to the middle of the second phalanx. Ever since then, at night, as soon as he was in bed, he began to suck his fingers, and could not get to sleep unless they were in his mouth. Very frequently he would suck them in the daytime too. This finger-sucking could only be put a stop to by some occupation which kept both hands busy. All sorts of methods were adopted to cure him of this bad habit, without any sort of result. A good many gastric and digestive troubles ensued, which the parents rightly attributed to this bad trick.

In the first hypnotic stance Bcfrillon suggested to the boy to go to sleep without putting his fingers in his mouth on that and the following nights. Although the hypnosis had been very light, the suggestion was carried out. Emile P. had felt inclined to suck his fingers, but had been able to resist the temptation. On the third day after this first stance the temptation recurred with greater intensity, and the boy remarked to his grandmother : *' It's peculiar, but I feel every now and then like sucking my fingers ; but I feel that I am unable to."

After three sittings, in the course of which the hypnosis obtained became progressively deeper, he was able to go to sleep without thinking of sucking his fingers. Since then he has never fallen into his bad habit again. And yet the

527 A] TO CHAPTER V 459

patient was very degenerate : his father was a drunkard ; also his grandfather ; his mother suffered from hysterical convulsions.

In the case of these automatic impulses, the first care of the physician should be, as B^rillon observes, to raise into the field of consciousness motor presentations which have sunk partially or wholly below the threshold. The process of hypnotic cure consists generally in calling the attention of the patient to movements which have become automatic and unconscious. In the most severe cases it is possible to counteract the automatic impulse by creating another impulse which is aroused by and inhibits the first. (B^rillon, Revue de P Hypnotisme, April 1895, p. 306.) Thus B^rillon took firm hold of the wrists of one of his patients while in the waking state and told him to try to bite his nails. This was, of course, impossible. The suggestion was then made that whenever the automatic movement was about to be carried out, the patient would feel a heaviness in his arms, which could not be lifted without considerable effort. He would then become intensely conscious of the incipient movement, and would be able to reinforce the automatic inhibition of it by an effort of conscious will.

For reports of hypnotic cure of onychophagy, see B^rillon, the articles already quoted ; Bourdon, Revue de VHypnotistne, November 1895, p. 134 ; Bouif^, Revue de PHypnotisftie, September 1898, p. 76.

For reports of hypnotic cure of even graver habits, see Van Renterghem and Van Eeden, Psycho-Therapie, p. 250 ; Bernheim, Revue de P Hypnotisme, December 1891, a case in which the habit had become quite automatic and irresistible, and where every other method of treatment had failed ; also De la S^iggestiofi ; Schrenck-Notzing, Die Suggestions- Therapie bei krankhaften Erschei7iungen des Geschlechtssinnes ; Berillon, Revue de P Hypnotisme, July 1893, pp. 12, 14, 15 ; Bourdon, Revue de P Hypnotisme, November 1895, pp. 136, 139, 140; Auguste Voisin, Revue de P Hypnotisme, November 1S87, p. 151.

For cures oi enuresis nocturna, see Li^beault, Revue de P Hypnotisme, September 1886, p. 71 ; Berillon, Revue de P Hypnotisme, June 1894, P- 359 J ^^^ Renterghem and Van Eeden, Psycho-Therapie; Paul Farez, Revue de P Hypnotisme, August 1899, p. 53. This author recommends the method of suggestion in normal sleep.

Liebeault, in the Revue de P Hyptiotis?ne for January 1889, gives twenty-two cases in which hypnotic suggestion was used in the moral education of children from the age of fourteen months upwards, with the aim of curing the habit of lying, excessive developments of emotions, such as fear and anger, and precocious or depraved appetites, etc. ; and of improving the normal faculties of attention and memory. He reports ten cures, eight improvements, and four failures.

For other cases of moral education, see Berillon, De la suggestion et de ses applications a la pe'dagogie (1887) ; D Hypnotisme et P Orthopedic morale (1898) ; Revue de P Hypnotisme, DeccmhQX iSd>'],^'^. 169-180, and

46o APPENDICES [527 B

December 1897, p. 162; Beinhe'im, J^evue de V Hypnotisme, November 1886, p. 129 ; Ladame, the same, June and July 1887 ; Voisin, the same, November 1888; De Jong, the same, September 1891 ; Bourdon, the same, August 1896; Van Renterghem and Van Eeden, Psycho-Therapiey p. 215.

627 B. Nervous troubles in adults have often been cured by the same means. Thus, in the Revue de rHypnotisme, September 1899, p. 73, Dr. Vlavianos records a case of tic convulsif cured by hypnotic suggestion.

Jeanne A., twenty-five years old, strong — nothing special to note in her parents' or in her own personal antecedents. Her tic is the first disease which she has had. It began three and a half years before Dr. V. saw the patient. Her parents noticed that she often shook her head as if in the usual gesture of denial. She was quite unconscious of it. Her attention having been drawn to this movement, it became conscious, but involuntary . She endeavoured without success to inhibit it. If for a time she succeeded, the tic would reappear in quick succession as if to make up for loss of time. Under the influence of emotion the tic was twice suspended for some months. On die first occasion this occurred apparently as a result of the joy and excitement of attending her first ball. On the second, after a great fright produced by a severe scalding. No hysteria, no sign of degeneration, physical or psychical. Hypnotic suggestion and appropriate gymnastic exercises removed the tic at the end of three sittings.

Wetterstrand has used the same method with success {loc. cit.,^. 76). See also Janet, Nevroses et Idees Fixes, vol. ii. part ii. oh. iii., " Les Tics."

528 A. The impulse to steal admits of many degrees which lead on one to another. The removal of the impulse by hypnotic suggestion cannot therefore be fully illustrated by quoting one case only. In degenerate children the impulse may result in action with all the automatism of an unconscious mechanism. When such children are questioned as to the motives which led them to commit the theft, they answer : '' I don't know ; I couldn't help it." Hypnotic suggestion, by strengthening the power of inhibition, and by bringing into full consciousness the impulse and the movements which have partially sunk below the threshold, may eradicate the bad habit. For illustrations see Berillon, Revue de /' Hypnotisme, September 1890, p. 75, and February 1896, p. 237; Re'gis, the same, May 18965 also the case of Krafft-Ebing's patient, lima S., described in his Experimental Study in Hypnotism, translated by Dr. C. G. Chattock (New York), 1889.

Cognate with the kleptomaniacal impulse of the degenerate, but widely different from each other, are two further forms of the impulse to steal which have been successfully combated by hypnotic suggestion. The one is the impulse to steal which is found in " moral idiots." (See cases reported by De Jong, Revue de V Hypnotisme, September 1891, p. 82, and Auguste Voisin, Revtte de P Hypnotisme, November 18S8, p. 130.) The

528B] TO CHAPTER V 461

disturbance of character is even more profound than in the cases first mentioned, for the automatic nature of the impulse has become so far exaggerated that round it crystalUses a partially or wholly independent chain of memory. The development of the disease is complete when the patient's original personality has become split up into two, which alternate ; the one which steals, the other which knows nothing of the thefts. To this type belongs a case observed by Pierre Janet, and described in Neuroses et Ide'es Fixes, vol. ii. p. 197 foil.: — " Le vol a lieu dans une esp^ce d'e'tat second avec amn^sie. II semble que I'id^e du vol, (^veill^e par la vue d'un objet quelconque, produise une Amotion, un choc qui annihile le reste de la conscience, et que cette id6e se de'veloppe seule dans une conscience retr^cie."

528 B. Another distressing but somewhat grotesque case in Professor Janet's Neuroses et Id'ees Fixes was that of a kleptomaniac who stole from everybody, but especially from himself. Worse than the somnambulic hero of an old Ingoldsby Legend, who buried a fresh pair of his own trousers every night in the garden, this boy could keep nothing by night or day from his own marauding hands. He stole from himself when he was asleep, but he stole from other people when they, at any rate, were wide awake, and saw perfectly what he was doing. In fact, the psychological interest of this case lies in the poor fellow's own condition at the moment of his thefts, — which was a kind of semi-hypnotisation by involuntary selfsuggestion, closely resembhng the half- hypnotised state into which an awakened subject falls when the time comes for him to execute some post-hypnotic suggestion. This unwilling kleptomaniac seemed to be subject to a permanent self-suggestion to carry off any object which he particularly noticed ; and his own gaze at a silver spoon would throw him into a dreamy condition in which he inevitably put that spoon in his pocket.

Another melancholy aberration, which is not without its comic element, is described by Janet under the heading of " Dipsomania of cafe au lait, complicated with kleptomania oi petits pains.'''

M™* Pt., a nervous personage, suffered from a dyspepsia which her doctor mistakenly attributed to dilatation of the stomach. He limited her to a wineglass of liquid at each meal, and made her live mainly on dry toast. Her husband supported the doctor, but meantime she saw him drinking cafe' au lait and eating rolls with gusto and freedom ; — " c'etait pour elle le stipplice de Tantale.'" One day her patience gave way. When her husband's back was turned, she threw herself upon a roll which he had left on his plate, then rushed to the cremerie, and made herself an excellent cafk au lait. She was none the worse for it ; her husband it was who died. After his death the passion for cafe au lait grew on her, so that when her stock of milk was exhausted at night she would tread her room in anguished longing till the crenieries opened in the morning. Not venturing to drink more than two cups at the same cremerie, she would

wander about Paris and drink at various shops twenty or thirty cups per day.

All these cups she duly and promptly paid for. But a morbid aggravation came. She wanted rolls with her coffee ; but now that there was no one to forbid her the rolls, they lost their savour, — the savour of petit pain defendu. A way of supplying this savour occurred to her ; — she stole the rolls. She would go to a shop and pay for one roll, — and adroitly make several others fall into a Gampish umbrella. Having collected a dozen or so, she would go home to eat them, and start again.

Now, this poor woman — this coffee-megalomaniac, as an erudite friend of Professor Janet's has termed her — becomes not infrequently very uncomfortable inside. She detests her own obsession, her idee fixe, but she cannot cure herself ; nor had Professor Janet, at the time of writing, succeeded in curing her.

529 A. Alcoholism, as the vice which least easily escapes notice, is that which medical practitioners have most frequently endeavoured to combat. The list of specifics alleged to cure drunkenness is inexhaustible. It is probable that the temporary success of those which have met with any success at all is due to the suggestive action of a convinced physician upon a patient anxious to be rid of his curse. At any rate, it is the vice which suggestion, intentionally and consciously used as a therapeutic method, has been (with varying success) most universally employed to eradicate. Lists of cures of alcoholism by suggestion have been published by practitioners in every country ever since the first impulse given to psycho-therapeutics by the Nancy School.

See Otto Wetterstrand, Der Hypnotisvius und seine Anwendung in dcr praktischen Medicin ; Georg Ringier, Erfolge des therapeutischen Hypnotisvius in der Landpraxis ; Van Renterghem and Van Eeden, Fsycho-Therapie ; Auguste Forel, Einige therapetitische Versuche mit dent Hypnotismus bei Geisteskranken ; Lloyd ''IwQk.t'^ , Revue de P Hypnotis7ne,']B\\ViaTY 1897, p. 207; Ladame, Revue de PHypnotisvie, November 1887, p. 131, and December 1887, p. 165 ; A. 'V o\%\xi. Revue de PHypnotisine, vol. ii. (1888), p. 69, and vol. iii.(i889), p. 353 ; N\div\anos, Revtie de P Hypnotisme, June 1899, p. 361 ; Neilson, Revue de PHypnotisnie, vol. vi. (1892), p. 1 7, See also the works of Li^beault, Bernheim, and Milne Bramwell.

The impulse to drink, like the impulse to steal, can be traced through a variety of stages ; from the most elementary, when the impulse is allowed to follow its course because the satisfaction of it is pleasurable, through the diminishing degrees of the power of inhibition, and the progressive mechanisation of the process, until the impulse becomes irresistible, and is felt as a curse, which the will is powerless to oppose. The complete evolution of the process is to be found in those cases where the impulse and its associated states of consciousness have become entirely separated from the normal stream of thought, and the dipsomaniac presents alternating personalities.

539 0] TO CHAPTER V 463

The case of one of Pierre Janet's patients, Maria (see Nevroses et Iddes Fixes, vol. i. p. 222), illustrates the final stage. She had a hysterical brother and an insane sister. Her father and grandfather were drunkards. She, however, abhorred this vice so thoroughly that she always drank water in her normal state. Moreover, she had no taste for alcohol nor desire to drink it. From time to time, however, she had a feehng of distress which drove her out of the house into the streets. This was the beginning of a dipsomaniacal attack. She drank ether, alcohol, anything she could get. After a few days of such conduct she used to be found by the police lying intoxicated in the street, and would after some time awaken to find herself in a police station or hospital. In her then normal condition she could remember nothing of the attack after the initial feeling of distress that had led to it.

529 B. A case recorded by Dr. Milne Bramwell in a paper entitled " Dipsomania and its Treatment by Suggestion " in the Proceedings of the Society for the Study of Inebriety, June 1900.

Mrs. C, aged forty-four, November 23rd, 1894. Family history of alcoholism. At the age of twenty the patient began to have frequent hysterical attacks, and for these stimulants were prescribed in rather large quantities. Two years later she began to take stimulants in excess, but did not do so frequently, and rarely became intoxicated. From thirty-two to thirty-six she was an abstainer ; then commenced taking stimulants again, and attacks of genuine dipsomania soon appeared. The patient suffered from an almost constant craving for alcohol. She was, however, a woman of culture, refinement, and high principle, devoted to her husband and children, and the idea of giving way to drink was in every way abhorrent to her. She therefore struggled with all her might against the temptation ; resisted it successfully for a week or two, then the craving became irresistible, and a drinking bout followed. I hypnotised Mrs. C. thirty times, from November 23rd, 1894, to February 14th, 1895. From the very beginning of the treatment she abstained from stimulants, but the craving, although much diminished, did not entirely disappear for some months. Up to the present date there has been absolutely no relapse.

Other successful cases, and a general discussion of dipsomania and the conditions favourable to its successful treatment, are given in this paper.

629 C. Nicotinism has also been successfully treated by suggestion. The following is a typical instance, recorded by Auguste Voisin, Revue de r Hypnotisme, vol. ix. (1895), p. 245.

Mr. X., forty-five years old, hypochondriacal, memory and moral power considerably diminished. For the last fifteen years has smoked between forty and sixty cigarettes a day. Pains at the level of the first dorsal vertebra ; constant sensation of fatigue ; emaciated. Heart-beats very feeble ; patient coughs frequently. Nothing abnormal in the senses of sight, hearing, and smell. Taste alone somewhat impaired. Speech clear. Hardly any appetite. Hypnosis was only attained after two attempts by the method of fixation of the eyes or of the fingers. The degree obtained was one of semi-lethargy. Patient cannot open his eyes ; although he asserts afterwards that he was not entirely

asleep. The suggestion given was, first, that he should dislike tobacco, and not smoke more than three cigarettes a day ; later, that he should detest tobacco. Suggestions perfectly carried out. Cure complete and final.

See also Dr. Hugenschmidt, Revue de P Hypnotisme, vol. ix. (1895), p. 217 ; and Wetterstrand, Ringier, Van Renterghem and Van Eeden, loc. cit.

530 A. There are many instances of the cure of morphinomania. I select the following (recorded by Dr. Marot in the Revue de VHypnotisme, February 1893) on account of the psychological interest of the patient's own remarks.

The patient was a woman of thirty-seven, mother of five children, and subject to morphinomania since the age of thirty-one.

Always of somewhat hysterical temperament, she had been since the age of twenty-six a hysteric of the most advanced type ; — violent attacks, anaesthesia of left side and of pharynx, diminution of visual field, etc.; then insistence on keeping her bed, and constant druggings with ether, chloroform, chloral, finally with injections of morphia every few hours. Exhaustion ; lividity ; cold sweat and hallucinations if the injection was deferred.

In 1889 Dr. Marot was asked by the patient to hypnotise her for sleeplessness. He succeeded ; and next day it occurred to him to suggest to her in the trance to abstain altogether from morphia. The suggestion at once succeeded, and she refused an injection on the following day. There was great discomfort, as is usually the case, from the sudden cessation ; but the patient, to her own extreme surprise, resisted all renewal of the practice.

Extracts from her private correspondence give an insight into her state of mind.

^ Septeinher z\st, 1889.

"One idea dominates all others in my mind: the desire to know why I have no desire for morphia. I should be obliged indeed to any one who would tell me why ! I have always Hked to understand things, and it is a real source of suffering to me not to be able to get at this. It is a fixed idea, a real monomania. If any one speaks to me of morphia, I answer as if it were a thing which does not attract me ; if I suffer from the want of it, I never say to myself, ' If only I had some ! ' No ; the idea never comes to me that I could easily get some. Why is this ? I believe that if any one wished to give me any I should resist. One night I dreamt that some one had made an injection, and the sensation was so strong that I woke up with a jump and sprang out of bed, feeling my arms and legs to see if there was a mark ; I thought that possibly I had had a fit of hysterics, and that a doctor had been called in and had injected me. You can't imagine how this fear distressed me till day came, when I could reassure myself. And all day I have been troubled and restless ; the very notion that such a thing could happen makes me tremble."

Now it is to be remarked here that there is practically no moral effort called for. The suggestion, whose efficacy puzzled the patient herself, operated, as she naively said, like an idee fixe. It was, in fact, an idiefixej but one implanted in her for a good purpose, not spontaneous and hurtful.

Wetterstrand, out of fourteen cases, records eleven cures of morphinomania. In a paper in the Revue de VHyptwtisme, November 1890, he discusses the benefit of prolonged hypnosis — causing the patient to sleep

532 A] TO CHAPTER V 465

for a week or more at a time — which he tried in one case. See also Voisin, Revue de V Hypnotisme, December 1886, p. 163.

532 A. Phobies are complex emotional states in which a feeling of abject, torturing, unreflective fear predominates. The object of this unconquerable fear is some particular action, or some particular event ; thus, an officer will be able to cross the barrack-yard on horseback without discomfort, but not to cross it on foot without horrid pangs and reeling gait; a medical man, every time he sends away a patient with a prescription, will fall into an intense fright lest he should by mistake have prescribed poison.^ Each profession, every walk of life, has its special phobies ; and although several have received special names, as agoraphobia, claustrophobia, &c., there is an indefinitely large variety of them. Phobies sometimes appear in people who are afflicted with no other morbid symptoms. They constitute then a special disease in themselves. On the other hand, they constitute frequently but one out of many symptoms of a deeper nervous derangement, — neurasthenia. The latter class are called phobies neurastheniques by the French authors. The former have been called by Gelineau "^ phobies essentielles ; and Freud has given to the state which is specially favourable to their evolution, — a state entirely distinct, according to him, from neurasthenia, — the name of Angstneurose. According to Hartenberg ® these phobies cannot be cured by suggestion, as their origin is to be found in organic derangements. However this may be, it is at least certain that the great majority of the phobies which have been cured by hypnotic suggestion are clearly phobies neurastheniques, and it is most probable that the removal of the phobia will arrest the development of the neurasthenia, and contribute largely to the restoration of neural stability.

For the use of the psycho-therapeutic method in the treatment of neurasthenia see Bernheim, Hypnotisme ; Suggestion ; Psycho-therapie (he expresses the opinion that inherited neurasthenia is very difficult to cure by suggestion, if not incurable) ; Bernheim, Revue de P Hypnotisme, 1892, pp. 23, 225 ; von Schrenck-Notzing, Die psychische Behandlung der Neurasthenie ; Van Renterghem and Van Eeden, Psycho-therapie, p. 162 et seq. (according to these authors even inherited neurasthenia can be cured with time, tact, and patience) ; Wetterstrand, Der Hypnotismus und seine Anwendung in der praktischen Medicin ; Ringier, Erfolge des the?-apeutischen Hypnotismus in der Landpraxis.

In all the cases just referred to, the removal of phobies was incidental

Cf. Berillon, "Les Phobies Professionnelles," Revue de f Hypnotisme, August 1894, p. 33 ; " Phobies et Service Militaire," Revue de V Hypnotisme, February 1894, p. 241.

See observations on" Phobies Essentielles," in Gelineau's " Peurs Maladives ou Phobies;" also Revue de V Hypnotisme, August 1896, p. 51, and September 1898, p. 79.

3 See communications on " Nevroses d'Angoisse " to the International Congresses of Psychology and Neurology at Paris, 1900.

VOL. I. 2 G

to the cure of the neurasthenia. In the following Appendices I quote some cases of the direct removal of phobies by hypnotic suggestion.

532 B. In the Revue de VHypnotisme, July 1899, p. 11, Dr. Vlavianos reports a case of agoraphobia cured by hypnotic suggestion.

Victor L., fifty-two years old. Bad hereditary conditions. His father was very irritable ; his mother also ; she besides had a tic and frequent headaches. Grandfather died at Bicetre asylum. L. is one of nine children, seven of whom died of convulsions. He has had two children, one of whom died of convulsions ; the other has kleptomania. From the age of twenty-one L. drank immoderately, after various accidents, paraplegia set in; this passed off at the end of six months. The first time he attempted to go out after his recovery he found he could not remain on his terrace nor look at the horizon without giddiness and terror. He could not cross an open space or a bridge. He was equally afraid of going in a tramcar or a carriage. His terror was much more intense in lonely than in busy streets. He was also afraid of remaining alone. At church the sound of the organ terrified him. In this case we see agoraphobia, musicophobia, &c. Strange to say, he had no fear of empty space in the country, but only in the town. Besides this, there were delusions of persecution and all sorts of eccentricities. Six stances of hypnotic suggestion removed the agoraphobia, so that the patient could walk about the boulevards in comfort, even unaccompanied. The other phobies were successively removed. The cure was complete.

See also Vlavianos, Revue de VHypnotisme, April 1899, p. 299 ; Godorichze, Revue de T Hypnotisme, 1893, p. 53 ; Gelineau, " De I'H^matophobie," Revue de rHypnotisme, 1893, p. 39.

532 C. In the Revue de PHypiiotisme, June 1893, Dr. Mavroukakis reports a case of agoraphobia cured by hypnotic suggestion.

Jules J., sixty-four years old. No hereditary antecedents. Venereal excesses from the age of fourteen. Has always smoked immoderately- Contracted yellow fever in Brazil. No physical stigmata of degeneration ; fairly good intellect and memory ; frequent giddiness, probably due to the use of tobacco. At the age of ten he had morbid aversions for knives, scissors, &c. Later these fears waxed more intense ; he could not venture into the street unaccompanied. At the same time appeared impulsive obsessions. Thus, while on a steamer, he suddenly felt an impulse to jump overboard and drown himself, which he was only just able to inhibit. In his own words : "he is afraid of extended space." He cannot cross a square, nor walk alone in the streets; he is afraid of fear, even in his dreams. He does not dare to go out alone, lest some accident should happen. He fears the unknown. And yet he is in other ways a very courageous man. He will rush through flames to save people from burning alive. He has in Brazil nursed many cases of yellow fever without giving a thought to his own danger. He is of an inquiring turn of mind, tries to discover reasons for everything, but cannot find any for his morbid fears.

Suggestion in the waking and the hypnotic state brought about a marked improvement, which gave hopes of a complete cure. After thirteen hypnotic stances he was able to go out alone, cross the streets and the squares, travel on the top of an omnibus without any impulse to throw himself over the side.

532 D] TO CHAPTER V 467

532 D. In a paper " On Imperative Ideas," published in Brain (Summer and Autumn, 1895), Dr. Bramwell gives a brief historical account and discussion of different varieties of phobies, &c., and a list of references to the most important papers on the subject. He describes the effect of hypnotic suggestion on many cases, including ten treated by himself. In one of these the patient, an athletic and strong man, whose mother had died from cancer of the breast, contracted a dread of this disease w^hich developed into a firm conviction that his left breast was infected by it. He spent his days confined almost continually in one room, and would not pass into another without muffling himself up and putting on an overcoat. His health naturally suffered ; his muscles were gradually wasting from disuse. All his morbid ideas were removed by hypnotic suggestion. He was entirely cured in a month, and suffered no relapse.

Another man suffered acutely from the fixed idea that every one noticed and criticised him, and he would blush whenever looked at. This morbid self-consciousness, which tortured him, and made him cherish ideas of suicide, was finally removed by hypnotic suggestion.

One lady, who had been a sleep-walker in girlhood, had so persistent a dread of having attacks of somnambulism, that she could not go to sleep unless she were securely tied to the bedposts. No argument, however much she might recognise its logical cogency, could avail to remove her baseless fears. She was first hypnotised for insomnia, and two months later a single suggestive treatment completely cured her morbid fears of sleep-walking.

The most remarkable case in this group, both from its clinical interest and its therapeutic importance, is undoubtedly that of Mr. G., aged twenty-eight.

His father was very nervous and passionate, and had suffered from " brain fever " and chorea. The patient is slight and undersized, and suffers from various neurasthenic symptoms. At the age of fourteen he had many religious doubts and fears, and believed he had committed the unpardonable sin. At the age of sixteen, while working in a cocoa manufactory, he began to fear that the red lead which was used in fastening certain hot pipes might get into the tins containing cocoa, and so poison people. This was the commencement of a folic du dotite and delire du toucher which have never since left him. Instead of going on with his work, he was irresistibly impelled to clean and reclean the tins. The following is taken from the letter of a friend to whom he confided his troubles : " On October ist, 189T, he told me that he had attempted to commit suicide, as his life was so miserable [he had taken poison]. He had read of a case of poisoning through eating chocolate, and connected himself with it, though it was five years since he had helped to manufacture any. He now believed he might have been careless with the moulds, and thus have produced a poisoned chocolate, which years afterwards had caused the child's death ! The grotesque absurdity of the story, as he related it to me, would have made me laugh, had I not felt how terribly real it was to him. His vivid

imagination had pictured every incident of the tragedy ; the child buying the chocolate, running home full of happiness, then becoming ill, and gradually sickening in awful agony till released by death. The keenness of mind with which he sought to prove the reasonableness of his belief that he had poisoned the child was extraordinary. He wrote : ' Yesterday I was unscrewing some gas burners in a provision shop and got some white lead on my hands, and I have been thinking that it may have got amongst the food.' I found that brooding over this fancy had brought him to the verge of despair, and for weeks his life was a perpetual agony. He worried himself about his work of fixing advertisement plates to walls, and can never persuade himself that they are securely fastened. He fancies the nails are bad, or the mortar loose, and makes himself ill over it. I have pointed out to him that if a plate fell, it would almost inevitably slide down the wall. This has not prevented him from painting a most elaborate mental picture of the decapitation of an unfortunate youngster who happened to be playing marbles with his head against the wall. To enumerate all his troubles would take a small volume. I have a great pile of his letters before me now, and I suppose they constitute one of the most extraordinary analytical autobiographies it would be possible to find. In reading them I cannot help marvelling at the strange unshapely wonder of such an imagination. He makes every incident in his life the foundation stone of a castle of fancies, and of late years each castle has become a prison — a torture-chamber in which he has dissected his motives and his actions until he has ceased to believe in himself at all."

When I first saw this patient the folie du doute and delire du toucher were constant and most varied in their manifestations. If he accidentally touched persons in the street, he began to fear that he might have injured them, and exaggerated the touch into a more or less violent push. If the person touched were a woman, he feared that she might have been pregnant, and that he might have injured the child. If he saw a piece of orange peel on the pavement, he kicked it into the road, but soon afterwards began to think this was a more dangerous place, as any one slipping on it might strike his head against the curb-stone, and so he was irresistibly impelled to return and put it in its former position. At one time he used to bind himself to perform certain acts, by vowing he would give God his money if he did not do them. Then sometimes he was uncertain if he had vowed or not. Owing to this he gave sums to religious objects which were quite disproportionate to his income. Apart from his peculiar fancies I found the patient perfectly rational and intelligent, and though his delire dti toucher hindered him greatly in his work, he generally managed to execute it, though on some occasions he was compelled to abandon the attempt. At this time I tried to hypnotise him on twenty-four occasions, but apparently without success, and he was then compelled to leave town. He returned on April 2nd, 1895, for a week's further treatment, and told me that since his former visit his morbid ideas had not been so frequent and marked, and were accompanied with less mental agony. His condition, however, leaves much to be desired.

Dr. Branfiwell informs me that this patient has since recovered. 533 A. From Dr. J. Milne Bramwell's " What is Hypnotism?" Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. p. 241.

Although Braid and Bernheim dififer on many points [with regard to the theory of hypnotism], they are in complete agreement as to the main factor in

533 A] TO CHAPTER V 469

