702. If we would measure such a base, the jungle must be cleared to begin with. Let us move for a while among first definitions ; trying to make clear to ourselves what kind of thing it is that we are endeavouring to trace or discover. In popular parlance, we are looking out for ghosts. What connotation, then, are we to give to the word " ghost " — a word which has embodied so many unfounded theories and causeless fears? It would be more satisfactory, in the present state of our knowledge, simply to collect facts without offering speculative comment. But it seems safer to begin by briefly pointing out the manifest errors of the traditional view; since that tradition, if left unnoticed, would remain lodged in the background even of many minds which have never really accepted it.

702] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 3

Briefly, then, the popular view regards a " ghost " as a deceased person permitted by Providence to hold communication with survivors. And this short definition contains, I think, at least three unwarrantable assumptions.

In the first place, such words as permission and Providence are simply neither more nor less applicable to this phenomenon than to any other. We conceive that all phenomena alike take place in accordance with the laws of the universe, and consequently by permission of the Supreme Power in the universe. Undoubtedly the phenomena with which we are dealing are in this sense permitted to occur. But there is no a priori reason whatever for assuming that they are permitted in any especial sense of their own, or that they form exceptions to law, instead of being exemplifications of law. Nor is there any a posteriori reason for supposing any such inference to be deducible from a study of the phenomena themselves. If we attempt to find in these phenomena any poetical justice or manifest adaptation to human cravings, we shall be just as much disappointed as if we endeavoured to find a similar satisfaction in the ordinary course of terrene history.

In the second place, we have no warrant for the assumption that the phantom seen, even though it be somehow caused by a deceased person, is that deceased person, in any ordinary sense of the word. Instead of appealing to the crude analogy of the living friend who, when he has walked into the room, is in the room, we shall find for the ghost a much closer parallel in those hallucinatory figures or phantasms which living persons can sometimes project at a distance. When Mr. Kirk, for instance, caused by an effort of will an apparition of himself to a waking percipient out of sight (see 668 B), he was himself awake and conscious in the place where, not his phantom, but his body, stood. Whatever, then, that phantom was — however generated or conditioned — we cannot say that it was himself. And equally unjustifiable must be the common parlance which speaks of the ghost as though it were the deceased person himself — a revenant coming back amongst living men.

All this, of course, will be already familiar to most of my readers, and only needs repetition here because experience shows that when — as with these post-mortem phantoms — the deceased person has gone well out of sight or reach there is a fresh tendency, so to say, to anthropomorphose the apparition ; to suppose that, as the deceased person is not provably anywhere else, he is probably here ; and that the apparition is bound to behave accordingly. All such assumptions must be dismissed, and the phantom must be taken on its merits, as indicating merely a certain connection with the deceased, the precise nature of that connection being a part of the problem to be solved.

And in the third place, just as we must cease to say that the phantom is the deceased, so also must we cease to ascribe to the phantom the motives by which we imagine that the deceased might be swayed. We must

therefore exclude from our definition of a ghost any words which assume its intention to communicate with the living. It may bear such a relation to the deceased that it can reflect or represent his presumed wish to communicate, or it may not. If, for instance, its relation to his postmortem life be like the relation of my dreams to my earthly life, it may represent little that is truly his, save such vague memories and instincts as give a dim individuality to each man's trivial dreams.

703. Let us attempt, then, a truer definition. Instead of describing a " ghost " as a dead person permitted to communicate with the living, let us define it as a manifestation of persistent personal energy, or as an indication that some kind of force is being exercised after death which is in some way connected with a person previously known on earth. In this definition we have eliminated, as will be seen, a great mass of popular assumptions. Yet we' must introduce a further proviso, lest our definition still seem to imply an assumption which we have no right to make. It is theoretically possible that this force or influence, which after a man's death creates a phantasmal impression of him, may indicate no continuing action on his part, but may be some residue of the force or energy which he generated while yet alive. There may be veridical afterimages— such as Gurney hints at {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 417) when in his comments on the recurring figure of an old woman — seen on the bed where she was murdered — he remarks that this figure suggests not so much " any continuing local interest on the part of the deceased person, as the survival of a mere image, impressed, we cannot guess how, on we cannot guess what, by that person's physical organism, and perceptible at times to those endowed with some cognate form of sensitiveness." (I quote the case referred to in 733 B, and a second similar one in 745 B.)

Strange as this notion may seem, it is strongly suggested by many of the cases of haunting which are referred to later in this chapter. We shall presently find (see 745-751) that there is strong evidence for the recurrence of the same hallucinatory figures in the same localities, but weak evidence to indicate any purpose in most of these figures, or any connection with bygone individuals, or with such tragedies as are popularly supposed to start a ghost on its career. In some of these cases of frequent, meaningless recurrence of a figure in a given spot, we are driven to wonder whether it can be some deceased person's past frequentation of that spot, rather than any fresh action of his after death, which has generated what I have termed the veridical after-image — veridical in the sense that it communicates information, previously unknown to the percipient, as to a former inhabitant of the haunted locality.

Such are some of the questions which our evidence suggests. And I may point out that the very fact that such bizarre problems should present themselves at every turn does in a certain sense tend to show that these

704] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 5

apparitions are not purely subjective things, — do not originate merely in the percipient's imagination. For they are not like what any man would have imagined. What man's mind does tend to fancy on such topics may be seen in the endless crop of fictitious ghost stories, which furnish, indeed, a curious proof of the persistence of preconceived notions. For they go on being framed according to canons of their own, and deal with a set of imaginary phenomena quite different from those which actually occur. The actual phenomena, I may add, could scarcely be made romantic. One true " ghost story " is apt to be very like another, and most of them to be fragmentary and apparently meaningless. Their meaning, that is to say, lies in their conformity, not to the mythopceic instinct of mankind, which fabricates and enjoys the fictitious tales, but to some unknown law, not based on human sentiment or convenience at all.

And thus, absurdly enough, we sometimes hear men ridicule the phenomena which actually do happen, simply because those phenomena do not suit their preconceived notions of what ghostly phenomena ought to be ; — not perceiving that this very divergence, this very unexpectedness, is in itself no slight indication of an origin outside the minds which obviously were so far from anticipating anything of the kind.

704. And in fact the very qualities which are most apt to raise derision are such as the evidence set forth in the earlier chapters of this work might reasonably lead us to expect. For I hold that now for the first time can we form a conception of ghostly communications which shall in any way consist or cohere with more established conceptions ; which can be presented as in any way a development of facts which are already experimentally known. Two preliminary conceptions were needed — conceptions in one sense ancient enough ; but yet the first of which has only in this generation found its place in science, while the second is as yet awaiting its brevet of orthodoxy. The first conception is that with which hypnotism and various automatisms have familiarised us, — the conception of multiplex personality, of the potential co-existence of many states and many memories in the same individual. The second is the conception of telepathy ; of the action of mind on mind apart from the ordinary organs of^liense ; and especially of its action by means of hallucinations ; — by the generation of veridical phantasms which form, as it were, messages from men still in the flesh. And I believe that these two conceptions are in this way connected, that the telepathic message generally starts from, and generally impinges upon, a subconscious or submerged stratum in both agent and percipient.1 Wherever there is hallucination, whether delusive or veridical, I hold that a message of some sort is forcing its way upwards from one stratum of personality to another, — a message which may be merely dreamlike and incoherent, or which may symbolise a fact otherwise unreachable by the percipient personality. And the mechanism seems much the same whether 1 See Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 231.

the message's path be continued within one individual or pass between two ; whether A's own submerged self be signalling to his emergent self or B be telepathically stimulating the hidden fountains of perception in A. If anything like this be true, it seems plainly needful that all that we know of abnormal or supernormal communications between minds, or states of the same mind, still embodied in flesh, should be searched for analogies which may throw light on this strangest mode of intercourse between embodied and disembodied minds. Our steps on this uncertain ground must needs be short and wavering. But they may help to mark the right direction for future inquiry, and to dispel certain vulgar preconceptions which can only mislead.

A communication (if such a thing exists) from a departed person to a person still on earth is, at any rate, a communication from a mind in one state of existence to a mind in a very different state of existence. And it is, moreover, a communication from one mind to another which passes through some channel other than the ordinary channels of sense, since on one side of the gulf no material sense-organs exist. It will apparently be an extreme instance of both these classes — of communications between state and state,1 and of telepathic communications ; and we ought, therefore, to approach it by considering the less advanced cases of both these types.

On what occasions do we commonly find a mind conversing with another mind not on the same plane with itself? — with a mind inhabiting in some sense a different world, and viewing the environment with a difference of outlook greater than the mere difference of character of the two personages will account for?

The first instance of this sort which will occur to us lies in spontaneous somnambulism, or colloquy between a person asleep and a person awake. And observe here how slight an accident allows us to enter into converse with a state which at first sight seems a type of incommunicable isolation. " Awake, we share our world," runs the old saying, " but each dreamer inhabits a world of his own." Yet the dreamer, apparently so self-enclosed, may be gently led, or will spontaneously enter, into converse with waking men.

The somnambulist, or rather the somniloquist — for it is the talking rather than the walking which is the gist of the matter — is thus our first natural type of the revenant.

And observing the habits of somnambulists, we note that the degree in which they can communicate with other minds varies greatly in different

1 Some word is much needed to express communications between one state and another, e.g. between the somnambulic and the waking state, or, in hypnotism, the cataleptic and the somnambulic, &c. The word " methectic " (/j.€0fKTiic6s) seems to me the most suitable, especially since neOel-is happens to be the word used by Plato (Farm. 132 D.) for participation between ideas and concrete objects. Or the word " inter-state " might be pressed into this new duty.

705] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 7

cases. One sleep-waker will go about his customary avocations without recognising the presence of any other person whatever; another will recognise certain persons only, or will answer when addressed, but only on certain subjects, his mind coming into contact with other minds only on a very few points. Rarely or never will a somnambulist spontaneously notice what other persons are doing, and adapt his own actions thereto.

Next let us turn from natural to induced sleep-waking, from idiopathic somnambulism to the hypnotic trance. Here, too, throughout the different stages of the trance, we find a varying and partial (or elective) power of communication. Sometimes the entranced subject makes no sign whatever ; sometimes he seems able to hear and answer one person, or certain persons, and not others ; sometimes he will talk freely to all ; but, however freely he may talk, he is not exactly his waking self, and as a rule he has no recollection, or a very imperfect recollection, in waking life of what he has said or done in his trance.

Judging, then, from such analogy as communications from one living state to another can suggest to us, we shall expect that the communication of a disembodied or discarnate person with an incarnate, if such exist, will be subject to narrow limitations, and very possibly will not form a part of the main current of the supposed discarnate consciousness.

705. These preliminary considerations are applicable to any kind of alleged communication from the departed — whether well or ill evidenced ; whether conveyed in sensory or in motor form.

Let us next consider what types of communication from the dead our existing evidence of communications among the living suggests to us as analogically possible. It appears to me that there is an important parallelism running through each class of our experiments in automatism and each class of our spontaneous phenomena. Roughly speaking, we may say that our experiment and observation up to this point have comprised five different stages of phenomena, viz., (I.) hypnotic suggestion; (II.) telepathic experiments; (III.) spontaneous telepathy during life; (IV.) phantasms at death; (V.) phantasms after death. And we find, I think, that the same types of communication meet us at each stage ; so that this recurrent similarity of types raises a presumption that the underlying mechanism of manifestation at each stage may be in some way similar.

Again using a mere rough form of division, we shall find three main forms of manifestation at each stage : (i) hallucinations of the senses ; (2) emotional and motor impulses; (3) definite intellectual messages.

(I.) And first let us start from a class of experiments into which telepathy does not enter, but which exhibit in its simplest form the mechanism of the automatic transfer of messages from one stratum to another of the same personality. I speak, of course, of post-hypnotic suggestions. Here the agent is a living man, operating in an ordinary way, by direct

speech. The unusual feature lies in the condition of the percipient, who is hypnotised at the time, and is thus undergoing a kind of dislocation of personality, or temporary upheaval of a habitually subjacent stratum of the self. This hypnotic personality, being for the time at the surface, receives the agent's verbal suggestion, of which the percipient's waking self is unaware. Then afterwards, when the waking self has resumed its usual upper position, the hypnotic self carries out at the stated time the given suggestion, — an act whose origin the upper stratum of consciousness does not know, but which is in effect a message communicated to the upper stratum from the now submerged or subconscious stratum on which the suggestion was originally impressed.

And this message may take any one of the three leading forms mentioned above ; — say a hallucinatory image of the hypnotiser or of some other person ; or an impulse to perform some action ; or a definite word or sentence to be written automatically by the waking self, which thus learns what order has been laid upon the hypnotic self while the waking consciousness was in abeyance.

(II.) Now turn to our experiments in thought-transference. Here again the agent is a living man ; but he is no longer operating by ordinary means, — by spoken words or visible gestures. He is operating on the percipient's subconscious self by means of a telepathic impulse, which he desires, indeed, to project from himself, and which the percipient may desire to receive, but of whose modus operandi the ordinary waking selves of agent and percipient alike are entirely unaware.

Here again we may divide the messages sent into the same three main classes. First come the hallucinatory figures — always or almost always of himself — which the agent causes the percipient to see. Secondly come impulses to act, telepathically impressed, as when the hypnotiser desires his subject to come to him at an hour not previously notified. And thirdly, we have a parallel to the post-hypnotic writing of definite words or figures in our own experiments on the direct telepathic transmission of words, figures, cards, &c., from the agent, using no normal means of communication, to the percipient, either in the hypnotised or in the waking state.

(III.) We come next to the spontaneous phantasms occurring during life. Here we find the same three broad classes of messages, with this difference, that the actual apparitions, which in our telepathic experimentation are thus far unfortunately rare, become now the most important class. I need not recall the instances given in Chapters IV. and VI., &c., where an agent undergoing some sudden crisis seems in some way to generate an apparition of himself seen by a distant percipient. Important also in this connection are those apparitions of the double, where some one agent (Mrs. Stone, Mrs. Beaumont, &c., see 645 B and C), is seen repeatedly in phantasmal form by different percipients at times when that agent is undergoing no special crisis.

706] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 9

Again, among our telepathic impressions generated (spontaneously, not experimentally) by living agents, we have cases, which I need not here recapitulate, of pervading sensations of distress ; or impulses to return home (see, e.g., the case of Mr. Skirving in 825 A), which are parallel to the hypnotised subject's impulse to approach his distant hypnotiser, at a moment when that hypnotiser is willing him to do so.

And thirdly, among these telepathic communications from the living to the living, we have definite sentences automatically written, communicating facts which the distant person knows, but is not consciously endeavouring to transmit.

(IV.) Passing on to phantasms which cluster about the moment of death, we find our three main classes of cases still meeting us. Our readers are familiar with the visual cases, where there is an actual apparition of the dying man, seen by one or more persons ; and also with the emotional and motor cases, where the impression, although powerful, is not definitely sensory in character. And various cases also have been published where the message has consisted of definite words, not always externalised as an auditory hallucination, but sometimes automatically uttered or automatically written by the percipient himself, as in the case communicated by Dr. Liebeault (see section 866), where a girl writes the message announcing her friend's death at the time when that friend is, in fact, dying in a distant city.

706. (V.) And now I maintain that in these post-mortem cases also we find the same general classes persisting, and in somewhat the same proportion. Most conspicuous are the actual apparitions, with which, indeed, the following pages will mainly deal. It is very rare to find an apparition which seems to impart any verbal message ; but a case of this kind has been given in 429 E. As a rule, however, the apparition is of the apparently automatic, purposeless character, already so fully described. We have also the emotional and motor class of post-mortem cases (as Mr. Cameron Grant's, given in 736 B) ; and these may, perhaps, be more numerous in proportion than our collection would indicate ; for it is obvious that impressions which are so much less definite than a visual hallucination (although they may be even more impressive to the percipient himself) can rarely be used as evidence of communication with the departed.

But now I wish to point out that, besides these two classes of postmortem manifestations, we have our third class also still persisting ; we have definite verbal messages which at least purport, and sometimes, I think, with strong probability, to come from the departed.

I have, indeed, for the reader's convenience, postponed these motor cases to a subsequent chapter, so that the evidence here and now presented for survival will be very incomplete. Yet, at any rate, we are gradually getting before us a fairly definite task. We have in this chapter to record and analyse such sensory experiences of living men

io CHAPTER VII [707

as seem referable to the action of some human individuality persisting after death. We have also obtained some preliminary notion as to the kind of phenomena for which we can hope, especially as to what their probable limitations must be, considering how great a gulf between psychical states any communication must overpass.

707. Let us now press the actual evidential question somewhat closer. Let us consider, for it is by no means evident at first sight, what conditions a visual or auditory phantasm is bound to fulfil before it can be regarded as indicating prima facie the influence of a discarnate mind. The discussion may be best introduced by quoting the words in which Edmund Gurney opened it in iSSS.1 The main evidential lines as there laid down retain their validity, although the years which have since passed have greatly augmented the testimony, and in so doing have illustrated yet other tests of true post-mortem communication, — to which we shall presently come.

Those who have followed the records and discussions printed in the Proceedings and the Journal of this Society will not need to be informed how little the evidence which has not infrequently led even educated persons to believe in the actual reappearance of dead friends really justifies any such belief. The reason can be given in a single sentence. In most of the cases where persons have professed to have seen or to have held communication with deceased friends and relatives, there is nothing to distinguish the phenomenon which their senses have encountered from purely subjective hallucination. Simple as this statement seems, the truth which it embodies remained for centuries unguessed. It is only in comparatively modern days that the facts of sensory hallucination have been at all understood, and that the extreme definiteness which the delusive object may take has been recognised ; and even now the truth of the matter has not had time to penetrate to the popular mind. The reply of average common sense to any account of an apparition is usually either that the witness is lying or grossly exaggerating, or that he was mad or drunk or emotionally excited at the time ; or at the very most that his experience was an illusion — a misinterpretation of some sight or sound which was of an entirely objective kind. A very little careful study of the subject will, however, show that all these hypotheses must of ten be rejected ; that the witness may be in good health, and in no exceptional state of nervousness or excitement, and that what he sees or hears may still be of purely subjective origin — the projection of his own brain. And among the objects thus fictitiously presented, it is only natural to expect that a certain percentage will take the form of a human figure or voice which the percipient recognises as that of a deceased person ; for the memory of such figures and voices is part of his mental store, and the latent images are ready to supply the material of waking hallucination, just as they are ready to supply the material of dream.

It is further evident that in alleged cases of apparitions of the dead, the point which we have held to distinguish certain apparitions of living persons from purely subjective hallucinations is necessarily lacking. That point is coincidence between the apparition and some critical or exceptional condition of the person who seems to appear ; but with regard to the dead, we have no

1 Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 403-408.

707] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 11

independent knowledge of their condition, and therefore never have the opportunity of observing any such coincidences.

There remain three, and I think only three, conditions which might establish a presumption that an apparition or other immediate manifestation1 of a dead person is something more than a mere subjective hallucination of the percipient's senses. Either (i) more persons than one might be independently affected by the phenomenon ; or (2) the phantasm might convey information, afterwards discovered to be true, of something which the percipient had never known ; or (3) the appearance might be that of a person whom the percipient himself had never seen, and of whose aspect he was ignorant, and yet his description of it might be sufficiently definite for identification. But though one or more of these conditions would have to be fully satisfied before we could be convinced that any particular apparition of the dead had some cause external to the percipient's own mind, there is one more general characteristic of the class which is sufficiently suggestive of such a cause to be worth considering. I mean the disproportionate number of cases which occur shortly after the death of the person represented. Such a time-relation, if frequently enough encountered, might enable us to argue for the objective origin of the phenomenon in a manner analogous to that which leads us to conclude that many phantasms of the living have an objective (a telepathic) origin. For, according to the doctrines of probabilities, a hallucination representing a known person would not by chance present a definite time-relation to a special cognate event — viz., the death of that person — in more than a certain percentage of the whole number of similar hallucinations that occur ; and if that percentage is decidedly exceeded, there is reason to surmise that some other cause than chance — in other words, some objective origin for the phantasm — is present.

Supposing the peculiarity which I have mentioned to be established, the significance of the time-relation would of course be quite a different question. The popular mind naturally leaps to explanations of an exciting fact, before the fact itself is at all established. Thus it is said that the deceased person comes to say farewell, or to cheer the hearts of mourners while their grief is fresh ; or that his "spirit" is "earth-bound," and can only gradually free itself. Or, again, there is the elaborate theory of "shells " propounded by M. D'Assier, who holds that, though consciousness and individuality have died, some basis of physical manifestation is still left, which fades away by slow degrees. I do not propose now to discuss any of these hypotheses. Our business at present is wholly with \hzfacts of post-mortem appearances. The question for science is simply whether those facts point to any external cause at all ; and it is as bearing on this great primary question that the inquiry as to the relative frequency of the phenomena near the time of death assumes importance.

It was in the formation of a large collection of first-hand testimony on the subject of sensory hallucination, that I was first struck by the large proportion of cases where the phantasm represented a friend or relative recently dead. Out of two hundred and thirty-one hallucinations representing recognised human beings, twenty-eight, or nearly an eighth part, occurred within a few weeks of the death of the person represented. There are two reasons, however, why little weight can be allowed to this fact. In the first place a phantasm repre-

1 I am not here considering mediate manifestations, as where evidence of "spirit identity " is alleged to have been given through, e.g., the writing of a medium under "control."

senting a person whose death is recent is specially likely to excite interest, and so to be noted and remembered ; and this might easily swell the percentage of this class of cases in such a collection as mine. And in the second place, the fact of the death was in every instance known to the percipient. It is, therefore, natural to conclude that the emotional state of the percipient was the sufficient cause of the hallucination; and that is the explanation which the large majority of psychological and medical experts would at once adopt. I should myself feel more completely satisfied with it if we had any record of the phantasmal appearance of a person whom the friend who saw the appearance believed to be dead, but who was really safe and sound. Still, false alarms of death are not so common as to make it certain, or perhaps even likely, that we should have encountered such a case. And meanwhile I think that grief, and the sense of awe commonly connected with death, ought to be held as the sufficient cause of abnormal sensory experiences connected with persons whose recent death is being mourned, until the objective reality of phantasms of the dead in certain cases is established by some independent line of proof.

If, then, we are to draw any probable conclusion as to the objective nature of post-mortem appearances and communications (or of some of them) from the fact of their special frequency soon after death, we must confine ourselves to cases where the fact of death has been unknown to the percipient at the time of his experience. Now, in these days of letters and telegrams, people for the most part hear of the deaths of friends and relatives within a very few days, sometimes within a very few hours, after the death occurs ; so that appearances of the sort required would, as a rule, have to follow very closely indeed on the death. Have we evidence of any considerable number of such cases ?

Readers of Phantasms of the Living will know that we have. In a number of cases which were treated in that book as examples of telepathic transference from a dying person, the person was actually dead at the time that the percipient's experience occurred ; and the inclusion of such cases under the title of Phantasms of the Living naturally occasioned a certain amount of adverse criticism. Their inclusion, it will be remembered, required an assumption which cannot by any means be regarded as certain. We had to suppose that the telepathic transfer took place just before, or exactly at, the moment of death ; but that the impression remained latent in the percipient's mind, and only after an interval emerged into his consciousness, whether as waking vision or as dream or in some other form. Now, as a provisional hypothesis, I think that this assumption was justified. For, in the first place, the moment of death is, in time, the central point of a cluster of abnormal experiences occurring to percipients at a distance, of which some precede, while others follow, the death ; it is natural, therefore, to surmise that the same explanation will cover the whole group, and that the motive force in each of its divisions lies in a state of the " agent " prior to bodily death. In the second place, some of the facts of experimental thought-transference countenance the view that " transferred impressions " may be latent for a time before the recipient becomes aware of them ; and recent discoveries with respect to the whole subject of automatism and " secondary intelligence " make it seem far less improbable than it would otherwise have seemed that telepathy may take effect first on the " unconscious " part of the mind.1 And in the third place, the period of supposed latency has

1 In some experimental cases, it will be remembered, the impression takes effect through the motor, not the sensory, system of the recipient, as by automatic writing, so that he is never directly aware of it at all.

707] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 13

in a good many instances been a period when the person affected was in activity, and when his mind and senses were being solicited by other things ; and in such cases it is specially easy to suppose that the telepathic impression did not get the right conditions for rising into consciousness until a season of silence and recueille?nent arrived.1 But though the theory of latency has thus a good deal to be said for it, my colleagues and I are most anxious not to be supposed to be putting forward as a dogma what must be regarded at present merely as a working hypothesis. Psychical research is of all subjects the one where it is most important to avoid this error, and to keep the mind open for new interpretations of the facts. And in the present instance there are certain definite objections which may fairly be made to the hypothesis that a telepathic impression derived from a dying person may emerge after hours of latency. The experimental cases to which I have referred as analogous are few and uncertain, and, moreover, in them the period of latency has been measured by seconds or minutes, not by hours. And though, as I have said, some of the instances of apparent delay among the death-cases might be accounted for by the fact that the percipient's mind or senses needed to be withdrawn from other occupations before the manifestation could take place, there are other instances where this is not so, and where no ground at all appears for connecting the delay with the percipient's condition. On the whole, then, the alternative hypothesis — that the condition of the phenomenon on the " agent's " side (be it psychical or be it physical) is one which only comes into existence at a distinct interval after death, and that the percipient really is impressed at the moment, and not before the moment, when he is conscious of the impression — is one which must be steadily kept in view.

So far I have been speaking of cases where the interval between the death and the manifestation was so short as to make the theory of latency possible. The rule adopted in Phantasms of the Living was that this interval must not exceed twelve hours. But we have records of a few cases where this interval has been greatly exceeded, and yet where the fact of the death was still unknown to the percipient at the time of his experience. The theory of latency cannot reasonably be applied to cases where weeks or months divide the vision (or whatever it may be) from the moment of death, which is the latest at which an ordinary 2 telepathically transferred idea could have obtained access to the percipient. And the existence of such cases— so far as it tends to establish the reality of objectively-caused apparitions of the dead — diminishes the objection to conceiving that the appearances, &c., which have very shortly followed death have had a different causation from those which have coincided with or very shortly preceded it. For we shall not be inventing a wholly new class for the former cases, but only provisionally shifting them from one class to another — to a much smaller and much less well-evidenced class, it is true, but one nevertheless for which we have evidence enough to justify us in expecting more.

1 See, for instance, case 500, Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 462.

2 I mean by " ordinary " the classes which are recognised and treated of in Phantasms of the Living. But if the departed survive, the possibility of thoughttransference between them and those who remain is of course a perfectly tenable hypothesis. " As our telepathic theory is a psychical one, and makes no physical assumptions, it would be perfectly applicable (though the name perhaps would be inappropriate) to the conditions of disembodied existence." — Phantasms ; vol. i. p. 512.

I4 CHAPTER VII [708

708. This, as I conceive, is a sound method of proceeding from ground made secure in Phantasms of the Living — and retraversed in my own just previous chapter — to cases closely analogous, save for that little difference in time-relations, that occurrence in the hours which follow, instead of the hours which precede, bodily dissolution, which counts for so much in our insight into cosmic law.1

The hypothesis of latency which thus meets us in limine in this inquiry, will soon be found inadequate to cover the facts. Yet it will be well to dwell somewhat more fully upon its possible range.

It might conduce to a clearer view of the facts if we could draw a curve, showing the proportionate number of apparitions observed at various periods before and after death. It would then be seen that they increase very rapidly for the few hours which precede death, and decrease gradually during the hours and days which follow. In the present state of our evidence, however, and considering all the problems involved, there would perhaps be an affectation of more exactness than we can actually attain, were we to set forth such a curve, embodying the dates, in reference to death, of all the cases as yet received by us. It may be enough to say, generally, that if the length of the base-line represents a year, and the point with the highest ordinate the moment of death, the comparative frequency of veridical apparitions might be somewhat as follows : —

ONE YEAR

That is to say, the recognised apparitions decrease rapidly in the few days after death, then more slowly ; and after about a year's time they become so sporadic that we can no longer include them in a steadily descending line.

1 Certain statistics as to these time-relations are given by Edmund Gurney as follows (Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 408) : "The statistics drawn from the first-hand records in Phantasms of the Living as to the time-relation of appearances, &c., occurring in close proximity to deaths, are as follows : — In 134 cases the coincidence is represented as having been exact, or, when times are specifically stated, close to within an hour. In 104 cases it is not known whether the percipient's experience preceded or followed the death; such cases cannot be taken account of for our present purpose. There

708] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 15

Yet one more point must be touched on, to avoid misconception of the phrase cited above, that " the moment of death is the centre of a cluster of abnormal experiences, of which some precede, while others follow the death." Gurney, of course, did not mean to assume that the act of death itself was the cause of all these experiences. Those which occur before death may be caused or conditioned, not by the death itself, but by the abnormal state, as of coma, delirium, &c., which preceded the death. This we say because Ve have many instances where veridical phantasms have coincided with moments of crisis — carriage-accidents and the like — occurring to distant agents, but not followed by death. Accordingly we find that in almost all cases where a phantasm, apparently veridical, has preceded the agent's death, that death was the result of disease and not of accident. To this rule there are very few exceptions. There is a case given in Phantasms of the Living (vol. ii. p. 52), where the phantasm seems on the evidence to have preceded by about half-an-hour (longitude allowed for) a sudden death by drowning. In this case the percipient was in a Norfolk farmhouse, the drowning man — or agent — was in a storm off the island of Tristan d'Acunha ; and we have suggested that an error of clocks or of observation may account for the discrepancy. In another case the death was in a sense a violent one, for it was a suicide ; but the morbidly excited state of the girl a few hours before death — when her phantasm was seen — was in itself a state of crisis. But there are also a few recorded cases (none of which were cited in Phantasms of the Living) where a phantasm or double of some person has been observed some days previous to that person's accidental death. The evidence obtained in the Census of Hallucinations, however, tended to show that cases of this sort are too few to suggest even primd facie a causal connection between the death and the apparition (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 331).

Thus much it has seemed needful to say in order to explain the difficulty of representing by any one curved line the true time-relations involved in this complex matter. I now proceed briefly to review some of the cases where the interval between death and phantasm has been measurable by minutes or hours.

It is not easy to get definite cases where the interval has been measurable by minutes ; for if the percipient is at a distance from the agent we can seldom be sure that the clocks at both places have been correct, and correctly observed ; while if he is present with the agent we can

remain 78 cases where it appears that there was an interval of more than an hour ; and of these 38 preceded and 40 followed the death. Of the 38 cases where the percipient's experience preceded the death (all of which, of course, took place during a time when the 'agent' was seriously ill), 19 fell within twenty-four hours of the death. Of the 40 cases where the percipient's experience followed the death, all followed within an interval of twenty-four hours, and in only one ( included by mistake ) was the twelve hours' interval certainly exceeded, though there are one or two others where it is possible that it was slightly exceeded."

rarely be sure that the phantasm observed is more than a mere subjective hallucination. Thus we have several accounts of a rushing sound heard by the watcher of a dying man just after his apparent death, or of some kind of luminosity observed near his person ; but this is just the moment when we may suppose some subjective hallucination likely to occur, and if one person's senses alone are affected we cannot allow much evidential weight to the occurrence. I may add that one of our cases (which I quote below, in 747) is remarkable in that the auditory hallucination— a sound as of female voices gently singing — was heard by five persons— by four of them, as it seems, independently — and in two places, on different sides of the house. At the same time, one person — the Eton master whose mother had just died, and who was therefore presumably in a frame of mind more prone to hallucination than the physician, matron, friend, or servants who actually did hear the singing — himself heard nothing at all. In this case the physician felt no doubt that Mrs. L. was actually dead ; and in fact it was during the laying out of the body that the sounds occurred. In including this case and similar collective ones in Phantasms of the Living, Gurney expressly stated (vol. ii. pp. 190-92) that he did so because in his view they involved at least an element of thought-transference between the living minds of the percipients, whatever other influence may or may not have proceeded from the deceased person. But if we are finding reason to suppose that the deceased person's power of influencing other minds may persist after death, it seems reasonable to dwell on that aspect of such an incident as this.1

709. There are some other circumstances also in which, in spite of the fact that the death is already known, a hallucination occurring shortly afterwards may have some slight evidential value. Thus we have a case where a lady who knew that her sister had died a few hours previously, but who was not herself in any morbidly excited condition, seemed to see some one enter her own dining-room, opening and shutting the door. The percipient (who had never had any other hallucination) was much astonished when she found no one in the dining-room ; but it did not till some time afterwards occur to her that the incident could be in any way connected with her recent loss. This reminds us of a case (ii. p. 6942) where the Rev. R. M. Hill sees a tall figure rush into the room, which alarms and surprises him, then vanishes before he has time to recognise it.

1 The Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical Research (vol. i. p. 405) contain a case where a physician and his wife, sleeping in separate but adjoining rooms, are both of them awakened by a bright light. The physician sees a figure standing in the light ; his wife, who gets up to see what the light in her husband's room may be, does not reach that room till the figure has disappeared. The figure is not clearly identified, but has some resemblance to a patient of the physician's, who has died suddenly (from hemorrhage) about three hours before, calling for her doctor, who did not anticipate this sudden end. Even this resemblance did not strike the percipient until after he knew of the death, and the defect in recognition has prevented me from quoting this case at length.

a The references in this and the two folio wing sections are to Phantasms oj the Living.

710] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 17

An uncle, a tall man, dies about that moment, and it is remarked that although Mr. Hill knew his uncle to be ill, the anxiety which he may have felt would hardly have given rise to an unrecognised and formidable apparition.

There are cases also where a percipient who has had an apparition of a friend shortly after that friend's known death has had veridical hallucinations at other times, and has never had any hallucination of purely subjective origin. Such a percipient may naturally suppose that his apparition of the departed friend possessed the same veridical character which was common to the rest, although it was not per se evidential, since the fact of the death was already known.

For the present, however, it will be better to return to the cases which are free from this important primd facie drawback — cases where the percipient was, at any rate, unaware that the death, which the phantasm seemed to indicate, had in fact taken place.

710. In the first place, there are a few cases where a percipient is informed of a death by a veridical phantasm, and then some hours afterwards a similar phantasm, differing perhaps in detail, recurs.

Such was the case of Archdeacon Farler (i. p. 414), who twice during one night saw the dripping figure of a friend who, as it turned out, had been drowned during the previous day. Even the first appearance was several hours after the death, but this we might explain by the latency of the impression till a season of quiet. The second appearance may have been a kind of recrudescence of the first ; but if the theory of latency be discarded, so that the first appearance (if more than a mere chancecoincidence) is held to depend upon some energy excited by the deceased person after death, it would afford some ground for regarding the second appearance as also veridical. The figure in this case was once more seen a fortnight later, and on this occasion, as Archdeacon Farler informs me, in ordinary garb, with no special trace of accident.

A similar repetition occurs (as noted by Gurney, vol. ii. p. 237, note) in the cases of Major Moncrieff (i. p. 415) ; of Mr. Keulemans (i. p. 444), where the second phantasm was held by the percipient to convey a fresh veridical picture; of Mr. Hernaman (i. p. 561), where, however, the agent was alive, though dying, at the time of each appearance ; in the case of Mrs. Ellis (ii. p. 59) ; in the case of Mrs. D. (ii. p. 467) ; of Mrs. I<airman (ii. p. 482), and of Mr. F. J. Jones (ii. p. 500), where the death was again due to drowning, and the act of dying cannot, therefore, have been very prolonged. We may note also Mrs. Reed's case (ii. p. 237), where a phantom is seen three times, the first two visions being apparently about the time of death, the third (occurring to a different percipient, whether independently or not is not clear) a few hours later. And in Captain Ayre's case (ii. p. 256), a phantom seen by one percipient at about the time of the agent's death is followed by hallucinatory sounds heard by the same and by another percipient for some three hours longer, VOL. ii. B

i8 CHAPTER VII [711

till the news of the death arrives. In the case of Mrs. Cox, again (ii. p. 235), a child sees a phantom at about 9 P.M., and Mrs. Cox sees the same figure, but in a different attitude, at about midnight, the exact hour of the corresponding death being unknown. In the case of Miss Harriss (ii. p. 117), a hallucinatory voice t about the time of the death, but not suggesting the decedent, is followed by a dream the next night, which presents the dead person as in the act of dying. One or two other cases might be added to this list, and it is plain that the matter is one towards which observation should be specially directed.

711. Turning now to the cases where the phantasm is not repeated, but occurs some hours after death, let us take a few narratives where the interval of time is pretty certain, and consider how far the hypothesis of latency looks probable in each instance.

Where there is no actual hallucination, but only a feeling of unique malaise or distress following at a few hours' interval on a friend's death at a distance, as in Archdeacon Wilson's case (i. p. 280), it is very hard to picture to ourselves what has taken place. Some injurious shock communicated to the percipient's brain at the moment of the agent's death may conceivably have slowly worked itself into consciousness. The delay may have been due, so to say, to physiological rather than to psychical causes.

Next take a case like that of Mrs. Wheatcroft (i. p. 420), or of Mrs. Evens (ii. p, 690), or Mr. Wingfield (quoted in 429 C), or Sister Bertha (quoted below in 743 A) , where a definite hallucination of sight or sound occurs some hours after the death, but in the middle of the night. It is in a case of this sort that we can most readily suppose that a " telepathic impact" received during the day has lain dormant until other excitations were hushed, and has externalised itself as a hallucination after the first sleep, just as when we wake from a first sleep some subject of interest or anxiety, which has been thrust out of our thoughts during the day, will often well upwards into consciousness with quite a new distinctness and force. But on the other hand, in the case (for instance) of Mrs. Teale (ii. p. 693), there is a deferment of some eight hours, and then the hallucination occurs while the percipient is sitting wide awake in the middle of her family. And in one of the most remarkable dream-cases in our collection (given in section 427), Mrs. Storie's experience does not resemble the mere emergence of a latent impression. It is long and complex, and suggests some sort of clairvoyance ; but if it be "telepathic clairvoyance," that is, a picture transferred from the decedent's mind, then it almost requires us to suppose that a post-mortem picture was thus transferred, a view of the accident and its consequences fuller than any which could have flashed through the dying man's mind during his moment of sudden and violent death from " the striking off of the top of the skull " by a railway train.

If once we assume that the deceased person's mind could continue to

712] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 19

act on living persons after his bodily death, then the confused horror of the series of pictures which were presented to Mrs. Storie's view — mixed, it should be said, with an element of fresh departure which there was nothing in the accident itself to suggest — would correspond well enough to what one can imagine a man's feelings a few hours after such a death to be. This is trespassing, no doubt, on hazardous ground ; but if once we admit communication from the other side of death as a working hypothesis, we must allow ourselves to imagine something as to the attitude of the communicating mind, and the least violent supposition will be that that mind is still in part at least occupied with the same thoughts which last occupied it on earth. The case cited below (in 744) of the gardener Bard and Mrs. de FreVille well illustrates this view. And it is possible that there may be some interpretation of this kind for some of the cases where a funeral scene, or a dead body, is what the phantasm presents. In the remarkable case in 664 where a lady sees the body of a well-known London physician — about ten hours after death — lying in a bare unfurnished room (a cottage hospital abroad), the description, as we have it, would certainly fit best with some kind of telepathic clairvoyance prolonged after death — some power on the deceased person's part to cause the percipient to share the picture which might at that moment be occupying his own mind.

712. It will be seen that these phenomena are not of so simple a type as to admit of our considering them from the point of view of time-relations alone. Whatever else, indeed, a " ghost " may be, it is probably one of the most complex phenomena in nature. It is a function of two unknown variables — the incarnate spirit's sensitivity and the discarnate spirit's capacity of self- manifestation. Our attempt, therefore, to study such intercourse may begin at either end of the communication — with the percipient or with the agent. We shall have to ask, How does the incarnate mind receive the message? and we shall have to ask also, How does the discarnate mind originate and convey it?

Now it is by pressing the former of these two questions that we have, I think, the best chance at present of gaining fresh light. So long as we are considering the incarnate mind we are, to some extent at least, on known ground ; and we may hope to discern analogies in some other among that mind's operations to that possibly most perplexing of all its operations which consists in taking cognisance of messages from unembodied minds, and from an unseen world. I think, therefore, that " the surest way, though most about," as Bacon would say, to the comprehension of this sudden and startling phenomenon lies in the study of other rare mental phenomena which can be observed more at leisure, just as " the surest way, though most about," to the comprehension of some blazing inaccessible star has lain in the patient study of the spectra of the incandescence of terrestrial substances which lie about our feet. I am in hopes that by the study of various forms of subliminal consciousness, subliminal faculty, subliminal perception, we may ultimately obtain a

conception of our own total being and operation which may show us the incarnate mind's perception of the discarnate mind's message as no isolated anomaly, but an orderly exercise of natural and innate powers, frequently observed in action in somewhat similar ways.

It is, I say, from this human or terrene side that I should prefer, were it possible, to study in the first instance all our cases. Could we not only share but interpret the percipient's subjective feelings, could we compare those feelings with the feelings evoked by ordinary vision or telepathy among living men, we might get at a more intimate knowledge of what is happening than any observation from outside of the details of an apparition can supply. But this, of course, is not possible in any systematic way ; occasional glimpses, inferences, comparisons, are all that we can attain to as yet. On the other hand, it is comparatively easy to arrange the whole group of our cases in some series depending on their observed external character and details. They can, indeed, be arranged in more than one series of this kind — the difficulty is in selecting the most instructive. That which I shall here select is in some points arbitrary, but it has the advantage of bringing out the wide range of variation in the clearness and content of these apparitional communications, here arranged mainly in a descending series, beginning with those cases where fullest knowledge or purpose is shown, and ending with those where the indication of intelligence becomes feeblest, dying away at last into vague sounds and sights without recognisable significance.

713. But I shall begin (see 713 A) with a small group of cases, which I admit to be anomalous and non-evidential — for we cannot prove that they were more than subjective experiences — yet which certainly should not be lost, filling as they do, in all their grotesqueness, a niche in our series otherwise as yet vacant. If man's spirit is separated at death from his organism, there must needs be cases where that separation, although apparently, is not really complete. There must be subjective sensations corresponding to the objective external facts of apparent death and subsequent resuscitation. Nor need it surprise those who may have followed my general argument, if those subjective sensations should prove to be dreamlike and fantastic. Here, as so often in our inquiries, the very oddity and unexpectedness of the details — the absence of that solemnity which one would think the dying man's own mind would have infused into the occasion — may point to the existence of some reality beneath the grotesque symbolism of the transitional dream.

The transitional dream, I call it, for it seems to me not improbable — remote though such a view may be from current notions — that the passage from one state to another may sometimes be accompanied with some temporary lack of adjustment between experiences taking place in such different environments — between the systems of symbolism belonging to the one and to the other state. But the reason why I refer to the cases in this place is that here we have perhaps our nearest possible

714] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 21

approach — in M. Bertrand's case the account, but for remoteness, might have been evidential enough — to the sensations of the spirit which is endeavouring to manifest itself ; — an inside view of a would-be apparition. The narratives suggest, moreover, that spirits recently freed from the body may enjoy a fuller perception of earthly scenes than it is afterwards possible to retain, and that thus the predominance of apparitions of the recently dead may be to some extent explained.

714. We have, indeed, very few cases where actual apparitions give evidence of any continuity in the knowledge possessed by a spirit of friends on earth. Such evidence is, naturally enough, more often furnished by automatic script or utterance. But there is one case where a spirit is recorded as appearing repeatedly — in guardian angel fashion — and especially as foreseeing and sympathising with the survivor's future marriage.

The account of this case, given by Mr. E. Mamtchitch, is taken from the " Report on the Census of Hallucinations " in the Proceedings S. P. R., vol. x. pp. 387-91.

ST. PETERSBURG, April 29^, 1891.

Comme il s'agira des apparitions de Palladia, je dois dire auparavant quelques mots sur sa personne. Elle e'tait la fille d'un riche proprie'taire russe, mort un mois avant sa naissance. Sa mere, dans son de'sespoir, voua son enfant futur au couvent. De la son nom, usite' parmi les religieuses. Deux ans apres, sa mere mourut, et 1'orpheline, jusqu'a 1'age de 14 ans, fut e'leve'e dans un couvent de Moscou par sa tante, qui en e'tait la supe'rieure.

En 1870, dtant encore dtudiant a Puniversite' de Moscou, je fis la connaissance du frere de Palladia, e'tudiant comme moi, et il fut souvent question entre nous de rendre a la socie'te' la nonne malgre soi ; mais ce plan ne fut re'alise' qu'en 1872. J'e'tais venu en e'te' a Moscou, pour voir 1'exposition, et j'y rencontrai par hasard le frere de Palladia. J'appris qu'il e'tait en train de 1'envoyer en Crime'e pour cause de sante*, et je le secondai de mon mieux. C'est alors que je vis Palladia pour la premiere fois; elle avait 14 ans; quoique haute de taille, elle e'tait fort che'tive et de'ja poitrinaire. A la priere de son frere, j'accompagnai Palladia et sa sceur, Mme. P. S., en Crime'e, ou elles resterent pour passer 1'hiver, et moi, deux semaines apres, je revins a Kieff.

En e'te' 1873 je rencontrai par hasard Palladia et sa sceur a Odessa, ou elles e'taient venues pour consulter les me'decins, quoique Palladia avait 1'air de se porter assez bien. Le 27 Aout, pendant que je faisais la lecture aux deux dames. Palladia mourut subitement d'un aneVrisme, a 1'age de 15 ans.

Deux ans apres la mort de Palladia, en 1875, me trouvanta Kieff, il m'arriva, par une soire'e du mois de De'cembre, d'assister pour la premiere fois a une stance spiritique ; j'entendis des coups dans la table ; cela ne m'e'tonna nullement, car j'e'tait sur que c'e"tait une plaisanterie. De retour chez moi, je voulus voir si les memes coups se produiraient chez moi ; je me mis dans la meme pose, les mains sur la table. Bient6t des coups se firent entendre. Imitant le proce'de' dont j'avais dte* le temoin, je commencai a re'citer 1'alphabet ; le nom de Panadia me fut indiqud. Je fus e'tonne', presque effraye' ; ne pouvant me tranquilliser, je me mis de nouveau k la table, et je demandai a Palladia, qu'avait-elle a me dire? La re'ponse fut : " Replacer Fange, il tombe" Je ne

compris pas de suite de quoi il s'agissait. Le fait est qu'elle est enterree a Kieff, et j'avais entendu dire qu'on voulait mettre un monument sur sa tombe, mais je n'y avais jamais £t6, et je ne savais pas de quel genre e'tait le monument. Apres cette re'ponse, je ne me couchai plus, et des que le jour parut je me rendis au cimetiere. Non sans peine, avec 1'aide du gardien, je ddcouvris enfin la tombe enfouie sous la neige. Je m'arretai stupe'fie' : la statue en marbre de 1'ange avec une croix e'tait tout a fait de cotd.

Depuis ce moment, il me fut prouve a 1'eVidence qu'il y a un autre monde avec lequel, je ne sais comment, nous pouvons entrer en rapport, et dont les habitants peuvent nous donner de telles preuves de leur existence qu'elles ddsarment le scepticisme le plus tenace.

En Octobre, 1876, je me trouvais a Kieff, et j'dtais en train de m'installer dans un nouveau logement (rue Prore'snaya) avec mon camarade de service au Ministere de la Justice, M. Potolof. On venait de m'apporter un pianino. II fut place dans la salle, et je me mis a jouer; il e'tait a peu pres 8 h. du soir; la salle ou je jouais e'tait e'claire'e par une lampe pendue au mur. A c6td se trouvait mon cabinet de travail, eclaire aussi par une lampe. Je me rappelle tres bien que j'dtais de fort bonne humeur. Mon camarade, M. Potolof, etait occupe a sa table, a 1'autre bout du logis. Toutes les portes e^taient ouvertes, et de sa place il pouvait voir tres bien le cabinet et la salle ou je jouais.1 Jetant un regard vers la porte de mon cabinet de travail, je vis tout a coup Palladia. Elle se tenait au milieu de la porte. un peu de c6t6, avec le visage tourne' vers moi. Elle me regardait tranquillement. Elle avait la meme robe fonce'e qu'elle portait lorsqu'elle mourut en ma presence. Sa main droite pendait librement. Je voyais distinctement ses dpaules et sa taille, mais ne me rappelle pas du bas de son habit, et avais-je vu les pieds ? — peut-etre, parce que tout le temps je lui regardais dans les yeux. En la voyant, j'avais tout a fait oublie' que je voyais devant moi non une personne vivante, mais morte, tellement je la voyais distinctement ; elle e'tait e'claire'e de deux cote's ; et d'autant plus j'ai la vue tres bonne. Ma premiere sensation fut un frisson dans le dos. Je fus comme pe'trifie' et ma respiration fut suspendue ; mais ce n 'e'tait pas un eff et causd par la frayeur ou 1'excitation, — c'^tait quelque chose d'autre. Je puis comparer cela a la sensation que j'dprouve quand je regarde en bas d'une grande hauteur; je sens alors une terrible anxie'ti et en meme temps je ne puis me retenir de regarder, quelque chose m'attire invinciblement. Combien de temps Palladia resta devant moi, je ne saurais le dire, mais je me rappelle qu'elle fit un mouvement a droite et disparut derriere la porte du cabinet du travail. Je me prdcipitai vers elle, mais dans la porte je m'arretai, car alors seulement je me rappelai qu'elle e'tait ddja morte, et je craignai d'entrer, e'tant sur de la revoir. Dans ce moment mon camarade vint a moi et me demanda qu'est-ce que j'avais? Je lui dis ce qui venait de se passer; alors nous entrames au cabinet, ou nous ne trouvames personne. Mon camarade, ayant entendu la brusque interruption de mon jeu, avait leve* la tete et, tant que je me rappelle, disait avoir vu aussi quelqu'un passer devant la porte de mon cabinet ; mais, voyant mon excitation, il me dit, pour me tranquilliser, que probablement c'e'tait Nikita, mon domestique, qui e'tait venu arranger la lampe. Nous allames imme'diatement dans sa chambre, il n'y e'tait pas ; il e'tait en bas, dans la cuisine, ou il

1 A plan enclosed shows a suite of four rooms, M. Potolof 's study, the ante-room, the drawing-room, and M. Mamtchitch's study, all opening into one another, the three doors between them being in one straight line.

714] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 23

prdparait le samovar. Voilk comment je vis Palladia pour la premiere fois, trois ans apres sa mort.

Apres la premiere apparition de Palladia, en Octobre, 1876, et jusqu'a present, je la vois souvent. II arrive que je la vois trois fois par semaine, ou deux fois le meme jour, ou bien un mois se passe sans la voir. En resume, voila les traits principaux de ces apparitions.

(1) Palladia apparait toujours d'une facon inattendue, me prenant comme par surprise, juste au moment quand j'y pense le moins.

(2) Quand je veux la voir moi-meme, j'ai beau y penser ou le vouloir — elle n'apparait pas.

(3)-, A de rares exceptions, son apparition n'a aucun rapport avec le courant de ma vie, comme presage ou avertissement de quelqu' e've'nement insolite.

(4) Jamais je ne la vois en songe.

(5) Je la vois dgalement quand je suis seul, ou en grande compagnie.

(6) Elle m'apparait toujours avec la meme expression sereine des yeux ; quelques fois avec un faible sourire. Elle ne m'a jamais parle*, <L 1'exception de deux fois, que je vais raconter plus loin.

(7) Je la vois toujours dans la robe fonce'e qu'elle portait lorsqu'elle mourut sous mes yeux. Je vois distinctement son visage, sa tete, les dpaules et les bras, mais je ne vois pas ses pieds, ou plutot je n'ai pas le temps de le examiner.

(8) Chaque fois, en voyant Palladia inopine'ment, je perds la parole, je sens du froid dans le dos, je palis, je m'dcrie faiblement, et ma respiration s'arrete (c'est ce que me disent ceux qui par hasard m'ont observe pendant ce moment),

(9) L'apparition de Palladia se prolonge une, deux, trois minutes, puis graduellement elle s'efface et se dissout dans 1'espace.

A present je vais de'crire trois cas d'apparitions de Palladia dont je me souviens bien.

(1) En 1879, ^a fin de Novembre, a Kieff, jMtais assis a mon bureau a e'crire un acte d'accusation ; il £tait 8J du soir, la montre dtait devant moi sur la table. Je me hatais de finir mon travail, car a 9 h. je devais me rendre a une soire'e. Tout a coup, en face de moi, assise sur un fauteuil, je vis Palladia ; elle avait le coude du bras droit sur la table et la tete appuyde sur la main. M'dtant remis de mon saisissement, je regardai la montre et je suivis le mouvement de 1'aiguille a seconde, puis je relevai les yeux sur Palladia ; je vis qu'elle n'avait pas changd de pose et son coude se dessinait clairement sur la table. Ses yeux me regardaient avec joie et se're'nite ; alors pour la premiere fois je me d£cidai de lui parler: "Que sentez-vous a present?" lui demandai-je. Son visage resta impassible, ses levres, tant que je me rappelle, resterent immobiles, mais j'entendis distinctement sa voix prononcer le mot " Quie'tude." " Je comprends," lui rdpondis-je, et effectivement, en ce moment, je comprenais toute la signification qu'elle avait mise dans ce mot. Encore une fois, pour etre sur que je ne revai pas, je regardai de nouveau la montre et je suivis les mouvements de 1'aiguille a seconde; je voyais clairement comme elle se mouvait. Ayant rapporte' mon regard sur Palladia, je remarquai qu'elle commen9ait deja a s'effacer et disparaitre. Si je m'e'tais avisd de noter imme'diatement la signification du mot " Quietude," ma me'moire aurait retenu tout ce qu'il y avait de nouveau et d'dtrange. Mais a peine avais-je quitte' la table pour monter en haut, chez mon camarade Apouktine, avec lequel nous devions aller ensemble, que je ne pus lui dire autre chose que ce que je viens d'e'crire.

(2) En 1885, Je demeurais chez mes parents, a une campagne du gouverne-

ment de Poltava. Une dame de notre connaissance e'tait venue passer chez nous quelques jours avec ses deux demoiselles. Quelque temps apres leur arrive'e, m'e'tant re'veille' a 1'aube du jour, je vis Palladia (je dormais dans une aile sdparde ou j'£tais tout seul). Elle se tenait devant moi, a cinq pas a peu pres, et me regardait avec un sourire joyeux. S'&ant approche'e de moi, elle me dit deux mots : " J'ai &6, j'ai vu," et tout en souriant disparut. Que voulaient dire ces mots, je ne pus le comprendre. Dans ma chambre dormait avec moi mon setter. Des que j'ape^us Palladia, le chien he'rissa le poil et avec glapissement sauta sur mon lit ; se pressant vers moi, il regardait dans la direction ou je voyais Palladia. Le chien n'aboyait pas, tandis que, ordinairement, il ne laissait personne entrer dans la chambre sans aboyer et grogner. Et toutes les fois, quand mon chien voyait Palladia, il se pressait aupres de moi, comme cherchant un refuge. Quand Palladia disparut et je vins dans la maison, je ne dis rien a personne de cette incident. Le soir du meme jour, la fille ainde de la dame qui se trouvait chez nous me raconta qu'une chose Strange lui e'tait arrive'e ce matin : " M'e'tant re'veille'e de grand matin," me dit-elle, "j'ai send comme si quelqu'un se tenait au chevet de mon lit, et j'entendis distinctement une voix me disant:  Ne me crains pas, je suis bonne et aimante.' Je tournai la tete, mais je ne vis rien ; ma mere et ma soeur dormaient tranquillement; cela m'a fort e'tonne'e, car jamais rien de pareil ne m'est arriveV' Sur quoi je r^pondis que bien des choses inexplicables nous arrivent; mais je ne lui dit rien de ce que j'avais vu le matin. Seulement un an plus tard, quand j'etais dejil son fiance, je lui fis part de 1'apparition et des paroles de Palladia le meme jour. N'&ait-ce pas elle qui e'tait venue la voir aussi? Je dois ajouter que j'avais vu alors cette demoiselle pour la premiere fois et que je ne pensais pas du tout que j'allais I'dpouser.

(3) En Octobre, 1890, je me trouvais avec ma femme et mon fils, age* de deux ans, chez mes anciens amis, les Strijewsky, a leur campagne du gouvernement de Woroneje. Un jour, vers les 7 h. du soir, rentrant de la chasse, je passai dans 1'aile que nous habitions pour changer de toilette; j'dtais assis dans une chambre e'claire'e par une grande lampe. La porte s'ouvrit et mon fils Oteg accourut; il se tenait aupres de mon fauteuil, quand Palladia apparut tout a coup devant moi. Jetant sur lui un coup d'ceil, je remarquai qu'il ne de'tachait pas les yeux de Palladia; se tournant vers moi et montrant Palladia du doigt, il pronon9a: "La tante." Je le pris sur les genoux et jetai un regard sur Palladia, mais elle n'e'tait plus. Le visage d'Oldg e'tait tout a fait tranquil et joyeux ; il commencait seulement a parler, ce qui explique la denomination qu'il donna a Palladia. EUGENE MAMTCHITCH.

Mrs. Mamtchitch writes : —

5 Mai, 1891.

Je me rappelle tres bien que le 10 Juillet 1885, lorsque nous e*tions en visite chez les parents de M. E. Mamtchitch, je m'e'tais re'veille'e a 1'aube du jour, car il avait e'te' convenu entre moi et ma soeur que nous irions faire une promenade matinale. M'e'tant souleve'e sur le lit, je vis que maman et ma soeur dormaient, et en ce moment je sentis comme si quelqu'un se tenait a mon chevet. M'e'tant tourne"e a demi — car je craignais de bien regarder — je ne vis personne ; m'e'tant recouch^e, j'entendis imme'diatement, derriere et au dessus de ma tete, une voix de femme me disant doucement, mais distinctement : " Ne me crains pas, je suis bonne et aimante," et encore toute une phrase que j'oubliai a 1'instant meme. Immediatement apres je m'habillai et j'allai me promener. C'est

714] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 25

dtrange que ces paroles ne m'effrayerent pas du tout. De retour, je n'en dis rien ni a ma mere, ni a ma soeur, car elles n'aimaient pas de telles choses et n'y croyaient pas ; mais le soir du meme jour, comme la conversation tourna sur le spiritisme, je racontai a M. M. ce qui venait de m'arriver le matin ; il ne me rdpondit rien de particulier.

Je n'ai jamais eu aucune hallucination, ni avant, ni apres cet incident, a 1'exception d'un cas tout re'cent, quand je me suis vue moi-meme, de quoi je parlerai une autre fois. SOPHIE MAMTCHITCH.

Mr. Potolof writes to the collector, Mr. Aksakoff:—

RUE SCHPALERNAYA, 26. S. PETERSBOURG, If IO Mai, iSgi.

MONSIEUR, — En rdponse a votre lettre du 8 Mai et les questions que vous me posez relativement a 1'incident avec M. E. Mamtchitch, lorsque dans les anne'es 1876-77 nous habitions ensemble Kieff, rue Proresnaya, maison Barsky, je puis vous communiquer ce qui suit. Effectivement, je fus alors te'moin comme M. M., pendant qu'il jouait un soir du piano quelque air me'lancolique, s'interrompit brusquement (comme si apres avoir fortement attaque le clavier, ses mains s'etaient subitement affaisse'es), et lorsque je vins lui demander ce qui lui dtait arrive, il me re'pondit qu'il venait de voir apparaitre le fantome de Palladia, se tenant derriere la draperie de la porte de la chambre contigue a celle ou se trouvait le piano. Je dois ajouter que notre appartement commun formait une enfilade de trois chambres, sans compter celle de I'entre'e, qui occupait le milieu ; je travaillais dans ma chambre, qui etait a droite de celle de I'entre'e, et je pouvais voir toute 1'enfilade bien e'claire'e. Ce qui me regarde personnellement, je ne vis en ce moment aucune figure humaine passer par les chambres de M. M., mais je ne nie pas que pour le tranquilliser j'essayai d'expliquer cet incident par I'entre'e de notre domestique Nikita; il se peut aussi que, ne 1'ayantpas trouve dans nos appartements, nous allames le chercher en bas, dans la cuisine. Voila tout ce que je puis vous dire relativement a cet incident. W. POTOLOF.

Note by the collector : —

S. PETERSBOURG, Le 16/28 Mai, 1891.

Traduit des manuscrits russes de M. et Madame Mamtchitch, et de M. Potolof. La premiere partie du manuscrit de M. Mamtchitch, jusqu'a la premiere apparition de Palladia, est abre'ge'e.

J'avais rencontre* M. Mamtchitch plusieurs fois, mais je n'avais aucune ide'e de ces apparitions constantes de Palladia. M. Mamtchitch a vu aussi d'autres figures que celle de Palladia, mais je n'ai pas eu le temps d'en faire un memorandum circonstantiel. A. AKSAKOFF.

Among repeated apparitions this case at present stands almost alone ; its parallels will be found when we come to deal with the persistent " controls," or alleged communicating spirits, which influence tranceutterance or automatic script.

A case bearing some resemblance to Palladia's is given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 233, the main difference being that the repeated communications are there made in dream. I add in 714 A another case, where the deceased person seems to make repeated efforts to impress on survivors a wish prompted by continued affection.

715. Less uncommon are the cases where an apparition, occurring singly and not repeated, indicates a continued knowledge of the affairs of earth. That knowledge, indeed, runs mainly, as we shall presently see, in two directions. There is often knowledge of some circumstance connected with the deceased person's own death, as the appearance of his body after dissolution, or the place of its temporary deposit or final burial. And there is often knowledge of the impending or actual death of some friend of the deceased person's. On the view here taken of the gradual passage from the one environment into the other, both these kinds of knowledge seem probable enough. I think it likely that some part of the consciousness after death may for some time be dreamily occupied with the physical scene. And similarly, when some surviving friend is gradually verging towards the same dissolution, the fact may be readily perceptible in the spiritual world. When the friend has actually died, the knowledge which his predecessor may have of his transition is knowledge appertaining to events of the next world as much as of this.

716. But apart from this information, acquired perhaps on the borderland between two states, apparitions do sometimes imply a perception of more definitely terrene events, such as the moral crises (as marriage, grave quarrels, or impending crimes) of friends left behind on earth. I quote in 716 A a specimen of this class, — a case of impressive warning, in which the phantom was seen by two persons, one of whom had already had a less evidential experience.

A word as to the light thrown on each other by these two successive experiences of the same percipient. The latter experience, as will have been seen, is strongly evidential. The nature of the warning given is such that the case would hardly have been communicated to us, even for anonymous publication, except under a grave sense of its importance. The former experience lacks, by its nature, coincidental proof. The daughter knew of her father's death ; she hoped, although uncertainly, that all was well with him; and the vision announcing his bliss might thus have been the creation of her own mind. It was a " vision of consolation" of a frequent type — a type excluded from our evidential reckonings. Yet I can hardly suppose that of the two visions thus similar the one was really due to spiritual agency and the other was not. I regard each as corroborating and lending weight to the other.

I add in 716 B another case of similar type, the message in which, while felt by the percipient to be convincing and satisfactory, was held too private to be communicated in detail. It is plain that just in the cases where the message is most intimately veracious, the greatest difficulty is likely to be felt as to making it known to strangers.

I have already given a case (in 714) where a departed spirit seems to show a sympathetic anticipation of a marriage some time before it is contemplated. In another case, given in 716 C, the percipient, Mrs. V., describes a vision of a mother's form suspended, as it were, in a church

717] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 27

where her son is undergoing the rite of confirmation. That vision, indeed, might have been purely subjective, as Mrs. V. was familiar with the departed mother's aspect; though value is given to it by the fact that Mrs. V. has had other experiences which included evidential coincidences.

717. From these instances of knowledge shown by the departed of events which seem wholly terrene, I pass to knowledge of events which seem in some sense more nearly concerned with the spirit-world. We have, as already hinted, a considerable group of cases where a spirit seems to be aware of the impending death of a survivor. In some few of those cases the foreknowledge is entirely inexplicable by any such foresight as we mortals can imagine. But those cases I shall not cite here; deferring them until the whole question of the limits of spiritual precognition comes to be discussed in a later chapter. In the cases to which I shall now allude the degree of foresight seems not greater than that of ordinary spectators, except in the case to be first given, where, though the family did not foresee the death, a physician might, for aught we know, have been able to anticipate it. However explained, the case is one of the best-attested, and in itself one of the most remarkable, that we possess.

The account, which I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 17, was sent in 1887 to the American Society for Psychical Research by Mr. F. G., of Boston. Professor Royce and Dr. Hodgson vouch for the high character and good position of the informants ; and it will be seen that, besides the percipient himself, his father and brother are first-hand witnesses as regards the most important point, — the effect produced by a certain symbolic item in the phantom's aspect. Mr. G. writes :—

January nth, 1888.

SIR, — Replying to the recently published request of your Society for actual occurrences of psychical phenomena, I respectfully submit the following remarkable occurrence to the consideration of your distinguished Society, with the assurance that the event made a more powerful impression on my mind than the combined incidents of my whole life. I have never mentioned it outside of my family and a few intimate friends, knowing well that few would believe it, or else ascribe it to some disordered state of my mind at the time ; but I well know I never was in better health or possessed a clearer head and mind than at the time it occurred.

In 1867 my only sister, a young lady of eighteen years, died suddenly of cholera in St. Louis, Mo. My attachment for her was very strong, and the blow a severe one to me. A year or so after her death the writer became a commercial traveller, and it was in 1876, while on one of my Western trips, that the event occurred.

I had " drummed " the city of St. Joseph, Mo., and had gone to my room at the Pacific House to send in my orders, which were unusually large ones, so that I was in a very happy frame of mind indeed. My thoughts, of course, were about these orders, knowing how pleased my house would be at my success. I had not been thinking of my late sister, or in any manner reflecting

on the past. The hour was high noon, and the sun was shining cheerfully into my room. While busily smoking a cigar and writing out my orders, I suddenly became conscious that some one was sitting on my left, with one arm resting on the table. Quick as a flash I turned and distinctly saw the form of my dead sister, and for a brief second or so looked her squarely in the face ; and so sure was I that it was she, that I sprang forward in delight, calling her by name, and, as I did so, the apparition instantly vanished. Naturally I was startled and dumbfounded, almost doubting my senses ; but the cigar in my mouth, and pen in hand, with the ink still moist on my letter, I satisfied myself I had not been dreaming and was wide awake. I was near enough to touch her, had it been a physical possibility, and noted her features, expression, and details of dress, &c. She appeared as if alive. Her eyes looked kindly and perfectly natural into mine. Her skin was so life-like that I could see the glow or moisture on its surface, and, on the whole, there was no change in her appearance, otherwise than when alive.

Now comes the most remarkable confirmation of my statement, which cannot be doubted by those who know what I state actually occurred. This visitation, or whatever you may call it, so impressed me that I took the next train home, and in the presence of my parents and others I related what had occurred. My father, a man of rare good sense and very practical, was inclined to ridicule me, as he saw how earnestly I believed what I stated ; but he, too, was amazed when later on I told them of a bright red line or scratch on the right-hand side of my sister's face, which I distinctly had seen. When I mentioned this my mother rose trembling to her feet and nearly fainted away, and as soon as she sufficiently recovered her self-possession, with tears streaming down her face, she exclaimed that I had indeed seen my sister, as no living mortal but herself was aware of that scratch, which she had accidentally made while doing some little act of kindness after my sister's death. She said she well remembered how pained she was to think she should have, unintentionally, marred the features of her dead daughter, and that unknown to all, how she had carefully obliterated all traces of the slight scratch with the aid of powder, &c., and that she had never mentioned it to a human being from that day to this. In proof, neither my father nor any of our family had detected it, and positively were unaware of the incident, yet / saw the scratch as bright as if just made. So strangely impressed was my mother, that even after she had retired to rest she got up and dressed, came to me and told me she knew at least that I had seen my sister. A few weeks later my mother died, happy in her belief she would rejoin her favourite daughter in a better world.

In a further letter Mr. F. G. adds :—

There was nothing of a spiritual or ghostly nature in either the form or dress of my sister, she appearing perfectly natural, and dressed in clothing that she usually wore in life, and which was familiar to me. From her position at the table, I could only see her from the waist up, and her appearance and everything she wore is indelibly photographed in my mind. I even had time to notice the collar and little breastpin she wore, as well as the comb in her hair, after the style then worn by young ladies. The dress had no particular association for me or my mother, no more so than others she was in the habit of wearing; but to-day, while I have forgotten all her other dresses, pins, and combs, I could go to her trunk (which we have just as she left it) and pick out

717] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 29

the very dress and ornaments she wore when she appeared to me, so well do I remember it.

You are correct in understanding that I returned home earlier than I had intended, as it had such an effect on me that I could hardly think of any other matter ; in fact, I abandoned a trip that I had barely commenced, and, ordinarily, would have remained on the road a month longer.

Mr. F. G. again writes to Dr. Hodgson, January 23rd, 1888 : —

As per your request, I enclose a letter from my father which is indorsed by my brother, confirming the statement I made to them of the apparition I had seen. I will add that my father is one of the oldest and most respected citizens

of St. Louis, Mo., a retired merchant, whose winter residence is at , Ills.,

a few miles out by rail. He is now seventy years of age, but a remarkably well-preserved gentleman in body and mind, and a very learned man as well. As I informed you, he is slow to believe things that reason cannot explain. My brother, who indorses the statement, has resided in Boston for twelve years,

doing business on Street, as per letter-head above, and the last man in

the world to take stock in statements without good proof. The others who were present (including my mother) are now dead, or were then so young as to now have but a dim remembrance of the matter.

You will note that my father refers to the " scratch," and it was this that puzzled all, even himself, and which we have never been able to account for, further than that in some mysterious way I had actually seen my sister nine years after death, and had particularly noticed and described to my parents and family this bright red scratch, and which, beyond all doubt in our minds, was unknown to a soul save my mother, who had accidentally caused it.

When I made my statement, all, of course, listened and were interested; but the matter would probably have passed with comments that it was a freak of memory had not I asked about the scratch, and the instant I mentioned it my mother was aroused as if she had received an electric shock, as she had kept it secret from all, and she alone was able to explain it. My mother was a sincere Christian lady, who was for twenty-five years superintendent of a large infant class in her church, the Southern Methodist, and a directress in many charitable institutions, and was highly educated. No lady at the time stood higher in the city of St. Louis, and she was, besides, a woman of rare good sense.

I mention these points to give you an insight into the character and standing of those whose testimony, in such a case, is necessary.

(Signed) F. G.

From Mr. H. G. :—

, ILLS., January 2Oth, 1888.

DEAR F.,— -Yours of i6th inst. is received. In reply to your questions relating to your having seen our Annie, while at St. Joseph, Mo., I will state that I well remember the statement you made to family on your return home. I remember your stating how she looked in ordinary home dress, and particularly about the scratch (or red spot) on her face, which you could not account for, but which was fully explained by your mother. The spot was made while adjusting something about her head while in the casket, and covered with powder. All who heard you relate the phenomenal sight thought it was

true. You well know how sceptical I am about things which reason cannot explain.

(Signed) H. G. (father).

I was present at the time and indorse the above.

(Signed) K. G. (brother).

The apparent redness of the scratch on the face of the apparition goes naturally enough with the look of life in the face. The phantom did not appear as a corpse, but as a blooming girl, and the scratch showed as it would have shown if made during life.

Dr. Hodgson visited Mr. F. G. later, and sent us the following notes of his interview :—

ST. Louis, Mo., April ibtk, 1890.

In conversation with Mr. F. G., now forty-three years of age, he says that there was a very special sympathy between his mother, sister, and himself.

When he saw the apparition he was seated at a small table, about two feet in diameter, and had his left elbow on the table. The scratch which he saw was on the right side of his sister's nose, about three-fourths of an inch long, and was a somewhat ragged mark. His home at the time of the incident was in St. Louis. His mother died within two weeks after the incident. His sister's face was hardly a foot away from his own. The sun was shining upon it through the open window. The figure disappeared like an instantaneous evaporation.

Mr. G. has had another experience, but of a somewhat different character. Last fall the impression persisted for some time of a lady friend of his, and he could not rid himself for some time of thoughts of her. He found afterwards that she died at the time of the curious persistence of his impression.

Mr. G. appears to be a first-class witness.

R. HODGSON.

I have ranked this case primd facie as a perception by the spirit of her mother's approaching death. That coincidence is too marked to be explained away : the son is brought home in time to see his mother once more by perhaps the only means which would have succeeded ; and the mother herself is sustained by the knowledge that her daughter loves and awaits her. Mr. Podmore l has suggested, on the other hand, that the daughter's figure was a mere projection from the mother's mind : a conception which has scarcely any analogy to support it ; for the one ancient case of Wesermann's projection of a female figure to a distance (already recounted in 668 G) remains, I think, the sole instance where an agent has generated a hallucinatory figure or group of figures which did not, at any rate, include his own. I mean that he may spontaneously project a picture of himself as he is or dreams himself to be situated, perhaps with other figures round him, but not, so far as our evidence goes, the single figure of some one other than himself. Whilst not assuming that this rule can have no exceptions, I see no reason for supposing that it has been transgressed in the present case. Nay, I think that the very fact that the

1 See " Phantasms of the Dead from another point of view," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 291.

719] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 31

figure was not that of the corpse with the dull mark on which the mother's regretful thoughts might dwell, but was that of the girl in health and happiness, with the symbolic red mark worn simply as a test of identity, goes far to show that it was not the mother's mind from whence that image came. As to the spirit's own knowledge of the fate of the body after death, a subsequent group of cases will, I think, show that this specific form of post-mortem perception is not unusual (see 730 and 731 A).

I add in Appendices three other cases where the impending death of a survivor seems to be indicated.1 In one of them — the apparition of a floating female figure to two officers (717 C) — the identification of that figure as the wife of the dying man is very imperfect. But the appearance of the figure to two persons collectively is well attested, and this is, at any rate, the explanation most in accordance with analogy.

