Some time during the summer a bunch of keys, among which was my wheat-garner key, was lost. After a lapse of about one week I requested Mr. William White, who was employed in the store and boarded at Rev. C. B. Sanders' in the village, on going to his dinner, to ask him to tell me where my keys were. On his return Mr. White said he made the request, but Mr. Sanders paid no attention to what he said, he being in one of his spells. However, during the same afternoon, while my younger sister, in company with other persons, was at his house, he told her that my keys were under the steps at the west door of my dwelling. In consequence of this information I returned home earlier than usual. As soon as I arrived I told my wife what I had heard. She ran immediately and found the keys under the door-step, just as Mr. Sanders had said, and somewhat rusty. They must have been thrown there a week before by a little child that played about the house.

I add that I know Mr. Sanders had not been in my house nor on the place for at least twelve months before that time.

A. J. BENTLEY.

We, the undersigned, certify that the above statements are true as far as they relate to us personally, and that we heard all the particulars, as above mentioned, at the time they occurred.

Mrs. JOSEPHINE E. BENTLEY.

Miss MARY A. BENTLEY.

Several cases are given of his supernormal knowledge of accidents occurring to distant persons, such as the stumbling of a lady carrying some boiling-hot water, and the scalding of her arm in consequence (the inci: dent occurring in another State) ; he also gave a description of injuries to another lady (thirty-five miles distant) from a lightning stroke, at the time of the occurrence. His account of a fire in Salisbury, N.C., with a description of " the tin-shop in which it broke out, and the extent of its ravages," reminds one of the incident of Swedenborg's description of the fire at Stockholm when he was at Gottenburg (see 936 A).

Several cases are also recorded of his knowledge that a distant person was just dying or dead. I quote one of these : —

On the same night he revealed the place of the lost gold coin, as before related, and perhaps about one hour afterwards, Dr. Blair, my wife, and myself being present, Mr. Sanders took his seat at the front window of the parlour. Our attention was attracted by manifestations of sympathy, sadness, and distress from him, accompanied by such expressions as " Poor fellow ! What a pity ! " He continued to repeat them, alternated with inarticulate expressions of intense emotion for a short time — I would say from one to several

minutes. Then he said, as well as I remember, " He is gone! gone! gone! " closing in a solemn whisper. There was for a short time a silence and stillness, such as usually is witnessed at the closing scene of a dying friend, which was broken by my asking him the cause of these manifestations. We were quite shocked on hearing his reply that " Lieutenant McClure has just died suddenly from an internal haemorrhage, near Clarkesville, Tennessee."

We append the following facts: Lieutenant Robert McClure some few months previous had married Miss Pattie, daughter of R. W. Vasser, deceased (long a prominent citizen and merchant in this place), and had, a few days before this, gone on a visit to his father, whose residence was then, and still is, in the immediate vicinity of Clarkesville, Tennessee, about forty miles below Nashville, having left his wife at her mother's, as he expected to make a flying trip. On the next morning after Mr. Sanders' development, above written, a telegram was received from Clarkesville bringing to his young bride the unexpected and melancholy news of her husband's sudden death. And it confirmed, in every circumstance, what Mr. Sanders had stated the night before. Clarkesville, Tennessee, vid Nashville, is nearly one hundred and fifty miles distant from Athens, Ala.

A recent letter, from a lady who was present, states that Lieutenant McClure died on Wednesday night, between eight and nine o'clock, the 2nd of November 1866. He was sitting in her room, reading aloud a book; had a paroxysm of coughing, and remarked to her that it was blood that he spit out. She put her babe down, which she was nursing, and assisted him in sitting down, for he had arisen to his feet. She thinks he did not breathe after being seated.

After writing these last two cases, I received the following testimony from J. S. Blair, M.D. G. W. MITCHELL.

Mr. Mitchell adds the corroborative testimony of Dr. Blair.

The last account which I quote is of an incident which occurred much later than those recorded in the book by Mr. Mitchell. An account of it was sent to Dr. Hodgson by Mr. Mitchell, in a letter of February 1891, which agrees with what follows from the witnesses themselves : —

BODENHAM, GILES Co., TENN., May 27, 1891.

We, the undersigned, certify that on Saturday night, August the [24th], 1889, Rev. C. B. Sanders, who was holding a protracted meeting with our pastor, Rev. G. W. Mitchell, at Mt. Moriah Church, repaired to our house, where they (the preachers) lodged. Mr. Sanders was suffering considerable pain in his head and chest, and lying upon a bed, and after hours spent in conversation and singing religious songs, and while Mr. Mitchell was temporarily absent— we think it was about eleven o'clock, or later — he said, with evident amusement, " Humph ! Brother Forsythe, like a child, knelt down to pray and has gone to sleep." Mrs. Wheeler said to him, " How do you know ? " He replied, " Child, you ask too many questions."

On that night, before Mr. Sanders dismissed the congregation, he proposed that all who would join in praying for the penitents until midnight to make it known by rising to their feet. To which Deacon Forsythe was a respondent* Mr. Forsythe lived about two miles on an air line from our home. . . .

GEO. E. WHEELER.

Mrs. GEO. E. WHEELER.

936A] TO CHAPTER IX 569

WALES, TENN., May 28, 1891.

I, the undersigned, hereby certify that on the night of the [24th] of August 1889, I did kneel at my chair for prayer, in my own house, between the hours of eleven and twelve o'clock, and having been labouring day and night for a week past, and being quite weary, in a short time I went to sleep. I went to church next morning, and Deacon Long and myself were asked by a brother if we complied with our pledge last night. I replied that I did not fully, as I went to sleep on my knees a short time before the time expired. . . .

I had not heard then what Mr. Sanders had said about me at Mr. Wheeler's. When we got to the church door, Mr. Wheeler was telling the incident that took place at his house on the night before, as having occurred about the time I went to sleep. R. H. FORSYTHE.

Mr. Mitchell writes in July 1902, that he has not been notified that Mr. Sanders has had any recent communications from " X + Y = Z."

936 A. For Kant's evidence in regard to the supernormal powers of Swedenborg, see Dreams of a Spirit Seer, by Immanuel Kant, translated by E. F. Goerwitz; edited by Frank Sewall (London: Swan Sonnenschein & Co. ; New York : The Macmillan Company, 1900).

The three most famous cases are : (i) Swedenborg's communication to the Queen of Sweden of some secret information, which she had asked him for, and believed that no living human being could have told him. (2) The widow of the Dutch Ambassador at Stockholm was called upon by a goldsmith to pay for a silver service which her husband had purchased. She believed that it had been paid for, but could not find the receipt ; so she begged Swedenborg to ask her husband where it was. Three days later he came to her house and informed her in the presence of some visitors that he had conversed with her husband, and had learnt from him that the debt had been paid, and the receipt was in a bureau in an upstairs room. The spirit had said that after pulling out the left-hand drawer a board would appear, and on drawing out this a secret compartment would be disclosed, containing his private Dutch correspondence and the receipt. The whole company went upstairs and the papers were found, as described, in the secret compartment, of which no one had known before.

(3) In September, 1759, at four o'clock on a Saturday afternoon, Swedenborg arrived at Gottenburg from England, and was invited by a friend to his house. Two hours after he went out and then came back and informed the company that a dangerous fire had just broken out in Stockholm (which is about fifty German miles from Gottenburg), and that it was spreading fast. He was restless and went out often. He said that the house of one of his friends, whom he named, was already in ashes, and that his own was in danger. At eight o'clock, after he had been out again, he declared that the fire was extinguished at the third door from his house. This news occasioned great commotion throughout the whole city, and was announced to the Governor the same evening.

5/0 APPENDICES [936 B

On Sunday morning Swedenborg was summoned to the Governor, who questioned him about the disaster. He described the fire precisely, how it had begun and in what manner it had ceased, and how long it had continued. On Monday evening a messenger arrived at Gottenburg, who had been despatched by the Board of Trade during the time of the fire. In the letters brought by him, the fire was described precisely as stated by Swedenborg, and next morning the news was further confirmed by information brought to the Governor by the Royal Courier. As Swedenborg had said, the fire had been extinguished at eight o'clock.

These cases are given in Kant's letter to Fraulein Charlotte von Knobloch, which is quoted in Appendix II. of Dreams of a Spirit Seer, the original letter being contained in Borowsky's Darstellung des Lebens und Charakters Immanuels Kant, Konigsberg, 1804, pp. 211 to 225.

See also Documents concerning Swedenborg, by R. L. Tafel.

936 B. Frau Frederica Hauffe, better known as the " Seeress of Prevorst," was one of the most noted of the group of somnambules who flourished in Germany in the early part of the nineteenth century. A history of her trances was published soon after her death by Justinus Kerner, — a well-known poet and physician to whom she had come for " magnetic" treatment, — under the title of Die Seherin von Prevorst : Eroffnungen uberdas innere Leben des Menschen unduber das Hereinragen einer Geisterwelt in die Unsere (Stuttgart und Tubingen, I829).1 It was claimed that the Seeress possessed supernormal powers of vision, both of distant scenes and of the future ; she was supposed to see and converse with discarnate spirits, who gave her information on their affairs and family history, and physical phenomena were observed in her presence. The evidence, however, for her supernormal powers was what would now be considered quite inadequate. She excited even greater interest by her supposed revelations of things spiritual. These revelations formed the study of Gorres, Eschenmayer, and other members of a circle of mystics, and were expounded by them in the Blatter aus Prevorst, of which several volumes appeared from 1831 onwards. Besides the doctrine — more or less common to all the mystics of the time — of the threefold nature of man, the revelations of the Seeress included descriptions of certain intricate systems of circles — designated respectively Sun-Circles and Life -Circles — which represented symbolically spiritual conditions and the passage of time. Diagrams of these are given in Kerner's work. Their interpretation was furnished partly by cyphers, partly by words of the supposed primitive universal language written in the primitive ideographs. These have some resemblance to Hebrew characters, and the

1 A second edition was published in 1832, and later ones in 1838 and 1846. An English translation, greatly abridged, by Mrs. Crowe, was published in London in 1845. See also The Pioneers of the Spiritual Reformation: Life and Works of Dr. Justinus Kerner : William Howitt and his -work for Spiritualism, by Anna Mary Howitt Watts (London: The Psychological Press Association and E. W. Allen, 1883).

936 C] TO CHAPTER IX 571

Seeress herself compared the language to Hebrew, and maintained that it resembled the language actually spoken in the time of Jacob, and that it was the common language of the inner life. She frequently spoke it in her trances, and it is asserted that she was quite consistent in her use of the words. It was supposed to be the primitive Nature-speech, which was lost and forgotten with the coming of sin, but something of which can be recovered in rare states of exaltation. There are, of course, many other instances of this type of supposed languages, — e.g. the unknown tongues spoken in Edward Irving's church,1 and the Martian and other languages ,of MIla Helene Smith (see 837).

936 C. The following is another case of ecstasy, which was reported to us along with a series of incidents suggesting an unseen protection or guidance. The narrator, Mr. J. W. Skilton, was a railway engineer, residing at Jacksonville, Florida, U.S.A., who had several times had veridical dreams or impressions, which in some cases saved himself and his train from serious accidents. One of these — a premonition of an accident — was published in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 333, and further cases in vol. xi. pp. 559-567. I quote from vol. xi. p. 560. Mr. Skilton's narrative is dated November roth, 1890.

I would say that I have been engaged a great part of my life as a locomotive engineer, and this happened while engaged in that business. I was

ngaged with two other men one day about two o'clock P.M. in taking out some evergreen trees from a box car to take home and set out ; they were large and heavy ; I had to run the car up on the switch rails to get them out ; but as there was no train due till forty minutes I would have plenty of time to get them out, and push the car back out of the way. There had been a great deal

;of other freight put in the car after mine was, so it was necessary to take out some of it before I could get at mine. I opened the car door, and a barrel of eggs fell out on the ground, and just at that instant I saw a medium-sized person standing at my right hand clothed in white with a bright countenance, beaming with intelligence. I knew what he wanted in an instant, although he put his hand on my shoulder and said, " Come with me." We moved upward, and a little to the south-east, with the speed of lightning, as it were ; I could see the hills, trees, buildings, and roads as we went up side by side till they vanished out of our sight. As we passed on, this glorious being that was with me told me he was going to show me that bright heavenly world. We soon came to a world of light and beauty, many thousand times larger than this earth, with at least four times as much light. The beauties of this place were beyond any human being to describe. I was seated by the tree of life on a square bunch of what appeared to be a green velvet moss, about eighteen inches high ; there I saw many thousand spirits clothed in white, and singing the heavenly songs, and I could think of but one verse that I had ever heard that

• would do justice to this heavenly music, and that is this : " Hark ! what sweet music, what a song Sounds from the bright, celestial throng ! " for it was the sweetest song I have ever heard. I here told my attendant that it was the first

1 For a description of these, see The Life of Edward Irving, by Mrs. Oliphant (Hurst & Blackett, 1862).

time I had ever been perfectly at rest in my life. They did not converse by ! sound, but each knew the other's thoughts at the instant, and conversation was carried on in that way, and also with me.

After viewing the wonderful beauties of the place for some time, and the thousands of spirits, robed in spotless white, passing through the air, for they did not confine themselves to the surface, but went every direction as they pleased, I wanted to see my dear mother, two sisters, and a child of mine that had died some time before this. The request was granted at once, but I was not allowed to converse with them. They were standing in a row in front of me, and I looked at them and coolly estimated the distance we were apart at thirty feet, and wondered how these things could be. They seemed very much pleased to see me, and I shall never forget how they welcomed me when I first saw them, although no conversation passed. About this time my attendant told me we must go back ; I wished to stay, but he told me my time had not come yet, but would in due time, and that I should wait with patience. At this we started back, and were soon out of sight of that heavenly land. When we came in sight of this world, I saw everything as it looked from a great height, such '•. as trees, buildings, hills, roads, and streams, as natural as could be, till we came to the car that I had opened the door of, and I found myself there in the body, and he vanished out of my sight. I spoke then (just as I opened my watch and ' found it had been just twenty-six minutes that I had been engaged with that , mysterious one), and said I thought I had left this world for good. One of the men said, " There is something the matter with you ever since you opened the car door; we have not been able to get a word out of you," and that I had done all the work of taking out everything and putting it back into the car, and one item was eight barrels of flour I had taken off the ground alone and put them back in the car, three feet and a half high, with all the ease of a giant. I told them where I had been and what I had seen, but they had seen no one.

This I count the brightest day of my life, and what I saw is worth a lifetime of hardship and toil. Being in good health, and in my right mind in mid-day, while busy about my work, and my mind not more than ordinarily engaged on the great subject of eternal life, I consider this a most extraordinary incident. I was told by this mysterious person that if we are counted worthy at death, we shall be accompanied to that bright world by one of those glorious beings, and this is my firm belief.

Mr. Skilton writes to me that he has never had any trance save this — which he regards as " worth a lifetime of hardship and toil."

As I have elsewhere said, I incline to believe that ecstasy is the highest condition into which a spirit still incarnate can pass. The so-called ecstasy of hysteria I regard as merely an instance of the imperfect simulations of various psychical states which the disintegrated personality of the hysteric readily affords. True ecstasy I regard as a condition where the centre of consciousness changes from the supraliminal to the subliminal self, and realises the transcendental environment in place of the material. The reminiscence of such a momentary enlightenment I regard as inevitably confused and coloured by pre-existing supraliminal notions. I no more accept Mr. Skilton's picture of the unseen world as exact than I accept Swedenborg's ; but I incline to believe that both alike were in truth

937A] TO CHAPTER IX 573

exalted into an " interior condition," where their perception of the Cosmos, though less distinct and intelligible, was wider and profounder than our own.

937 A. [The first volume of Alphonse Cahagnet's Arcanes de la vie future devoiles was published at Paris in 1848, and the second, reporting his sittings with Adele Maginot, in 1849. This medium had been long known to him ; she had been a natural somnambulist from her childhood, and he had " magnetised " her to put a stop to the spontaneous attacks which were impairing her health. He found her an excellent clairvoyant, especially for the diagnosis and cure of diseases. Later, she was chiefly consulted by persons who wished for interviews with deceased friends. It appears that Cahagnet took great care to report the communications, and to obtain signed attestations from witnesses, so that the case stands on a much higher evidential level than most early records of clairvoyants. An account of Cahagnet's work, quoting the records of some of the best cases, is given in an article by Mr. F. Podmore (in which he compares the trance performances of Adele with those of Mrs. Piper) in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiv. p. 50, and I give below some extracts from this article.]

The following (says Mr. Podmore) are a few representative records : —

No. 1 29. — M. Petiet asks for M. Jerome Petiet. Adele sees a young man, about twenty-four or twenty-six years of age (he was thirty), not so tall as his brother now present; auburn hair, rather long; open forehead, arched and very pronounced eyebrows ; brown and rather sunken eyes ; nose rather long, pretty well formed ; complexion fresh, skin very white and delicate ; medium-sized mouth, round dimpled chin. " He was weak in the chest ; he would have been very strong had it not been for this. He wears a rough grey vest, buttons with a shank and eye such as are no longer worn. I do not think they are brass ones, nor of the same stuff as the vest. They don't look to me very bright. His pantaloons are of a dark colour, and he wears low quartered shoes without any instep.

" This man was of a stubborn disposition, selfish, without any fine feelings, had a sinister look, was not very communicative, devoid of candour, and had but little affection for any one. He had suffered with his heart. His death was natural, but sudden. He died of suffocation." Adele chokes as this man choked, and coughed as he did. She says that " he must have had moxas or a plaster applied to his back, and this accounts for the sore I see there. He had no disease, however, in that part. The spine was sound. Those who applied this remedy did not know the seat of the disease. He holds himself badly. His back is round without being humped."

M. Petiet finds nothing to alter in these details, which are very exact, and confirm him in his belief that the application of this plaster, advised by a man who was not a doctor, brought on his brother's death, which was almost sudden.

" Signed the present report as very exact.

PETIET, 19 Rue Neuve-Coquenard."

Note. — The buttons that Adele was unable to describe were of metal, a dirty white ground, and surrounded by a blue circle. In this apparition there is a remarkable fact to be noted — viz., that Adele experienced the same kind of illness as this man. I was obliged to release her by passes ; she suffered terribly.

No. 117. — M. du Potet [a well-known writer on Animal Magnetism] wishes to call up M. Dubois, a doctor, a friend of his who had been dead about fifteen months.

Adele said : " I see a grey-headed man, he has very little hair on the front of his head ; his forehead is bare and prominent at the temples, making his head appear square. He may be about sixty years of age. He has two wrinkles on either side of his cheeks, a crease under his chin, making it look double ; he is short-necked and stumpy ; has small eye$, a thick nose, a rather large mouth, a flat chin, and small thin hands. He does not look to me quite so tall as M. du Potet; if he is not stouter, he is more broad-shouldered. He wears a brown frock-coat with side pockets. I see him draw a snuff-box out of one of them and take a pinch. He has a very funny walk, he does not carry himself well, and has weak legs ; he must have suffered from them. He has rather short trousers. Ah ! he does not clean his shoes every day, for they are covered with mud. Taking it altogether, he is not well dressed. He has asthma, for he breathes with difficulty. I see, too, that he has a swelling in the abdomen, he has something to support it. I have told him that it is M. du Potet who asked for him. He talks to me of magnetism with incredible volubility ; he talks of everything at once ; he mixes everything up : I cannot understand any of it ; it makes him sputter saliva."

M. du Potet asks that the apparition may be asked why he has not appeared to him before as he had promised ? He answers : " Wait till I find out my whereabouts ; I have only just arrived, I am studying everything I see. I want to tell you all about it when I appear, and I shall have many things to tell you."

" Which day did you promise me you would do so ? " " On a Wednesday." Adele adds : " This man must be forgetful ; I am sure that he was very absentminded." M. du Potet asks further : " When will you appear to me ? " cannot fix the time; I shall try to do so in six weeks." "Ask him if he was fond of the Jesuits." At this name he gives such a leap in the air, stretching out his arms, and crying " The Jesuits," that Adele draws back quickly, and is so startled that she does not venture to speak to him again.

M. du Potet declares that all these details are very accurate, that he cannot alter a syllable. He says that this man's powers of conversation were inexhaustible ; he mixed up all the sciences to which he was devoted, and spoke with such volubility that, as the clairvoyante says, he sputtered in consequence. He took little pains with his appearance ; he was so absent-minded that he sometimes forgot to eat. When any one mentioned the Jesuits to him he jumped as Adele has described. He was always covered with mud like a spaniel. It is not surprising that the clairvoyante should see him with muddy shoes. He had, in fact, promised M. du Potet that he would appear to him on a Wednesday or a Saturday. M. du Potet has acknowledged the accuracy of this apparition in No. 75 of the Journal du Magnetisme.

In effect, in the Journal of August loth of the same year, in reviewing

937 A] TO CHAPTER IX 575

the first volume, Du Potet gives handsome testimony to the striking nature of the impersonation, " si bien que je croyais le voir moi-meme, tant le tableau en e"tait saisissant. Bientot cette ombre s'est enfuie en effrayant la somnambule ; un seul mot avait cause" cette disparition subite, et mon e"tonnement en fut porte a son comble, car ce meme mot le mettait toujours en fureur." But Du Potet, for all that, is inclined to attribute the phenomenon to transmission of thought from his own mind ; l and a few months later,2 in reviewing the second volume, he takes occasion to give the result of his further inquiries on this seance. Generally, the minute description of the personal appearance and other particulars which were prominent in Du Potet's own mind at the time were correct ; and other details were correctly given which Du Potet might have heard, but had certainly not remembered at the time. He had ascertained, however, from the widow and children, that Dr. Dubois took no tobacco ; never had a redingote of the colour described ; had no hernia, and consequently wore no bandage. Moreover, the apparition predicted never came off. Du Potet, however, adds expressly that Dr. Dubois was unknown in life to Cahagnet and his somnambule.

In some cases, with the express object of excluding thought-transference, the sitter came armed with the name of some dead person of whom he

knew nothing — as in the following case. M. 1'Abbe" A , mentioned at

the beginning of the record, had had a successful experiment of the same kind at a previous sitting (No. 112).

No. 122. — Pastor Rostan, who is referred to in the preceding stance in connection with the conversion of M. 1'Abbe A , desired in his turn to obtain an

apparition. He asked for a person unknown to him, whose name had been given to him ; but there had been a mistake made in giving him this name ; in consequence a person appeared whose description we took, but who could not be recognised. At least, such is this gentleman's version, and I do not imagine that I was imposed upon. I suggested a second stance to him, especially as he persisted in asking for a person entirely unknown to him, to such an extent had he been influenced by M. Hubert's arguments. He then asked his maidservant to give him a name of one of her acquaintances who had been dead some time ; he came armed with this name, and asked for Jeannette Jex. Adele replied : " I see a woman who is not tall, she may be between thirty and forty years of age ; if she is not hump-backed she must be crook-backed, for she carries herself very badly. I cannot make her turn round. Her hair is auburn, approaching to red ; she has small grey eyes, a thick nose. She is not good-looking. She has a prominent chin, a receding mouth, thin lips; her dress is countrified. I see that she has a cap with two flat bands, rounded over the ears. She must have suffered from a flow of blood to the head, she has had indigestion. I see she has a swelling in the abdomen on the left side and in the glands of one breast. She has been ill a long time."

M. Rostan handed over the report to his servant, and gave it back to me after adding his signature and the following remarks : —

" This is correct as regards stature, age, dress, carriage, the disease and deformed figure. (Signed) J. J. ROSTAN."

1 Journal du Magnetisme, vol. vii. p. 89. 2 Journal du Magnetisme, vol. viii. p. 24.

5/6 APPENDICES [937 A

But if M. Rostan was staggered by the result of his test, his friends apparently still ascribed the results to thought-transference, which gives Cahagnet occasion for some argument on the subject.

There are, indeed, indications that some at least of the alleged apparitions were subjective — inspired, that is, by the imagination of the medium, supplemented occasionally by telepathic drafts from the sitter. We should probably be justified in assuming — in default of any corroborative evidence as to their reality — that the accounts of heaven and of the occupations of the spirits therein, given in the first volume [of the Arcanes~\t had no more remote origin than the medium's own mind, whose workings were no doubt directed, now by memories of lessons learnt in childhood, now by hints of the Swedenborgian philosophy received from Cahagnet himself.

[Descriptions of various visions of heaven, quoted by Mr. Podmore, are here omitted.]

But there are other accounts which, while they point to the action of telepathy, are extremely difficult to reconcile with the theory of spiritintercourse held by the recorder.

On two occasions Adele was asked to search for a long-lost relative of the sitter. On each occasion she found the man alive, and conversed with his spirit.

M. Lucas, a carrier (messager), of Rambouillet, came to inquire after the fate of his brother-in-law, who had disappeared after a quarrel some twelve years previously. Adele in the trance found the man at once, said that he was alive, and that she saw him in a foreign country, where there were trees like those in America, and that he was busy gathering seeds from small shrubs, about 3 feet high. He would not answer her question, and she asked to be awoke, as she was afraid of wild beasts. M. Lucas returned a few days afterwards, bringing with him the mother of the missing man.

No. 99. — Adele, as soon as she was asleep, said : — " I see him." " Where do you see him ? " " Here." " Give us a description of him again and also of the place where he is." " He is a fair man, tanned by the heat of the sun ; he is very stout, his features are fairly regular; brown eyes, large mouth; he appears gloomy and meditative. He is dressed as a workman, in a sort of short blouse. He is occupied at present, as he was last time, in gathering seed, which resembles pepper-corns, but I do not think it is pepper; it is larger. This seed grows on small shrubs about one metre high. There is a little negro with him occupied in the same way." " Try to obtain some answer to-day. Get him to tell you the name of the country where you see him." " He will not answer." " Tell him that his good mother, for whom he had a great affection, is with you, and asks for news of him." " Oh ! at the mention of his mother he turned round and said to me, ' My mother ! I shall not die without seeing her again. Comfort her, and tell her that I always think of her. I am not dead ! ' ' " Why does he not write to her?" " He has written to her, but the vessel has no doubt been wrecked — at least he supposes this to be so, since he has received no answer. He tells me that he is in Mexico. He has followed the emperor,

937A] TO CHAPTER IX 577

Don Pedro; he has been imprisoned for five years, he has suffered a great deal, and will use every effort to return to France ; they will see him again." " Can he name the place in which he is living ? " " No ; it is very far inland, those countries have no names." "Is he living with a European?" " No, with a coloured man. " " Why does he not write to his mother ? " " Because no vessels come to the place where he is. He does not know to whom to turn. Besides, he only knew how to write a very little, and has almost forgotten. There is no one with him who can render him this service ; no one speaks his language ; he makes himself understood with great difficulty. Besides that, he has never been of a communicative disposition or a talker. He seems to be rather a surly fellow. It is very difficult to get these few words out of him. One would think he were dumb." " In short, how can one manage to write to him or hear news of him ? " " He knows nothing about it. He can only say these three things : I am in Mexico, I am not dead, they will see me again." " Why did he leave his parents in this manner, without saying anything to them, as he was happy at home ? " " This man was very reserved ; he hardly ever spoke. He loved his mother very much, but he had not the same affection for his father, who was a passionate, surly man, and often treated him brutally. The cup had long since been full. It was not the trifling dispute that he had had with his father the day before his departure that made him decide to go away ; it had been his fixed determination for some time past. He told no one of it. He went away on the sly. Having kissed them all the evening before, he made good his escape next day, without another word. Do not be uneasy, madam ; you will see him again ! " This good woman burst into tears, because she recognised the truth of every detail given her by Adele. She did not find anything at fault in the description. The disposition, the education, and the departure of her son were as Adele said ; but a greater semblance of probability is given to the clairvoyante's account by the fact that his relations had an idea that he had enlisted in Don Pedro's army, and at one time took some steps to ascertain the , truth of it. M. Lucas told me of this detail on a journey which he afterwards made to Paris. No information was, however, obtainable. What no less contributed to the astonishment of this good woman, of M. Lucas, and the other people present at this curious sdance, was to see Adele put up her hand to the left side of her face to keep off the fiery rays of the sun in those countries, and appear to be suffocated with heat ; but the most extraordinary part of this scene was that she had a severe sunstroke which turned the whole of that side of her face, from forehead to shoulder, bluish red, whilst the other side remained dead white. This dark colour did not begin to disappear till twenty-four hours later. At the time the heat of it was so great that one could not hold one's hand on it.

This simulation, by the subliminal consciousness, of the effects of severe sunburn is no doubt not more incredible than the production in hypnosis of mimic stigmata. Such physical effects of the imagination, if rare, are well authenticated. But if Cahagnet's last sentence refers to the 'heat of the medium's skin, I am afraid we must admit that the imagination of the recorder possibly played as prominent a part in the marvel as that of the patient.

[On another occasion, inquiry being made for a missing man, believed 'by his relatives to be dead, Adele described him as alive, and gave many

VOL. II. 2 O

details of his personal appearance, which were recognised as correct, and of his then whereabouts and occupations, which could not be verified. Full details are given by Mr. Podmore.]

We have, unfortunately (Mr. Podmore continues l) , no corroboration of the truth of the statements made about those two persons. It follows, then, that in the two stances all that we are entitled to say is that Adele was able to divine with, it may be admitted, singular accuracy the ideas present in the minds of her interlocutors. It was a striking example of telepathy ; but we have no kind of proof that it was anything more, and from internal evidence it seems very unlikely that it was anything more.

It appears, in fact, that no evidence is forthcoming of Adele' s power of conversing with the living at a distance, since the only two cases in which she professed to do so could not be verified, and this affords, I submit, a strong presumption that she did not possess that power, and that the conversations here detailed were purely imaginary, the authentic or plausible details which they contained being filched telepathically from the minds of those present. The curious similarity of the two accounts also points in the same direction. Both men profess to have written home, but the letters must have miscarried. Neither can write now, because they are far from the sea, in the interior. Both have suffered much ; both have been prisoners ; both protest that their relations will see them before they die ; neither, however, is in a hurry to come back ; and neither is willing to discover the name of his present place of abiding.

To suppose, as the recorder supposes, that these narratives are authentic revelations obtained from actual conversations with the spirits of men living in unnamed, and — as Cahagnet explains at length— probably nameless localities in the interior of Mexico or Asiatic Russia, is to strain credulity to the breaking- point. But if these two narratives are not what they seem to be, what are we to say of the other narratives in the book, which are cast in the same dramatic form, and contain similar details harmonising with the expectations or memories of the interlocutors ? If those are not authentic messages from the distant living, we require some further warrant for the assumption that these are authentic messages from the spirits of the dead. Considered in conjunction with the almost certainly subjective visions of Heaven and dead playmates which characterised the earlier trances, these later stances certainly point to an exclusively mundane origin.

We must, however, at least note that all the witnesses cited by Cahagnet seem to have been satisfied that nothing less than thoughttransference would explain the revelations, and that any candid reader now must find it hard to resist the same conviction.

938 A. The chief sources of information as to D. D. Home's life and experiences are the following works : —

Incidents in my Life, by D. D. Home (ist edition, London, 1863 ; 2nd edition, 1864; second series, 1872).

1 Mr. Podmore's argument is here abbreviated.

938B] TO CHAPTER IX 579

D. D. Home : His Life and Mission, by Madame Dunglas Home (London, 1888).

The Gift of D. D. Home, by Madame Dunglas Home (London, 1890).

Report on Spiritualism of the Committee of the London Dialectical Society (London, 1871). This contains the evidence of the Master of Lindsay, — now Earl of Crawford and Balcarres, — and others.

Experiences in Spiritualism with Mr. D. D. Home, by Viscount Adare (now Lord Dunraven; privately printed).

Researches in the Phenomena of Spiritualism, by William Crookes, F.R.S. Reprinted from the Quarterly Journal of Science (London, 1874).

Notes of Seances with D. D. Home, by William Crookes, F.R.S. (Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 98.)

See also a review by Professor Barrett and the present writer of Madame Home's first book, D. D. Home : His Life and Mission, in the Journal S.P.R., vol. iv. pp. 101-136 ; a briefer review of her second book, The Gift of D. D. Home, in the Journal S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 249 ; and a note on "The Character of D. D. Home " in the Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 176; also an article by Mr. Hamilton Aide", "Was I hypnotised?" in the Nineteenth Century for April 1890.

938 B. I give here a brief summary of the review by Professor Barrett and myself of D. D. Home : His Life and Mission, just referred to.

Shortly after the book was published I met Madame Home in Paris, and she allowed me to examine the original letters of more than a hundred of her correspondents and compare them with the extracts and translations printed in the book, where I found that they were correctly reproduced. Our second aim was to acquire further evidence, either for or against the validity of Home's claims. Several fresh cases confirmatory of those given by Madame Home were obtained and printed in full in our review (pp. 122—136). The evidential value of Home's own narrative, Incidents in my Life, was much increased by a letter written to me by Mr. W. M. Wilkinson, the well-known solicitor, of 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, stating that he had written nearly the whole of the book, — Home staying with him in his house, producing all the letters and documents, and giving him the necessary information ; while the preface to the second series of Incidents, dealing with Sir David Brewster, was written by Mr. Wilkinson from information given him by Dr. Robert Chambers, to whom the proofs of the whole work were submitted. Dr. Chambers also wrote the introduction and concluding chapter of the first series.

There is thus a considerable body of evidence as to Home, which enables us to discuss the three questions : (i) Was he ever convicted of fraud? (2) Did he satisfy any trained observer in a series of experiments selected by the observer and not by himself? (3) Were the phenomena entirely beyond the known scope of the conjurer's art ?

With regard to (i), Mr. Robert Browning told us the circumstances

58o APPENDICES [938 B

which mainly led to the opinion of Home which he expressed in Mr. Sludge the Medium. A lady had repeated to him a statement made to her by a lady and gentleman that they had found Home experimenting with phosphorus on the production of "spirit-lights." This evidence, then, came to us at third-hand ; the incident had occurred nearly forty years before, and it was impossible to learn more of it, since all the witnesses were dead and had left no written record.

We received one first-hand account, from a gentleman of character and ability, of a stance given in very poor light, where a small " spirit hand " — visible to all the sitters — appeared, and moved about. It seemed to him that he could see slight movements in the shoulder or upper part of Home's arm corresponding with the movements of the " spirit hand." Afterwards, " the movements of both plainly corresponded, and at length ... I saw continuous connection in the upper outline of Home's arm and the thing, whatever it was, that supported the * spirit hand.' " The sitting took place in 1855, but the account was not written until 1889. It is printed in full in our review {op. cit. p. 120).

There is also a frequently repeated story that Home was found in France to be using a stuffed hand; our inquiries into this tended to show that the story was a fabrication.

The most serious blot on Home's character was that revealed by the Lyon case. He had sittings with Mrs. Lyon, at which communications were given purporting to come from her deceased husband, and urging her to adopt Home as her son and give him ^700 a year. An admitted letter from her to Home, in which she said that she presented him with"24,000 " as an entirely free gift," was stated by her at the trial to have been written at Home's dictation and under " magnetic influence." The strongest evidence against Home was furnished by memorandum books, in his own writing, containing accounts of his experiences with her, and communications in the form of a dialogue between her and her husband, in which Home was alluded to as " our beloved son." Of Mrs. Lyon, the judge observed that " Reliance cannot be placed on her testimony ; " but there was much evidence besides hers to show that Home worked on her mind by spiritualistic devices, especially by suggesting communications from her husband, and the Court held that such transactions as those in question could not be upheld "unless the Court is quite satisfied that they are acts of pure volition uninfluenced." Such proof not being forthcoming, the case was decided against Home. (A review of the evidence in this case was furnished us by Mr. H. Arthur Smith, and is printed in our article, p. 117.)

We must observe, however, that the Lyon case, however discreditable to Home personally, has no clear bearing on the reality of his powers, since there seems to have been no assertion that any of the phenomena were produced by fraudulent means.

(2) With regard to our second question, — whether his powers were

938 B] TO CHAPTER IX 581

tested by competent observers,— Home in this respect stands pre-eminent ; since we have the evidence of Sir William Crookes (already referred to in 938 A) corroborated by the testimony of the Master of Lindsay (now Earl of Crawford and Balcarres) himself a savant of some distinction, and the privately printed series of careful observations by the present and the late Lords Dunraven.

(3) As to our third question — whether the phenomena could have been produced by conjuring — many of them, especially the "fire tests" and the movements of large untouched objects in good light, seem inexplicable by this supposition. The hypothesis of collective hallucination on the part of the sitters seems very improbable, because in most cases all those present saw the same thing ; 1 and often without receiving from Home any audible suggestion as to what was about to happen.

The telekinetic phenomena observed in Home's case were those which attracted most attention ; but the communications given at his sittings purporting to come from deceased persons are also noteworthy, though the records of them are unfortunately very inadequate. In our article (op. cit. pp. 110—114) we give a brief abstract of thirty-five cases of " recognition " taken from Madame Home's work, omitting those which rest on Home's uncorroborated testimony.2

These cases are of very different evidential value. But many are firsthand accounts, volunteered by independent witnesses, of messages closely affecting themselves, and sometimes involving incidents which can hardly have been known to servants or dependants.

I conclude with some extracts from the list just referred to, which follows the paging of Madame Home's book : —

i. p. 15. — Mr. S. B. Brittan's testimony. Home suddenly becomes entranced; says "Hannah Brittan is here," — a relative long since dead, and whose existence, as Mr. Brittan believes, was not known to any one " in all that region." Home, entranced, acts as though a melancholic in terror of hell ; Hannah Brittan "became insane from believing in the doctrine of endless punishment."

12. p. 153. — Mrs. Senior's evidence. At their first meeting Mr. Home describes Mr. Senior and adds, " You forgot to wind his watch, and how miserable it made you." " Now this was a fact known to no living being but myself. I had wound the watch the night I lost my husband and resolved never to let

1 The famous case of Home floating out at one window and in at another, related by : Lords Lindsay and Adare, as witnessed by them, was quoted by Dr. Carpenter in the

Contemporary Review for January 1876, as an instance of believers affirming that they saw the phenomenon, " while a single honest sceptic declares that Mr. Home was sitting in his chair all the time." In reply to this, the only other person who was present at the ! time, Captain Wynne, wrote a letter (seen by the present writer and printed in Home's Life] stating that he also on that occasion had seen Home go out of one window and in at the other.

2 A further list of cases where there is some first-hand evidence for the identity of an alleged communicating spirit is given in my review of The Gift of D. D. Home in the

i Journal S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 251.

it go down again. I forgot to wind it one night, and my agony was great when I discovered it in the morning, but I never mentioned it even to my husband's sister, who was in the house with me." Home also mentions " Mary," Mr. Senior's mother.

13. p. 154. — Mrs. Senior narrates how at another sdance Home, entranced, recalls private conversation (date, positions, and other details given) between herself and her husband.

16. p. 177. — Mr. B. Coleman's evidence. At his first stance messages are given by raps as from his aunts Elizabeth and Hannah. " I did not recognise the names. I had never known of any aunts of those names," but he learns that sisters of his father, thus named, died before he was born.

17. p. 196. — Mrs. S. C. Hall's testimony. Raps from deceased Madame Home to Mr. Durham, sculptor, saying, " Thanks for your early morning labour ; I have often been near you." Mr. Durham had been rising early to work at a bust of Madame Home intended as a present to Mr. Home ; " this fact was not even known in his own household."

18. p. 206.— Mrs. S. C. Hall's evidence. "Your father, Colonel Hall," is announced ; test asked for, " The last time we met in Cork you pulled my tail." Colonel Hall had worn a queue, and this fact was correct.

20. p. 278. — Mrs. Hennings' testimony. Home says, " George is here "nephew of Mrs. Hennings, recently deceased ; mentions accident from bite of dog when a boy at Dulwich — correct. One of us has seen Mrs. Hennings, who, although very old, retains a singularly bright intelligence. She confirmed this statement, and added several details.

21. p. 278. — Mrs. Hennings' testimony. Home speaks in trance as from her father ; " The night before your father passed away you played whist with him," some details, and explanation as to provisions of will. " Mr. Home had never seen my father, nor heard anything about him ; and most wonderful to me was this detail of such long-past events, known only to myself."

22. p. 288. — Lord Lindsay's testimony (now Lord Crawford). Lord Lindsay misses train at Norwood, sleeps on sofa in Home's room; sees female figure standing near Home's bed, which fades away ; recognises face among other photographs next morning; it was Home's deceased wife. Lord Adare (now Lord Dunraven) and two others, in Lord Adare's rooms, see (February 1869) a shadowy figure resembling this form, but cannot distinguish features.

26. p. 377. — Mrs. Peck's testimony. " By permission I put several mental questions, each of which was promptly and correctly answered, with the full names of friends and relatives deceased, and circumstances which could not have been known to any of those present ; all, as I have stated, having been previous to the past twenty-four hours strangers to me." (Mrs. Peck was an American, staying at a hotel in Geneva.)

27- P- 378. — Mrs. Peck's testimony. Home, entranced, says : " There is a portrait of his mother." " I made no reply; but my thought was, * There is no portrait of her.' " Home insists that there is, " with an open Bible upon her knee." There was, in fact, a daguerreotype thirty years old, which Mrs. Peck had forgotten, in attitude described — with indistinct book on knee, which was, in fact, a Bible.

943 A. A general account of "The Experiences of W. Stainton Moses" was given by me in Proceedings S.P.R. vol. ix. pp. 245-352, and vol. xi. pp. 24-113. The following extract is from vol. ix. pp. 245-252

943A] TO CHAPTER IX 583

I. Among his printed works the most important for our present purpose are —

1. Researches in Spiritualism. This unfinished work was published in

Human Nature — a periodical now extinct — in 1874-5, and not reprinted. It is now difficult of access.

2. Spirit Identity, published in 1879. This work also has been for some

years out of print.

3. Spirit Teachings, published in 1883; [reprinted after his death in a

Memorial Edition (London, 1894) with a short biographical notice

by Mr. Charlton Speer.] Two other volumes, Psychography and Higher Aspects of Spiritualism,

contain .little which bears on our present theme. Besides these books, Mr. Moses wrote much in the weekly periodical

Light, of which he was for some years the editor.

II. Mr. Moses' MS S. entrusted to me, and of which I have made use, consists of thirty-one note-books, ranging from September 1872 to March 1883, and various letters.

The note-books may be divided as follows : —

Twenty-four books of automatic script, numbered 1-24, and extending from March 1873 to March 1883.

Four books of records of physical phenomena, September i872-January 1875. These books run concurrently with the books of automatic script. The first book of this series (April-September 1872) is missing. Those which remain I have numbered 2 B, 3 B, 4 B, and 5 B.

Three books of retrospect and summary, which I number 25, 26, 27. Books 25 and 26 recapitulate physical phenomena, with reflections. Book 27 is entitled The Identity of Spirit, and contains, in briefer form, much of the evidence first printed in Spirit Identity ; which work, indeed, this later tractate may have been intended to supersede. Some of the letters also are of value, but mainly as adding contemporary confirmation to facts already to be found in the note-books.

III. Among the records made by friends the most important are Mrs. Stanhope Speer's " Records of Private Stances, from notes taken at the time of each sitting." Over sixty instalments of these records have now (October 1893) been published in Light. They begin in 1872 and go down to 1881 — considerably beyond the date (1875) at which Mr. Moses' extant records of physical phenomena obtained in his seances cease. As will be seen later on, these independent and contemporary records are evidentially of capital importance. Dr. and Mrs. Stanhope Speer were Mr. Moses' most intimate friends ; and they, often with another intimate friend, Mr. F. W. Percival (Barrister-at-Law and Examiner in the Education Department), were the habitual members, and generally the only members, of the small group who witnessed the phenomena about to be described.

Mr. Percival, the late Dr. Speer, Mr. W. H. Harrison, Dr. Thomson, and the late Mr. Serjeant Cox have at different times printed short first-hand records of certain of Mr. Moses' phenomena, and Mrs. Garratt and Miss Birkett took some contemporary notes of sittings at which they were present.

Two note-books and other MSS. by Dr. Speer have been placed in my hands, and contain independent contemporary records of much evidential value.

[Many additional records of the automatic script from Mr. Moses' note-books have been published in Light during the last few years.]

IV. In estimating the evidential value of oral intercourse as to Mr. Moses' phenomena, the character of my own friendship for him is an item on which I am bound to be explicit. Friendship it might truly be called, for it was based upon a consciousness of common pursuits of great moment, and I felt for him much both of gratitude and of esteem. He responded to my unfeigned interest with a straighforward intimacy of conversation on the experiences of which I cared so much to learn. But there was no such close personal attraction as is likely to prompt me to partiality as a biographer ; and indeed both Edmund Gurney and I were conscious in him of something like the impatience of a schoolmaster towards slow students ; — natural enough in a man whose inborn gifts have carried him irresistibly to a conviction, on the edge of which less favoured persons must needs pause and ponder long. I am bound to add that the study of his note-books, by making him more intimately known to me as he was in his best days, has brought me nearer to the warm and even enthusiastic estimate implied in the letters of various more intimate friends of his which lie before me.

More important, however, than the precise degree of attractiveness, or of spiritual refinement, in Mr. Moses' personal demeanour are the fundamental questions of sanity and probity. On these points neither I myself, nor, so far as I know, any person acquainted with Mr. Moses, has ever entertained any doubt. " However perplexed for an explanation," says Mr. Massey, " the crassest prejudice has recoiled from ever suggesting a doubt of the truth and honesty of Stainton Moses." " I believe that he was wholly incapable of deceit," writes Mr. H. J. Hood, barrister-at-law, who knew him for many years. The people who assumed that he must somehow have performed the phenomena of his dark stances himself — who asked triumphantly, " Where was Moses when the candle went out ? " — even these never, so far as I know, suggested anything beyond unconscious fraud in a trance-condition.

A brief record of Mr. Moses' life, with some estimates of the work done by him in ordinary professional capacities, will help the reader to form something of a personal judgment on his character.

On the events of his life the Speer family, who were his most intimate friends, and are well acquainted with his nearest surviving relatives, are my main authority. Their importance as witnesses of the phenomena is so great that I must be pardoned for inserting a " testimonial " to the late Dr. Speer (M.D. Edinburgh), which shall not, however, be in my own words, but in those of Dr. Marshall Hall, F.R.S., one of the best known physicians of the middle of this century. Writing on March i8th, 1849, Dr. Marshall Hall says (in a printed collection of similar testimonials now before me): " I have great satisfaction in bearing my testimony to the talents and acquirements of Dr. Stanhope Templeman Speer. Dr. Speer has had unusual advantages in having been at the Medical Schools, not only of London and Edinburgh, but of Paris and Montpellier, and he has availed himself of these advantages with extraordinary diligence and talent. He ranks among our most distinguished rising physicians."

Dr. Speer held at different times various hospital posts of credit, and was much valued as a practising physician at Cheltenham and in London. The work of a physician, however, was rendered somewhat trying to him by an

943A] TO CHAPTER IX 585

over- anxious temperament ; and as he possessed private means, and had strong scientific and artistic tastes, he quitted his profession at thirty-four, and preferred to spend the latter part of his life in studious retirement. Dr. Speer's cast of mind was strongly materialistic, and it is remarkable that his interest in Mr. Moses' phenomena was from first to last of a purely scientific, as contrasted with an emotional or a religious, nature.

I regret that I never met Dr. Speer, who died in 1889. His widow, Mrs. Stanhope Speer, is well known tome ; and I regard her as an excellent witness. Her son, Mr. Charlton T. Speer (also an excellent witness), is an Associate of the Royal Academy of Music, and is well known in musical circles as a successful composer and performer.

With these words of preface I pass on to the facts — simple and ordinary enough in their external aspect — of Mr. Moses' life.

William Stainton Moses was born in Lincolnshire, November 5th, 1839. His father had been headmaster of a grammar-school at Donington, near Lincoln. His mother's family name was Stainton. Mr. Stainton Moses believed that the name Moses had been originally Mostyn, but that an ancestor had changed it in order to avoid some peril in the time of the Commonwealth. There seems no reason to suppose that the family, which had been for some time settled in Lincolnshire, was of Jewish descent. Mrs. Moses — still living and vigorous (1893) at the age of ninety-one — was a serious and intelligent woman, and brought up her only son with pious care. He showed ability; and the family moved to Bedford, about 1852, that he might have the advantage of education at Bedford College. There he did well, and in due time gained a scholarship at Exeter College, Oxford. In his school days he occasionally walked in his sleep, and on one occasion his mother saw him go down into the sitting-room and write an essay on a subject which had puzzled him on the previous evening, and return to bed without awaking. The essay thus written was the best of those sent up by the class that day (Mr. Moses tells us), and was fully up to the level of his waking performances. This is the only incident of which I have heard which in any way foreshadowed his future gift. He is not recorded as having been a specially nervous or excitable child ; and he was at this time strong and healthy. In after life his health was bad ; but his troubles were mainly respiratory — constantly recurring catarrh and bronchitis — until near the end of his life, when he was attacked by Bright's disease, which ultimately caused his death. His phenomena, it may be observed, were at their best when he was in his best health, and declined or disappeared altogether when he was ill.

To return to his Oxford career. At Oxford he was an ambitious and hardvorking, but not in other ways a very noticeable, undergraduate. His health broke down from overwork, and he left Oxford without taking a degree, and spent some considerable time in travel, mainly with friends, but in part alone. He was already much interested in theology, and he lived for some six months [none of these dates are very precise) in a monastery on Mount Athos. Beyond the mere fact of his residence on Mount Athos, to which his surviving friends testify, all that is known of this period of seclusion consists of allusions made by his " spirit guides," who say that they directed him thither that he might study the Eastern Church, and be prepared by a comparison of theologies for the reception of a wider truth. Be this as it may, he recovered his health, returned to Oxford, took his degree, was ordained by Bishop Wilberforce, and

accepted a curacy at Kirk Maughold, near Ramsey, in the Isle of Man, at the age of twenty-four. He was an active parish clergyman, liked by his parishioners, and holding Anglican views of an ordinary type. On the occasion of an outbreak of small-pox he distinguished himself by his zeal and kindness; and it is recorded that in one case he helped to nurse and to bury a man whose malady was so violent that it was hard to get any one to approach him. During this period also he began to write for periodicals, Punch and the Saturday Review being specially mentioned. The memorial verses to the Rev. F. D. Maurice which appeared in Punch have since been quoted as of Mr. Moses' writing ; and I should conceive that his other contributions were probably in this serious strain. He continued to write much, anonymously, for various periodicals during many years of his life, and showed an easy style and a good deal of miscellaneous knowledge.

After some four years of residence near Ramsey, he accepted the curacy of St. George's, Douglas, Isle of Man. Here also he was esteemed as an active clergyman, and admired as a preacher. In April 1869 he had a serious illness, and hearing that Dr. Speer, whom he knew slightly, was in the island on a holiday, he called in his medical aid. Dr. Speer brought him successfully through his illness, and invited him as a convalescent to the house which he was renting in the island. The foundations of a lifelong friendship with Dr. and Mrs. Speer were then laid.

In 1870 he took a curacy somewhere in Dorsetshire, where also he was liked, and was appointed " Lent preacher " for the county. A very severe attack of whooping-cough obliged him to interrupt his parish work, which, in fact, he never resumed. Dr. Speer invited him to become his son's tutor, and for seven years he filled that office in a way that attached to him both parents and pupil more closely than ever. In 1871 he was offered a mastership in University College School ; and this post he held until failing health compelled him to resign it some three years before his death. The physical phenomena about to be described began in 1872, and continued with gradually lessening frequency until 1881. The automatic script began in 1873, and finally died out, so far as we know, in 1883. During these later years Mr. Moses was active in contributing to, and afterwards in editing, the weekly newspaper Light; and he took a leading part in several spiritistic organisations. Of one of these— the London Spiritualist Alliance — he was president at the time of his death. In 1882 he aided in the foundation of the Society for Psychical Research; but he left that body in 1886, on account of its attitude towards Spiritualism, which he regarded as unduly critical. It is worth remarking that although, as the fact of his withdrawal shows, many members of the Society held an intellectual position widely differing from that of Mr. Moses, and although his own published records were of a kind not easily credible, no suspicion as to his personal probity and veracity was ever, so far as I know, either expressed or entertained.

Mr. Moses' health became steadily weaker. He suffered greatly from suppressed gout, in addition to other ailments. A serious fall from the top of an omnibus made matters worse. In 1890 he was attacked by influenza in the severest form, and was reckoned, I believe, to have had twelve separate relapses or recurrences of that complaint. An accident to his eyes also gave him much trouble. He worked on, as best he could, to the last ; but the period of decline was tedious and distressing; and it would be very unfair to judge

943 A] TO CHAPTER IX 587

him from the utterances of these last years. When in September 1892 he passed from earth, we may surely trust that his achievements here had won their way to promotion, and his sufferings to repose.

Mr. Moses never married, and went very little into general society. His personal appearance offered no indication of his peculiar gift. He was of middle stature, strongly made, with somewhat heavy features, and thick dark hair and beard. His expression of countenance was honest, manly, and resolute. Many testimonies of affection and esteem appeared in Light and elsewhere after his decease ; especially, of course, from those to whom his experiences and teachings had brought a convincing hope. I subjoin a few letters from friends who had good opportunities of estimating his value in the common duties and intercourse of life.

Dr. Johnson, of Bedford, writes to me as follows : —

"68 HIGH STREET, BEDFORD, March 24^, 1893.

"DEAR SIR, — As the intimate friend and medical adviser of the late Stainton Moses I have had ample opportunities of thoroughly knowing his character and his mental state.

" He was a man even in temper, painstaking and methodical, of exceptional ability, and utterly free from any hallucination or anything to indicate other than a well-ordered brain.

"He was a firm believer in all that he uttered or wrote about matters of a spiritual nature, and he impressed me — and, I believe, most others he came in contact with — with the genuineness of his convictions, and a firm belief not only that he believed in the statements he had made and written, but that they were the outcome of a mind which had given itself up entirely to the study of a subject which he considered of essential value and importance to the welfare of his fellow men.

" I have attended him in several very severe illnesses, but never, in sickness or at other times, has his brain shown the slightest cloudiness or suffered from any delusion. I not only consider that he believed what he stated, but I think that those who knew him best would not for an instant doubt that all he stated were facts and words of truth. — Sincerely yours, WM. G. JOHNSON."

In another letter Dr. Johnson says : —

"He was a most lovable character ; kind and generous in his every action ; and with a fund of information on most subjects which made him a most welcome guest."

Dr. Eve, headmaster of University College School, writes as follows to Professor Sidgwick: —

" UNIVERSITY COLLEGE SCHOOL, GOWER STREET,

LONDON, W.C., March i%th, 1893.

"My DEAR SIDGWICK, — Stainton Moses was an excellent colleague. He confined himself entirely to English ; in that subject he took classes in all parts of the school, and his work was always well and methodically done. ' He taught essay-writing well, and was very skilful in appreciating the relative value of boys' essays, which is not easy. He was much looked up to by boys, and had considerable influence over them. On general points connected with the management of the school he was one of the colleagues to whom I most naturally turned for advice, and I have every reason to be grateful to him. — Yours very sincerely, H. W. EVE."

Mr. F. W. Levander, a master at University College School, writes to me thus : —

"UNIVERSITY COLLEGE SCHOOL, GOWER STREET, LONDON, W.C., May i6tk, 1893.

" DEAR SIR, — My acquaintance with the late W. Stainton Moses commenced in the year 1871, when he first became one of the masters here. This acquaintance soon extended beyond the nature of that generally met with between colleagues ; it ripened into a constantly increasing friendship, which continued unbroken until his death. During the whole of this long period he always impressed me with the idea that he was thoroughly earnest and conscientious, and I believe that perfect reliance can be placed on all his statements. — Yours faithfully, F. W. LEVANDER."

I have often heard Mr. Moses discussed by persons of opinions opposed to his own ; and since I owe it to my readers to make the present paper not merely eulogistic, but as accurately descriptive as my materials allow, I feel bound to reproduce adverse criticisms. I have, then, heard him, in his later years, characterised as an obstinate, confused, and irritable controversialist. I have heard him described as lacking in the grace of humility, and in that spirituality of tastes and character which should seem appropriate to one living much in the commerce of the Unseen. But I have never heard any one who had even the slightest acquaintance with Mr. Moses impugn his sanity or his sincerity, his veracity or his honour.

946 A. From the preface to Spirit Teachings, by W. Stainton Moses.

The communications which form the bulk of this volume were received by the process known as automatic or passive writing. This is to be distinguished from Psychography. In the former case the psychic holds the pen or pencil, or places his hand upon the planchette, and the message is written without the conscious intervention of his mind. In the latter case the writing is direct, or is obtained without the use of the hand of the psychic, and sometimes without the aid of pen or pencil.

Automatic writing is a well-known method of communication with the invisible world of what we loosely call Spirit. I use that word as the most intelligible to my readers, though I am well aware that I shall be told that I ought not to apply any such term to many of the unseen beings who communicate with earth, of whom we hear much and often as being the reliquia of humanity, the shells of what were once men. It is no part of my business to enter into this ghost question. My interlocutors call themselves spirits, perhaps because I so call them, and spirits they are to me for my present purposes.

These messages began to be written through my hand just ten years since — March soth, 1873 — about a year after my first introduction to Spiritualism. I had had many communications before, and this method was adopted for the purpose of convenience, and also to preserve what was intended to be a connected body of teaching. The laborious method of rapping out messages was manifestly unfitted for communications such as those which I here print. If spoken through the lips of the medium in trance they were partially lost, and it was moreover impossible at first to rely upon such a measure of mental passivity as would preserve them from admixture with his ideas. I procured a pocket-book which I habitually carried about with me. I soon found that

946A] TO CHAPTER IX 589

writing flowed more easily when I used a book that was permeated with the psychic aura ; just as raps come more easily on a table that has been frequently used for the purpose, and as phenomena occur most readily in the medium's own room.

At first the writing was very small and irregular, and it was necessary for me to write slowly and cautiously, and to watch the hand, following the lines with my eye ; otherwise the message soon became incoherent, and the result was mere scribble. In a short time, however, I found that I could dispense with these precautions. The writing, while becoming more and more minute, became at the same time very regular and beautifully formed. As a specimen of caligraphy some of the pages are exceedingly beautiful. The

1 answers to my questions (written at the top of the page) were paragraphed

, and arranged as if for the press, and the name of God was always written in capitals and slowly, and, as it seemed, reverentially. The subject matter was always of a pure and elevated character, much of it being of personal application, intended for my own guidance and direction. I may say that throughout the whole of these written communications, extending in unbroken continuity to the year 1880, there is no flippant message, no attempt at jest, no vulgarity or incongruity, no false or misleading statement, so far as I know or could discover ; nothing incompatible with the avowed object, again and again repeated, of instruction, enlightenment, and guidance by spirits fitted for the task. Judged as I should wish to be judged myself, they were what they pretended to be. Their words were words of sincerity, and of sober, serious purpose.

The earliest communications were all written in the minute characters that

i I have described, and were uniform in style and in the signature, " Doctor, the Teacher," nor have his messages ever varied during all the years that he has written. Whenever and wherever he wrote, his handwriting was unchanged, showing indeed less change than my own does during the last decade. The tricks of style remained the same, and there was, in short, a sustained individuality throughout his messages. He is to me an entity, a personality, a being with his own idiosyncrasies and characteristics quite as clearly defined as the human beings with whom I come in contact, if indeed I do not do him injustice by the broad comparison.

After a time, communications came from other sources, and these were distinguished each by its own handwriting, and by its own peculiarities of style and expression. These, once assumed, were equally invariable. I could tell at once who was writing by the mere characteristics of the caligraphy.

By degrees, I found that many spirits who were unable to influence my hand themselves sought the aid of a spirit " Rector," who was apparently able to write more freely and with less strain on me ; for writing by a spirit unaccustomed to the work was often incoherent, and always resulted in a serious

! drain upon my vital powers. They did not know how easily the reserve of force was exhausted, and I suffered proportionately.

Moreover, the writing of the spirit who thus became a sort of amanuensis was fluent and easy to decipher, whereas that of many spirits was cramped,

1 archaic in form, and frequently executed with difficulty, and almost illegible. So it came to pass, as a matter of ordinary course, " Rector " wrote, but when a spirit came for the first time, or when it was desired to emphasise a communi-

' cation, the spirit responsible for the message wrote for himself.

It must not be assumed, however, that all messages proceeded from one solitary inspiration. In the case of the majority of the communications printed in this volume this is so. The volume is a record during which " Imperator" was alone concerned with me, though, as he never attempted writing, " Rector " acted as his amanuensis. At other times, and especially since that time, communications have apparently proceeded from a company of associated spirits, who have used their amanuensis for the purpose of their message. This was increasingly the case during the last five years that I received these communications.

The circumstances under which the messages were written were infinitely varied. As a rule it was necessary that I should be isolated, and the more passive my mind the more easy the communications. But I have received messages under all sorts of conditions. At first they came with difficulty, but soon the mechanical method appeared to be mastered, and page after page was covered with matter of which the specimens contained in this book will enable the public to judge.

What is now printed has been subjected to revision by a method similar to that by which it was first written. Originally published in the Spiritualist newspaper, the messages have been revised, but not substantially altered by those who first wrote them. When the publication in the Spiritualist was commenced, I had no sort of idea of doing what is now being done. Friends desired specimens to be published, and the selection was made without any regard to continuity. I was governed only by a desire to avoid the publication of what was of personal interest only, and I, perforce, excluded much that involved allusion to those still living, whom I had no right to drag into print. I disliked printing personal matter relating to myself; I had, obviously, noright to print that which concerned others. Some of the most striking and impressive communications have thus been excluded, and what is printed must be regarded as a mere sample of what cannot see the light now, and which must be reserved for consideration at a remote period, when I and those concerned can no longer be aggrieved by its publication.

It is an interesting subject for speculation whether my own thoughts entered into the subject-matter of the communications. I took extraordinary pains to prevent any such admixture. At first the writing was slow, and it was necessary for me to follow it with my eye, but even then the thoughts were not my thoughts. Very soon the messages assumed a character of which I had no doubt whatever that the thought was opposed to my own. But I cultivated the power of occupying my mind with other things during the time that the writing was going on, and was able to read an abstruse book, and follow out a line of close reasoning while the message was written with unbroken regularity. Messages so written extended over many pages, and in their course there is no correction, no fault in composition, and often a sustained vigour and beauty of style.

I am not, however, concerned to contend that my own mind was not utilised, or that what was thus written did not depend for its form on the mental qualifications of the medium through whom it was given. So far as I know it is always the case that the idiosyncrasies of the medium are traceable in such communications. It is not conceivable that it should be otherwise. But it is certain that the mass of ideas conveyed to me were alien to my own opinions, were, in the main, opposed to my settled convictions, and, moreover.

947A] TO CHAPTER IX 591

that in several cases information, of which I was assuredly ignorant, clear, precise, and definite in form, susceptible of verification, and always exact, was thus conveyed to me. As, at many of the stances, spirits came and rapped out on the table clear and precise information about themselves, which we afterwards verified, so, on repeated occasions, was such information conveyed to me by this method of automatic writing.

I argue from the one case to others. In one I can positively assert and prove the conveyance of information new to me. In others I equally believe that I was in communication with an external intelligence which conveyed to me thoughts other than my own. Indeed, the subject-matter of many of the communications printed in this volume will, by its own inherent quality, probably lead to the same conclusion.

I never could command the writing. It came unsought usually, and when I did seek it, as often as not I was unable to obtain it. A sudden impulse, coming I know not how, led me to sit down and prepare to write. Where the messages were in regular course I was accustomed to devote the first hour of each day to sitting for their reception. I rose early, and the beginning of the day was spent, in a room that I used for no other purpose, in what was to all intents and purposes a religious service. These writings frequently came then, but I could by no means reckon upon them. Other forms of spirit-manifestation came too ; I was rarely without some unless ill-health intervened, as it often did of late years, until the messages ceased.

The particular communications which I received from the spirit known to me as " Imperator " mark a distinct epoch in my life.

I have noted in the course of my remarks the intense exaltation of spirit, the strenuous conflict, the intervals of peace, that I have since longed for, but have seldom attained, which marked their transmission. It was a period of education in which I underwent a spiritual development that was in its outcome a very regeneration. I cannot hope, I do not try, to convey to others what I then experienced. But it may possibly be borne in upon the minds of some who are not ignorant of the dispensation of the spirit in their own inner selves, that for me the question of the beneficent action of external spirit on my own self was then finally settled. I have never since, even in the vagaries of an extremely sceptical mind, and amid much cause for questioning, ever seriously entertained a doubt.

947 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 106-7.

I will now give the account of " Rector" — one of the alleged remoter spirits— as to a quotation from a closed and unknown book. This spirit was, as described above, very intimately associated with Mr. Moses, and habitually wrote for " Imperator," and for the group of guides generally. His handwriting came more and more to resemble that of Mr. Moses himself. To him, moreover, was attributed the power of reading in books unknown to Mr. Moses, and of writing out matter there found through Mr. Moses' hand.

Q. Can you read ?

A. " No, friend, I cannot, but Zachary Gray can, and Rector. I am not able to materialise myself, or to command the elements." Q. Are either of those spirits here ?

A. " I will bring one by-and-by. I will send . . . Rector is here."

Q. I am told you can read. Is that so? Can you read a book ?

A. [Spirit handwriting changed.] " Yes, friend, with difficulty."

Q. Will you write for me the last line of the first book of the ALnz'id ?

A. " Wait Omnibus errantem terris etfluctibus azstas"

[This was right.]

Q. Quite so. But I might have known it. Can you go to the book-case, take the last book but one on the second shelf, and read me the last paragraph of the ninety-fourth page ? I have not seen it, and do not even know its name.

A. " I will curtly prove by a short historical narrative, that Popery is a novelty, and has gradually arisen or grown up since the primitive and pure time of Christianity, not only since the apostolic age, but even since the lamentable union of kirk and the state by Constantine."

[The book on examination proved to be a queer one called "Roger's Antipopopriestian, an attempt to liberate and purify Christianity from Popery, Politikirkality, and Priestrule." The extract given above was accurate, but the word " narrative " substituted for "account."]

Q. How came I to pitch upon so appropriate a sentence ?

A. "I know not, my friend. It was by coincidence The word was changed by error. I knew it when it was done, but would not change."

Q. How do you read? You wrote more slowly, and by fits and starts.

A. " I wrote what I remembered, and then I went for more. It is a special effort to read, and useful only as a test. Your friend was right last night ; we can read, but only when conditions are very good. We will read once again, and write and then impress you of the book : — ' Pope is the last great writer of that school of poetry, the poetry of the intellect, or rather of the intellect mingled with the fancy.' That is truly written. Go and take the eleventh book on the same shelf. [I took a book called Poetry, Romance, and Rhetoric^ It will open at the page for you. Take it and read, and recognise our power, and the permission which the great and good God gives us, to show you of our power over matter. To Him be glory. Amen."

[The book opened at page 145, and there was the quotation perfectly true. I had not seen the book before : certainly had no idea of its contents.] [These books were in Dr. Speer's library. — F. W. H. M.]

It is plain that a power such as this of acquiring and reproducing fresh knowledge interposes much difficulty in the way of identifying any alleged spirit by means of his knowledge of the facts of his earth-life. 948 A. [Abridged from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 69-93.] In his little book on " Spirit Identity " (1879), Mr. Moses had collected some of the most impressive of these cases of identity, and added some interesting matter as to the subjective side of his experiences. The book was never widely known ; and when the small edition was exhausted Mr. Moses postponed the republication, on the ground that the book was imperfect, and that he had no time to improve it. I repeatedly pressed him on the subject ; and when last we spoke of it (October i5th, 1886), he said that he would some time re-write the book, and would consult me* as to further passages of MS. to be published. The book

948A] TO CHAPTER IX 593

was never re-written ; but an essay called " The Identity of Spirit," found among Mr. Moses' papers, and apparently intended to be read to the London Spiritualist Alliance, in some degree fulfils his expressed intention. I communicated this paper first to Light, the newspaper of which Mr. Moses was Editor until his death. I have carefully compared it with the MSS. on which it rests, and have found it accurate. I have also discussed it with Mrs. Speer, who helped Mr. Moses in its compilation and vouches for facts of verification, &c., not recorded in the MS. From this paper I cite the following instances. I add in square brackets a few notes where I have been able to bring some independent corroboration.

(1) It was in August 1872, that I first became acquainted with evidence of Spirit Identity. Dr. and Mrs. Speer and I were then sitting regularly almost every evening. A friend of Mrs. Speer's, of whom I had never heard, came and wrote through my hand her name, "A. P. Kirkland." Dr. Speer said, "Is that our old friend ? " Then I wrote. " Yes. I came to tell you that I am happy, but I can't impress our friend to-night." The handwriting then changed, and there came communications from Mr. Callister (a friend of mine) ; and from my cousin, T. J. S. ; and from another spirit, which I do not think it of importance to mention here.

With regard to these communications, they were distinct in style, and it is of importance to notice that the handwriting of Miss Kirkland was very similar to her own, which I had never seen, and that of Mr. Callister, on being questioned as to his identity, recalled to my memory a fact which had escaped it, i and referred to a conversation, the last I had had with him on earth. This I do not adduce as evidence of identity, nor do I withdraw it as such.

This was on August 2ist, 1872, and on September 4th in the same year there came a little sister of Dr. Speer's, particulars respecting which case are printed in " Spirit Identity," p. 59, as follows : —

(2) " I pass to a case in which a spirit who first manifested her presence on September 4th, 1872, has remained in permanent communication with us ever since. I note this case because we have the advantage of prolonged intercourse to aid us in forming an opinion as to identity, and because the spirit has not only given an unequivocal proof of her characteristic individuality, but has evidenced her presence in various ways. This is a remarkable case, too, as tending to prove that life once given is indestructible, and that the spirit which has once animated a human body, however brief its tenure, lives on with unimpaired identity.

"The spirit in question announced herself by raps, giving a message in French. She said she was a sister of Dr. Speer's, and had passed away at Tours, an infant of seven months old. I had never heard her mentioned, and •her brother had forgotten her existence, for she lived and died before his birth. Clairvoyants had always described a child as being in my company, and I had wondered at this, seeing that I had no trace of any such relation or friend. ;Here was the explanation. From the time of her first appearance she had remained attached to the family, and her clear, joyous little rap, perfectly individual in its nature, is never-failing evidence of her presence. It never varies, and we all know it at once as surely as we should know the tone of a friend's yoice. She gave particulars of herself, and also her four names in full. One {Stanhope) was new to her brother, and he verified it only by reference to

VOL. II. 2 P

another member of the family (Mrs. Denis). Names, and dates, and facts were alike unknown to me. I was absolutely ignorant of the fact of the existence of any such person."

(3) On an evening in the month of January 1874, I repeatedly said to Mrs.

Speer, "Who is Emily C .? Her name keeps sounding in my ear." Mrs.

Speer replied that she did not know any one of that name. " Yes," I said very emphatically, " there is some one of that name passed over to the world of spirit." She could give me no information, and I was disturbed, in the way in which I always am when such things take place. This is one of the many cases occurring about this time. When the evening paper came in we looked (as we frequently did) at the obituary. I may say that our minds were set on this subject of identity. At our daily sittings fact on fact was given to prove it and to remove any doubts. It became a regular thing for us to receive a message giving such facts as an obituary notice would contain. We therefore looked for them, and we found an announcement of the death of " Emily,

widow of the late Captain C C ." On a subsequent evening in the

following year, the date of which I can produce, but which I have not by me at the moment, she returned again. Dr. Speer and I had gone out for a walk in the afternoon — I was then staying with him at Dudley Villa, Shanklin, Isle

of Wight — and at our stance in the evening came " Emily C C ." I

inquired what brought her, and her answer was rapped out on the table, " You passed my grave." Here I should explain that at this time I never went near a graveyard but I attracted some spirit, identified afterwards as one whose body lay there. I said, " No, that is impossible ; we have been near no graveyard," and Dr. Speer confirmed my impression. The communication, however, was persistent, and we agreed that we would take the same walk the next day. We did so, and at a certain place I had an impulse to climb up and look over a wall, which quite shut out from the view of the ordinary passer-by what was behind it. I climbed up and looked over, and my eye fell at once on the grave

of " Emily C C ," and on the dates and particulars given to us, all

exactly accurate.

(4) Another instance similar in kind — though this is of a personal friend of Mrs. Speer's— is the case of Cecilia Feilden. (See " Spirit Identity," p. 58.) We were then at Shanklin, sitting regularly every evening, when on January ist, 1874, there came a fresh sound, a little ticking sound in the air, close to; Mrs. Speer. We inquired what it might represent, and were told that it: indicated the presence of Cecilia Feilden, who had died 17 years ago. We asked why she came, and were told that she had been attracted to her old friend, Mrs. Speer, through me, and in consequence of Dr. Speer's and my presence at her grave at Bonchurch that afternoon. She answered many questions, and finally rapped out, " I must now depart. Adieu." This word Miss Feilden always used at the end of her letters. Mrs. Speer tells me thai she seldom concluded a letter otherwise. I had never known her, or heard oJ, her until Dr. Speer pointed out her grave. When we rose from the table we found that a piece of marked paper, which we had put down under the table. j had written upon it the words, " passed 17 years."

(5) Again, there is the case of Henry Spratley. We were then the sarw, circle, sitting in the same way, on January 2nd, 1874, and I can aver that no1, one of us had ever heard of this person. He had lately departed (Decembe: 1 873)5 and it was alleged that he had been brought by the controlling spirit

948A] TO CHAPTER IX 595

" Imperator," for purposes of evidence, and in pursuance of a plan intended to break down my persistent scepticism. We had from him messages of the usual type, saying simply who he was, when he was born, and when he died. We found it difficult, I remember, to verify the facts, but in the end Mrs. Speer succeeded in doing so by writing (i) to the Post Office, making a general inquiry, to which no answer came ; (2) to the vicar of Maidenhead, with no reply (we afterwards discovered that he was on his holiday) ; (3) to the "present occupant of Moor Cottage," the address given to us by the spirit; (4) to his nearest surviving representative, who wrote back with some surprise to say that all things were quite true. " My father lived here till he died on December 24th."

(6) Another account to which I should like to refer is that of Rosamira 'Lancaster : —

