At about 4.30 that night, or rather Monday morning, Reddell looked at her watch, poured out the medicine, and was bending over the bed to give it to Helen, when the call-bell in the passage rang. She said to herself, " There's that tiresome bell with the wire caught again." (It seems it did occasionally ring of itself in this manner.) At that moment, however, she heard the door open, and looking round, saw a very stout old woman walk in. She was dressed in a night-gown and red flannel petticoat, and carried an old-fashioned brass candlestick in her hand. The petticoat had a hole rubbed in it. She walked into the room, and appeared to be going towards the dressing-table to put her candle down. She was a perfect stranger to Reddell, who, however, merely thought, " This is her mother come to see after her," and she felt quite glad it was so, accepting the idea without reasoning upon it, as one would in a dream. She thought the mother looked annoyed, possibly at not having been sent for before. She then gave Helen the medicine, and turning round, found that the apparition had disappeared, and that the door was shut. A great change, meanwhile, had taken place in Helen, and Reddell fetched me, who sent off for the doctor, and meanwhile applied hot poultices, &c., but Helen died a little before the doctor came. She was quite conscious up to about half-an-hour before she died, when she seemed to be going to sleep.

During the early days of her illness Helen had written to a sister, mentioning her being unwell, but making nothing of it, and as she never mentioned any one but this sister, it was supposed by the household, to whom she was a perfect stranger, that she had no other relation alive. Reddell was always offering to write for her, but she always declined, saying there was no need, she would write herself in a day or two. No one at home, therefore, knew anything of her being so ill, and it is, therefore, remarkable that her mother, a far from nervous person, should have said that evening going up to bed, " I am sure Helen is very ill."

Reddell told me and my daughter of the apparition, about an hour after Helen's death, prefacing with, " I am not superstitious, or nervous, and I wasn't the least frightened, but her mother came last night," and she then told the story, giving a careful description of the figure she had seen. The relations were asked to come to the funeral, and the father, mother, and sister came, and in the mother Reddell recognised the apparition, as I did also, for Reddell's description had been most accurate, even to the expression, which she had ascribed to annoyance, but which was due to deafness. It was judged best not to speak about it to the mother, but Reddell told the sister, who said

the description of the figure corresponded exactly with the probable appearance of her mother if roused in the night; that they had exactly such a candlestick at home, and that there was a hole in her mother's petticoat produced by the way she always wore it. It seems curious that neither Helen nor her mother appeared to be aware of the visit. Neither of them, at any rate, ever spoke of having seen the other, nor even of having dreamt of having done so.

F. A. Pole-Carew.

[Frances Reddell states that she has never had any hallucination, or any odd experience of any kind, except on this one occasion. The Hon. Mrs. Lyttelton, formerly of Selwyn College, Cambridge, who knows her, tells us that " she appears to be a most matter-of-fact person, and was apparently most impressed by the fact that she saw a hole in the mother's flannel petticoat, made by the busk of her stays, reproduced in the apparition."]

Now what I imagine to have happened here is this. The mother, anxious about her daughter, paid her a psychical visit during the sleep of both. In so doing she actually modified a certain portion of space, not materially nor optically, but in such a manner that persons perceptive in a certain fashion would discern in that part of space an image approximately corresponding to the conception of her own aspect latent in the invading mother's mind. A person thus susceptible happened to be in the room, and thus, as a bystander, witnessed a psychical invasion whose memory the invader apparently did not retain, while the invaded person — the due percipient — may or may not have perceived it in a dream, but died and left no sign of having done so.

651. I give in 651 A a somewhat similar case, where there is strong attestation that a sailor, watching by a dying comrade, saw figures around his hammock, apparently representing the dying man's family, in mourning garb. The family, although they had no ordinary knowledge of the sailor's illness, had been alarmed by noises, &c., which rightly or wrongly they took as indications of some danger to him. I conceive, then, that the wife paid a psychical visit to her husband ; and I take the mourning garb and the accompanying children's figures to be symbolical accompaniments, representing her thought, " My children will be orphans," in just the same way as the figure in the flannel petticoat, &c., represented Mrs. Reddell's thought, " I must get out of bed and see how my daughter looks to-night." I think this more likely than that the Pearce children also should have possessed this rare peculiarity of becoming perceptible at a distant point in space. And secondary figures, as we shall see later on, are not uncommon in such telepathic presentations. One may picture oneself as though holding a child by the hand, or even driving in a carriage and pair, as vividly as though carrying an umbrella or walking across a room ; and one may be thus pictured to others. I will give one more instance of this deflected perception, where a dying (or dead) man, apparently wishing to appear to his sister, fails to attract her attention, but is observed by a black nurse, who has never seen him in the flesh.

651] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 269

From Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 61.

This case came from Mrs. Gierke, of Clifton Lodge, Farquhar Road, Upper Norwood, S. E.

October 'ipth, 1885.

In the month of August 1864, about 3 or 4 o'clock in the afternoon, I was sitting reading in the verandah of our house in Barbadoes. My black nurse was driving my little girl, about eighteen months or so old, in her perambulator in the garden. I got up after some time to go into the house, not having noticed anything at all — when this black woman said to me, " Missis, who was that gentleman that was talking to you just now ? " " There was no one talking to me," I said. " Oh, yes, dere was, missis — a very pale gentleman, very tall, and he talked to you, and you was very rude, for you never answered him." I repeated there was no one, and got rather cross with the woman, and she begged me to write down the day, for she knew she had seen some one. I did, and in a few days I heard of the death of my brother in Tobago. Now, the curious part is this, that / did not see him, but she — a stranger to him — did ; and she said that he seemed very anxious for me to notice him.

May Clerke.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Clerke says —

(i) The day of death was the same, for I wrote it down. I think it was the 3rd of August, but I know it was the same.

(2) The description, " very tall and pale," was accurate.

(3) I had no idea that he was ill. He was only a few days ill.

(4) The woman had never seen him. She had been with me for about eighteen months, and I considered her truthful. She had 710 object in telling me.

In conversation, Gurney learned that Mrs. Gierke had immediately mentioned what the servant said, and the fact that she had written down the date, to her husband. Colonel Gierke, who corroborates as follows : —

I well remember that on the day on which Mr. John Beresford, my wife's brother, died in Tobago — after a short illness of which we were not aware — our black nurse declared she saw, at as nearly as possible the time of his death, a gentleman, exactly answering to Mr. Beresford's description, leaning over the back of Mrs. Gierke's easy-chair in the open verandah. The figure was not seen by any one else. Shadwell H. Clerke.

We find it stated in Burke's Peerage that Mr. J. H. de la Poer Beresford, Secretary for the Island of Tobago, died on August 3, 1863 (not 1864). It is on this case that Gurney remarks : —

If this incident is to be interpreted telepathically, it is scarcely possible to suppose that Mrs. Gierke's own presence did not play a part in the phenomenon. The case would then be comparable to some " collective " cases where one of the percipients is a stranger to the agent ; the difference being that here the person who should (so to speak) have been the principal percipient was as unconscious of the impression which she received as we have found the percipient to be in some of the experimental cases.

To me it seems that the nurse was merely the bystander, endowed with a special perceptivity, more effective here than the kinship of the intended percipient. Note that in this case we have no means of knowing whether the invader recollected the incident or not. The narrative belongs to a class as to which we shall afterwards have to say much, where the death of the agent has prevented question, and has left it uncertain what his condition at the time or his subsequent recollection may have been.

652. And here I note a gradual transition to the next large class of cases on which I am about to enter. I am about to deal with telcesihesia ,-— with cases where an agent-percipient — for he is both in one — makes a clairvoyant excursion (of a more serious type than the mere psychorrhagies already described), and brings back some memory of the scene which he has psychically visited. Now, of course, it may happen that he fails to bring back any such memory, or that if he does bring it back, he tells no one about it. In such cases, just as in the telepathic cases of which I have just spoken, the excursive phantom may possibly be observed by a bystander, and the circumstances may be such as to involve some coincidence which negatives the supposition of the bystander's mere subjective fancy. Such, I think, is the following case. The narrator is a lady well known to me, who has had other veridical experiences.

From the "Report on the Census of Hallucinations," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. X. p. 332. The account is given by Mrs. Mc Alpine.

Garscadden, Bearsden, Glasgow, April zoth, 1892.

I remember in the June of 1889, 1 drove to Castleblaney, a little town in the county Monaghan, to meet my sister, who was coming by train from Longford. I expected her at three o'clock, but as she did not come with that train, I got the horse put up, and went for a walk in the demesne. The day was very warm and bright, and I wandered on under the shade of the trees to the side of a lake, which is in the demesne. Being at length tired, I sat down to rest upon a rock, at the edge of the water. My attention was quite taken up with the extreme beauty of the scene before me. There was not a sound or movement, except the soft ripple of the water on the sand at my feet. Presently I felt a cold chill creep through me, and a curious stiffness of my limbs, as if I could not move, though wishing to do so. I felt frightened, yet chained to the spot, and as if impelled to stare at the water straight in front of me. Gradually a black cloud seemed to rise, and in the midst of it I saw a tall man, in a suit of tweed, jump into the water and sink.

In a moment the darkness was gone, and I again became sensible of the heat and sunshine, but I was awed and felt " eerie " — it was then about four o'clock or so — I cannot remember either the exact time or date. On ni)- sister's arrival I told her of the occurrence ; she was surprised, but inclined to laugh at it. When we got home I told my brother; he treated the subject much in the same manner. However, about a week afterwards, a Mr. Espie, a bank clerk (unknown to me), committed suicide by drowning in that very spot. He left a letter for his wife, indicating that he had for some time contemplated his

652] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 271

death. My sister's memory o£ the event is the only evidence I can give. I did not see the account of the inquest at the time, and did not mention my strange experience to any one, saving my sister and brother. F. C. McAlpine.

Mrs. McAlpine's sister writes : —

RoxBORo', February \K,th, 1892. I remember perfectly you meeting me in Castleblaney, on my way home from Longford, and telling me of the strange thing which happened in the demesne. You know you were always hearing or seeing something, and I paid little attention, but I remember it distinctly — your troubled expression more than the story. You said a tall gentleman, dressed in tweed, walked past you, and went into a little inlet or creek. I think, but am not sure, that you said he had a beard. You were troubled about it, or looked so ; and I talked of other things. You told me while we were driving home. I think, but I am not sure, that it was about the 25th or 27th of June 1889 that I left Longford. I am sure of that being the day, but cannot remember the date. // was m yitne, and on the 3rd of July 1889 a Mr. Espie, a bank clerk, drowned himself in the lake in the demesne in 'Blaney. I have no doubt that the day I came home you saw Mr. Espie's "fetch."

The following account is taken from a local paper, the Northern Standard, Saturday, July 6th, 1889 : —

Sad Case of Suicide. — The town of Castleblaney was put into a fearful state of excitement when it became known on Wednesday last that Mr. Espy had committed suicide by drowning himself in the lake in the demesne. Latterly he was noticed to be rather dull and low in spirits, but no serious notice was taken of his conduct, nor had any one the most remote idea that he contemplated suicide. On Wednesday morning he seemed in his usual health, and, as was customary with him, walked down to get his newspaper on the arrival of the 9.45 train from Dubhn. He met Mr. Fox (in whose office he has been for years) at the station, and having procured his paper walked up to the office, wrote a note in which he stated what he was going to do, and indicating where his body would be found. This seemed to concern him a good deal, for he seemed very anxious that his body should be recovered without any delay. He had fishing-tackle in his pocket, and having tied one end of a pikeline to a tree, and the other end round one of his legs, he threw himself into about three feet deep of water, where he was found shortly afterwards quite dead, and before the note that he had left in the office had been opened.

It would be possible, no doubt, to explain this appearance as simply precognitive — as a picture from the future impressed in some unknown way upon the percipient's inner vision. We shall later on encounter certain cases which may drive us to this extreme hypothesis. But it seems here simpler to assume that the unhappy man was already imagining his plunge into the lake when Mrs. McAlpine visited the shore, and that his intense thought effected a self-projection, conscious or unconscious, of some element of his being. I may refer to a similar case from Phantasins of the Living, vol. ii. p. 541, where a girl, who is corporeally present in a certain drawing-room, is seen phantasmally in a neighbouring grove, whither she herself presently goes and hangs herself.

653. These ponderings on projected suicide form perhaps the strongest instance of mental preoccupation with a particular spot. But of course, in our ignorance of the precise quality of thought or emotion needed to prompt a psychical excursion, we need not be surprised to find such an excursion observed on some occasions as trivial as the " arrival-case " of Col. Reed, with which I prefaced the mere psychorrhagic cases.

The evidential value of that case depended on the improbability of the costume ; since no coincidence was involved in the mere fact of the Colonel's entering the barracks. I now go on to some cases where a man's coming is unexpected, so that there is a real coincidence in the fact that his phantom is seen in the place to which he is going, shortly before he arrives there in flesh and blood. I quote a case from Phantasms of the Living. The informant, a butler named James Carroll, was personally known to Edmund Gurney, and has had another psychical experience, not visual— a feeling of extreme exhaustion and sadness, coupled with the idea of his twin-brother, on the first day of his distant twin-brother's fatal illness ; and again just before the receipt of a telegram summoning him to the deathbed. It is an interesting observation based by Gurney on his analysis of relationships in telepathic cases, that the link of twinship seems markedly to facilitate this kind of communication.^

From Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 96 : —

September, 1S84.

In the autumn of 1877, while at Sholebrook Lodge, Towcester, Northamptonshire, one night, at a little after ten o'clock, I remember I was about to move a lamp in my room to a position where I usually sat a little while before retiring to bed, when I suddenly saw a vision of my brother. It seemed to affect me like a mild shock of electricity. It surprised me so that I hesitated to carry out what I had intended, my eyes remaining fixed on the apparition of my brother. It gradually disappeared, leaving me wondering what it meant. I am positive no light or reflection deceived me. I had not been sleeping or rubbing my eyes. I was again in the act of moving my lamp when I heard taps along the window. I looked towards it — the window was on the ground-floor — and heard a voice, my brother's, say, " It's I, don't be frightened." I let him in ; he remarked, " How cool you are ! I thought I should have frightened you."

The fact was, that the distinct vision of my brother had quite prepared me for his call. He found the window by accident, as he had never been to the house before; to use his own words, " I thought it was your window, and that I should find you." He had unexpectedly left London to pay me a visit, and when near the house lost his way, and had found his way in the dark to the back of the place.

In reply to inquiries, Mr. Carroll says : —

You are quite right in supposing the hallucination of my brother to be the only instance in my experience.

1 Cf. the case of Mrs. Storie in 427 and the cases given by Mr. F. Gal ton [Euqtiiries into Human Faculty, pp. 226-231) of consentaneous thought and action on the part of twins, which he attributes to a specially close similarity of constitution.

655] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 273

In another letter, Mr. Carroll says : —

As to the apparition of my brother in Northamptonshire, at a place and window where he had never before been — I think I said the room was very light indeed, the night very dark. Even had I looked out of the window I could not have seen him. With my head turned from the window, I distinctly saw his face. I was affected and surprised. It seemed like a slight shock of electricity. I had not recovered from the effects when the second surprise came, the reality — my brother. I did not mention the subject to him then, being rather flattered at his astonishment at my cool demeanour. The coolness was caused by the apparition first of him. The window my brother came to was at the back of the house. He found my window out only by accident, or, as he said, he thought it was my window.

On this case Gurney notes : —

Mr. Carroll is a clear-headed and careful witness. He is quite positive as to this being his only experience of a hallucination. In conversation, he stated that there were no mirrors in the room, and that the figure was seen noi in the direction of the window. He thinks that the interval between the hallucination and his brother's appearance was about a minute.

654. I give in 654 A a strange case, which comes to us on good authority, where we must suppose one man's subliminal impulse to have created a picture of himself, his wife, a carriage and a horse, persistent enough to have been watched for some seconds at least by three observers in one place, and by a fourth and independent observer at another point in the moving picture's career. The only alternative, if the narrative be accepted as substantially true, will be the hypothesis before alluded to of the flashing of an impending scene, as in crystal-vision, from some source external to any of the human minds concerned. I need hardly at this point repeat that in my view the wife and the horse will be as purely a part of the man's conception of his own aspect or environment as the coat on his back.

I add in 654 B, for purposes of comparison, one of the most bizarre cases in our collection. Four credible persons, to some extent independently, see a carriage and pair, with two men on the box and an inside occupant, under circumstances which make it impossible that the carriage was real. Now this vision cannot have been precognitive ; nothing of the kind occurred for years after it, nor well could occur ; and I am forced to regard it as the externalisation of some dream, whether of an incarnate or of a discarnate mind. The parallel between this midnight drive near the Moray Firth, and the mid-day drive on the Norfolk Fens, cited in the previous Appendix, tends therefore to show that that Norfolk drive, in spite of the paraphernalia of wife, horse, and dog-cart, may have been the outcome of a single waking dream ; — of the phantasmogenetic dissociation of elements of one sole personality.

655. 1 will add here, still following Phantasms of the Living (vol. ii. p. 100), a case oi auditory \xi\v:Q.2X\oxi of an arrival.

VOL. I. s

The account comes from Mr. J. Stevenson, of 2S Prospect Street, Gateshead.

AprU 20tk^ 1885.

During the months of Mav and June iSSi, my brother was staying with us. He went out one Sunday night between 5 and 6 o'clock. He did not say what time he would return, but his time was generally about 10 p.m. About 7 o'clock, while I was reading bv the window, and Mrs. Stevenson by the fire, all being quiet, I heard a voice sav " David is coming.''' I instantly turned to Mrs. S., asking what sue said. She said, " I have not spoken a word." I told her that I heard some one say that " David is coming." I then thought I had imagined it, but, lo and behold ! in less than 3 minutes, in he comes, quite mieypected. I was surprised, but did not mention anything to him about it. The position of the house prevented us from seeing him until just about to enter the house. He was in good health, as we all were at the time. This is a candid statement of the facts. To5. Stevexsox.

la answer to an inquiry, !Mr. Stevenson adds : —

This was the sole experience I have had of the kind. I have never experienced any hallucination.

Mrs. Stevenson corroborates as follows : —

In reference to my husband's letter of April 20th. I have pleasure in testifying to the accuracy of his account, and of his drawing my attention to the fact at the time mentioned. Serjexa Ste\'exsox.

I need hardly repeat that my hypothesis of a real modification of a part of space, transforming it into a pbantasmogenetic centre, applies to a phantasmal voice just as well as to a phantasmal figure. The voice is not heard acoustically any more than the figure is seen optically. Yet a phantasmal voice may in a true sense " come from " a given spot In such a case as the above, however, where it is only heard by one person, it is simpler to suppose that the auditory tract of the percipient's brain was the only portion of space affected. A case of a similar kind is gi%'en in 655 A.

656. I add another " arrival-case " in 656 A. But before leaving the subject I must remind the reader that among telsesthetic cases we have already encountered some where a percipient seemed to have become aware of the contents of a letter when it had reached his vicinity (see the cases of Sir L. Jones and Professor Alexander in 421 H and J), and another instance of this, related by Dr. O. W. Holmes, is quoted in 656 B.

I: is of course possible that in the same way the percipient may become aware of the contents of another mind when it comes into its vicinity ; so that the intimations of nearness above discussed may sometimes have been gathered by the percipient spirit alone. In either case the link of spatial nearness still persists. That link indeed seems more directly operative in cases of telaesthesia than in cases of telepathy. When a telepathic message is transmitted from one person to his neighbour in

I I

657] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 275

space, one may say, as Edmund Gumey did, that two minds looking on the same scene have much of their content in common : so that a psychical bond is thus established. But if the contents of a letter become known when it is close at hand, then, unless we assume that the writer is thinking of its arrival (which would in several of our cases be a very farfetched supposition), it seems that the clairvoyant perception must have been prompted or facilitated by the mere contiguity. This is of course by no means the same thing as to suppose that there is any " law of distances " governing the telepathic message.

It is more like a difference in facility of reception than in facility of action — as though trifles attracted the clairvoyant' s notice more readily when they happened to be close at hand.

657. The cases which I have lately been recounting can be called telsesthetic only by courtesy. There has been a psychical excursion, with its possibilities of clairvoyance ; but the excursive element has not brought home any assignable knowledge to the supraliminal personality. I go on now to cases where such knowledge has thus been garnered. But here there is need of some further pause, to consider a little in how many ways we can imagine that knowledge to be reached.

Firstly, the distant knowledge may, it would seem, be reached through h}'pers5thesia, — an extended power of the ordinary senses. Secondlv, it sometimes seems to come through crystal-gazing or its correlative shellhearing, — artifices which seem to utilise the ordinary senses in a new way. And besides these two avenues to distant knowledge there is a third, the telepathic avenue, which, as we have already surmised, sometimes shades off into the purely telffisthetic ; when no distant mind, but only the distant scene, seems to be attracting the excursive spirit. And in \hs. fourth place we must remember that it is mainly in the form of dream or vision that the most striking instances of telaesthesia which I have as yet recorded have come. Can we in any way harmonise these various modes of perception? Can we discover any condirion of the percipient which is common to aU?

To a certain limited extent such co-ordination is possible. In each approach to telaesthesia in turn we find a tendency to something like a dream- excursion. Hj^persesthesia, in the first place, although it exists sometimes in persons wide awake, is characteristically an attribute of sleep-waking states.

We have seen in discussing hypnotic experiments that it is sometimes possible to extend the subject's perceptive faculty by gradual suggestion, so far as to transform a hyperaesthesia which can still be referred to the action of the sense-organs into a telaesthesia which cannot be so referred. It is observable that percipients in such cases sometimes describe their sensation as that of recei%"ing an impression, or seeing a picture placed before them ; sometimes as that of travelling and visiting the distant scene or person. Or the feeling may oscUlate between these two sensations.

2/6 CHAPTER VI [658

just as the sense of iwie-relation in the picture shown may oscillate between past, present, and future.

To all these complex sensations the phenomena of crystal-gazing offer close analogies. I have already remarked on the curious fact that the simple artifice of gazing into a speculum should prove the avenue to phenomena of such various types. There may be very different origins even for pictures which in the crystal present very similar aspects ; and certain sensations do also accompany these pictures ; sensations not in&rQ\y oi gazing but sometimes (though rarely) of partial trance; and oftener of bilocatioit ; — of psychical presence among the scenes which the crystal has indeed initiated, but no longer seems to limit or to contain.

658. The idea of psychical excursion thus suggested must, however, be somehow reconciled with the frequently symbolic character of these visions. The features of a crystal-vision seem often to be no mere transcription of material facts, but an abbreviated selection from such facts, or even a bold modification of such facts with a view of teUing some story more quickly and clearly. We are familiar with the same kind of succession of symbolical scenes in dream, or in waking reverie. And of course if an intelligence outside the crystal-gazer's mind is endeavouring to impress him, this might well be the chosen way.

And moreover through all telsesthetic vision some element of similar character is wont to run — some indication that mind has been at work upon the picture — that the scene has not been presented, so to say, in crude objectivity, but that there has been some choice as to the details discerned ; and some symbolism in the way in which they are presented.

Let us consider how these characteristics affect different theories of the mechanism of clairvoyance. Let us suppose first that there is some kind of transition from hypergesthesia to telsesthesia, so that when peripheral sensation is no longer possible, central perception may be still operating across obstacles otherwise insurmountable.

If this be the case, it seems likely that central perception will shape itself on the types of perception to which the central tracts of the brain are accustomed ; and that the connaissance siiperieure, the telsesthetic knowledge, however it may really be acquired, will present itself mainly as clairvoyance or clairaudience — as some form of sight or sound. Yet these telsesthetic sights and sounds may be expected to show some trace of their unusual origin. They may, for instance, be imperfectly co-ordinated with sights and sounds arriving through external channels ; and, since they must in some way be a translation of supernormal impressions into sensory terms, they are likely to show something symbolic in character.

I take as an illustration certain experiments — carefully made in their day — which were reported in the Zoist, and some of which are quoted in 673 E. Mottoes printed on folded scraps of paper, inside nuts bought by the experimenters, were read by the mesmerised clairvoyant. But she saw these folded slips of paper as though stretched out straight ; and

659] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 277

once or twice she gave the general purport of the motto, not the exact words. There was want of co-ordination with optical sight, and there was symbolism — a retranslation of thoughts into words — certain words being reported to the supraliminal self which were not identical, but synonymotis with the actual words on the slip.

659. This tendency to subliminal symbolism, indeed, has met us at each point of our inquiry. As an instance of it in its simplest form, I may mention a case where a botanical student passing inattentively in front of the glass door of a restaurant thought that he had seen Vei'bascum Thapsiis printed thereon. The real word was Bouillon ; and that happens to be the trivial name in French for the plant Verbascum Thapsus. The actual optical perception had thus been subliminally transformed ; the words Verbascum Thapsus were the report sent up to the inattentive supraliminal self by a subliminal self more interested in botany than in dinner.

Nay, we know that our own optical perception is in its own way highly symbolic. The scene which the baby sees instinctively, — which the impressionist painter manages to see by a sort of deliberate self-simplification, — is very different from the highly elaborate interpretation and selection of blotches of colour by which the ordinary adult figures to himself the visible world.

Now we adults stand towards this subliminal symbolism in much the same attitude as the baby stands towards our educated optical symbolism. Just as the baby fails to grasp the third dimension, so may we still be failing to grasp a fourth ; — or whatever be the law of that higher cognisance which begins to report fragmentarily to man that which his ordinary senses cannot discern.

Assuredly then we must not take the fact that any knowledge comes to us symbolically as a proof that it comes to us from a mind outside our own. The symbolism may be the inevitable language in which one stratum of our personality makes its report to another. The symbolism, in short, may be either the easiest, or the only possible psychical record of actual objective fact ; whether that fact be in the first instance discerned by our deeper selves, or be conveyed to us from other minds in this form ; — elaborated for our mind's digestion, as animal food has been elaborated for our body's digestion, from a primitive crudity of things.

But again one must question, on general idealistic principles, whether there be in such cases any real distinction between symbolism and reality, — between subjective and objective as we commonly use those terms. The resisting matter which we see and touch has " solid " reality for minds so constituted as to have the same subjective feeling awakened by it. But to other minds, endowed with other forms of sensibility — minds possibly both higher and more numerous than our own — this solid matter may seem disputable and unreal, while thought and emotion, perceived in ways unknown to us, may be the only reality.

2/8 CHAPTER VI [660

This material world constitutes, in fact, a " privileged case " — a simplified example — among all discernible worlds, so far as the perception of incarnate spirits is concerned. For discarnate spirits it is no longer a privileged case ; to them it is apparently easier to discern thoughts and emotions by non-material signs. But they need not therefore be wholly cut off from discerning material things, any more than incarnate spirits are wholly cut off from discerning immaterial things — thoughts and emotions symbolised in phantasmal form. Very possibly the spirit has the same kind of advantage that the sea-gull has over the mackerel ; — the bird can see the fish better than the fish can see the bird. Certain hindrances to clear vision (^as refraction) may affect bird and fish alike ; certain other hindrances (as position of eyes and density of water) may be worse for the fish than for the bird ; while others again (as incidence of sunlight on ripple) may bafifie the bird in ways of which the fish can form no idea.

"The ghost in man, the ghost that once was man," to use Tennyson's words, have each of them got to overcome by empirical artifices certain difficulties which are of different type for each, but are not insurmountable by either.

660. These reflections, applicable at various points in our argument, have seemed specially needed when we had first to attack the meaning of the so-called " travelling clairvoyance," of which instances were given in the chapter on hypnotism. It was needful to consider how far there was a continuous transition between these excursions and directer transferences between mind and mind, — between telsesthesia and telepathy. It now seems to me that such a continuous transition may well exist, and that there is no absolute gulf between the supernormal perception of ideas as existing in other minds, and the supernormal perception of what we know as matter. All matter may, for aught we know, exist as an idea in some cosmic mind, with which mind each individual spirit may be in relation, as fully as with individual minds. The difference perhaps lies rather in the fact that there may be generally a s2immons from a cognate mind which starts the so-called agent's mind into action; his invasion may be in some v^z-^ invited ; while a spiritual excursion among inanimate objects only may often lack an impulse to start it. If this be so, it would explain the fact that such excursions have mainly succeeded under the influence of hypnotic suggestion.

Looking back to those records of travelling clairvoyance already cited in the Appendices to sections 572 and 573 (Mr. Dobbie, Dr. F., Dr. Backman, Dr. Fahnestock, &c.) we shall see in them, just as we saw in the crystal-visions, a kind of fusion of all our forms of supernormal faculty. There was telepathy, teloesthesia, retrocognition, precognition ; and in the cases reported by Cahagnet, which will be referred to in Chapter IX., there was apparently something more besides. We see, in

1 See Chapter Y)L., passim.

661] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 279

short, as we saw with the crystal-visions, that any empirical inlet into the metetherial world is apt to show us those powers, which we try to distinguish, co-existing in some synthesis by us incomprehensible. Here, therefore, just as with the crystal-visions, we have artificially to separate out the special class of phenomena with which we wish first to deal.

In these experiments, then, there seems to be an independent power of visiting almost any desired place, its position having been perhaps first explained by reference to some landmark already known. The clairvoyante (I use the female word, but in several cases a man or boy has shown this power) will frequently miss her way, and describe houses or scenes adjacent to those desired. Then if she almost hterally gets on the scent, — if she finds some place which the man whom she is sent to seek has some time traversed, — she follows up his track with greater ease, apparently recognising past events in his life as well as present circumstances. The process often reminds one of the dog who, if let loose far from home, will find his way homewards vaguely at first, and using we do not quite know what instinct ; then if he once gets on the scent will hold it easily across much of confusion and obstacle.

In these prolonged experimental cases there is thus time enough to allow of the clairvoyante's traversing certain places, such as empty rooms, factories, and the like, whither no assignable link from any living person could draw her. The evidence to prove telaesthesia, unmixed with telepathy, has thus generally come incidentally in the course of some experiment mainly telepathic in character.

661. These long clairvoyant wanderings are more nearly paralleled by dreatns than by waking hallucinations. And among dreams (cited in Chapter IV.) we have already seen some cases much resembling, for instance, "Jane's" experiences (Dr. F.'s case in 573 B). See also in Chapter IV. two dreams, in one of which (Mr. Watts' case, 421 B) the dreamer visits a garden scene with no occupant; in the other (Miss Luke's case, 421 G) a room which has been dismantled by thieves. The first case depends on a single statement, but from an informant whom we believe to be trustworthy. The seco?id incident is well authenticated, and if its telaesthetic significance is attacked, that must be by ascribing the coincidence to chance alone. On this occasion the thieves must, no doubt, have been eagerly excited over their successful thefts. It is possible that this focus of excitement was a contributory cause of Miss Luke's dream ; — in some way drew her excursive spirit to the scene of the loss.

Here again is a case essentially parallel, where a physician is impressed, probably in dream, with a picture of a special place in a street, where something is happening, which, though in itself unemotional — merely that a man is standing and talking in the street — is of moment to the physician, who wants to get unobtrusively into the man's house.

From Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 267. The case is there

described as coming " from a Fellow of the College of Physicians, who fears professional injury if he were ' supposed to defend opinions at variance with general scientific belief,' and does not therefore allow his name to appear. He is candid enough to admit that if every one argued as he does, ' progress would be impossible.' "

May 20th, 1S84.

Twenty years ago [abroad] I had a patient, wife of a parson. She had a peculiar kind of deHrium which did not belong to her disease, and perplexed me. The house in which she lived was closed at midnight, that is — the outer door had no bell. One night I saw her at nine. When I came home I said to my wife, " I don't understand that case ; I wish I could get into the house late." We went to bed rather early. At about one o'clock I got up. She said, " What are you about.? are you not well? " I said, " Perfectly so." " Then why get up .'' " " Because I can get into that house." " How, if it is shut up ? " "I see the proprietor standing under the lamp-post this side of the bridge, with another man." " You have been dreaming." " No, I have been wide awake ; but dreaming or waking, I mean to try." I started with the firm conviction that I should find the individual in question. Sure enough there he was under the lamp-post, talking to a friend. I asked him if he was going home. (I knew him very well.) He said he was, so I told him I was going to see a patient, and would accompany him. I was positively ashamed to explain matters ; it seemed so absurd that I knew he would not believe me. On arriving at the house I said, " Now I am here, I will drop in and see my patient." On entering the room I found the maid giving her a tumbler of strong grog. The case was clear; it was as I suspected — deHrium from drink. The next day I delicately spoke to the husband about it. He denied it, and in the afternoon I received a note requesting me not to repeat the visits. Three weeks ago I was recounting the story and mentioned the name. A lady present said : "That is the name of the clergyman in my parish, at B., and his wife is in a lunatic asylum from drink ! "

In conversation with Gurney, the narrator explained that the vision — though giving an impression of externality and seen, as he believes, with open eyes — was not definably located in space. He had never encountered the proprietor in the spot where he saw him, and it was not a likely thing that he should be standing talking in the streets at so late an hour.

In this case we cannot consider either the drunken patient or the indifferent proprietor as in any sense the agent. Somehow or other the physician's own persistent Avish to get some such opportunity induced a collaboration of his subliminal with his supraliminal self, akin to the inspirations of genius. Genius, however, operates within ordinary sensory limits ; while in this physician's case the subliminal self exercised its farthest-reaching supernormal powers.

With this again may be compared a case in Phantasms of the Living (vol. ii. p. 368), where a dreamer seems to himself to be present in the Thames Tunnel during a fatal accident, which did in fact occur during that night. Here again the drowned workman — who was quite unknown

662] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 281

to the distant dreamer — can hardly be called an agent ; yet it may have been the excitement surrounding his death which attracted the dreamer's spirit to that scene, as a conflagration might attract a waking nightwanderer.

662. There are, on the other hand, a good many cases where a scene thus discerned in a flash is one of special interest to the percipient, although no one in the scene may have actually wished to transfer it to him.

A case again of a somewhat different type is the sudden waking vision of Mr. Gottschalk (662 B), who sees in a circle of light the chalked hands and ruffled wrists of Mr. Courtenay Thorpe — a wellknown actor — who was opening a letter of Mr. Gottschalk's in that costume at the time. Trivial in itself, this incident illustrates an interesting class of cases, where a picture very much like a crystal-vision suddenly appears on a wall or even in the air with no apparent background.

I know one or two persons who have had in their lives one single round or oval hallucinatory picture of this kind, of which no interpretation was apparent, — a curious indication of some subliminal predisposition towards this somewhat elaborate form of message.

Somewhat like Mr. Gottschalk's projection of his picture upon a background of dark air are two experiences of Mr. Searle (662 C) and of Mrs. Taunton (662 D) — excellent informants — which I give next with an important note of Edmund Gurney's on the occasional transparency of these phantasmal pictures. Gurney regards this transparency as indicating imperfect externalisation of the hallucinatory image.

My own phrase, " imperfect co-ordination of inner with outward vision," comes to much the same thing, and seems specially applicable to Mrs. Taunton's words : " The appearance was not transparent or filmy, but perfectly solid-looking ; and yet I could somehow see the orchestra, not through, but behind ity There are a few cases where the percipient seems to see a hallucinatory figure behind him, out of the range of optical vision (see the case of Mr. Kearne, 665 A). There is of course no reason why this should not be so, — even if a part of space external to the percipient's brain should be actually affected.

Mr. Searle's case also is very interesting. Here Mrs. Searle faints when visiting a house a few miles from Mr. Searle's chambers in the Temple. At or about the same sime, he sees as though in a looking-glass, upon a window opposite him, his wife's head and face, white and bloodless.

Gurney suggests that this was a transference from Mrs. Searle's mind simply of "the idea of fainting," which then worked itself out into perception in an appropriate fashion.

Was it thus? Or did Mr. Searle in the Temple see with inner vision his wife's head as she lay back faint and pallid in Gloucester Gardens?

Our nearest analogy here is plainly crystal-vision ; and crystal-visions, as we have observed, point both ways. Sometimes the picture in the crystal is conspicuously symbolical ; sometimes it seems a transcript of an actual distant scene.

663. It is likely enough that, if we could really understand the mechanism involved, some of these questions would be seen to be — not indeed merely verbal — but beside the point. If each of us is a system of forces united in innumerable ways to other systems of forces ; and if there comes a tug somewhere — a perturbation of one of these linked personalities — then the resultant thrill (whether of ether or beyond ether) may affect those other human systems in ways which our experience cannot help us to imagine.

I will add here two cases which will illustrate two problems which occur as we deal with each class of cases in turn, — the problem of timerelations and the problem of spirit-agency. Can an incident be said to be seen clairvoyantly if it is seen some hours after it occurred? Ought we to say that a scene is clairvoyantly visited, or that it is spiritually shown, if it represents a still chamber of death, where no emotion is any longer stirring ; but to which the freed spirit might desire to attract the friend's attention and sympathy? The first of these two cases appeared in a paper by Mrs. Sidgwick, whose comments I reproduce.

From Mrs. Sidgwick's paper " On the Evidence for Clairvoyance," in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vii. pp. 32-35.

Mrs. Sidgwick writes : —

I shall begin with cases closely parallel to many which have been included in Phantasms of the Living as cases of telepathic clairvoyance, and in which telepathy is pri?nd facie the simplest explanation. In these cases the agent is clearly designated, and also his connection with the percipient ; and the experience of the supposed agent at the moment is generally of a marked and exceptional character. Moreover, in most of these cases the initiative, or at least the psychical disturbance or impulse which leads to the vision, is, so far as we can see, entirely on the side of the agent, the percipient being in an apparently normal state and not expecting or seeking any vision.

The first case I shall give comes to us through the American Branch of the Society. Mr. A. B. Wood writes to Mr. F. A. Nims, an Associate of the American Branch, as follows : —

Muskegon, April zgt/i, 1S90.

In compliance with your suggestion, supplemented by the request of Mr. Richard Hodgson, I sought an interview with Mrs. Agnes Paquet, and obtained the following information regarding her strange experience on the day of her brother's death. I submit the papers to you feeling that they should go forward with the fullest and clearest information obtainable, and believing that you may suggest other questions, the answers to which may have important bearing on the case. A. B. Wood.

Statement of Accident.

On October 24th, 1889, Edmund Dunn, brother of Mrs. Agnes Paquet, was serving as fireman on the tug Wolf a small steamer engaged in towing vessels

663] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 283

in Chicago Harbour. At about 3 o'clock a.m., the tug fastened to a vessel, inside the piers, to tow her up the river. While adjusting the tow-hne Mr. Dunn fell or was thrown overboard by the tow-line, and drowned. The body, though sought for, was not found until about three weeks after the accident, when it came to the surface near the place where Mr. Dunn disappeared.

Mrs. Paq2iet''s Statement.

I arose about the usual hour on the morning of the accident, probably about six o'clock. I had slept well throughout the night, had no dreams or sudden awakenings. I awoke feeling gloomy and depressed, which feeling I could not shake off. After breakfast my husband went to his work, and, at the proper time, the children were gotten ready and sent to school, leaving me alone in the house. Soon after this I decided to steep and drink some tea, hoping it would relieve me of the gloomy feelings aforementioned. I went into the pantry, took down the tea canister, and as I turned around my brother Edmund — or his exact image — stood before me and only a few feet away. The apparition stood with back toward me, or, rather, partially so, and was in the act of falling forward — away from me — seemingly impelled by two ropes or a loop of rope drawing against his legs. The vision lasted but a moment, disappearing over a low railing or bulwark, but was very distinct. I dropped the tea, clasped my hands to my face, and exclaimed, " My God ! Ed is drowned."

At about half-past ten a.m. my husband received a telegram from Chicago, announcing the drowning of my brother. When he arrived home he said to me, " Ed is sick in hospital at Chicago ; I have just received a telegram." To which I replied, " Ed is drowned ; I saw him go overboard." I then gave him a minute description of what I had seen. I stated that my brother, as I saw him, was bareheaded, had on a heavy, blue sailor's shirt, no coat, and that he went over the rail or bulwark. I noticed that his pants legs were rolled up enough to show the white lining inside. I also described the appearance of the boat at the point where my brother went overboard.

I am not nervous, and neither before nor since have I had any experience in the least degree similar to that above related.

My brother was not subject to fainting or vertigo. Agnes Paquet.

Mr. Paqtiefs Statement.

At about 10.30 o'clock a.m., October 24th, 1889, I received a telegram from Chicago, announcing the drowning of my brother-in-law, Edmund Dunn, at 3 o'clock that morning. I went directly home, and, wishing to break the force of the sad news I had to convey to my wife, I said to her : " Ed is sick in hospital at Chicago ; I have just received a telegram." To which she replied : "Ed is drowned; I saw him go overboard." She then described to me the appearance and dress of her brother as described in her statement ; also the appearance of the boat, &c.

I started at once for Chicago, and when I arrived there I found the appearance of that part of the vessel described by my wife to be exactly as she had described it, though she had never seen the vessel ; and the crew verified my wife's description of her brother's dress, &c., except that they thought that he had his hat on at the time of the accident. They said that Mr. Dunn had purchased a pair of pants a few days before the accident occurred, and as they were a trifle long before, wrinkling at the knees, he had worn them rolled up, showing the white lining as seen by my wife.

The captain of the tug, who was at the wheel at the time of the accident, seemed reticent. He thought my brother-in-law was taken with a fainting fit or vertigo and fell over backward ; but a sailor (Frank Yemont) told a friend of mine that he (Yemont) stood on the bow of the vessel that was being towed and saw the accident. He stated that my brother-in-law was caught by the tow-line and thrown overboard, as described by my wife. I think that the captain, in his statement, wished to avoid responsibility, as he had no right to order a fireman — my brother-in-law's occupation — to handle the tow-line.

My brother-in-law was never, to my knowledge, subject to fainting or vertigo. Peter Paquet.

Mr. Wood writes again on August 12th, 1890 : —

In accordance with request, I have had statements made in first person. . .

I have made diligent inquiry, but cannot place the sailor Yemont. A letter sent to his last known, or supposed, address has been returned, marked " Not called for.'" ... A. B. Wood.

Mrs. Sidgvvick adds : —

Here Mrs. Paquet not only had a vivid impression of her brother within a few hours of his death — not only knew that he was dead — but saw a more or less accurate representation of the scene of his death.

It will have been noticed that her impression was not contemporaneous with the event to which it related, but occurred some six hours afterwards. It was preceded by a feeling of depression with which she had awoken in the morning, and one is at first tempted to suppose that she had dreamed of the event and forgotten it, and that her subsequent vision was the result of a sudden revivification of the dream in her memory. But we do not know enough to justify us in assuming this, and against such a hypothesis may be urged the experience of Mrs. Storie related in Phantasms of the Livmg [quoted in 427], which somewhat resembles Mrs. Paquet's. Mrs. Storie tells us that all the evening she felt unusually nervous, and then, when she went to bed, she had a remarkable dream, in which she saw a series of scenes which afterwards turned out to have a clear relation to the death of her brother, who had been killed by a passing train four hours earlier. In her case the nervousness cannot be regarded as telepathic, as it is stated to have begun before the accident, but it seems quite possible that the nervousness and depression may have had to do with some condition in the percipient which rendered the vision possible.

Can we fairly press an idea of any mere latency of the scene in the percipient's mind to account for such an incident as this ? Or must we not feel that there is here a mode of dealing with time which is not ours? This apparently diflferent mode of conceiving time-relations is also shown in cases of precognition, — already referred to in Chapter IV. (425), — and I add in 663 A a case of waking premonition which there seems no reason to ascribe to spirit agency. I recur to the problem of timerelations in Chapter IX. ; meanwhile it is well to be reminded at every stage that no category which we can make can be a really distinct category, but that all these supernormal phenomena are somehow linked together beyond our sight.

664. The decedent in the next case was a man of some note, who would, I think, have been anxious to manifest his continued existence if he found that possible.

From Phantasjns of the Living, vol. i. p. 265. I quote Gurney's prefatory remarks on the case.

We received the next account through the kindness of Mr. J. Bradley Dyne, of 2 New Square, Lincoln's Inn. The incident took place in his house at Highgate, and the narrator is his sister-in-law. The case brings us again to the very ver_ge of actual sensory hallucination. It seems also to be an extreme instance of a deferred or latent telepathic impression — the death of the agent (allowing for longitude) having preceded the percipient's experience by about ten hours. This feature does not seem specially surprising, when we remember how actual impressions of sense may pass unnoted, and yet emerge into consciousness hours afterwards, either in dream or in some moment of silence and recueillement.

The following is the percipient's account : —

I had known Mr. • as a medical man, under whose treatment I had been

for some years, and at whose hands I had experienced great kindness. He had ceased to attend me for considerably more than a year at the time of his death. I was aware that he had given up practice, but beyond that I knew nothing of his proceedings, or of the state of his health. At the time I last saw him he appeared particularly well, and even made some remark himself as to the amount of vigour and work left in him.

On Thursday, the i6th day of December 1875, I had been for some little time on a visit at my brother-in-law's and sister's house near London. I was in good health, but from the morning and throughout the day I felt unaccountably depressed and out of spirits, which I attributed to the gloominess of the weather. A short time after lunch, about two o'clock, I thought I would go up to the nursery to amuse myself with the children, and try to recover my spirits. The attempt failed, and I returned to the dining-room, where I sat by myself, my

sister being engaged elsewhere. The thought of Mr. came into my mind,

and suddenly, with my eyes open, as I believe, for I was not feeling sleepy, I seemed to be in a room in which a man was lying dead in a small bed. I

recognised the face at once as that of Mr. , and felt no doubt that he was

dead, and not asleep only. The room appeared to be bare and without carpet or furniture. I cannot say how long the appearance lasted. I did not mention the appearance to my sister or brother-in-law at the time. I tried to argue with myself that there could be nothing in what I had seen, chiefly on the ground

that from what I knew of Mr, 's circumstances it was most improbable that,

if dead, he would be in a room in so bare and unfurnished a state. Two days afterwards, on December i8th, I left my sister's house for home. About a week after my arrival, another of my sisters read out of the daily papers the announcement of Mr. ■'s death, which had taken place abroad, and on December i6th,

the day on which I had seen the appearance.

I have since been informed that Mr. had died in a small village hospital in a warm foreign climate, having been suddenly attacked with illness whilst on his travels.

In answer to an inquiry, Mr. Dyne says : —

My sister-in-law tells me that the occasion which I mentioned to you is absolutely the only one on which she has seen any vision of the kind.

We learnt from Mr. 's widow that the room in which he died

fairly corresponded with the above description, and that the hour of death was 3.30 A.M.

Now this incident begins with what looks like a telepathic impression of calamity of familiar type, coinciding with, or following closely upon, the death of a friend. But then this depression suddenly develops, as it were, into a waking vision of the material scene — an absolutely unexpected one — in which that friend's dead body is lying. Now what is to draw the percipient's mind to this scene, unless it be indeed the agency of the departed spirit? We shall find later on that we have indications that departed spirits may for a time be cognisant of the position or aspect of their bodies, and may impress this knowledge upon survivors. (See also the case of Mrs. Storie in 427.) May not the picture of the cottage-hospital have been impressed by the action of the spirit which had quitted the corpse there lying?

Such problems cannot at present be solved ; nor, as I have said, can any one class of these psychical interchanges be clearly demarcated from other classes. Recognising this, we must explain the central characteristics of each group in turn, and show at what points that group appears to merge into the next.

665. We now come, then, to that class of cases where B invades A, and A perceives the invasion ; but B retains no memory of it in supraliminal life. From one point of view, as will be seen, this is just the reverse of the class last discussed — where the invader remembered an invasion which the invaded person (when there was one) did not perceive.

We have already discussed some cases of this sort which seemed to be psychorrhagic — to have occurred without will or purpose on the part of the invader. What we must now do is to collect cases where there may probably have been some real projection of will or desire on the invader's part, leading to the projection of his phantasm in a manner recognisable by the distant friend whom he thus invades — yet without subsequent memory of his own. These cases will be intermediate between the psychorrhagic cases already described and the experimental cases on which we shall presently enter.

I will remind the reader, to begin with, of two cases printed in a previous chapter. In the first — the case of Mrs. West (422 A) — a dangerous accident happens, and a near relation suddenly sees the endangered persons in the scene. They know nothing of having been seen. In Phantasms of the Living, from which the case is quoted, this was regarded as a projection from their minds, or from the mind of one of

665J SENSORY AUTOMATISM 287

them. I should now prefer to call it a spasmodic tightening of the bond always existing between the father and daughter.

In the second case — that of Canon Warburton — in section 422 — the person undergoing the accident did recollect a vivid thought of his brother at the moment ; — while his brother on the other hand was startled from a slight dose by the vision of the scene of danger as then taking place ; — the steep stairs and the falling figure. This is an acute crisis, much resembling impending death by drowning, &c. ; and the apparition may be construed either way — either as a scene clairvoyantly discerned by Canon Warburton, owing, as I say, to a spasmodic tightening of his psychical link with his brother, or as a sudden invasion on that brother's part, whose very rapidity perhaps helped to prevent his remembering it.

The following case, again, is interesting both evidentially and from its intrinsic character. The narrative, printed in Phantasms of the Living on the authority of one only of the witnesses concerned, led to the discovery of the second witness — whom we had no other means of finding — and has been amply corroborated by her independent account.

The case stands about midway between psychorrhagic cases and intentional self-projections, and is clearly of the nature of an invasion, since the phantasm was seen by a stranger as well as by the friend, and seemed to both to be moving about the room. The figure, that is to say, was adapted to the percipient's environment.

From Fhafitasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 239. Mrs. Elgee, of 18 Woburn Road, Bedford, gave the following account : —

March isf, 1S85.

In the month of November 1S64, being detained in Cairo, on my way out to India, the following curious circumstance occurred to me : —

Owing to an unusual influx of travellers, I, with the young lady under my charge (whom we will call D.) and some other passengers of the outward-bound mail to India, had to take up our abode in a somewhat unfrequented hotel. The room shared by Miss D.and myself was large, lofty, and gloomy; the furniture of the scantiest, consisting of two small beds, placed nearly in the middle of the room and not touching the walls at all, two or three rush-bottomed chairs, a very small washing-stand, and a large old-fashioned sofa of the settee sort, which was placed against one-half of the large folding doors which gave entrance to the room. This settee was far too heavy to be removed, unless by two or three people. The other half of the door was used for entrance, and faced the two beds. Feeling rather desolate and strange, and Miss D. being a nervous person, I locked the door, and, taking out the key, put it under my pillow; but on Miss D. remarking that there might be a duplicate which could open the door from outside, I put a chair against the door, with my travelling bag on it, so arranged that, on any pressure outside, one or both must fall on the bare floor, and make noise enough to rouse me. We then proceeded to retire to bed, the one I had chosen being near the only window in the room, which opened with two glazed doors, almost to the floor. These doors, on account of the heat, I left open, first assuring myself that no communication

from the outside could be obtained. Tlie window led on to a small balcony, which was isolated, and was three stories above the ground.

I suddenly woke from a sound sleep with the impression that somebody had called me, and, sitting up in bed, to my unbounded astonishment, by the clear light of early dawn coming in through the large window before mentioned, I beheld the figure of an old and very valued friend whom I knew to be in England. He appeared as if most eager to speak to me, and I addressed him with, " Good gracious ! how did you come here ? " So clear was the figure, that I noted every detail of his dress, even to three onyx shirt-studs which he always wore. He seemed to come a step nearer to me, when he suddenly pointed across the room, and on my looking round, I saw Miss D. sitting up in her bed, gazing at the figure with every expression of terror. On looking back, my friend seemed to shake his head, and retreated step by step, slowly, till he seemed to sink through that portion of the door where the settee stood. I never knew what happened to me after this ; but my next remembrance is of bright sunshine pouring through the window. Gradually the remembrance of what had happened came back to me, and the question arose in my mind, had I been dreaming, or had I seen a visitant from another world ? — the bodily presence of my friend being utterly impossible. Remembering that Miss D. had seemed aware of the figure as well as myself, I determined to allow the test of my dream or vision to be whatever she said to me upon the subject, I intending to say nothing to her unless she spoke to me. As she seemed still asleep, I got out of bed, examined the door carefully, and found the chair and my bag untouched, and the key under my pillow; the settee had not been touched, nor had that portion of the door against which it was placed any appearance of being opened for years.

Presently, on Miss D. waking up, she looked about the room, and, noticing the chair and bag, made some remark as to their not having been much use. I said, " What do you mean ? " and then she said, " Why, that man who was in the room this morning must have got in somehow." She then proceeded to describe to me exactly what I myself had seen. Without giving any satisfactory answer as to what I had seen, I made her rather angry by affecting to treat the matter as a fancy on her part, and showed her the key still under my pillow, and the chair and bag untouched. I then asked her, if she was so sure that she had seen somebody in the room, did not she know who it was ? " No," said she, " I have never seen him before, nor any one like him." I said, " Have you ever seen a photograph of him?" She said, "No." This lady never was told what I saw, and yet described exactly to a third person what we both had seen.

Of course, I was under the impression my friend was dead. Such, however, was not the case ; and I met him some four years later, when, without telling him anything of my experience in Cairo, I asked him, in a joking way, could he remember what he was doing on a certain night in November 1S64. "Well," he said, "you require me to have a good memory ; " but after a little reflection he replied, " Why, that was the time I was so harassed with trying to decide for or against the appointment which was offered me, and I so much wished you could have been with me to talk the matter over. I sat over the fire quite late, trying to think what you would have advised me to do." A little cross-questioning and comparing of dates brouglit out the curious fact that, allowing for the difference of time between England and Cairo, his meditations over the fire and

665] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 289

my experience were simultaneous. Having told him the circumstances above narrated, I asked him had he been aware of any peculiar or unusual sensation. He said none, only that he had wanted to see me very much.

E. H. Elgee.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Elgee says : —

I fear it is quite impossible to get any information from Miss D. She married soon after we reached India, and I never met her since, nor do I know where she is, if alive. I quite understand the value of her corroboration ; and at the time she told the whole circumstance to a fellow-traveller, who repeated it to me, and her story and mine agreed in every particular, save that to her the visitant was a complete stranger ; and her tale was quite unbiassed by mine, as I always treated hers as a fancy, and never acknowledged I had been aware of anything unusual having taken place in our room at Cairo. I never have seen, or fancied I saw, any one before or since.

My visitant, also, is dead, or he would, I know, have added his testimony, small as it was, to mine. He was a very calm, quiet, clever, scientific man, not given to vain fancies on any subject, and certainly was not aware of any desire of appearing to me.

The publication of Phantasms of the Living led fortunately to our obtaining the testimony of the second percipient, now Mrs. Ramsay, of Clevelands, Bassett, Southampton, whose account follows : —

July i8gi.

I have been asked by a leading member of the Psychical Society to write down what I can remember of a strange experience that occurred no less than twenty-seven years ago. I now do so as simply as I can, and to the best of my recollection.

In October 1864 I was travelling to India, going to rejoin my parents, from whom I had been separated twelve years, a kind friend — a Mrs. E. — having undertaken to chaperon me as far as Calcutta. She was going out to join her husband, Major E., of the 23rd Royal Welsh Fusiliers. We started by a P. & O. steamer — the Ceylon — from Southampton, and travelled by the overland route, via Alexandria, and Cairo, to Suez.

We landed at Alexandria, and went by rail across the desert to Cairo. There all passengers had to sleep the night before proceeding on to Suez. Shepherd's Hotel was the best hotel then, and there was consequently a great rush to try and get rooms in it; but Mrs. E. and I, finding we could get no corner, decided, with two or three other passengers, to get accommodation in the Hotel de I'Europe. We felt somewhat nervous at the swarthy visages of the Arabs all round us, and for this reason selected our quarters on the veryhighest storey, thinking we should be more out of reach of robbers and thieves than if we were on the ground floor. This is an important point to remember, as no one could have effected an entrance into our room from outside. It was a bright moonlight night when we went to bed, and I can recollect as if it were yesterday this fact, that the shadow of a " pepul " tree was reflected on the wall opposite our beds — the leaves of the tree were trembling and shaking, as the leaves of a " pepul " always do, making the shadows dance about the wall.

Before we finally retired to rest we made the grandest arrangements for personal security ! The window looking out on to the street below was much VOL. I. T

too high up to be at all unsafe. So we left that open (I think), but we closed our door very firmly indeed ! It was a large folding door, and opened inwards. We locked it carefully, leaving the key in the lock; pushed an arm-chair against the middle of the door ; and, to crown all, we balanced a hand-bag on one of the arms, with a bunch of keys in the lock thereof ! so that if any intruder should venture to open that door, we should know of it at any rate ! ! (But no one did venture, and we found everything in the morning exactly as we had left it.) I remember that Mrs. E. was very careful about tucking her mosquito curtains all round, but I disliked the feeling of suffocation they gave, and put mine up ; not realising, of course, in my inexperience, what the consequences would be for myself; for these small plagues of Egypt (!) soon descended upon me, nearly eating me up, and absolutely prevented sleep. This is another important fact to remember, for had I slept I might have dreamed, but, as it happened, I was wide awake. I was looking at the shadows of the tree shaking on the wall when gradually they seemed to merge into a form, which form took the shape of a man, not of an Arab, but of an English gentleman. Then this form glided into the room, advancing towards my chaperon, stretching out his hands as if in blessing, turned round, looked at me, sadly and sorrowfully (so I thought), and then vanished again into the shadows as it came. I do not remember feeling terrified, only awed — the face was so kind and human, only the moonlight made it look very white. I did not wake Mrs. E., as she appeared to me to be asleep. I felt sure I had seen a vision, and something that had to do with her.

The next morning, while we were dressing, she remarked how odd I looked, and quite apart from the mosquito bites, I know I did. We had a good laugh over my comical appearance, for I had not scrupled to scratch the bites, until my forehead and face resembled a plum bun ! I beheve I then told her it was not strange that I should look odd, for I "had seen a ghost." She started violently, and asked me to tell her what I saw. I described it as best I could, and she said she had seen "zV" too^ and that she knew it to be the form and face of a valued friend. She was much disturbed about it — as indeed, so was I, for I had never indulged in "hallucinations" and was not given to seeing visions.

We proceeded next day to join our ship at Suez, and when on board, it was a great relief to us to be able to tell it to a kind fellow-passenger. He was an absolute sceptic in all matters relating to the invisible world, but he was obliged to admit that it was the most extraordinary thing he had ever heard. ... I should like to add, that I have never, before or since, had any kind of vision.

Our experience at Cairo had this sequel, that Mrs. E.'s spirit-friend happened to be, at that very time, in great perplexity of mind — most anxious about some very important event in his life. He was sitting in his room one night in the month of October 1864, and a most intense yearning came over him for her advice and assistance — so great was it, that he felt as if an invisible power had drawn him into some spirit-state, in which he could and did see her.^

1 I noted on this narrative at the time I received it : " This account is entirely concordant with the account written by Mrs. Ramsay before reading Mrs. Elgee's account in 1888, and abstracted by me for an article in Murray's Magazine. There was this discrepancy between Mrs. Elgee and Mrs. Ramsay, — that Mrs. Ramsay thought that the figure wore a beard, whereas Mrs. Elgee saw him as she knew him — with whiskers only. He certainly had no beard at the time."

668] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 291

For a somewhat similar case, that of the apparition of General Fremont (too lengthy to quote here), I may refer the reader to the. Journal S. P. R., vol. V. p. 54. The crisis there is the removal of long and wearing anxiety ; the self-projection into the home-scene which now at last the General felt assured of being able to reach alive.

Cases of this general character, both visual and auditory, occupy a great part of Phantasfns of the Living, and others have been frequently quoted in the S. P. R. Journal during recent years. I cannot in this work attempt any complete collection, but I give examples of various types in Appendices to this section.

666. Of still greater interest is the class which comes next in order in my ascending scale of apparent intensity ; the cases, namely, where there is recollection on both sides, so that the experience is reciprocal. Of these I give in Appendices several examples. (See also some cases in the Appendices to 428.) They deserve study, for it is by noting under what circumstances these spontaneously reciprocal cases occur that we have the best chance of learning how to produce them experimentally. It will be seen that there have been various degrees of tension of thought on the agent's part.

667. And here comes in a small but important group — the group of what I may call death-compacts prematurely fulfilled. We shall see in the next chapter that the exchange of a solemn promise between two friends to appear to one another, if possible, after death is far from being a useless piece of sentiment. Such posthumous appearances, it is true, may be in most cases impossible, but nevertheless there is real ground to believe that the previous tension of the will in that direction makes it more likely that the longed-for meeting shall be accomplished. If so, this is a kind of experiment, and an experiment which all can make.

Now we have two or three cases where this compact has been made, and where an apparition has followed — but before and not after the agent's death — at the moment, that is to say, of some dangerous accident, when the sufferer was perhaps all but drowned, or was stunned, or otherwise insensible. One of these cases I quote in 667 A, and I add for comparison in 667 B an auditory case of a similar kind, in which, however, there had been no previous compact. In this latter case it is noticeable that the agent (Commander Aylesbury), who was in imminent danger of drowning, did not lose consciousness ; and we therefore can feel certain that the phantasmal voice did not involve any distinctive supraliminal sensation on his part. This shows how decisive an action may be going on below the surface, while nothing is known of it above.

668. Lastly, the lessons of these spontaneous apparitions have been confirmed and widened by actual experiment. It is plain that just as we are not confined to noting small spontaneous telepathic transferences when they occur, but can also endeavour to reproduce them by experiment, so also we can endeavour to reproduce experimentally these

more advanced telepathic phenomena of the invasion of the presence of the percipient by the agent. It is to be hoped, indeed, that such experiment may become one of the most important features of our inquiry. The type of the experiment is somewhat as follows. The intending agent endeavours by an effort at self-concentration, made either in waking hours or just before sleep, to render himself perceptible to a given person at a distance, who, of course, must have no reason to expect a phantasmal visit at that hour. Independent records must be made on each side, of all attempts made, and of all phantoms seen. The evidential point is, of course, the coincidence between the attempt and the phantojti, whether or not the agent can afterwards remember his own success. (See Appendices.)

Now the expertfnental element here is obviously very incomplete. It consists in little more than in a concentrated desire to produce an effect which one can never explain, and seldom fully remember. I have seen no evidence to show that any one can claim to be an adept in such matters — has learned a method of thus appearing at will.^ We are acting in the dark. Yet nevertheless the mere fact that on some few occasions this strong desire has actually been followed by a result of this extremely interesting kind is one of the most encouraging phenomena in our whole research. The successes indeed have borne a higher proportion to the failures than I should have ventured to hope. But nowhere is there more need of persistent and careful experimentation ; — nowhere, I may add, have emotions quite alien from Science — mere groundless fears of seeing anything unusual — interfered with more disastrous effect. Such fears, one hopes, will pass away, and the friend's visible image will be recognised as a welcome proof of the link that binds the two spirits together.

The case which I shall next quote illustrates both the essential harmlessness — nay, naturalness — of such an experiment, and the causeless fear which it may engender even in rational and serious minds.

The long friendship of Mr. S. H. B. with the Verity family was probably one of the factors which enabled him to appear to them ; yet — willing though they were to help in the investigations — the experiment was found too trying to the percipients for frequent repetition.

Yion\ Fhantasfus of the Living, vol. i. pp. 104-109. The following case was especially remarkable in that there were two percipients. The narrative was copied by Gurney from a MS. book of Mr. S. H. B.'s, to which he transferred it from an almanac diary, since lost.

On a certain Sunday evening in November 1881, having been reading of the great power which the human will is capable of exercising, I determined with the whole force of my being, that I would be present in spirit in the front bed-

1 Some such power as this is frequently claimed in oriental books as attainable by mystic practices. We have not thus far been fortunate enough to discover any performances corresponding to these promises.

668] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 293

room on the second floor of a house situated at 22 Hogarth Road, Kensington, in which room slept two ladies of my acquaintance, viz., Miss L. S. V. and Miss E. C. v., aged respectively 25 and 11 years. I was living at this time at 23 Kildare Gardens, a distance of about three miles from Hogarth Road, and I had not mentioned in any way my intention of trying this experiment to either of the above ladies, for the simple reason that it was only on retiring to rest upon this Sunday night that I made up my mind to do so. The time at which I determined I would be there was i o'clock in the morning, and I also had a strong intention of making my presence perceptible.

On the following Thursday I went to see the ladies in question, and in the course of conversation (without any allusion to the subject on my part) the elder one told me, that on the previous Sunday night she had been much terrified by perceiving me standing by her bedside, and that she screamed when the apparition advanced towards her, and awoke her little sister, who saw me also.

I asked her if she was awake at the time, and she replied most decidedly in the affirmative, and upon my inquiring the time of the occurrence, she replied, about I o'clock in the morning.

This lady, at my request, wrote down a statement of the event and signed it.

This was the first occasion upon which I tried an experiment of this kind, and its complete success startled me very much.

Besides exercising my power df volition very strongly, I put forth an effort which I cannot find words to describe. I was conscious of a mysterious influence of some sort permeating in my body, and had a distinct impression that I was exercising some force with which I had been hitherto unacquainted, but which I can now at certain times set in motion at will. S. H. B.

Of the original entry in the almanac diary, Mr. B. says : " I recollect having made it within a week or so of the occurrence of the experiment, and whilst it was perfectly fresh in my memory."

Miss Verity's account is as follows : —

January \%th, 1883.

On a certain Sunday evening, about twelve months since, at our house in Hogarth Road, Kensington, I distinctly saw Mr. B. in my room, about i o'clock. I was perfectly awake and was much terrified. I awoke my sister by screaming, and she saw the apparition herself. Three days after, when I saw Mr. B., I told him what had happened ; but it was some time before I could recover from the shock I had received, and the remembrance is too vivid to be ever erased from my memory. L. S. Verity.

In answer to inquiries, Miss Verity adds : " I had never had any hallucination of the senses of any sort whatever."

Miss E. C. Verity says : —

I remember the occurrence of the event described by my sister in the annexed paragraph, and her description is quite correct I saw the apparition which she saw, at the same time and under the same circumstances.

E. C. Verity.

Miss A. S. Verity says : —

I remember quite clearly the evening my eldest sister awoke me by calling to me from an adjoining room ; and upon my going to her bedside, where she slept with my youngest sister, they both told me they had seen S. H. B. standing in the room. The time was about i o'clock. S. H. B. was in evening dress, they told me. A. S. Verity.

Mr. B, does not remember how he was dressed on the night of the occurrence.

Miss E. C. Verity was asleep when her sister caught sight of the figure, and was awoke by her sister's exclaiming, " There is S." The name had therefore met her ear before she herself saw the figure ; and the hallucination on her part might thus be attributed to suggestion. But it is against this view that she has never had any other hallucination, and cannot therefore be considered as predisposed to such experiences. The sisters are both equally certain that the figure was in evening dress, and that it stood in one particular spot in the room. The gas was burning low, and the phantasmal figure was seen with far more clearness than a real figure would have been.

"The witnesses" (says Gurney) "have been very carefully cross-examined by the present writer. There is not the slightest doubt that their mention of the occurrence to S. H. B. was spontaneous. They had not at first intended to mention it ; but when they saw him their sense of its oddness overcame their resolution. Miss Verity is a perfectly soberminded and sensible witness, with no love of marvels, and with a considerable dread and dislike of this particular form of marvel."

[I omit here for want of space the next case, in which Mr. S. H. B. attempted to appear in Miss Verity's house at two different hours on the same evening, and was seen there, at both the times fixed, by a married sister who was visiting in the house.]

Gurney requested Mr. B. to send him a note on the night that he intended to make his next experiment of the kind, and received the following note by the first post on Monday, March 24th, 1884.

March 22}id, 1S84. Dear Mr. Gurney, — I am going to tiy the experiment to-night of making my presence perceptible at 44 Norland Square, at 12 p.m. I will let you know the result in a few days. — Yours very sincerely, S. H. B.

The next letter was received in the course of the following week : —

April, 2rd, 1S84.

Dear Mr. Gurney, — I have a strange statement to show you, respecting my experiment, which was tried at your suggestion, and under the test conditions which you imposed.

Having quite forgotten which night it was on which I attempted the projection, I cannot say whether the result is a brilliant success, or only a slight

668] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 295

one, until I see the letter which I posted you on the evening of the experiment.

Having sent you that letter, I did not deem it necessary to make a note in my diary, and consequently have let the exact date slip my memory.

If the dates correspond, the success is complete in every detail, and I have an account signed and witnessed to show you.

I saw the lady (who was the subject) for the first time last night, since the experiment, and she made a voluntary statement to me, which I wrote down at her dictation, and to which she has attached her signature. The date and time of the apparition are specified in this statement, and it will be for you to decide whether they are identical with those given in my letter to you. I have completely forgotten, but yet I fancy that they are the same. S. H. B.

This is the statement : —

44 Norland Square, W.

On Saturday night, March 22nd, 1884, at about midnight, I had a distinct impression that Mr. S. H. B. was present in my room, and I distinctly saw him whilst I was quite widely awake. He came towards me, and stroked my hair, I voluntarily gave him this information, when he called to see me on Wednesday, April 2nd, telling him the time and the circumstances of the apparition, without any suggestion on his part. The appearance in my room was most vivid, and quite unmistakable. L. S. Verity.

Miss A. S. Verity corroborates as follows : —

I remember my sister telling me that she had seen S. H. B., and that he had touched her hair, before he came to see us on April 2nd. A. S. V.

Mr. B.'s own account is as follows : —

On Saturday, March 22nd, I determined to make my presence perceptible to Miss v., at 44 Norland Square, Notting Hill, at 12 midnight, and as I had previously arranged with Mr. Gurney that I should post him a letter on the evening on which I tried my next experiment (stating the time and other particulars), I sent a note to acquaint him with the above facts.

About ten days afterwards I called upon Miss V., and she voluntarily told me, that on March 22nd, at 12 o'clock midnight, she had seen me so vividly in her room (whilst widely awake) that her nerves had been much shaken, and she had been obliged to send for a doctor in the morning. S. H. B.

Unfortunately Mr. B.'s intention to produce the impression of touching the percipient's hair is not included in his written account. On August 21st, 1885, he wrote to Gurney, " I remember that I had this intention; " and Gurney remembered that, very soon after the occurrence, he mentioned this as one of the points which made the success " complete in every detail ; " and that he recommended him in any future trial to endeavour instead to produce the impression of some spoken phrase.

On this case, Gurney observes : — •

It will be observed that in all these instances the conditions were the same — the agent concentrating his thoughts on the object in view before going to sleep. Mr. B. has never succeeded in producing a similar effect when he has

been awake. And this restriction as to time has made it difficult to devise a plan by which the phenomenon could be tested by independent observers, one of whom might arrange to be in the company of the agent at a given time, and the other in that of the percipient. Nor is it easy to press for repetitions of the experiment, which is not an agreeable one to the percipient, and is followed by a considerable amount of nervous prostration. Moreover, if trials were frequently made with the same percipient, the value of success would diminish ; for any latent expectation on the percipient's part might be argued to be itself productive of the delusion, and the coincidence with the agent's resolve might be explained as accidental. We have, of course, requested Mr. B. to try to produce the effect on ourselves ; but though he has more than once made the attempt, it has not succeeded.

669. In these experimental apparitions, which form, as it were, the spolia ophna of the collector, we naturally wish to know all that we can about each detail in the experience. Two important points are the aj?iount of effort xa.d.^t by the experimenter, and the degree of his consciousness of success. The amount of effort in Mr. S. H. B.'s case (for instance) and in Mr. Godfrey's (668 A) seems to have been great ; and this is encouraging, since what we want is to be assured that the tension of will has really some power. It seems to act in much the same way as a therapeutic suggestion from the conscious self; one can never make sure that any given selfsuggestion will " take " ; but, on the whole, the stronger the self-suggestions, the better the result. It is therefore quite in accordance with analogy that a suggestion from without, given to a hypnotised person, should be the most promising way of inducing these self-projections. It should be strongly impressed on hypnotised subjects that they can and must temporarily " leave the body," as they call it, and manifest themselves to distant persons — the consent, of course, of both parties to the experiment having been previously secured.

Of this type were Dr. Backman's experiments with his subject " Alma," already mentioned (in 573 C) ; and although that series of efforts was prematurely broken off, it was full of promise. There were some slight indications that Alma's clairvoyant excursions were sometimes perceptible to persons in the scenes psychically invaded ; and there was considerable and growing evidence to her own retention in subsequent memory of some details of those distant scenes.

By all analogy, indeed, that subsequent memory should be an eminently educable thing. The carrying over of recollections from one stratum of personality into another — as hypnotic experiment shows us — is largely a matter of patient suggestion. It would be very desirable to hypnotise the person who had succeeded in producing an experimental apparition, of Mr. S. H. B.'s type, and to see if he could then recall the psychical excursion. Hypnotic states should be far more carefully utilised in connection with all these forms of self-projection.

670. In these self-projections we have before us, I do not say the most useful, but the most extraordinary achievement of the human will. What

SENSORY AUTOMATISM

