December igth. — A letter of inquiry sent to Mr. Robert B. " R.," and an envelope, with official stamp of our Society on the cover, has been returned to me, unopened, by Mr. Robert B. " R.," so that further corroboration is lacking, at least for the present. — R. H.

It will be observed that Miss Mary Q.'s letter is virtually a confirmation of Miss Q.'s account ; and that Mr. Q.'s action is in harmony with his sister's belief that he cannot deny, but does not wish to confirm, the truth of this singular narrative.

Now here the two minds aware of the mother's death were the mother's own mind and the telegraphist's. The telegraphist was certainly aware that, when the song came to an end, he should have to communicate to the singer a painful shock. But, on the other hand, the telegraphist did not know the senders of the telegram ; had no means of picturing them or their surroundings. I think, therefore, that it will be more in accordance with analogy to suppose that the mother's mind was aware of the impending communication, and transmitted, perhaps scarce consciously, to her daughters the sensation of the trivial and tiresome cause of delay. I give in 736 A an incident equally grotesque, where also the indication is of impatience on the part of the deceased person, who perceives the news of his death kept back by vexatious accidents. And I add thereto Mr. Cameron Grant's case (736 B), where the date of arrival of the news of Lord Z.'s death was specially difficult to calculate by ordinary means — Mr. Grant being in a wild part of Brazil. Mr. Grant's impulse to draw what turned out to be Lord Z.'s death-scene might place this case among motor automatisms. There is naturally no clear line between seeing a scene in one's mind's eye and feeling an impulse to draw it on paper. Finally, I quote in 736 C a case where a phantasmal appearance became visible while the percipient actually held in her hand an unopened letter, announcing, not the decedent's death, but her dangerous illness. And on the strength of all these cases, and of some less striking, I repeat my suggestion that in our ignorance as to the degree of knowledge of earthly affairs possessed by the departed, and of the causes which permit or stimulate their apparition, this possibility of their following the diffusion of news of their own death may be well worth our continued attention.

737. Having thus discussed a number of cases where the apparition shows varying degrees of knowledge or memory, I pass on to the somewhat commoner type, where the apparition lacks the power or the impulse to communicate any message much more definite than that all-important one — of his own continued life and love. These cases, nevertheless, might be subdivided on many lines. Each apparition, even though it be momentary, is a phenomenon complex in more ways than our minds can follow. We must look for some broad line of demarcation, which may apply to a great many different incidents, while continuing to some extent the series which we have already been descending — from knowledge and purpose on the deceased person's part down to vagueness and apparent automatism.

Such a division — gradual, indeed, but for that very reason the more instructive — exists between personal and local apparitions ; between mani-

739] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 61

festations plainly intended to impress the minds of certain definite survivors and manifestations in accustomed haunts, some of which, indeed, may be destined to impress survivors, but which degenerate and disintegrate into sights and sounds too meaningless to prove either purpose or intelligence.

738. Let us look, then, for these characteristics, not expecting, of course, that our series will be logically simple; for it must often happen that the personal and local impulses will be indistinguishable, as when the desired percipient is inhabiting the familiar home. But we may begin with some cases where the apparition has shown itself in some scene altogether strange to the deceased person.

We have had, of course, a good many cases of this type already. Such was the case of the apparition with the red scratch (717) ; such was the apparition in the Countess Kapnist's carriage (727), and the apparition to Mrs. B. at Fiesole (728 B). Such cases, indeed, occur most frequently — and this fact is itself significant — among the higher and more developed forms of manifestation. Among the briefer, less -developed apparitions with which we have now to deal, these invasions by the phantasm of quite unknown territory are relatively few. I will begin by referring to a curious case, where the impression given is that of a spiritual presence which seeks and finds the percipient, but is itself too confused for coherent communication (Mrs. Lightfoot's case, 429 B). It will be seen that this narrative is thoroughly in accordance with previous indications of a state of posthumous bewilderment supervening before the spirit has adjusted its perceptions to the new environment.

739. In cases like Mrs. Lightfoot's, where the percipient's surroundings are unknown to the deceased person, and especially in cases where the intimation of a death reaches the percipient when at sea (as in 739 A), there is plainly nothing except the percipient's own personality to guide the spirit in his search. We have several narratives of this type. In one of these — Archdeacon Farler's, already referred to in 710 — the apparition appears twice, the second appearance at least being subsequent to the death. It is plain that if in such a case the second apparition conveys no fresh intelligence, we cannot prove that it is more than a subjective recrudescence of the first. Yet analogy is in favour of its veridical character, since we have cases (like Miss Hall's, cited in 713 A) where successive manifestations do bring fresh knowledge, and seem to show a continued effort to communicate. In this connection I may refer to an experience of a witness who has had many experiences, Mr. Keulemans (see, 662 A, &c.), where his little son appeared to him both about the time of death and again after death (739 0). In that case the child, it would appear, sought his father first in familiar, then in unfamiliar surroundings.

Then, again, there are auditory cases where the phantasmal peech has occurred in places not known to the deceased person. One such case is that of Mr. V/ambey (see 735 A). In 739 B I give a case in which an

apparition was seen several weeks after death, the death being unknown to the percipient.

740. One specially impressive characteristic of apparitions (as has been already remarked) is their occasional collectivity — the fact that more percipients than one sometimes see or hear the phantasmal figure or voice simultaneously. When one is considering the gradual decline in definiteness and apparent purpose from one group of apparitions to another, it is natural to ask whether this characteristic — in my view so important — is found to accompany especially the higher, more intelligent manifestations.

I cannot find that this is so. On the contrary, it is, I think, in cases of mere haunting that we oftenest find that the figure is seen by several persons at once, or else (a cognate phenomenon) by several persons successively. I know not how to explain this apparent tendency. Could we admit the underlying assumptions, it would suit the view that the " haunting " spirits are " earthbound," and thus somehow nearer to matter than spirits more exalted. Yet instances of collectivity are scattered through all classes of apparitions ; and the irregular appearance of a characteristic which seems to us so fundamental affords another lesson how great may be the variety of inward mechanism ih cases which to us might seem constructed on much the same type.1

741. I pass on to a group of cases which are both personal and local; although the personal element in most of them — the desire to manifest to the friend — may seem more important than the local element — the impulse to revisit some accustomed haunt.

In the first case which I shall cite the deceased person's image is seen simultaneously by several members of his own household, in his own house. Note the analogy to a collective crystal vision.

The account is taken from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 213. It is given by Mr. Charles A. W. Lett, of the Military and Royal Naval Club, Albemarle Street, W.

December yd, 1885.

On the 5th April 1873 my wife's father, Captain .Towns, died at his residence, Cranbrook, Rose Bay, near Sydney, N. S. Wales. About six weeks after his death my wife had occasion, one evening about nine o'clock, to go to one of the bedrooms in the house. She was accompanied by a young lady, Miss Berthon, and as they entered the room — the gas was burning all the time — they were amazed to see, reflected as it were on the polished surface of the wardrobe, the image of Captain Towns. It was barely half figure, the head, shoulders, and part of the arms only showing — in fact, it was like an ordinary medallion portrait, but life-size. The face appeared wan and pale, as it did before his death, and he wore a kind of grey flannel jacket, in which he had been accustomed to sleep. Surprised and half alarmed at what they saw, their first idea was that a portrait had been hung in the room, and that what they saw was its reflection ; but there was no picture of the kind.

1 Certain appearances, collectively seen, in the actual death-chamber, are discussed in 740 A.

742] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 63

Whilst they were looking and wondering, my wife's sister, Miss Towns, came into the room, and before either of the others had time to speak she exclaimed, " Good gracious ! Do you see papa ? " One of the housemaids happened to be passing downstairs at the moment, and she was called in, and asked if she saw anything, and her reply was, " Oh, miss ! the master." Graham — Captain Towns' old body servant — was then sent for, and he also immediately exclaimed, " Oh, Lord save us ! Mrs. Lett, it's the Captain ! " The butler was called, and then Mrs. Crane, my wife's nurse, and they both said what they saw. Finally, Mrs. Towns was sent for, and, seeing the apparition, she advanced towards it with her arm extended as if to touch it, and as she passed her hand over the panel of the wardrobe the figure gradually faded away, and never again appeared, though the room was regularly occupied for a long time after.

These are the simple facts of the case, and they admit of no doubt ; no kind of intimation was given to any of the witnesses ; the same question was put to each one as they came into the room, and the reply was given without hesitation by each. It was by the merest accident that I did not see the apparition. I was in the house at the time, but did not hear when I was called. C. A. W. LETT.

We, the undersigned, having read the above statement, certify that it is strictly accurate, as we both were witnesses of the apparition.

SARA LETT.

SIBBIE SMYTH (ne'e TOWNS). Gurney writes : —

Mrs. Lett assures me that neither she nor her sister ever experienced a hallucination of the senses on any other occasion. She is positive that the recognition of the appearance on the part of each of the later witnesses was independent, and not due to any suggestion from the persons already in the room.

I add in 741 A another collective case noticeable from the fact that the departed spirit appears to influence two persons at a distance from each other in a concordant way, so that one of them becomes conscious of the appearance to the other. Compare with this the incident given at the end of 751 A, when Miss Campbell has a vision of her friend seeing an apparition at a time when this is actually occurring.

742. In the case which I shall next quote, the evidence, though coming from a young boy, is clear and good, and the incident itself is thoroughly characteristic. The decedent was satisfying both a local and a personal attraction.

We owe this case (which I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 173) to the kindness of Lady Gore Booth, from whom I first heard the account by word of mouth. Her son (then a schoolboy aged 10) was the percipient, and her youngest daughter, then aged 15, also gives a firsthand account of the incident as follows : —

LlSSADELL, SLIGO, February 1891.

On the loth of April 1889, at about half-past nine o'clock A.M., my youngest brother and I were going down a short flight of stairs leading to the kitchen, to

fetch food for my chickens, as usual. We were about half-way down, my brother a few steps in advance of me, when he suddenly said — "Why, there's John Blaney, I didn't know he was in the house ! " John Blaney was a boy who lived not far from us, and he had been employed in the house as hall-boy not long before. I said that I was sure it was not he (for I knew he had left some months previously on account of ill-health), and looked down into the passage, but saw no one. The passage was a long one, with a rather sharp turn in it, so we ran quickly down the last few steps, and looked round the corner, but nobody was there, and the only door he could have gone through was shut. As we went upstairs my brother said, " How pale and ill John looked, and why did he stare so ? " I asked what he was doing. My brother answered that he had his sleeves turned up, and was wearing a large green apron, such as the footmen always wear at their work. An hour or two afterwards I asked my maid how long John Blaney had been back in the house ? She seemed much surprised, and said, " Didn't you hear, miss, that he died this morning ? " On inquiry we found he had died about two hours before my brother saw him. My mother did not wish that my brother should be told this, but he heard of it somehow, and at once declared that he must have seen his ghost. MABEL OLIVE GORE BOOTH.

The actual percipient's independent account is as follows : —

March 1891.

We were going downstairs to get food for Mabel's fowl, when I saw John Blaney walking round the corner. I said to Mabel, " That's John Blaney ! " but she could not see him. When we came up afterwards we found he was dead. He seemed to me to look rather ill. He looked yellow ; his eyes looked hollow, and he had a green apron on. MORDAUNT GORE BOOTH.

We have received the following confirmation of the date of death : —

THE PRESBYTERY, BALLINGAL, SLIGO,

loth February 1891.

I certify from the parish register of deaths that John Blaney (Dunfore) was interred on the I2th day of April 1889, having died on the loth day of April 1889. P. J. SHEMAGHS, C. C.

Lady Gore Booth writes : —

May 3U/, 1890.

When my little boy came upstairs and told us he had seen John Blaney, we thought nothing of it till some hours after, when we heard that he was dead. Then for fear of frightening the children, I avoided any allusion to what he had told us, and asked every one else to do the same. Probably by now he has forgotten all about it, but it certainly was very remarkable, especially as only one child saw him, and they were standing together. The place where he seems to have appeared was in the passage outside the pantry door, where John Blaney's work always took him. My boy is a very matter-of-fact sort of boy, and I never heard of his having any other hallucination.

G. GORE BOOTH.

Now this apparition — unless we explain it as a telepathic impression projected at the moment of death and remaining latent for some hours before it attained externalisation — may possibly be taken as showing something of continued memory in the departed boy. Something of him

744] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 65

or from him, it may be said, reverted to well-known haunts, and was discerned in habitual surroundings. But even of this there is no sure indication. If it be suggested that the dead boy waited to manifest until his young master reached a suitable spot, it may be replied that the living boy's presence in that spot merely enabled him to discern some influence which might have been discernible in that spot possibly at any moment during some hours, if the fitting percipient had been at hand. Or else, and perhaps more simply, we may suppose that there was a mere influence transmitted from the departed mind to the living mind, which influence the living mind discerned when in surroundings in which its own recollection of the decedent might most readily be evoked.

I add in 742 A a somewhat similar case. The figure of the grandmother looking at the clock resembles the figure of the pantry-boy seen in the offices, but was seen by both persons in a position to see it, instead of by one only. See also an account given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 93, by the Rev. G. Lewis of his seeing an apparition of a young man who — unknown to him — had died three days before. The young man had much wished to see Mr. Lewis before he died, but Mr. Lewis, not having heard of his illness, had not been to visit him. This narrative, if interpreted in the way which the percipient suggests, might have been placed among cases where the figure communicates a message ; the reproachful expression implying a recollected sense of injury. It is, at any rate, an example of the class now under discussion.

743. The case given in 743 A — which comes from excellent informants— is one of those which correspond most nearly to what one would desire in a posthumous message. I may refer also to General Campbell's case (in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 476) in which a long-continued series of unaccountable noises and an apparition twice seen by a child in the house suggested to the narrator the agency of his dead wife. The case, which depends for its evidential force on a great mass of detail, is too long for me to quote; but it is worth study, as is any case where there seems evidence of persistent effort to manifest, meeting with one knows not what difficulty. It may be that in such a story there is nothing but strange coincidence, or it may be that from records of partially successful effort, renewed often and in ambiguous ways, we shall hereafter learn something of the nature of that curtain of obstruction which now seems so arbitrary in its sudden lifting, its sudden fall.

744. I will conclude this group with three cases closely similar, all well attested, and all of them capable of explanation either on local or personal grounds. In the first (see 744 A) an apparition is seen by two persons in a house in Edinburgh, a few hours before the death of a lady who had lived there, and whose body was to be brought back to it. In the second (see 744 B) the dead librarian haunts his library, but in the library are members of his old staff. In the third, the dead wife loiters round her husband's tomb, but near it passes a gardener who had been

VOL. II. E

in her employ. This last — the case of Mrs. de Fre'ville and the gardener Bard — I must insert in the text. As often happens when (as I do here) one knows the percipient and his milieu, even the very plot of ground on which he dodged about to watch the phantom, one feels a reality in the incident which the most satisfactory depositions from a distance will not always bring. The case is quoted from Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 212. Gurney there remarks of it : —

The next case again exhibits the slight deferment of the percipient's experience which I have already mentioned. But its chief interest is as illustrating what may be called a local, as distinct from a personal, rapport between the parties concerned. The percipient, at the moment of his impression, was contemplating a spot with which the agent was specially connected, and which may even have had a very distinct place in her dying thoughts; and it is natural to find in this fact a main condition why he, of all people, should have been the one impressed.

The first account of it was sent to us by the Rev. C. T. Forster, Vicar of Hinxton, Saffron Walden, as follows : —

August 6th, 1885.

My late parishioner, Mrs. de Fre'ville, was a somewhat eccentric lady, who was specially morbid on the subject of tombs, &c.

About two days after her death, which took place in London, May 8th, in the afternoon, I heard that she had been seen that very night by Alfred Bard. I sent for him, and he gave me a very clear and circumstantial account of what he had seen.

He is a man of great observation, being a self-taught naturalist, and I am quite satisfied that he desires to speak the truth without any exaggeration.

I must add that I am absolutely certain that the news of Mrs. de FreVille's death did not reach Hinxton till the next morning, May Qth. She was found dead at 7.30 P.M. She had been left alone in her room, being poorly, but not considered seriously or dangerously ill. C. T. FORSTER.

The following is the percipient's own account : —

July 2ist, 1885.

I am a gardener in employment at Sawston. I always go through Hinxton churchyard on my return home from work. On Friday, May 8th, 1885, I was walking back as usual. On entering the churchyard, I looked rather carefully at the ground, in order to see a cow and donkey which used to lie just inside the gate. In so doing, I looked straight at the square stone vault in which the late Mr. de Fre'ville was at one time buried. I then saw Mrs. de Fre'ville leaning on the rails, dressed much as I had usually seen her, in a coal-scuttle bonnet, black jacket with deep crape, and black dress. She was looking full at me. Her face was very white, much whiter than usual. I knew her well, having at one time been in her employ. I at once supposed that she had come, as she sometimes did, to the mausoleum in her own park, in order to have it opened and go in. I supposed that Mr. Wiles, the mason from Cambridge, was in the tomb doing something. I walked round the "tomb, looking carefully at it, in order to see if the gate was open, keeping my eye on her, and never more than five or six yards from her. Her face turned and followed me. I passed between the church and the tomb (there are about four yards between

745] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 67

the two), and peered forward to see whether the tomb was open, as she hid the part of the tomb which opened. I slightly stumbled on a hassock of grass, and looked at my feet for a moment only. When I looked up she was gone. She could not possibly have got out of the churchyard, as in order to reach any of the exits she must have passed me.1 So I took for granted that she had quickly gone into the tomb. I went up to the door, which I expected to find open, but to my surprise it was shut and had not been opened, as there was no key in the lock. I rather hoped to have a look into the tomb myself, so I went back again and shook the gate to make sure, but there was no sign of any one's having been there. I was then much startled and looked at the clock, which marked 9.20. When I got home I half thought it must have been my fancy, but I told my wife that I had seen Mrs. de FreVille.

Next day, when my little boy told me that she was dead, I gave a start, which my companion noticed, I was so much taken aback.

I have never had any other hallucination whatever.

ALFRED BARD.

Mrs. Bard's testimony is as follows : —

July &t&, 1885.

When Mr. Bard came home, he said, " I have seen Mrs. de Fre'ville tonight, leaning with her elbow on the palisade, looking at me. I turned again to look at her and she was gone. She had cloak and bonnet on." He got home as usual between nine and ten. It was on the 8th of May 1885.

SARAH BARD.

The Times obituary confirms the date of the death.

From information more recently received (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 415) we learn that the lady was found dead at 2 P.M. — not 7.30 P.M. as stated above — so that the apparition was seen about seven and a half hours after the death. This, as Gurney remarked, makes it still more difficult to regard the case as a telepathic impression transmitted at the moment of death, and remaining latent in the mind of the percipient. The incident suggests rather that Bard had come upon Mrs. de Fre"ville's spirit, so to say, unawares. One cannot imagine that she specially wished him to see her, and to see her engaged in what seems so needless and undignified a retracing of currents of earthly thought. Rather this seems a rudimentary haunting — an incipient lapse into those aimless, perhaps unconscious, reappearances in familiar spots which may persist (as it would seem) for many years after death.

A somewhat similar case is that of Colonel Crealock (in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 432) where a soldier who had been dead some hours was seen by his superior officer in camp at night rolling up and taking away his bed.

745. It is, indeed, mainly by dwelling on these intermediate cases,

1 I was conducted over Hinxton churchyard by Mr. Forster, and can attest the substantial accuracy of Mr. Bard's description of the relative position of the church, the tomb, and the exits. The words " must have passed me," however, give a slightly erroneous impression ; " must have come very near me," would be the more correct description.— F. W. H. M.

between a message-bringing apparition and a purposeless haunt, that we have most hope of understanding the typical haunt which, while it has been in a sense the most popular of all our phenomena, is yet to the careful inquirer one of the least satisfactory. One main evidential difficulty generally lies in identifying the haunting figure, in finding anything to connect the history of the house with the vague and often various sights and sounds which perplex or terrify its flesh and blood inhabitants. We must, at any rate, rid ourselves of the notion that some great crime or catastrophe is always to be sought as the groundwork of a haunt of this kind. To that negative conclusion the cases now to be described, and the cases which have just been described, do concordantly point us. Mrs. de Fre"ville was concerned in no tragedy ; she was merely an elderly lady with a fancy for sepulchres. And as to the cases to which I now proceed— although in Sir Arthur Becher's case, for example (see 745 A), there was at least a rumour of some crime,1 and in Mrs. M.'s case (745 B) of past troubles, in which the percipients, of course, were in no way concerned — yet in Mr. Husbands' and Mrs. Clerke's cases (745 C and D), and Mrs. Lewin's case (Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 462), there was nothing, so far as we know, which could trouble the departed spirit with importunate memories of his earthly home. Again, Mr. Husbands' case, Mrs. Lewin's, Mrs. Clerke's, have much in common. In each case the apparition is seen by a stranger, several months after the death, with no apparent reason for its appearance at that special time. This last point is of interest in considering the question whether the hallucinatory picture could have been projected from any still incarnate mind. In another case — the vision of the Bishop of St. Brieuc (given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 460), there was such a special reason; — the Bishop's body, unknown to the percipient, was at that moment being buried at the distance of a few miles. Mr. Podmore suggests (op. cit., vol. vi. p. 301) that it was from the minds of the living mourners that the Bishop's phantasm was generated. That hypothesis may have its portion of truth ; the surrounding emotion may have been one of the factors which made the apparition possible. But the assumption that it was the only admissible factor — that the departed Bishop's own possible agency must be set aside altogether — lands us, I think, in difficulties greater than those which we should thus escape. The reader who tries to apply it to the apparitions quoted in my earlier groups will find himself in a labyrinth of complexity. Still more will this be the case in dealing with the far fuller and more explicit motor communications, by automatic writing or speech, which we shall have to discuss in the two next chapters. Unless the actual evidence be disallowed in a wholesale manner, we shall be forced, I think, to admit the continued action of the departed as a main element in these apparitions.

I do not say as the only element. I myself hold, as already implied, 1 See also the case of Mrs. Pennee in Proceedings S. P. R., vol. vi. p. 60.

747] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 69

that the thought and emotion of living persons does largely intervene, as aiding or conditioning the independent action of the departed. I even believe that it is possible that, say, an intense fixation of my own mind on a departed spirit may aid that spirit to manifest at a special moment — and not even to me, but to a percipient more sensitive than myself. In the boundless ocean of mind innumerable currents and tides shift with the shifting emotion of each several soul.

746. But now we are confronted by another possible element in these vaguer classes of apparitions, harder to evaluate even than the possible action of incarnate minds. I mean the possible results of past mental action, which, for ought we know, may persist in some perceptible manner, without fresh reinforcement, just as the results of past bodily action persist. This question leads to the still wider question of retrocognition, and of the relation of psychical phenomena to time generally — a problem whose discussion cannot be attempted in this chapter. Yet we must remember that such possibilities exist ; they may explain certain phenomena into which little of fresh intelligence seems to enter, as, for instance, the alleged persistence, perhaps for years, of meaningless sounds in a particular room or house.

747. And since we are coming now to cases into which this element of meaningless sound will enter largely, it seems right to begin their discussion with a small group of cases where there is evidence for the definite agency of some dying or deceased person in connection with inarticulate sounds, or I should rather say of the connection of some deceased person with the sounds; since the best explanation may perhaps be that they are sounds of welcome — before or after actual death — corresponding to those apparitions of welcome of which -we have already had specimens. I give one of these cases in full in the text, and a second in 747 A. A third has already been cited in the "Peak in Darien" group (718 A). The following is taken from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 639.

A gentleman who is a master at Eton College wrote to us, on February 3rd, 1884 :—

I enclose a copy of a memorandum made a few days after the event referred to. My memorandum has been copied for me by Miss H., whose name occurs in it. She is my matron — a sensible, middle-aged, active, and experienced woman. None of the people concerned were young, flighty, or fanciful. I have the doctor's letter; his name is G., and he still resides here. Miss H. only wishes to add that it must have occurred from twenty minutes to perhaps thirty after dissolution, and she says that she has never heard anything like the extreme sweetness of the sound. H. E. L.

The memorandum is as follows : —

ETON COLLEGE, August 6tk, 1881.

I wish to write down, before there is time for confusion, the following fact, occurring on Thursday morning, July 28th, 1881, when my dear mother died,

7o CHAPTER VII [747

whom God rest ! After all was over, Miss E. I., Eliza W., Dr. G., and myself being in the room, Miss I. heard a sound of " very low, soft music, exceedingly sweet, as if of three girls' voices passing by the house." She described further the sound as if girls were going home singing, only strangely low and sweet; it seemed to come from the street, past the house towards the College buildings (the road ends there in a cul-de-sac}, and so passed away. She looked to call my attention, and thought I perceived it. She noticed that the doctor heard it, and that he went to the window to look out. The window faces S.E. Eliza W. being in the room at the same time heard a sound of a very low, sweet singing. She recognised the tune and words of the hymn, " The strife is o'er, the battle done." Miss I. recognised no tune, but felt " that the music sounded, as it were, familiar." As a very accomplished musician, especially remarkable for her quick memory of music, had words or air been those of a well-known hymn, she would almost certainly have remembered it. These two spoke to each other when alone about what they had heard. Miss I. gives the time at about ten minutes after my dear mother expired. They were then unaware of this additional circumstance. Miss H. had left the room, and had summoned Charlotte C, with whom she had procured something required for laying out the body. As the two returned upstairs they heard a sound of music, and both stopped. Charlotte said to Miss H., " What is this ? " After a pause she said, " It must be Miss I. singing to comfort master." They afterwards entered the room, of which the door had been shut all along. Charlotte further described the sound as very sweet and low, seeming to pass by them. She felt as if, had she only been able to listen, she could have distinguished the words. It did not occur to her that her description was most incongruous. She could not listen attentively, but felt "as if rapture were all around her." It was not until afterwards, when she mentioned to Eliza having heard Miss I. singing, and how strangely it sounded, that they found that each had heard the sound. Miss H. described the sound as very peculiar and sweet, seeming to pass by them and pass away, as they both stopped on the stairs. All the staircase windows give north-west. I heard nothing, and I should have given no weight to a sound heard or described by these women in the room after communicating with each other, or by these women out of the room respectively ; but the coincidence of each party hearing it separately and independently without previous communication, as well as the matter-of-fact explanation suggested for it by one of them, seeming to imply that their thoughts were not dwelling on the supernatural, added so much weight to this account that I wrote to the doctor, who answers: — " I quite remember hearing the singing you mention; it was so peculiar that I went to the window and looked out, but although quite light I could see no one, and cannot therefore account for it." The time must have been about 2 A.M. on July 28th, 1881.

Miss I. writes : —

13 PARK STREET, WINDSOR, February 22nd, 1884.

I will copy the memorandum which I made in my diary just after the death of my dear friend and connection, Mrs. L.

"Just after dear Mrs. L.'s death between two and three A.M., I heard a most sweet and singular strain of singing outside the windows ; it died away after passing the house. All in the room heard it, and the medical attendant, who

747] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 71

was still with us, went to the window as I did, and looked out, but there was nobody. It was a bright and beautiful night. It was as if several voices were singing in perfect unison a most sweet melody, which died away in the distance. Two persons had gone from the room to fetch something, and were coming upstairs at the back of the house, and heard the singing and stopped, saying, 'What is that singing?' They could not naturally have heard any sound outside the windows in the front of the house from where they were. I cannot think that any explanation can be given to this — as I think — supernatural singing ; but it would be very interesting to me to know what is said by those who have made such matters a subject of study. E. I."

Dr. G. writes in 1884 : —

ETON, WINDSOR.

I remember the circumstance perfectly. Poor Mrs. L. died on July 28th, 1 88 1. I was sent for at about midnight, and remained until her death at about 2.30 A.M. As there was no qualified nurse present, I remained and assisted the friends to " lay out " the body. Four or five of us assisted, and at my request the matron of Mr. L.'s house and a servant went to the kitchen department to find a shutter or flat board upon which to place the body. Soon after their departure, and whilst we were waiting for their return, we distinctly heard a few bars of lovely music — not unlike that from an ^olian harp — which seemed to fill the air for a few seconds. I went to the window and looked out, thinking there must be some one outside, but could see no one, although it was quite light and clear. Strangely enough those who went to the kitchen heard the same sounds as they were coming upstairs, quite at the other side of the door. These are the facts, and I think it right to tell you that I have not the slightest belief in the supernatural, spiritualism, &c., &c. J. W. G.

The fact that Mr. L. did not share the experience is strong evidence that the sounds were not objectively caused by persons singing outside the house ; and this is further confirmed by the slight difference which there appears to have been between the impressions received.

I have already discussed (Chapter VI., 643 and 655) the nature of these phantasmal sounds: — nor is it contrary to our analogies that the person most deeply concerned in the death should in this case fail to hear them. But the point on which I would here lay stress is that phantasmal sounds — even non- articulate sounds — may be as clear a manifestation of personality as phantasmal figures. Among non-articulate noises music is, of course, the most pleasing; but sounds, for instance, which imitate the work of a carpenter's shop, may be equally human and intelligent. In some of the cases of this class we see apparent attempts of various kinds to simulate sounds such as men and women — or manufactured, as opposed to natural, objects — are accustomed to produce To claim this humanity, to indicate this intelligence, seems the only motive of sounds of this kind.1

1 See, however, Mrs. Sidgwick's remarks (Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. pp. 79-80), as to the rarity of any indication of intelligence in such sounds, and the possibility of reading more intelligence into them than they really possess. There is now, of course, more evidence as to these sounds than there was at the date of Mrs. Sidgwick's paper

748. These sounds, in their rudimentary attempt at showing intelligence, are about on a level with the exploits of the " Poltergeist," where coals are thrown about, water spilt, and so forth. Physical phenomena of that type will fall to be dealt with in a later chapter ; but it is a curious fact that Poltergeist phenomena should so seldom coincide with the ordinary phenomena of a haunt. We have one remarkable case — to be mentioned later — where Poltergeist phenomena coincide with a death (868 B) ; and a few cases where they are supposed to follow on a death ; but, as a rule, where figures appear there are no movements ; and where there are movements no apparition is seen. If alleged Poltergeist phenomena are always fraudulent, there would be nothing to be surprised at here. If, as I suspect, they are sometimes genuine, their dissociation from visual hallucinations may sometimes afford us a hint of value.

749. But after Poltergeists have been set aside — after a severe line has been drawn excluding all those cases (in themselves singular enough) where the main phenomena observed consist of non-articulate sounds, — there remains a great mass of evidence to haunting, — that is, broadly speaking, to the fact that there are many houses in which more than one person has independently seen phantasmal figures, which usually, though not always, bear at least some resemblance to each other.1 The facts thus baldly stated are beyond dispute. Their true interpretation is a very difficult matter. Mrs. Sidgwick gives four hypotheses, which I must quote at length as the first serious attempt ever made (so far as I know) to collect and face the difficulties of this problem, so often, but so loosely, discussed through all historical times. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. pp. 146-8.)

" I will, therefore, proceed briefly to state and discuss the only four theories that have occurred to me.

" The two which I will take first in order assume that the apparitions are due to the agency or presence of the spirits of deceased men.

"There is first the popular view, that the apparition is something belonging to the external world — that, like ordinary matter, it occupies and moves through space, and would be in the room whether the percipient were there to see it or not. This hypothesis involves us in many difficulties, of which one serious one — that of accounting for the clothes of the ghost — has often been urged, and never, I think, satisfactorily answered. Nevertheless, I am bound to admit that there is some little evidence

1 Thus Mrs. Sidgwick, even as far back as 1885 (Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 142), writes . " I can only say that having made every effort — as my paper will, I hope, have shown — to exercise a reasonable scepticism, I yet do not feel equal to the degree of unbelief in human testimony necessary to avoid accepting, at least provisionally, the conclusion that there are, in a certain sense, haunted houses, i.e. that there are houses in which similar quasi-human apparitions have occurred at different times to different inhabitants, under circumstances which exclude the hypothesis of suggestion or expectation."

749] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 73

tending to suggest this theory. For instance, in the account,1 of which I have given an abstract, of the weeping lady who has appeared so frequently in a certain house, the following passage occurs : — ' They went after it (the figure) together into the drawing-room ; it then came out, and went down the aforesaid passage (leading to the kitchen), but was the next minute seen by another Miss [M.] . . . come up the outside steps from the kitchen. On this particular day, Captain [M.'s] married daughter happened to be at an upstairs window . . . and independently saw the figure continue her course across the lawn and into the orchard.' A considerable amount of clear evidence to the appearance of ghosts to independent observers in successive points in space would certainly afford a strong argument for their having a definite relation to space ; but in estimating evidence of this kind it would be necessary to know how far the observer's attention had been drawn to the point in question. If it had been a real woman whom the Miss [M.'s] were observing, we should have inferred, with perfect certainty, from our knowledge that she could not be in two places at once, that she had been successively, in a certain order, in the places where she was seen by the three observers. If they had noted the moments at which they saw her, and comparing notes afterwards, found that according to these notes they had all seen her at the same time, or in some other order to that inferred, we should still feel absolute confidence in our inference, and should conclude that there must be something wrong about the watches or the notes. From association of ideas, it would be perfectly natural to make the same inference in the case of a ghost which looks exactly like a woman. But in the case of the ghost the inference would not be legitimate, because, unless the particular theory of ghosts which we are discussing be true, there is no reason, so far as we know, why it should not appear in two or more places at once. Hence, in the case of the ghost, a well-founded assurance that the appearances were successive would require a careful observation of the times, which, so far as I know, has never been made. On the whole, therefore, I must dismiss the popular theory as not having, in my opinion, even a prima fade ground for serious consideration.

" The theory that I will next examine seems to me decidedly more plausible, from its analogy to the conclusion to which I am brought by the examination of the evidence for phantasms of the living. This theory is that the apparition has no real relation to the external world, but is a hallucination caused in some way by some communication, without the intervention of the senses, between the disembodied spirit and the percipient, its form depending on the mind either of the spirit or of the percipient, or of both. In the case of haunted houses, however, a difficulty meets us that we do not encounter, or at least rarely encounter, in applying a similar hypothesis to explain phantasms of the living, or phantasms of the dead other than fixed local ghosts. In these cases we have 1 This case is given in 751 A.

generally to suppose a simple rapport between mind and mind, but in a haunted house we have a rapport complicated by its apparent dependence on locality. It seems necessary to make the improbable assumption, that the spirit is interested in an entirely special way in a particular house (though possibly this interest may be of a subconscious kind), and that his interest in it puts him into connection with another mind, occupied with it in the way that that of a living person actually there must consciously or unconsciously be, while he does not get into similar communication with the same, or with other persons elsewhere.

" If, notwithstanding these difficulties, it be true that haunting is due in any way to the agency of deceased persons, and conveys a definite idea of them to the percipients through the resemblance to them of the apparition, then, by patiently continuing our investigations, we may expect, sooner or later, to obtain a sufficient amount of evidence to connect clearly the commencement of hauntings with the death of particular persons, and to establish clearly the likeness of the apparition to those persons. The fact that almost everybody is now photographed ought to be of material assistance in obtaining evidence of this latter kind.

" My third theory dispenses with the agency of disembodied spirits, but involves us in other and perhaps equally great improbabilities. It is that the first appearance is a purely subjective hallucination, and that the subsequent similar appearances, both to the original percipient and to others, are the result of the first appearance; unconscious expectancy causing them in the case of the original percipient, and some sort of telepathic communication from the original percipient in the case of others. In fact, it assumes that a tendency to a particular hallucination is in a way infectious. If this theory be true, I should expect to find that the apparently independent appearances after the first depended on the percipient's having had some sort of intercourse with some one who had seen the ghost before, and that any decided discontinuity of occupancy would stop the haunting. I should also expect to find, as we do in one of the cases I have quoted, that sometimes the supposed ghost would follow the family from one abode to another, appearing to haunt them rather than any particular house.

" The fourth theory that I shall mention is one which I can hardly expect to appear plausible, and which, therefore, I only introduce because I think that it corresponds best to a certain part of the evidence ; — and, as I have already said, considering the altogether tentative way in, which we are inevitably dealing with this obscure subject, it is as well to express definitely every hypothesis which an impartial consideration of the facts suggests. It is that there is something in the actual building itself — some subtle physical influence — which produces in the brain that effect which, in its turn, becomes the cause of a hallucination. It is certainly difficult on this hypothesis alone to suppose that the hallucinations of different people would be similar, but we might account for this by a combination

750] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 75

of this hypothesis and the last. The idea is suggested by the case, of which I have given an abstract, where the haunting continued through more than one occupancy, but changed its character ; and if there be any truth in the theory, I should expect in time to obtain a good deal more evidence of this kind, combined with evidence that the same persons do not as a rule encounter ghosts elsewhere. I should also expect evidence to be forthcoming supporting the popular idea that repairs and alterations of the building sometimes cause the haunting to cease." l

750. These hypotheses— none of which, as Mrs. Sidgwick expressly states (op. cit., p. 145), seemed to herself satisfactory — did nevertheless, I think, comprise all the deductions which could reasonably be made from the evidence as it at that time stood. A few modifications, which the experience of subsequent years has led me to introduce, can hardly be said to afford further explanation, although they state the difficulties in what now seems to me a more hopeful way.

In the first place then — as already explained in Chapter VI. — I in some sense fuse into one Mrs. Sidgwick's two first hypotheses by my own hypothesis of actual presence, actual spatial changes induced in the metetherial, but not in the material world. I hold that when the phantasm is discerned by more than one person at once (and on some other, but not all other occasions) it is actually effecting a change in that portion of space where it is perceived, although not, as a rule, in the matter which occupies that place. It is, therefore, not optically nor acoustically perceived ; perhaps no rays of light are reflected nor waves of air set in motion ; but an unknown form of supernormal perception, not necessarily acting through the sensory end-organs, comes into play. In the next place, I am inclined to lay stress on the parallel between these narratives of haunting and those phantasms of the living which I have already classed as psychorrhagic. In each case, as it seems to me, there is an involuntary detachment of some element of the spirit, probably with no knowledge thereof at the main centre of consciousness. Those " haunts by the living," as they may be called (see Chapter VI., 649) where, for instance, a man is seen phantasmally standing before his own fireplace — seem to me to be repeated, perhaps more readily, after the spirit is freed from the flesh.

1 In an earlier part of this paper, I mentioned cases of haunted houses where the apparitions are various, and might therefore all of them be merely subjective hallucinations, sometimes, perhaps, caused by expectancy. It is, of course, also possible to explain these cases by the hypothesis we are now discussing. Another class of cases is, perhaps, worth mentioning in this connection. We have in the collection two cases of what was believed by the narrators to be a quite peculiar feeling of discomfort, in houses where concealed and long since decomposed bodies were subsequently found. Such feelings are seldom clearly defined enough to have much evidential value, for others, at any rate, than the percipient ; even though mentioned beforehand, and definitely connected with the place where the skeleton was. But if there be really any connection between the skeleton and the feeling, it may possibly be a subtle physical influence such as I am suggesting. — E. M. S.

751. Again, I think that the curious question as to the influence of certain houses in generating apparitions may be included under the broader heading of Retrocognition. That is to say, we are not here dealing with a special condition of certain houses, but with a branch of the wide problem as to the relation of supernormal phenomena to time. Manifestations which occur in haunted houses depend, let us say, on something which has taken place a long time ago. In what way do they depend on that past event? Are they a sequel, or only a residue? Is there fresh operation going on, or only fresh perception of something already accomplished ? Or can we in such a case draw any real distinction between a continued action and a continued perception of a past action? The closest parallel, as it seems to me, although not at first sight an obvious one, lies between these phenomena of haunting, these persistent sights and sounds, and certain phenomena of crystal-vision and of automatic script, which also seem to depend somehow upon long-past events, — to be their sequel or their residue. One specimen case I give in an Appendix (751 A), where the connection of the haunting apparition with a certain person long deceased may be maintained with more than usual plausibility. From that level the traceable connections get weaker and weaker (see 751 B) , until we come to phantasmal scenes where there is no longer any even apparent claim to the contemporary agency of human spirits. Such a vision, for instance, as that of a line of spectral deer crossing a ford, may indeed, if seen in the same place by several independent observers, be held to be something more than a mere subjective fancy ; but what in reality such a picture signifies is a question which brings us at once to theories of the permanence or simultaneity of all phenomena in a timeless Universal Soul.

Such conceptions, however difficult, are among the highest to which our mind can reach. Could we approach them more nearly, they might deeply influence our view, even of our own remote individual destiny. So, perhaps, shall it some day be ; at present we may be well satisfied if we can push our knowledge of that destiny one step further than of old, even just behind that veil which has so long hung impenetrably before the eyes of men.

752. Here, then, is a natural place of pause in our inquiry. We have worked as far as we can on the data which we have had under our view. The sensory automatisms with which we have dealt in this and the preceding chapter have proved to us, in my view, the connection of definite apparitions with individual men, both during bodily life and after bodily death. They have, in short, proved by logical reasoning the existence and the persistence of a spirit in man.

But great as this achievement is, it opens out more problems than it solves ; it leaves us even more eager than at first for a fuller insight into this new dim-lit world. We crave for some wider field of induction, for some more potent engine of analysis. We feel that, important though the facts

753] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 77

of phantasmal appearances may be, they yet are in a sense somewhat jejune and external ; we want to get deeper, to reach some psychological discussion not dependent on time-coincidences nor on the details of some evanescent observation. We instinctively seek, in short, just that knowledge which will now be in some measure afforded to us through the study of that wide range of phenomena which I have classed together as motor automatisms.

The line of demarcation indeed between sensory and motor automatisms is by no means distinct. Neither class, to begin with, is more veridical, more inspired from without than the other. In neither case have we any clear subjective criterion as to the origin of the message ; whether it comes merely from the automatist's own mind, or from minds of the living, or from minds of the departed. Even in mere external form, again, the two groups are often closely mixed. It makes little difference whether one sees words written in a crystal, or writes them oneself with unknowing hand. But nevertheless it must on the whole be admitted that motor automatisms have thus far been, and seem likely to continue, the more instructive of the two classes. The suddenness, the brevity of an apparition may be actually an evidential aid if we are simply establishing, say, a death coincidence. But when we have proceeded to a somewhat further stage — when we are looking for information from the inside as to the nature of spiritual operations — then, as I have said, the power of question and answer, of prolonged scrutiny, becomes all-important. We certainly cannot, I repeat, claim any more universal trustworthiness for motor than for sensory automatisms. The proportion of misleading to veridical written messages is probably even greater than the proportion of merely subjective to veridical apparitions. But while the apparition is gone in a moment, the written or spoken matter may renew itself for years, allowing us to test both its authenticity and its truthfulness — two different matters — with every touchstone which our leisure can devise.

It must be, then, on the study of motor automatisms that our general view of the metetherial world now opening to us must mainly be based. Those longer colloquies of automatic speech and script will introduce us to points of philosophy which fleeting apparitions cannot teach.

753. And yet it is by no means needful, it would be by no means wise, to close even this earlier branch of the inquiry without some few words on its ethical, its religious aspect. If one hopes to influence opinion, one must realise where that opinion at present stands which one would fain lead into further truth. The novelties of this book are intended to work upon preconceptions which are ethical quite as much as intellectual. It would be mere pedantry to avoid all mention of ethical implications, when matters are touched upon which the majority of thinking men are agreed to regard from a point of view which is as yet ethical rather than scientific. If the new facts, of such far-reaching import, are to enter deeply into

the consciousness of our race, they must be seen to be morally, as well as intellectually, coherent and acceptable.

For the most part, indeed, such discussion may be postponed to my concluding chapter. But one point already stands out from the evidence — at once so important and so manifest, that it seems well to call attention to it at once — as a solvent more potent than any Lucretius could apply to human superstition and human fears.

In this long string of narratives, complex and bizarre though their details may be, we yet observe that the character of the appearance varies in a definite manner with their distinctness and individuality. Haunting phantoms, incoherent and unintelligent, may seem restless and unhappy. But as they rise into definiteness, intelligence, individuality, the phantoms rise also into love and joy. I cannot recall one single case of a proved posthumous combination of intelligence with wickedness. Such evil as our evidence will show us, — we have as yet hardly come across it in this book — is scarcely more than monkeyish mischief, childish folly. In dealing with automatic script, for instance, we shall have to wonder whence come the occasional vulgar jokes or silly mystifications. We shall discuss whether they are a kind of dream of the automatist's own, or whether they indicate the existence of unembodied intelligences on the level of the dog or the ape. But, on the other hand, all that world-old conception of Evil Spirits, of malevolent Powers, which has been the basis of so much of actual devil-worship and of so much more of vague supernatural fear ; — all this insensibly melts from the mind as we study the evidence before us.

Hunc igitur terrorem animi tenebrasque necessest Non radii soils neque lucida tela diei Discutiant, sed naturae species ratioque.

Here surely is a fact of no little meaning. Our narratives have been collected from men and women of many types, holding all varieties of ordinary opinion. Yet the upshot of all these narratives is to emphasise a point which profoundly differentiates the scientific from the superstitious view of spiritual phenomena. The terror which shaped primitive theologies still tinges for the populace every hint of intercourse with disembodied souls. The transmutation of savage fear into scientific curiosity is of the essence of civilisation. Towards that transmutation each separate fragment of our evidence, with undesigned concordance, indisputably tends. In that faintly opening world of spirit I can find nothing worse than living men; I seem to discern not an intensification but a disintegration of selfishness, malevolence, pride. And is not this a natural result of any cosmic moral evolution? If the selfish man (as Marcus Antoninus has it) "is a kind of boil or imposthume upon the universe," must not his egoistic impulses suffer in that wider world a sure, even if a painful, decay ; finding no support or sustenance among those permanent forces which maintain the stream of things ?

754] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 79

754. I have thus indicated one point of primary importance on which the undesignedly coincident testimony of hundreds of first-hand narratives supports a conclusion, not yet popularly accepted, but in harmony with the evolutionary conceptions which rule our modern thought. Nor does this point stand alone. I can find, indeed, no guarantee of absolute and idle bliss; no triumph in any exclusive salvation. But the student of these narratives will, I think, discover throughout them uncontradicted indications of the persistence of Love, the growth of Joy, the willing submission to Law.

These indications, no doubt, may seem weak and scattered in comparison with the wholesale, thorough-going assertions of philosophical or religious creeds. Their advantage is that they occur incidentally in the course of our independent and cumulative demonstration of the profoundest cosmical thesis which we can at present conceive as susceptible of any kind of scientific proof. Cosmical questions, indeed, there may be which are in thtmselves of deeper import thari our own survival of bodily death. The nature of the First Cause ; the blind or the providential ordering of the sum of things ; — these are problems vaster than any which affect only the destinies of men. But to whatever moral certainty we may attain on those mightiest questions, we can devise no way whatever of bringing them to scientific test. They deal with infinity; and our modes of investigation have grasp only on finite things.

But the question of man's survival of death stands in a position uniquely intermediate between matters capable and matters incapable of proof. It is in itself a definite problem, admitting of conceivable proof which, even if not technically rigorous, might amply satisfy the scientific mind. And at the same time the conception which it involves is in itself a kind of avenue and inlet into infinity. Could a proof of our survival be obtained, it would carry us deeper -into the true nature of the universe than we should be carried by an even perfect knowledge of the material scheme of things. It would carry us deeper both by achievement and by promise. The discovery that there was a life in man independent of blood and brain would be a cardinal, a dominating fact in all science and in all philosophy. And the prospect thus opened to human knowledge, in this or in other worlds, would be limitless indeed.

I do not venture to suppose that the evidence set forth in these volumes, even when considered in connection with other evidence now accessible in our Proceedings, will at once convince the bulk of my readers that the momentous, the epoch-making discovery has been already made. Nay, I cannot even desire that my own belief should at once impose itself upon the world. Let men's minds move in their wonted manner : great convictions are sounder and firmer when they are of gradual growth. But I do think that to the candid student it should by this time become manifest that the world-old problem can now in reality be hopefully attacked ; that there is actual and imminent possibility that the all-impor-

8o CHAPTER VII [755

tant truth should at last become indisputably known ; and, therefore, that it befits all " men of goodwill " to help toward this knowing with what zeal they may.

755. And this leads me to conclude this chapter with one urgent word — at once of gratitude and of appeal. To the informants, to whose care and kindness we owe the evidence collected in this work, I must express the cordial acknowledgment of the wh'ole group of inquirers to whom their indispensable aid has been given. Especial thanks are due to those exceptionally gifted persons who have permitted us to witness and to test their supernormal powers. Viewed from the standpoint of our own personal claim, or absence of claim, upon our informants' time and attention, the amount of collaboration offered to us has been generous indeed.

But another point of view must be considered. The research on which my friends and I are engaged is not the mere hobby of a few enthusiasts. Our opinions, of course, are individual and disputable ; but the facts presented here and in the S.P.R. Proceedings are a very different matter. Neither the religious nor the scientific reader can longer afford to ignore them, to pass them by. They must be met, they must be understood, unless Science and Religion alike are to sink into mere obscurantism. And the one and only way to understand them is to learn more of them ; to collect more evidence, to try more experiments, to bring to bear on this study a far more potent effort of the human mind than the small group who have thus far been at work can possibly furnish. Judged by this standard, the needed help has still to come. Never was there a harvest so plenteous with labourers so few.



Chapter VIII. Motor Automatism

fAOvov arvfJL7rv€lv TO> Treptc^ovrt depi, dAA? 77877 KCU TW Trepte^ovTt Travra vo€p<3.

—MARCUS AURELIUS.

800. In the pursuit of the vast and inchoate inquiry to which this work is devoted, we are inevitably driven to push on in several directions in turn, along an irregular line of advance. And it will be well to look back for a moment from this point on the paths by which we have thus far travelled, to realise what we have already achieved, and to make a preliminary survey of the ground which still lies before us.

Our main theme, I repeat once more, is the analysis of human personality, undertaken with the object of showing that in its depths there lie indications of life and faculty not limited to a planetary existence, or to this material world.

In the first chapter this thesis was explained, and each chapter that has followed has advanced us a step towards its establishment. In the second chapter we found that the old-fashioned conception of human personality as a unitary consciousness known with practical completeness to the waking self needed complete revision. We began by tracing instances in which that consciousness was disintegrated in various ways ; and even among those morbid cases we found traces of the action of a profounder self. In the third chapter, dealing with the phenomena of so-called genius, we found further indications of a deeper self possessing habitually a higher degree of faculty than the superficial self can readily employ. In the fourth chapter certain phenomena connected with sleep — manifestations of supernormal faculty both telsesthetic, telepathic, and premonitory — led us on to the conception of a highly evolved subliminal self operating with unknown faculty in an unknown environment. Nay, we have thus been led to think that this subliminal self represents, more fully than the supraliminal self, our central and abiding being, so that, when the slumber of the supraliminal self leaves it comparatively free, it performs two functions of profound importance ; in the first place restoring and rejuvenating the bodily organism by drafts upon the energy of the spiritual world with which it is in communion, and in the second place itself

VOL. II. 8z F

entering into closer connection with that spiritual world, apart from the bodily organism.

Our fifth chapter, on Hypnotism, served as an experimental illustration of this view. We there found that we could, by empirical processes, deepen the sleeping phase of personality, and thus increase both the subliminal self s power of renovating the organism, both in familiar and in unfamiliar ways, and also its power of operating in a quasi-independent manner in the spiritual world. In the hypnotic trance, moreover, that hidden self was able to come to the surface, to speak and to answer ; to present itself as an independent agent with which we could directly deal. We seemed to see here an opening which might lead us far, if we could learn to intensify the trance, and at the same time to keep the subliminal self sufficiently alert and near to us to be still able to describe its experiences as they occur. If, then, my evidence had ended at this point, I should already have ventured to say, not indeed that my far-reaching theses had received adequate proof, but yet that I had offered an intelligible and coherent hypothesis which would be found to cover a multitude of phenomena which at present stand in the text-books with no adequate explanation, as well as a multitude of phenomena which the text-books altogether ignore.

But the evidence has not in fact ended with my fifth chapter. On the contrary it has from that point taken a fresh start ; has become more explicitly and manifestly corroborative of my initial thesis. For we have gone on to find that this subliminal self, whose more remarkable workings had thus far mainly been apparent in the sleeping phase of our personality, is active, at any rate at occasional moments, during waking hours as well. We proceeded in the sixth chapter to the study of automatisms, that is to say, of manifestations of submerged mental processes, which do not enter into ordinary consciousness. For convenience' sake I have divided these automatisms into sensory and motor: on the one hand; the sights and sounds which we see and hear through some subliminal faculty rather than through the ordinary channels of sense ; on the other hand, the motions which we perform, the words which we utter, moved in like manner by some unknown impulse from the deeps within.

The sensory automatisms with which the sixth chapter dealt might be regarded, then, as messages transmitted from the subliminal to the supraliminal self. Many of those sensory messages seemed plainly to have been originated in the automatist's own mind. These illustrated in a new way the coexistence of different series of thought and expressions of thought in the same organism, but did not add to the evidence of supernormal operations. Other sensory messages, however, there were which the agency of a second person also was manifestly needed to explain. Such were the telepathic or coincidental hallucinations for which so much evidence has been adduced. These definitely indicate, — I should rather say that they distinctly prove^ — a communication between the minds

801] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 83

living persons, independently of the action of the recognised organs of sense.

But this was not all. In the seventh chapter I went on to show that there was no valid reason to suppose that bodily death put a stop to the despatch of telepathic messages. By a long series of narratives I endeavoured to prove that departed spirits, perhaps as frequently as incarnate spirits, have communicated with incarnate spirits, — with living persons, — by telepathic sensory messages of the same general type.

Here then we found a class of evidence — the ghost-story of all ages — which has always hung loosely present in human belief, but which now at last attains to a real cogency, partly by the improvement in its quality as well as in its quantity, but largely also by its juxtaposition with all that other telepathic evidence with which it is in fact of kindred type, — and which shows the old ghostly stories as no supernatural anomaly, but as merely an advanced term in a progressive series of incidents dependent on some coherent, though as yet incomprehensible, law.

At this point, one may broadly say, we reach the end of the phenomena whose existence is vaguely familiar to popular talk. And here, too, I might fairly claim, the evidence for my primary thesis, — namely, that the analysis of man's personality reveals him as a spirit, surviving death, — has attained an amplitude which would justify the reader in accepting that view as the provisional hypothesis which comes nearest to a comprehensive co-ordination of the actual facts. What we have already recounted seems, indeed, impossible to explain except by supposing that our inner vision has widened or deepened its purview so far as to attain some glimpses of a spiritual world in which the individualities of our departed friends still actually subsist.

801. The reader, however, who has followed me thus far must be well aware that a large class of phenomena, of high importance, is still awaiting discussion. Motor automatisms, — though less familiar to the general public than the phantasms which I have classed as sensory automatisms,— are in fact even commoner, and even more significant.

Motor automatisms, as I define them, are phenomena of very wide range. We have encountered them already many times in this book. We met them in the first place in a highly developed form in connection with multiplex personality in Chapter II. Numerous instances were there given of motor effects, initiated by secondary selves without the knowledge of the primary selves, or sometimes in spite of their actual resistance. All motor action of a secondary self is an automatism in this sense, in relation to the primary self. And of course we might by analogy extend the use of the word still further, and might call not only post- epileptic acts, but ; also maniacal acts, automatic ; since they are performed without the ; initiation of the presumedly sane primary personality. Those degenerative phenomena, indeed, are not to be discussed in this chapter. Yet it will be well to pause here long enough to make it clear to the reader just

what motor automatisms I am about to discuss as evolutive phenomena, and as therefore falling within the scope of this treatise; — and what kind of relation they bear to the dissolutive motor phenomena which occupy so much larger a place in popular knowledge.

802. In order to meet this last question, I must here give more distinct formulation to a thesis which has already suggested itself more than once in dealing with special groups of our phenomena.

// may be expected that supernormal vital phenomena will manifest themselves as far as possible through the same channels as abnormal or morbid vital phenomena, when the same centres or the same synergies are involved.

To illustrate the meaning of this theorem, I may refer to a remark long ago made by Edmund Gurney and myself in dealing with " Phantasms of the Living," or veridical hallucinations, generated (as we maintained) , not by a morbid state of the percipient's brain, but by a telepathic impact from an agent at a distance. We observed that if a hallucination — a subjective image — is to be excited by this distant energy, it will probably be most readily excited in somewhat the same manner as the morbid hallucination which follows on a cerebral injury. We urged that this is likely to be the case — we showed ground for supposing that it is the case — both as regards the mode of evolution of the phantasm in the percipient's brain, and the mode in which it seems to present itself to his senses.

And here I should wish to give a much wider generality to this principle, and to argue that if there be within us a secondary self aiming at manifestation by physiological means, it seems probable that its readiest path of externalisation — its readiest outlet of visible action, — may often lie along some track which has already been shown to be a line of low resistance by the disintegrating processes of disease. Or, varying the metaphor, we may anticipate that the partition of the primary and the secondary self will lie along some plane of cleavage which the morbid dissociations of our psychical synergies have already shown themselves disposed to follow. If epilepsy, madness, &c., tend to split up our faculties in certain ways, automatism is likely to split them up in ways somewhat resembling these.

This argument might be illustrated by various physical analogies. Let us choose as a simple one a musical instrument of limited range. The consummate musician can get effects out of this instrument which the ordinary player cannot rival. But he does this at the risk of evoking occasional sounds such as only the most blundering of beginners is wont to produce.

Savages take epilepsy for inspiration. They are thus far right, that epilepsy is (so to speak) the temporary destruction of the personality in consequence of its own instability, whereas inspiration was assumed to be the temporary subjugation of the personality by invasion from without. The one case (if I may use the metaphor) was a spontaneous combustion ; the other an enkindlement by heavenly fire. In less metaphorical language, explosion and exhaustion of the highest nervous centres must have some-

803] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 85

what the same look, whatever may have been the nature of the stimulus which overcame their stability.

803. But in what way then, it will be asked, do you distinguish the supernormal from the merely abnormal? Why assume that in these aberrant states there is anything besides hysteria, besides epilepsy, besides insanity ?

The answer to this question has virtually been given in previous chapters of this book. The reader is already accustomed to the point of view which regards all psychical as well as all physiological activities as necessarily either developmental or degenerative, tending to evolution or to dissolution. And now, whilst altogether waiving any teleological speculation, I will ask him hypothetically to suppose that an evolutionary nisus, something which we may represent as an effort towards self-development, selfadaptation, self-renewal, is discernible especially on the psychical side of at any rate the higher forms of life. Our question, Supernormal or abnormal ? — may then be phrased, Evolutive or dissolutive ? And in studying each psychical phenomenon in turn we shall have to inquire whether it indicates a mere degeneration of powers already acquired, or, on the other hand, the "promise and potency," if not the actual possession, of powers as yet unrecognised or unknown.

Thus, for instance, Telepathy is surely a step in evolution}- To learn the thoughts of other minds without the mediation of the special senses, manifestly indicates the possibility of a vast extension of psychical powers. And any knowledge which we can amass as to the conditions under which telepathic action takes place, will form a valuable starting-point for an inquiry as to the evolutive or dissolutive character of unfamiliar psychical states.2

For example, we may learn from our knowledge of telepathy that the superficial aspect of certain stages of psychical evolution, like the super-

1 To avoid misconception, I may point out that this view in no way negatives the possibility that telepathy (or its correlative telergy) may be in some of its aspects commoner, or more powerful, among savages than among ourselves. Evolutionary processes are not necessarily continuotts. The acquirement by our lowly-organised ancestors of the sense of smell (for instance) was a step in evolution. But the sense of smell probably reached its highest energy in races earlier than man ; and it has perceptibly declined even in the short space which separates civilised man from existing savages. Yet if, with some change in our environment, the sense of smell again became useful, and we reacquired it, this would be none the less an evolutionary process because the evolution had been interrupted.

2 I do not wish to assert that all unfamiliar psychical states are necessarily evolutive or dissolutive in any assignable manner. I should prefer to suppose that there are states which may better be styled allotropic ; — modifications of the arrangements of nervous elements on which our conscious identity depends, but with no more conspicuous superiority of the one state over the other than (for instance) charcoal possesses over graphite or graphite over charcoal. But there may also be states in which the (metaphorical) carbon becomes diamond ; — with so much at least of advance on previous states as is involved in the substitution of the crystalline for the amorphous structure.

ficial aspect of certain stages of physiological evolution, may resemble mere inhibition, or mere perturbation. But the inhibition may involve latent dynamogeny, and the perturbation may mask evolution. The hypnotised subject may pass through a lethargic stage before he wakes into a state in which he has gained community of sensation with the operator ; somewhat as the silkworm (to use the oldest and the most suggestive of all illustrations) passes through the apparent torpor of the cocoon-stage before evolving into the moth. Again, the automatist's hand (as we shall presently see) is apt to pass through a stage of inco-ordinated movements, which might almost be taken for choreic, before it acquires the power of ready and intelligent writing. Similarly the development, for instance, of a tooth may be preceded by a stage of indefinite aching, which might be ascribed to the formation of an abscess, did not the new tooth ultimately show itself. And still more striking cases of a perturbation which masks evolution might be drawn from the history of the human organism as it develops into its own maturity, or prepares for the appearance of the fresh human organism which is to succeed it.

Analogy, therefore, both physiological and psychical, warns us not to conclude that any given psychosis is merely degenerative until we have examined its results closely enough to satisfy ourselves whether they tend to bring about any enlargement of human powers, to open any new inlet to the reception of objective truth. If such there prove to be, then, with whatever morbid activities the psychosis may have been intertwined, it contains indications of an evolutionary nisus as well.

804. These remarks, I hope, may have sufficiently cleared the ground to admit of our starting afresh on the consideration of such motor automatisms as are at any rate not morbid in their effect on the organism, and which I now have to show to be evolutive in character. I maintain that we have no valid ground for assuming that the movements which are not due to our conscious will must be less important, and less significant, than those that are. We observe, of course, that in the organic region the movements which are not due to conscious will are really the most important of all, though the voluntary movements by which a man seeks food and protects himself against enemies are also of great practical importance — he must first live and multiply if he is to learn and know. But we must guard against confusing importance for immediate practical life with importance for science — on which even practical life ultimately depends. As soon as the task of living and multiplying is no longer all- engrossing, we begin to change our relative estimate of values, and to find that it is not the broad and obvious phenomena, but the residual and elusive phenomena, which are oftenest likely to introduce us to new avenues of knowledge. I wish to persuade my readers that this is quite as truly the case in psychology as in physics.

I may say at once that some of the automatic movements with which we shall have to deal — certain utterances and writings given in a state of

805] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 87

" possession " — must rank, in my view, among the most important phenomena yet observed by man. For their proper study we need far more of introductory matter than in these volumes I can possibly give. I shall at any rate, therefore, make no apology for the ambages et longa exorsa — the long and tortuous approach — through which my reader, I fear, must follow me, if he is at last to discover any connection and congruity between those trance-messages and the structure of his own previous knowledge. I shall at any rate not attempt to conceal my own ignorances and uncertainties ; but shall grope about, so to say, before my reader's eyes, indicating again and again where our insight at present ends, and repeating again and again, from different points of view, and with fresh illustrations, those imperfect, yet important, fragments of knowledge which I hold that we have in fact attained.

805. As a first step in our analysis, we may point out certain main characters which unite in a true class all the automatisms which we are here considering — greatly though these may differ among themselves in external form.

In the first place, then, our automatisms are independent phenomena ; they are what the physician calls idiognomonic. That is to say, they are not merely symptomatic of some other affection, or incidental to some profounder change. The mere fact, for instance, that a man writes messages which he does not consciously originate will not, when taken alone, prove anything beyond this fact itself as to the writer's condition. He may be perfectly sane, in normal health, and with nothing unusual observable about him. This characteristic — provable by actual observation and experiment — distinguishes our automatisms from various seemingly kindred phenomena. Thus we may have to include in our class the occasional automatic utterance of words or sentences. But the continuous exhausting vociferation of acute mania does not fall within our province ; for those shouts are merely symptomatic ; nor, again, does the cri hydrocephalique (or spontaneous meaningless noise which sometimes accompanies water on the brain) ; for that, too, is no independent phenomenon, but the direct consequence of a definite lesion. Furthermore, we shall have to include in our class certain simple movements of the hands, co-ordinated into the act of writing. But here, also, our definition will lead us to exclude choreic movements, which are merely symptomatic of nervous mal-nutrition : or which we may, if we choose, call idiopathic, as constituting an independent malady. But our automatisms are not idiopathic but idiognomonic ; they may indeed be associated with or facilitated by certain states of the. organism, but they are neither a symptom of any other malady, nor are they a malady in themselves.

Agreeing, then, that our peculiar class consists of automatisms which are idiognomonic, — whose existence does not necessarily imply the existence of some profounder affection already known as producing them, — we have still to look for some more positive bond of connection between them

some quality common to all of them, and which makes them worth our prolonged investigation.

This we shall find in the fact that they are all of them message-bearing or nunciative automatisms. I do not, of course, mean that they all of them bring messages from sources external to the automatist's own mind. In some cases they probably do this ; but as a rule the so-called messages seem more probably to originate within the automatist's own personality. Why, then, it may be asked, do I call them messages ? We do not usually speak of a man as sending a message to himself. The answer to this question involves, as we shall presently see, the profoundest conception of these automatisms to which we can as yet attain. They present themselves to us as messages communicated from one stratum to another stratum of the same personality. Originating in some deeper zone of a man's being, they float up into superficial consciousness as deeds, visions, words, ready-made and full-blown, without any accompanying perception of the elaborative process which has made them what they are.

806. Can we then (we may next ask) in any way predict the possible range of these motor automatisms ? Have we any limit assignable a priori, outside which it would be useless to look for any externalisation of an impulse emanating from sub-conscious strata of our being?

The answer to this must be that no such limit can be with any confidence suggested. We have not yet learnt with any distinctness even how far the wave from a conscwusfy-perceived stimulus will spread, or what changes its motion will assume. Still less can we predict the limitations which the resistance of the organism will impose on the radiation of a stimulus originated within itself. We are learning to consider the human organism as a practically infinite complex of interacting vibrations ; and each year adds many new facts to our knowledge of the various transformations which these vibrations may undergo, and of the unexpected artifices by which we may learn to cognise some stimulus which is not directly felt.

A few concrete instances will make my meaning plainer. And my first example shall be taken from those experiments in muscle-reading— less correctly termed mind-reading — with which the readers of these Proceedings are already familiar. Let us suppose that I am to hide a pin, and that some accomplished muscle-reader is to take my hand and find the pin by noting my muscular indications.1 I first hide the pin in the hearth-rug ; then I change my mind and hide it in the bookshelf. I fix my mind on the bookshelf, but resolve to make no guiding movement. The muscle-reader takes my hand, leads me first to the rug, then to the bookshelf, and finds the pin. Now, what has happened in this case? What movements have I made?

Firstly, I have made no voluntary movement ; and secondly, I have made no conscious involuntary movement. But, thirdly, I have made an 1 See, for instance, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. i. p. 291.

807] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 89

unconscious involuntary movement which directly depended on conscious ideation. I strongly thought of the bookshelf, and when the bookshelf was reached in our vague career about the room I made a movement — say rather a tremor occurred — in my hand, which, although beyond both my knowledge and my control, was enough to supply to the musclereader's delicate sensibility all the indication required. All this is now admitted, and, in a sense, understood ; we formulate it by saying that my conscious ideation contained a motor element; and that this motor element, though inhibited from any conscious manifestation, did yet inevitably externalise itself in a peripheral tremor.

But, fourthly, something more than this has clearly taken place. Before the muscle-reader stopped at the bookshelf he stopped at the rug. I was no longer consciously thinking of the rug ; but the idea of the pin in the rug must still have been reverberating, so to say, in my sub-conscious region • and this unconscious memory, this unnoted reverberation, revealed itself in a peripheral tremor nearly as distinct as that which (when the bookshelf was reached) corresponded to the strain of conscious thought.

This tremor, then, was in a certain sense a message-bearing automatism. It was the externalisation of an idea which, once conscious, had become unconscious, though in the slightest conceivable degree — namely, by a mere slight escape from the field of direct attention.

807. Having, then, considered an instance where the automatic message passes only between two closely-adjacent strata of consciousness, externalising an impulse derived from an idea which has only recently sunk out of consciousness and which could easily be summoned back again ; — let us find our next illustration in a case where the line of demarcation between the strata of consciousness through which the automatic message pierces is distinct and impassable by any effort of will.

Let us take a case of post-hypnotic suggestion — say, for instance, an experiment of Edmund Gurney's (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 319). The subject had been trained to write with planchette, after he had been awakened, the statements which had been made to him when in the hypnotic trance. He wrote the desired words, or something like them, but while he wrote them his waking self was entirely unaware of what his hand was writing. Thus, having been told in the trance, " It has begun snowing again," he wrote after waking, " It begun snowing," while he read aloud, with waking intelligence, from a book of stories, and was quite unconscious of what his hand (placed on a planchette behind a screen) was at the same time writing.

Here we have an automatic message of traceable origin ; a message implanted in the hypnotic stratum of the subject's self, and cropping up —like a fault — in the waking stratum, — externalised in automatic movements which the waking self could neither predict nor guide.

808. Yet once more. In the discussion which will follow we shall have various instances of the transformation (as I shall regard it) of psychical shock into definite muscular energy of apparently a quite alien kind. Such transformations of so-called psychical into physical force — of will into motion — do of course perpetually occur within us. But the nature of these is commonly much obscured by the problem as to the true efficacy of the will ; and it seems desirable to cite one or two examples of such transmutation where the process is what we call automatic, and we seem to detect the simple muscular correlative — the motor equivalent — to some emotion or sensation which contains no obvious motor element at all.

An easy, though a rough, way of testing transmutations of this kind is afforded by the dynamometer. It is necessary first to discover the amount of pressure which the subject of experiment can exert on the dynamometer, by squeezing it with all the force at his command, in his ordinary condition. After he has had a little practice his highest attainable force of squeeze becomes nearly constant ; and it is then possible to subject him to various stimuli, and to measure the degree of response ; that is, the degree in which his squeeze becomes either more or less powerful while the stimulus is applied. The experiments are, in fact, a sort of elaboration of a familiar phenomenon. I take a child to a circus ; he sits by me holding my hand ; there is a discharge of musketry and his grip tightens. Now in this case we should call the child's tightened grip automatic. But suppose that, instead of merely holding my hand, he is trying with all his might to squeeze the dynamometer, and that the sudden excitation enables him to squeeze it harder — are we then to describe that extra squeeze as automatic? or as voluntary?

