Just as Mme. B. was sent by passes into a state of lethargy from which she emerged as Ldontine, so also Leontine in her turn was reduced by renewed passes to a state of lethargy from which she emerged no longer as Ldontine, but as Ldonore. This second awakening is slow and gradual, but the personality which emerges is in one most important point superior to either Leonie or Leontine. Alone among the subject's phases this phase possesses the memory of every phase. Ldonore, like Leontine, knows the normal hfe of Leonie, but distinguishes herself from Ldonie, in whom, it must be said, these subjacent personalities appear to take little interest. But Leonore also remembers the life of Leontine, condemns her as noisy and frivolous, and is anxious not to be confounded with her either. " Vous voyez bien que je ne suis pas cette bavarde, cette folle ; — nous ne nous ressemblons pas du tout." And in fact Ldonore's own character, so far as it has yet been manifested, is worthy of that profounder place in the personality which she seems to occupy.

Yet one further variation, and I end my brief resume of this complex history. Leonore is liable to pass into a state which does not, indeed, interrupt her chain of memory, but which removes her for a time from the possibility of communication with other minds. She grows pale, she ceases to speak or to hear, her

[230 B

eyes, though still shut, are turned heavenwards, her mouth smiles, and her face takes an expression of beatitude.

This is plainly a state of so-called ecstasy ; but it differs from the ecstasy common in hysterical attacks in one capital point. Not only is it remembered — indistinctly, perhaps — by L^onore, who describes herself as having been dazzled by a light on the left side, but also it brings with it the most complex of all the chains of memory, supplementing even L^onore's recollection on certain acts which have been accomplished unconsciously by Leonore herself.

The subjoined scheme, simplified from that given by Professor Janet, may enable the reader to follow the above description with greater ease. The shaded spaces indicate absence of consciousness.

Diagram

of the

joint life

of

Leonie

Leontine

Leonore

Ordinary

waking

life

Ordinary

waking

life

Knowledge

of Leonie :

latent

Emergence in somnambulic life

Emergence in somnambulic life

Knowledge

of Leonie :

latent

Knowledge

of Leonie &

Leontine :

latent

Knowledge

of

Leontine :

latent

Emergence

and

ecstasy

Knowledge

of

Leontine :

latent

Knowledge

of Leonie &

Leontine :

latent

230 B. The greater number of facts reported in L Automatisme Psychologique, as Professor Janet says in his introduction, were observed in four of his principal subjects, whom he called Leonie, Lucie, Rose, and Marie. Among all the subjects he knew, he regarded these four as the most satisfactory for purposes of psychological experiment ; partly because of his long and complete acquaintance with all the details of their maladies and characters, and partly because — having been always observed with care and only by competent persons — they had been as little as possible affected by the example of other patients, or by suggestions imprudently made in their presence. The case of Leonie has just been given, and that of Lucie is almost equally instructive. She was described first in articles published by Professor Janet in the Revue Philosophique, being there called " L.," and the summary here given is founded chiefly on an article in the Revue for December i886, but adopts the nomenclature of the different personalities or stages of personality — Lucie i, Lucie 2, Lucie 3 — used in V Automatisme Psychologique.

The subject was a girl of nineteen, who was highly hysterical, having attacks daily of several hours' duration. She was also devoid of the sense of pain, or the sense of contact, so that she "lost her legs in bed," as she put it. I may begin by saying that M. Janet and Dr. Powilewicz completely cured her, mainly by hypnotic suggestion, so that the phenomena which I am about to describe, though morbid in the sense that they occurred in a morbid person, were healthy in the sense that they were incidental to a process of cure.

230 BJ TO CHAPTER II 327

Post-h}Tjnotic suggestion succeeded easily, with no recollection in the waking state of the hypnotic command. At first, however, it was necessary that the hypnotised subject — Lucie 2 — should assent when she was told to do something on awakening. When the command was an unwelcome one she would say no instead oiyes^ and would not fulfil it on awaking.

On her fifth hypnotisation, however, Lucie underwent a kind of brief catalepsy, after which she returned to the somnambulic state ; but that state was deeper than before. (This was the first appearance of Lucie 3.) She no longer made any sign, whether of assent or refusal, when she received the hypnotic commands ; but she executed them infallibly, whether they were to take effect immediately or after awaking. Moreover, the suggested actions became absolutely a portion of the trance-life. She executed them without apparently knowing what she was doing. If, for instance, in her waking state she was told (in the tone which in her hypnotic state signified command) to get up and walk about, she walked about, but, to judge from her conversation, she supposed herself to be still sitting quiet. She would weep violently when commanded, but while she wept she continued to talk as gaily and unconcernedly as if the tears had been turned on by a stop-cock. One day M. Janet begged Lucie, in her waking state {i.e. Lucie i), to resist his next command. She said that she was not aware that she had ever obeyed him, and would certainly resist now. The command was given, and she executed it unconsciously, while still protesting that she would certainly resist.

Here, then, was an indication of a new partition of the identity — not merely that partition which is habitually established between the hypnotic trance and the waking state. For this new partition subsisted equally in both states, and the dividing boundary was no obvious gulf, but a line as imaginary as the Equator. For the line was merely this, that any suggestion uttered by M. Janet in a brusque tone of command reached the subliminal self alone; any other remark reached the subject — awake or somnambulic — in the ordinary way.

The next step was to test the intelligence of Lucie 3. M. Janet began with a simple experiment. " When I shall have clapped my hands together twelve times," he said to the entranced subject before awakening her, " you will go to sleep again." There was no sign that the sleeper heard or understood ; and when she was awakened the events of the trance were blank to her, as usual. She began talking to other persons. M. Janet, at some little distance, clapped his hands feebly together five times. Seeing that she did not seem to be attending to him, he went up to her and said, " Did you hear what I did just now ? " " No, what ? " " Do you hear this ? " and he clapped his hands once more. "Yes, you clapped your hands." " How often ? " " Once." M. Janet again withdrew, and now clapped his hands six times gently, with pauses between the claps. Lucie paid no apparent attention ; but when the sixth clap of this second series — making the twelfth altogether — was reached, she fell instantly into the trance again.

It seemed, then, that Lucie 3 had counted the claps through all, and had obeyed the order. M. Janet varied the conditions; ordering that the girl should fall asleep when he should mention the same letter of the alphabet twice in succession ; or when the sum of the digits which he mentioned should reach ten. The result showed that Lucie 3 could successfully attend and obey so long as the problem was a simple one, but that when the problem became too complex, confusion ensued.

Thus far, however, the knowledge gained as to Lucie 3 was not direct but inferential. The nature of the commands which she could execute showed her to be capable of attention and memory ; but there was no way of learning her own conception of herself, if such existed, nor of determining her relation to other phenomena of the trance. And here it is that automatic writing was successfully invoked. M. Janet began by the following simple command: "When I clap my hands you will write Bonjour.'''' This was done in the usual loose and scrawling script of automatism, and Lucie, though fully awake, was not aware that she had written anything at all. She was next ordered to write a letter, which she did in a commonplace style, and signed " Lucie." But Lucie was unconscious of the letter-writing, and when the epistle was shown to her she pronounced it a forgery. The unconscious hand was again bidden to write a letter; it wrote word for word the same letter as before, as if it were a musicalbox wound up to repeat a particular tune.

By means of a simple artifice, however, it was found possible to do more than this. M. Janet simply ordered the entranced girl to write answers to all questions of his after her awakening. The command thus given had a persistent effect, and while Lucie i continued to chatter as usual with other persons, Lucie 3 wrote brief and scrawling responses to M. Janet's questions. This was the moment at which in many cases a new and separate invading personality is assumed; and if Lucie had believed in possession by devils — as so many similarly-constituted subjects in old times believed — we can hardly doubt that the energy now writing through her hand would have assumed the style and title of a " familiar spirit." Or if, again, she had been a modern Spiritualist, it is probable that the signature of some deceased friend would have appeared at the foot of these communications. But here the "communicating intelligence " was of so obviously artificial a kind that it could scarcely venture to pretend to be either a devil or Lucie's grandmother. A singular conversation gave to this limited creation, this statutory inteliigeftce, an identity sufficient for practical convenience. " Do you hear me? " asked Professor Janet. Answer (by writing), "No." " But in order to answer one must hear? " "Certainly." "Then how do you manage?" "I don't know." "There must be somebody who hears me?" "Yes." "Who is it?" "Not Lucie." " Oh, some one else? Shall we call her Blanche?" "Yes, Blanche.'' "Well then, Blanche, do you hear me ? " " Yes.'' This name, however, had to be changed, for the following reason: — The name Blanche happened to have very disagreeable associations in Lucie's mind ; and when Lucie was shown the paper with the name Blanche, which she had unconsciously written, she was angry, and wanted to tear it up. Another name had to be chosen. " What name will you have ? " " No name." "You must — it will be more convenient." "Well then, Adrienne." Never, perhaps, has a personality had less spontaneity about it.

Yet Adrienne (Lucie 3) was in some respects deeper down than Lucie i. She could get at the genesis of certain psychical manifestations of which Lucie i experienced only the results. A striking instance of this was afforded by the phenomena of the hystero-epileptic attacks to which this patient was subject.

In cases of this sort it often happens that the patient's imagination during the attack is excited by the reminiscence of some scene of terror which perhaps first set on foot this nervous disturbance. On a smaller scale this recurrence to a still dominant moment of past fear may be familiar to some of my readers. I know a lady who was much frightened in childhood by a large dog which sprang out on her ; and who still, in moments of alarm or agitation, seems to

230 B] TO CHAPTER II 329

see the creature spring at her again. Well, Lucie's special terror, which recurred in wild exclamation in her hysterical fits, was somehow connected with hidden men. She could not, however, recollect the incident to which her cries referred ; she only knew that she had had a severe fright at seven years old, and an illness in consequence. Now during these " crises " Lucie (except, presumably, in the periods of unconsciousness which form a pretty constant element in such attacks) could hear what Professor Janet said to her. Adrienne, on the contrary, was hard to get at, could no longer obey orders, and if she wrote, wrote oxAy,J^aipeur,faipe7ir.

M. Janet, however, waited till the attack was over, and then questioned Adrienne as to the true meaning of the agitated scene. Adrienne was able to describe to him the terrifying incident in her childish life which had originated the confused hallucinations which recurred during the attack. She could not explain the recrudescence of the hallucinations ; but she knew what Lucie saw and why she saw it : nay, indeed, it was Adrienne rather than Lucie to whom the hallucinations were directly visible.

Adrienne thus appeared to be in a sense more deeply involved than Lucie I and 2 in the hysterical attacks. But it must not be therefore supposed that Adrienne represented a necessarily morbid aspect of the complex identity. And the experiments showed that her plane of existence lay beneath some of the superficial evils from which Lucie i suffered.

Lucie I was a hysterical patient, very seriously amiss. One conspicuous symptom was an almost absolute defect of sensibility, whether to pain, to heat, or to contact, which persisted both when she was awake and when entranced. There was, as already mentioned, an entire defect of the muscular sense also, so that when her eyes were shut she did not know the position of her limbs. Nevertheless, it was remarked as an anomaly that when she was thrown into the cataleptic state (Lucie 3), not only did the movements impressed on her continue to be made, but the corresponding or complementary movements, the corresponding facial expression, followed just as they usually follow in such experiments. Thus, if M. Janet clenched her fist in the cataleptic stage, her arm began to deal blows, and her face assumed a look of anger. The suggestion given through the so-called muscular sense had operated on a subject in whom the muscular sense, as tested in other ways, had seemed to be wholly lacking. As soon as Adrienne could Be communicated with, it was possible to get somewhat nearer to a solution of this puzzle. Lucie was thrown into catalepsy ; then M. Janet clenched her left hand (she began at once to strike out), put a pencil in her right hand, and said, " Adrienne, what are you doing ? " The left hand continued to strike, and the face to bear the look of rage, while the right hand wrote, " I am furious." " With whom ? " " With F." " Why ? " " I don't know, but I am very angry." M. Janet then unclenched the subject's left hand and put it gently to her lips. It began to " blow kisses," and the face smiled. " Adrienne, are you still angry ? " " No, that's over." " And now 1 " " Oh ! I am happy." " And Lucie? " " She knows nothing, she is asleep."

Now, so far as I know, this is absolutely the first ghmpse that has yet been obtained into the subjective being of the subject in the cataleptic state. We have thus far only been able to conjecture whether there was or was not any psychical concomitant of the cataleptic gestures of anger or satisfaction. " II n'y aqua le cataleptique," say MM. Binet and Y€r€^ "qui merite le nom d'auto-

1 Binet et Fere, Le Magnitisme Animal, p. 105.

mate. . . . On a dit avec raison que le cataleptique n'a point una personnalitd k lui, qu'il n'existe pas de jnoi cataleptique.''' Yet the key of automatic writing has unlocked this closely-barred chamber, and has shown us that the clenched fist, which strikes out at our suggestion as if it were moved by a spring, does in fact imply a corresponding emotion of anger, which (in Lucie's case at least) is definite enough to select its own object, although it cannot explain to us its own origin.

The peculiar condition of Lucie when awake adds a further interest to this experiment. When awake, she suffered, as I have explained, from a grave sensory disturbance — an entire absence of the so-called muscular sense. But here we find Lucie 3 (Adrienne) possessed of that sense — responding to muscular stimuli in a way which showed normal sensibility. Adrienne's intelligence, indeed, showed little verve or spontaneity; but she might claim that if she were beneath the level of Lucie's waking intellect, she was — in another sense — beneath the level of Lucie's sensory disturbances as well: somewhat as deep-sea denizens are beneath not the sunlight only but the storm. This was, in fact, a culminant example of the disappearance, in hypnotic trance, of functional nervous derangements. The inabilities which result from organic lesion subsist, of course, though they may lose their painful character ; but the inabilities which, for want of a better name, we call hysterical, may, any of them, in any phase of hypnotism, change, diminish, or disappear.

Thus, as in Fdlida X.'s case (given in 231 A), the secondary or induced state was in some respects less morbid than the habitual state — free from the nervous troubles which crippled the patient's waking life. LTnless " morbid " is to become a word as question-begging as the word " natural " long has been, we must be as careful not to call these novel states morbid as we should be not to describe these operations of Nature as unnatural.

In Lucie's case, indeed, these odd manifestations were — as the pure experimentalist might say — only too sanative, only too rapidly tending to normality. M. Janet accompanied his psychological inquiries with therapeutic suggestion — telling Adrienne not only to go to sleep when he clapped his hands, or to answer his questions in writing, but to cease having headaches, to cease having convulsive attacks, to recover normal sensibility, and so on. Adrienne obeyed ; and even as she obeyed the rational command, her own Undine-like identity vanished away. The day came when M. Janet called on Adrienne, and Lucie laughed and asked him whom he was talking to. Lucie was now a healthy young woman ; but Adrienne, who had risen out of the Unconscious, had sunk into the Unconscious again — must I say ? — for evermore.

I must now point out the chief lesson which is in my view to be drawn from a study of this case. We have here demonstrably what we can find in other cases only inferentially — an intelligence manifesting itself continuously by written answers, of purport quite outside the normal subject's supraliminal mind, while yet that intelligence was but a part, a fraction, an aspect, of the normal subject's own identity.

We must bear this ascertained fact — for it is as near to an ascertained fact as anything which this perplexing inquiry can bring us — steadily in mind while we deal with future cases. And we must remember that Adrienne — while she was, if I may so say, the subliminal self reduced to

230C] TO CHAPTER II 331

its simplest expression — did, nevertheless, manifest certain differences from Lucie, which, if slightly exaggerated, might have been very perplexing. Her handwriting was slightly different, though only in the loose and scrawling character so frequent in automatic script. Suppose the handwriting had been rather more different, and had vaguely resembled that of some deceased member of the family? It is easy to understand what inferences might have been based on such a fact. Again, Adrienne remembered certain incidents in Lucie's childhood which Lucie had wholly forgotten. These events occurred at a grandmother's house. Suppose that the sentence recording them had been signed with the grandmother' s name, instead of with the merely arbitrary name selected for the convenience of a cool observer? Here, too, it is easy to imagine the confidence — in one sense the well-grounded confidence — with which any knowledge on Lucie's own part of those long past events would have been disclaimed.

230 C. Other cases of multiple personahty developed in connection with the hypnotic trance have been studied by Professor Pierre Janet's brother, Dr. Jules Janet, and were described by the latter in a paper entitled " L'Hyst^rie et I'Hypnotisme, d'apres la Th^orie de la Double Personnalit^," in the Revue Scientifique , May 19th, 1888. One of these cases was that of Professor Charcot's famous subject, Blanche Wittman, whose history, as developed in the hands of Dr. Jules Janet, I give in a later Appendix (225 A).

Another case,^ treated also by M. Jules Janet, and which he kindly gave me the opportunity of seeing, was even more remarkable in a therapeutic aspect. It is perhaps the most marked among those very rare cases where it can be said with confidence that death itself has been averted by a hypnotic change of personality.

From the age of thirteen the patient, Marceline R., had been subject to a miserable series of hysterical troubles — chorea, crises, ansesthesia, &c. In January 1886 the hysterical tendency took its most serious form — of insuperable vomiting, which became so bad that the very sight of a spoonful of soup produced distressing spasms. Artificial means of feeding were tried, with diminishing success, and in June 1887 she was paralytic and so emaciated that (in spite of the rarity of deaths from any form of hysteria) her death from exhaustion appeared imminent.

M. Janet was then asked to hypnotise her. Almost at once he succeeded in inducing a somnambulic state in which she could eat readily and digest well. Her weight increased rapidly, and there was no longer any anxiety as to a fatal result. But the grave inconvenience remained that she could only eat when hypnotised. M. Janet tried to overcome this difficulty ; for a time he succeeded ; and she left the

1 The earlier part of this case is described in M. Jules Janet's paper, " Un Cas d'Hyst^rie Grave," Kevue de rHypnotisme, May 1889.

hospital for a few months. She soon, however, returned in her old state of starvation. M. Janet now changed his tactics. Instead of trying to enable her to eat in her first or so-called normal state, he resolved to try to enable her to live comfortably in her secondary state. In this he gradually succeeded, and sent her out in October 1888, established in her new personality. The only inconveniences of this change seem to be (i) that when she has been left some months without re-hypnotisation a tendency to hysterical mutism sets in; and (2) that whenever she is " awakened " into her first personality she has lost (like F^lida X.) all memory of the time passed in the second.

After some shorter trials, M. Janet hypnotised her November 12th, 1888, and left her in her secondary state till January 15th, 1889, He then " awoke " her, but the vomiting at once returned, and she again applied to M. Janet for help. He hypnotised her, and left her in her second state till March 31st. He then again " awoke " her, with the same result. Again he hypnotised her ; and when he took me to see her on August loth, she had been in the hypnotic state continuously for three months and ten days, during which time she had successfully passed a written examination for the office of hospital nurse, which she had failed to pass in her normal state.

When we saw her, August loth, she was normal in appearance and manner, except for a certain shortness of breath, or difficulty of speaking, which M. Janet explained as likely to develop into hysterical mutism if hypnotisation were not renewed. She was fairly well nourished, and her expression was open and contented.

M. Janet resolved not merely to re-hypnotise her, but to wake her and leave her for a time in her first state, in order to see whether the dysphagia had disappeared, and at the same time to observe whether the loss of recollection of the events of the secondary state was really complete. He woke her — in the old Elliotsonian fashion — by " reverse passes." Her change of expression was very noticeable. The look of easy content was replaced by a pained, anxious air. Her attention was at once arrested by some masons at work in the courtyard, who apparently had pulled down a wall, or made some similar change, since her last wakening. Asked what she was looking at, she said, in a low, timid voice, " I had not observed the alterations." Asked what day of the week it was, she said "Sunday" — and in fact March 31st was a Sunday. "What day of the month?" "March 31st." "How, then, is this oleander in the courtyard in flower? " " Oh, sir," she said, "those flowers are only paper." " Feel them ! " She felt them timidly, and said nothing more. "What had you for breakfast this morning?" "I tried to take some milk." This again referred to March 31st — on August loth she had breakfasted on ordinary solid food. " Drink a little now." She attempted, but spasms at once began, and she could not retain it. We then left her ; but Professor Pierre Janet (who was

231 A] TO CHAPTER II 333

also present) told me later that during the two or three days for which she was left in her first state the alarming vomiting continued and she began to spit blood. "My brother was sent for, and determined to re-hypnotise her. She was calmed as if by enchantment, and is now in excellent condition. During her two ' waking ' days she made a number of serious blunders not only as regards her mother, but with lodgers in the house. Her conduct absolutely proved a complete forgetfulness of the preceding months. After making inquiries from the various persons who saw her, my brother told me that he could retain no doubt as to her forgetfulness." M. Jules Janet added that since she had been replaced in the second condition the loss of flesh had been rapidly repaired, and she was again comfortable.

231 A. I give next the case of Dr. Azam's often quoted patient, F^lida X.^ In this case the somnambulic life finally became the normal life; as the " second state," which appeared at first only in short, dreamlike accesses, gradually replaced the " first state," which finally recurred but for a few hours at long intervals. But the point on which I wish to dwell is this : that Felida's second state was altogether superior to the first — physically superior, since the nervous pains which had troubled her from childhood disappeared; and morally superior, inasmuch as her morose, self-centred disposition was exchanged for a cheerful activity which enabled her to attend to her children and her shop much more effectively than when she was in the " etat bete," as she called what was once the only personality that she knew. In this case, then, which at the time Dr. Azam wrote — 1887 — was of nearly thirty years' standing, the spontaneous readjustment of nervous activities — the second state, no memory of which remained in the first state — resulted in an improvement profounder than could have been anticipated from any moral or medical treatment that we know. The case shows us how often the word " normal " means nothing more than " what happens to exist." For Felida's normal state was in fact her morbid state ; and the new condition, which seemed at first a mere hysterical abnormality, brought her at last to a life of bodily and mental sanity which made her fully the equal of average women of her class.

A very complete account of the case, reproducing in full almost the whole of Dr. Azam's report, is given in Dr. A. Binet's Alterations de la Personnaliti (pp. 6-20), and I briefly summarise this here : —

Fdlida was born at Bordeaux, in 1843, of healthy parents. Towards the age of thirteen years she began to exhibit symptoms of hysteria. When about fourteen and a half she used suddenly to feel a pain in her forehead, and then to fall into a profound sleep for some ten minutes, after which she woke spontaneously in her secondary condition. This lasted an hour or two; then the sleep came on again, and she awoke in her normal state. The change at first

For the fullest account of Felida, see Hypnotisme, Double Conscience, &c., par le Dr. Azam. Paris, 1887.

I

occurred every five or six days. As the hysterical symptoms increased, Dr. Azam was called in to attend her in 1858.

His report of that time states that in the primary state she appears very intelligent and fairly well educated ; of a melancholy disposition, talking little, very industrious ; constantly thinking of her maladies and suffering acute pains in various parts of the body, especially the head— the clou hysterique being very marked ; all her actions, ideas, and words perfectly rational. Almost every day what she calls her crise comes on spontaneously — often while she is sitting at her needlework — preceded by a brief interval of the profound sleep, from which no external stimulus can rouse her. On waking into the secondary state, she appears like an entirely different person, smiling and gay ; she continues her work cheerfully or walks about briskly, no longer feeling all the pains she has just before been complaining of. She looks after her ordinary domestic duties, goes out, walks about the town, and pays calls ; behaves in every way like an ordinary healthy girl.

In this condition she remembers perfectly all that has happened on previous occasions when she was in the same state, and also all the events of her normal life ; whereas during her normal life she forgets absolutely the occurrences of the secondary state. She declares constantly that whatever state she is in at the moment is the normal one— her raison — while the other one is always her crise.

The change of character in the secondary state is strongly marked ; she becomes gay and vivacious — almost noisy; instead of being indifferent to everything, her sensibilities — both imaginative and emotional — become excessive. All her faculties appear more developed and more complete. The condition, in fact, is much superior to her ordinary one, as shown by the disappearance of her physical pains, and especially by the state of her memory.

She married early, and her crises became more frequent, though there were occasionally long intervals when they never came at all. But the secondary state, which in 1858 and 1859 only occupied about a tenth part of her life, gradually encroached more and more on the primary state, till the latter began to appear only at intervals and for a brief space of time.

In 1875 Dr. Azam, having for long lost sight of her, found her a mother of a family, keeping a shop. Now and then, but more and more rarely, occurred what she called her crises — really relapses into her pri7naty condition. These were excessively inconvenient, since she forgot in them all the events of what was now her ordinary life, all the arrangements of her business, &c. ; for instance, in going to a funeral, she had a crise, and consequently found it impossible to remember who the deceased person was. She had a great dread of these occurrences, though, by long practice, she had become very skilful at concealing them from every one but her husband ; and the transition periods in passing from one state to another, during which she was completely unconscious, were now so short as to escape general notice. A peculiar feeling of pressure in the head warned her that the crise was coming, and she would then, for fear of making mistakes in her business, hastily write down whatever facts she most needed to keep in mind.

"While the primary state lasted, she relapsed into the extreme melancholy and depression that characterised her early life, these being, in fact, now aggravated by her troublesome amnesia. She also lost her affection for her husband and children, and suffered from many hysterical pains and other symptoms

231 B] TO CHAPTER II 335

which were much less acute in the secondary state. By 1887, however, the primary state only occurred every month or two, lasting only for a few hours at a time.

231 B. The following is another case in which the faculties appeared to be heightened in the secondary condition. The account is taken from the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iv. pp. 230-32. The case was sent to Professor Barrett, in 1876, by a clergyman, then vicar of a London parish, and father of the subject. He did not choose to give further particulars, or to allow his name to be published.

My son was in his seventeenth year attacked by what was said to be cataleptic hysteria. At their first commencement they were little more than prolonged fainting fits; afterwards, each attack began by his passing in an instant into a state of complete rigidity. Occasionally he would remain for five minutes to a quarter of an hour in that state, retaining the attitude in which he was when attacked, as if made of marble, with his eyes open and fixed and perfectly unconscious. After a time he would rise with a sigh, move about, and speak without the slightest hesitation or incoherency, and thence continue for hours or days, leading an entirely separate existence, not recognising friends or relations or even the way to his own bedroom, and taking no notice if addressed by his own name, writing letters with another signature, always imagining himself to have arrived at middle-age, and alluding to incidents of his imaginary youth, which teemed with echoes of his past reading; he was most courteous and pleasant in his manner, excepting when any doubt was implied as to the accuracy of any statement which he made.

At times all his faculties were in a most excited state. He would continue for hours playing games of skill with almost preternatural dexterity ; he would repeat to the air pages of poetry ; and he would play and sing in a wild and original manner, of which he was incapable at other times, quite unconscious of the presence of others and impervious to any interruptions. In this state he has continued for a week at a time, going out with us to dine with old friends, whom, however, he never recognised, but treated as new acquaintances. He always spoke of his parents as far off in some distant Eastern country, in which he himself had been born, and spoke to us (his father and mother) as kind hosts and friends whom he was soon to leave. Suddenly he would fall to the ground, roll about in convulsive agony with loud groans, and, a little water being poured into his lips, would get up and go on talking upon the subject of conversation on which he had been engaged at the time of his seizure, and without the slightest remembrance of anything that had passed meanwhile. These attacks continued every few days for more than two years, during which he was forbidden all kinds of study. At the age of nineteen we were advised to send him on a voyage, and accordingly he paid a visit to an uncle, a military officer at Madras ; from thence he returned in six or seven months quite cured, went up to the University of Cambridge, where he went out in honours, and is now at the bar. These attacks never came upon him whilst actually employed, but generally at church, in bed, or during quiet conversation ; they were often induced by anything that vexed or startled him. He has since told me that he might have resisted them, but that they came upon him with a sensation of pleasant drowsiness that fascinated him. Certainly he was the worse for any display of sympathy. I may add that he suffers now at times from some defect

I

in the circulation which prevents great bodily exertion and which produces pain in his heart and head ; in all other respects he is hale and hearty.

232 A. The following account of Mary Reynolds is taken from Professor W. James' "Principles of Psychology," vol. i. pp. 381-84, being there quoted from Dr. Weir Mitchell's report in the Transactions of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia, April 4th, 1888.

This dull and melancholy young woman, inhabiting the Pennsylvania wilderness in 181 1, was found one morning, long after her habitual time for rising, in a profound sleep from which it was impossible to arouse her. After eighteen or twenty hours of sleeping she awakened, but in a state of unnatural consciousness. Memory had fled. To all intents and purposes she was as a being for the first time ushered into the world. All of the past that remained to her was the faculty of pronouncing a few words, and this seems to have been as purely instinctive as the wailings of an infant; for at first the words which she uttered were connected with no ideas in her mind. Until she was taught their significance they were unmeaning sounds.

Her eyes were virtually for the first time opened upon the world. Old things had passed away ; all things had become new. Her parents, brothers, sisters, friends, were not recognised or acknowledged as such by her. She had never seen them before — never known them. . . . To the scenes by which she was surrounded she was a perfect stranger. The house, the fields, the forest, the hills, the vales, the streams — all were novelties. ... She had not the slightest consciousness that she had ever existed previous to the moment in which she awoke from that mysterious slumber. In a word, she was an infant, just born, yet born in a state of maturity. . . .

The first lesson in her education was to teach her by what ties she was bound to those by whom she was surrounded. . . . This she was very slow to learn, and, indeed, never did learn, or, at least, never would acknowledge the ties of consanguinity, or scarcely those of friendship. . . .

The next lesson was to re-teach her the arts of reading and writing. She was apt enough, and made such rapid progress in both, that in a few weeks she had readily re-learned to read and write. . . .

The next thing that is noteworthy is the change which took place in her disposition. Instead of being melancholy, she was now cheerful to extremity. Instead of being reserved, she was buoyant and social. Formerly taciturn and retiring, she was now merry and jocose. . . . While she was, in this second state, extravagantly fond of company, she was much more enamoured of nature's works, as exhibited in the forests, hills, vales, and water-courses. She used to start in the morning, either on foot or horseback, and ramble until nightfall over the whole country ; nor was she at all particular whether she were on a path or in the trackless forest. . . .

She knew no fear, and as bears and panthers were numerous in the woods, and rattlesnakes and copperheads abounded everywhere, her friends told her of the danger to which she exposed herself ; but it produced no other effect than to draw forth a contemptuous laugh, as she said, " I know you only want to frighten me and keep me at home, but you miss it, for I often see your bears, and I am perfectly convinced that they are nothing more than black hogs."

One evening, after her return from her daily excursion, she told the following incident: " As I was riding to-day along a narrow path a great black hog

232A] TO CHAPTER II 337

came out of the woods and stopped before me. I never saw such an impudent black hog before. It stood up on its hind feet and grinned and gnashed its teeth at me. I could not make the horse go on. I told him he was a fool to be frightened at a hog, and tried to whip him past, but he would not go, and wanted to turn back. I told the hog to get out of the way, but he did not mind me. ' Well,' said I, ' if you won't for words, I '11 try blows ; ' so I got off and took a stick, and walked up toward it. When I got pretty close by, it got down on all fours and walked away slowly and sullenly, stopping every few steps and looking back and grinning and growling. Then I got on my horse and rode on." . . .

Thus it continued for five weeks, when one morning after a protracted sleep, she awoke and was herself again. She recognised the parental, the brotherly, and sisterly ties as though nothing had happened, and immediately went about the performance of duties incumbent upon her, and which she had planned five weeks previously. Great was her surprise at the change which one night (as she supposed) had produced. Nature bore a different aspect. Not a trace was left in her mind of the giddy scenes through which she had passed. Her ramblings through the forest, her tricks and humour, all were faded from her memory, and not a shadow left behind. ... Of course her natural disposition returned; her melancholy was deepened by the information of what had occurred. All went on in the old-fashioned way. . . . After the lapse of a few weeks she fell into a profound sleep, and awoke in her second state, taking up her new life again precisely where she had left it when she before passed from that state. . . . All the knowledge she possessed was that acquired during the fews weeks of her former period of second consciousness. She knew nothing of the intervening time. ... In this state she came to understand perfectly the facts of her case, not from memory, but from information. Yet her buoyancy of spirits was so great that no depression was produced. On the contrary, it added to her cheerfulness, and was made the foundation, as was everything else, of mirth.

These alternations from one state to another continued at intervals of varying length for fifteen or sixteen years, but finally ceased when she attained the age of thirty-five or thirty-six, leaving her permanetUly in her second state. In this she remained without change for the last quarter of a century of her life.

The emotional opposition of the two states seems, however, to have become gradually effaced in Mary Reynolds.

The change from a gay, hysterical, mischievous woman, fond of jests and subject to absurd beliefs or delusive convictions, to one retaining the joyousness and love of society, but sobered down to levels of practical usefulness, was gradual. The most of the twenty-five years which followed she was as different from her melancholy, morbid self as from the hilarious condition of the early years of her second state. Some of her family spoke of it as her third state. She is described as becoming rational, industrious, and very cheerful, yet reasonably serious; possessed of a well-balanced temperament, and not having the shghtest indication of an injured or disturbed mind. For some years she taught school, and in that capacity was both useful and acceptable, being a general favourite with old and young.

During these last twenty-five years she lived in the same house with the Rev. Dr. John V. Reynolds, her nephew, part of that time keeping house for

VOL. I. V

I.

him, showing a sound judgment and a thorough acquaintance with the duties of her position.

" Dr. Reynolds, who is still living in Meadville," says Dr. Mitchell, " and who has most kindly placed the facts at my disposal, states in his letter to me of January 4th, 1888, that at a later period of her life she said she did sometimes seem to have a dim, dreamy idea of a shadowy past, which she could not fully grasp, and could not be certain whether it originated in a partially restored memory or in the statements of the events by others during her abnormal state.

"Miss Reynolds died in January 1854, at the age of sixty-one. On the morning of the day of her death she rose in her usual health, ate her breakfast, and superintended household duties ! While thus employed she suddenly raised her hands to her head and exclaimed : ' Oh ! I wonder what is the matter with my head ! ' and immediately fell to the floor. When carried to a sofa she gasped once or twice and died."

For another and more detailed account, see " Mary Reynolds : a Case of Double Consciousness," by the Rev. W, S. Plummer, D.D., in Harper's Magazine for May i860 (reprinted in pamphlet form together with Dr. Stevens' report of the " Watseka Wonder," referred to in 238 A, — by the Religio-Philosophical Publishing House, Chicago, 1887). The most important additional details in this account are: (i) Immediately after falling asleep in her secondary state, Miss Reynolds would sometimes narrate audibly what she had done the day before, and plan what to do the next day ; which plans she would duly carry out, — as if they were post-hypnotic suggestions, — unless prevented. (2) The first time she was in the secondary state, she recovered through dreams some of the knowledge that she had lost while awake. She dreamt that she heard a man preach and explain passages in the Bible to her, and after the dream seemed to regain all her knowledge of the Bible, though at the time unable to read it. In the same dream she saw and talked with a woman, whom she did not recognise, but described minutely on waking ; and the description was said to correspond exactly to a dead sister, whose existence while awake — she had forgotten. After this she often dreamt of the same sister, and also of another dead friend.

233 A. We now come to spontaneous cases of multiplex personality,^ of which Louis Vive's is one of the best known. Louis Viv6 exhibited an extraordinary number and variety of phases of personality, partly spontaneous and partly the result of different experiments in " metallotherapy " tried by the physicians in charge of him. These experiments produced curious variations in the hysterical paralyses from which he suffered, and produced at the same time reversions to different past periods of his life — probably associated with the particular forms of paralysis. It appeared that not only were certain past and forgotten mental states recalled by the physical impression of these variations, but also if a past and forgotten mental state were

1 Besides the cases of multiplex personality given in this chapter, see reference to a remarkable recent case (recorded by Dr. Bramwell) in a footnote to section 523.

233A] TO CHAPTER II 339

suggested to the patient as his actual present condition, he accepted the behef, and with it came back his past physical condition. It is important to note that the first experiments with metals were made when the experimenters had no knowledge of what had been the actual history of the past paralyses of their patient. They recovered this from him bit by bit, and after carefully comparing his recollections with contemporary records, concluded that on the whole his various phases really represented himself at various periods of his life.

Louis Viv^ began life (in 1863) as the neglected child of a turbulent mother. He was sent to a reformatory at ten years old, and there showed himself, as he has always done when his organisation has given him a chance, quiet, well-behaved, and obedient. Then at fourteen years old he had a great fright from a viper — a fright which threw him off his balance and started the series of psychical oscillations on which he has been tossed ever since. At first the symptoms were only physical, epilepsy and hysterical paralysis of the legs ; and at the asylum of Bonneval, whither he was next sent, he worked at tailoring steadily for a couple of months. Then suddenly he had a hystero-epileptic attack — fifty hours of convulsions and ecstasy — and when he awoke from it he was no longer paralysed, no longer acquainted with tailoring, and no longer virtuous. His memory was set back, so to say, to the moment of the viper's appearance, and he could remember nothing since. His character had become violent, greedy, and quarrelsome, and his tastes were radically changed. For instance, though he had before the attack been a total abstainer, he now not only drank his own wine but stole the wine of the other patients. He escaped from Bonneval, and after a few turbulent years, tracked by his occasional relapses into hospital or madhouse, he turned up once more at the Rochefort asylum in the character of a private of marines, convicted of theft, but considered to be of unsound mind. And at Rochefort and La Rochelle, by great good fortune, he fell into the hands of three physicians — Professors Bourru and Burot, and Dr. Mabille — able and wiUing to continue and extend the observations which Dr. Camuset at Bonneval and Dr. Jules Voisin at Bicetre had already made on this most precious of mauvais sujets at earlier points in his chequered career.^

In 1887 he was no longer at Rochefort, and Dr. Burot informed me that his health had much improved, and that his peculiarities had in great part disappeared. I must, however, for clearness' sake, use the present tense in briefly describing his condition at the time when the long series of experiments were made.

The state into which he has gravitated is a very unpleasing one.

1 For Dr. Camuset's account see Annales Medico-Psychologiques, 1882, p. 75 ; for Dr. Voisin's Archives de Neurologie, September, 1885. The observations at Rochefort have been carefully recorded by Dr. Berjon, La Grande Hysterie ckez f Homme, Paris, 1886, and by Drs. Bourru and Burot in a treatise, De la suggestion mentale, &c. {Bibl. scientifique contemporaine), Paris, 1887.

There is paralysis and insenibility of the right side, and (as is often the case in right hemiplegia) the speech is indistinct and difficult. Nevertheless, he is constantly haranguing any one who will listen to him, abusing his physicians, or preaching, with a monkey-like impudence rather than with reasoned clearness, radicalism in politics and atheism in religion. He makes bad jokes, and if any one pleases him he endeavours to caress him. He remembers recent events during his residence at Rochefort asylum, but only two scraps of his life before that date, namely, his vicious period at Bonneval and a part of his stay at Bicetre.

Except this strangely fragmentary memory there is nothing very unusual in this condition, and in many asylums no experiments on it would have been attempted. But the physicians of Rochefort had faith in the efficacy of the contact of metals in provoking transfer of hysterical hemiplegia from one side to the other. They tried various metals in turn on Louis Viv6. Lead, silver, and zinc had no effect. Copper produced a slight return of sensibility in the paralysed arm. But steel, applied to the right arm, transferred the whole insensibility to the left side of the body.

Such phenomena are now, of course, generally attributed to suggestion. They are at least sufficiently common (as some French physicians hold) in hysterical cases to excite little surprise. What puzzled the doctors was the change of character which accompanied the change of sensibility. When Louis Viv6 issued from the crisis of transfer, with its minute of anxious expression and panting breath, he was what might fairly be called a new man. The restless insolence, the savage impulsiveness, have wholly disappeared. The patient is now gentle, respectful, and modest. He can speak clearly now, but he only speaks when he is spoken to. If he is asked his views on religion and politics, he prefers to leave such matters to wiser heads than his own. It might seem that morally and intellectually the patient's cure had been complete.

But now ask him what he thinks of Rochefort ; how he liked his regiment of marines. He will blankly answer that he knows nothing of Rochefort, and was never a soldier in his life. " Where are you, then, and what is the date of to-day?" "I am at Bicetre; it is January 2nd, 1884; and I hope to see M. Voisin to-day, as I did yesterday."

It is found, in fact, that he has now the memory of two short periods of life (different from those which he remembers when his right side is paralysed), periods during which, so far as can now be ascertained, his character was of the same decorous type and his paralysis was on the left side.

These two conditions are what are now termed his first and his second, out of a series of six or more through which he can be made to pass. For brevity's sake I will further describe hx?, fifth state only.

If he is placed in an electric bath, or if a magnet be placed on his head, it looks at first sight as though a complete physical cure had been

234 A] TO CHAPTER II 341

effected. All paralysis, all defect of sensibility, has disappeared. His movements are light and active, his expression gentle and timid. But ask him where he is, and you find that he has gone back to a boy of fourteen, that he is at St. Urbain, his first reformatory, and that his memory embraces his years of childhood, and stops short on the very day when he had the fright with the viper. If he is pressed to recollect the incident of the viper a violent epileptiform crisis puts a sudden end to this phase of his personality.

This complicated history may be rendered clearer by reference to the tabular statement of it — reproduced below — which was drawn up by my brother, the late A. T. Myers, M. D., F, R. C. P., for his account of the case in The Journal of Mental Science, January 1886, and approved by Drs. Bourru and Burot. The six states of the patient are represented by six vertical columns, and the memories attaching to them by thick black lines on their left-hand borders (see pp. 342-3).

234 A. The following account of Dr. Morton Prince's patient, " the Misses Beauchamp," is slightly abridged from his report to the International Congress of Psychology, Paris, August, 1900, which was published in the Proceedings S. P. R., vol. xv. pp. 466-83.

. . . This case has been the subject of a continuous study for at least three years, and has occupied hundreds of hours of time. . . .

When Miss Beauchamp first came under observation she was a neurasthenic of a very severe type. She was a student in one of our colleges, and there received a very good education. But in consequence of her neurasthenic condition it was simply impossible for her to go on with her work. She was a wreck, I might say, in body. In temperament she is a person of extreme ideahsm, with a very morbid New England conscientiousness, and a great deal of pride and reserve, so that she is very unwilling to expose herself or her life to anybody's scrutiny.

Now she came to see me in this neurasthenic state, but I found treatment was of almost no use. The usual methods were employed with no result, and it seemed as if her case was hopeless. Finally I concluded to try hypnotic suggestions. She proved a very good subject, and the suggestions produced at the time rather brilliant results. In hypnosis she went easily into the somnambulistic state. This somnambulistic state came later to be known as B. II., while the first personality with whom I became acquainted. Miss Beauchamp herself, was known as B. I. Now I used to notice that as B. II. she was continually rubbing her eyes ; her hands were in constant motion, always trying to get at her eyes. Still I paid very little attention to it, or placed very little significance in this fact, merely attributing it to nervousness. One day when I hypnotised her and referred to something that she had done in a previous hypnotic state, — that is to say, something that she had said or done in a previous state when I supposed she was B. II., — she denied all knowledge of it, and said it was not so. This surprised me, and I attributed the denial at first to an attempt at deception. [Finally], it turned out that when she went into the state of which she later denied the facts, she was an entirely distinct and separate person. This third personality, which then developed, came to

[233 A

a, o

<u

O

Soft iron on right thigh

tn (A

VO O

II II

l5 3

"o

t>0

o

O cJ

4-. -C

o 1 M> a.

? >S 2

in tn O "^

TT Till II

ci!

Oh

■rt

O

is""

-a 1) ,

^ tn 2.

-a

pq

t3 °

03 rt 4J

g42 C

tn tn

rr Till II

i5^

(U o

(U

O

o O

s

tn o „

00 O

II 1!

(5 J

1 — 1 c^ ex '4-1

■g

-^ tj

4_, (L)

'tn

O'

•a o o O

o

tn

O

oo O

II II

'5b

"E. ■g

u bO

"S

"o

'rt

tn

-a o

Oco

II II

tn

"itl

"u5

<u

in

o

ni

C

<J

<u

aj

a

o

s

C

Q

K O

h

tn

oj Ph

C

o

Lived at Luysan and Chartres. Ill-treated by mother

Sent to St. Urbain; employed in fields and vineyards; well taught

o

Went to Bonneval ; . . . learnt tailoring

H

t^si; u

tu OJ

W

P

lU tin

t^

M

a,

CO

tii

u

o

CO

233 a]

CHAPTER

II

j-^ost parapjegia and memory of all his paraplegic life

Did gardening work at Bonneval

Left Bonneval, and lived at Chartres, Macon, &c.

o g

Transferred to Bourg Asylum, where he stayed i8 months . . .

O

Oh

-a

ii5

an

u

'en

o o

■z; a.

s

o

<+H

Came to Rochefort and enlisted in Marines. Convicted of theft

Received in Rochefort Asylum

bO

ol

i 3

u o >" o

o

ei

3 o

o t:

t

O (U

CO

oo

bb

OO CO

o

>- OO 00 w

a,

1 — I

oo

o

ro

bb

ro CO oo

1— . CI.

oo

00 o

in

oo

CO CI

CO

be known as B. III. We had then three mental states, B. I., B. II., and B. III.

B. I. knew nothing of the others. B. II. knew B. I., but no more. B. III. knew both B. I. and B. II. Thus far there was nothing very unusual.

Now B. III. has proved to be one of the most interesting of all the personalities that have developed in the case. In one respect it is one of the most remarkable personalities, I think, that has ever been exhibited in any of these cases of multiple personality, as will, I think, presently appear. B. III., like B. II., was constantly rubbing her eyes, so that I was frequently compelled to hold her hands by force to prevent her from doing so. When asked why she did this, she said she wished to get her eyes opened, and it turned out afterwards that it was she who was rubbing the eyes of B. II. in the earlier times. At this time I prevented B. III. from opening her eyes for the reason that I feared that, if she got her eyes opened and was thereby able to add the visual images of her surroundings to her mental life as B. III., these same images of her surroundings which she would also have, of course, when she was B. I., would by force of the association awaken all her mental associations as B. III., and that, in consequence, B. III. spontaneously would be constantly coming into existence of her own accord. This afterwards proved to be the case. B. III. always insisted upon having her eyes opened, complaining that she wished to see, and had a "right to see." One day, some time after this, when she was at home, owing to some nervous excitement, she was thrown into the condition of B. III., and then, I not being there to prevent it, she rubbed her eyes until she got them opened, and from that time to this she (B. III.) has had a spontaneous and independent existence.

This personality dates her whole independent existence from this day, and she always refers to events as being "before" or "after she got her eyes opened." That is the central event in her life, just as mothers date periods before or after the birth of a child. Now this personality came afterwards to be known as Sally Beauchamp. (The name Beauchamp has been adopted in this account for all the personalities.) She took the name for fun one day, a name that she got out of some book, and by that name she has been known ever since. In character she differs very remarkably from B. I. I would say here that B. I. is a very serious-minded person, fond of books and study, of a religious turn of mind, and possesses a very morbid conscientiousness. She has a great sense of responsibility in hfe, and with those who know her trouble is rather sad and depressed in her general aspect, the latter the result of the general troubles and trials of her life. Sally, on the other hand, is full of fun, does not worry about anything ; all life is one great joke to her, she hates books, loves fun and amusement, does not like serious things, hates church, in fact is thoroughly childlike in every way. She is a child of nature. She is not as well educated as is Miss Beauchamp, although she reads and writes English well ; yet she complains constantly that she cannot express herself easily in writing, but she does it quite well all the same. She cannot read French or any of the foreign languages which Miss Beauchamp knows, and she cannot write shorthand ; in short, lacks a great many of the educational accomplishments which the other character possesses. She insists, although of this I have no absolute proof, that she never sleeps, and that she is always awake while Miss Beauchamp is asleep. I believe it to be true. Then Miss B. is a neurasthenic, Sally is perfectly well. She is never fatigued and never suffers pain. During the first year Sally and Miss Beauchamp used to come and go

234 A] TO CHAPTER II 345

in succession. At first whenever B. I. became fatigued or upset from any cause, Sally was likely to come. The periods during which Sally was in existence might be any time from a few minutes to several hours. Later these periods became prolonged to several days. It must not be forgotten that though Miss Beauchamp knows nothing of Sally, Sally, when not in the flesh, is conscious of all Miss Beauchamp's thoughts and doings, and the latter could hide nothing from her. Curiously enough, Sally took an intense dislike to B. I. She actually hated her. She used to say to me, " Why, I hate her, Dr. Prince! " and there was no length to which Sally would not go to cause her annoyance. She would play every kind of prank on her to make her miserable. She tormented her to a degree almost incredible. While Sally would never do anything to make any one else unhappy, she was absolutely remorseless in the way she tormented Miss Beauchamp by practical jokes and by playing upon her sensibilities. For example, I will give a few illustrations. If there is one thing which Miss Beauchamp has a perfect horror of, it is snakes and spiders. They throw her into a condition of terror. One day Sally went out into the country and collected some snakes and spiders and put them into a little box. She brought them home and did them up in a little package, and addressed them to Miss Beauchamp, and when B. I. opened the package they ran out and about the room and nearly sent her into fits. In order to get rid of them she had to handle them, which added to her terror. Another joke was to take Miss Beauchamp out into the country when she was very tired, and in an unfit condition to walk ; that is, Sally would take a car and go out six or seven miles into the country to some retired place, and wake up Miss Beauchamp, who would find herself far out in the country with no means of getting home, no money in her pocket, and nothing for it but to walk. She had to beg rides when she could from passing waggons, and come back tired, worn out, used up for a week.

A great friend of Miss Beauchamp, to whom she felt under strong obligations, had asked her to knit a baby's blanket. She worked on that blanket for nearly a year ; as fast as she would get it near completion, Sally would unravel it, and then, like Sisyphus, she would have to begin the task again, and regularly every tim.e Sally would pull the whole thing to pieces. Finally she came to herself one day and found herself standing in the middle of the room tied up in a perfect network and snarl of worsted yarn ; it was wound round the pictures and then round and round the furniture, the bed, the chairs, herself, and she had to cut it to get out of the snarl. Another favourite joke of Sally's was to make Miss Beauchamp lie. She had the power, when she pleased, of producing aboulia, and also of making B. I. say and do things against her will ; for after a fashion she can get control of her arms and legs, and of her tongue. Sally made her tell most frightful fibs. For instance, when asked who lived in a small squalid little house at the side of the road, she said, " Mrs. J. G.," a very prominent lady in society, and very wealthy. " Why, I thought she was rich ! " " Oh yes, but she has lost all her money now." Miss 'Beauchamp would be mortified at hearing herself tell these astounding barefaced fibs, which her listener must know were fibs, but she could not help it. .Again, for a time at least, Sally put B. I. on an allowance of five cents a day, IShe would find the money waiting for her in the morning on the table with la note saying that it was her allowance for the day and she could not spend lore. Sally took away her postage stamps, and if Miss Beauchamp wrote la letter it had first to be exhibited to Sally, and if Sally approved it, it was

posted ; if not, it did not go, and that was the end of it. Miss Beauchamp is a person with a great sense of dignity, and dislikes anything that smacks of a lack of decorum or of familiarity. Sally had a way of punishing her by making her sit on a chair with her feet upon the mantelpiece. B. I. could not take her feet down, and was mortified to think she had to sit that way. Sally carries on a correspondence with Miss Beauchamp, writes letters to her pointing out all the weak points of her character, dwelling on all the little slips and foibles of her mind, telling her all the reckless acts and secret thoughts, indeed, everything she has done that won't bear criticism. In fact, when she has a chance to stick a pin into her she does it. When Miss Beauchamp wakes in the morning she will find pinned up on the wall of the room verses containing all sorts of personal allusions, letters calling her names, telling fictitious things that people have said about her ; in short, doing everything imaginable to make her life miserable. Nevertheless, at times when she goes too far, Sally has got frightened, and then she would write me a letter and ask for help, saying that she " could not do anything with Miss Beauchamp, and I really must help her."

One of the most interesting problems is, who is Sally? . . . Sally as an individuality goes back to early infancy, and has grown with the growth of Miss Beauchamp. The theory which finally, I think, has been demonstrated, is that Sally represents the subliminal consciotisness.

Although B. I. knows nothing of Sally, Sally not only is conscious of Miss Beauchamp's thoughts at the moment they arise, but she is capable, as I have said, of controlling her thoughts and her arms and legs and tongue to a certain extent. Sally can produce positive and negative hallucination in B. I., and frequently does so for a practical joke. During the times when Sally is in existence, B. I. is — as Sally puts it — " dead," and these times represent complete gaps in Miss Beauchamp's memory, and she has no knowledge of them whatever, "What becomes of her?" Sally frequently asks. Sally is never "dead." Her memory is continuous; there are no gaps in it. She not only knows all B. I.'s thoughts and emotions and sensations, but will have a train of thought at the same time with B. I., of an entirely different nature. All this is also true of the relation of Sally's mind to that of the third personality — B. IV. — who came later, excepting that Sally does not know B. IV.'s thoughts. While either Miss B. I. or IV. is thinking and feeling one thing — is depressed and self-reproachful, for example — Sally is feeling gay and indifferent and enjoying Miss B.'s discomfiture and perhaps planning some amusement distasteful to her.

Speak to either B. I. or B. IV., and Sally hears you. Say something that Sally alone understands, and you see her smile. Then Sally remembers things in the past that B. I. knows nothing about at all, things that she apparently never was conscious of, or which she has completely forgotten. The most remarkable part of Sally's personality, I think, is that she has been able to write out for me her autobiography, beginning with the time when she was in her cradle, which she remembers. She actually describes her own thoughts and feelings as distinct from B. I.'s, all through her childhood, up to and including the present time ; although, as she says, she never got an independent existence until she " got her eyes open." She remembers her cradle, draws a picture of the bars in its sides, and remembers what she, as distinct from Miss Beauchamp, thought at the time when she was learning to walk. Then B. I. was frightened and wanted to go back, but Sally was

234A] TO CHAPTER II 347

not at all frightened and wanted to go ahead. She describes B. I. as having had a butterfly mind as contrasted with her own. She, as a small child, disliked the things that B. I. liked, and vice versA. She describes her school life, her own feelings when B. I. did things, and the different sensations of the two selves when, for example, B. I. was punished and felt badly, and she herself was entirely indifferent and without remorse. Thus I have been able to get an achial autobiography of a subliminal consciousness^ in which are described the contemporaneous and contrasted mental lives of two consciousnesses, the subliminal and the dominant, front early infancy to adult life. In this Sally has described for me various scenes and incidents which occurred and which she saw during her early life, but of which Miss Beauchamp is entirely ignorant. These usually represent scenes which occurred while B. I. was absorbed in thought, but which Sally as a subliminal noticed. Taking all this into consideration— taking the present relations of Sally's thoughts to Miss Beauchamp's thought, and many other facts, like automatic writing, which Sally performs with ease, and uses for purposes of correspondence — I think we are safe in saying that Sally is the subliminal consciousness, which has become highly developed and organised and obtained finally an independent existence, and led an individual life of its own.

After Sally's escape from her mental Bastille, the two went on leading their independent lives, coming and going for a year or two, until one day, June 7th, 1899, an event occurred which had an influence upon the whole history of this case. To understand it, it is necessary to go back six years, to the year 1893. It appeared that in 1893 Miss Beauchamp was in a hospital in a neighbouring city, call it Providence. She had been taken with the fancy that she would like to be a nurse (it was the passion of her life), and in a fit of idealism she entered the hospital. One night she was sitting in her room with a friend, a Miss L., when, upon looking up, she was startled to see a face in the window. It was the face of an old friend of hers, a Mr. "Jones," as we have agreed to call him, whom she had known ever since she was a small girl, and who had been a sort of preceptor to her. At first she thought it was a hallucination, but she presently saw that it was a real person. She then hastily got her friend out of the room, and she went downstairs and out of the side door, where this person met her. It appeared that this person was in Providence on his way to New York, had wandered to the hospital, and seeing the ladder had climbed it for a joke, and looked into the window. Outside the hospital door an exciting conversation occurred. It was to her of an intensely disturbing nature, and gave her a tremendous shock. Perhaps I should say here^ as I have told so much of the story — that it was the kind of thing that upon the ordinary person would not have had much influence, but with her sensitive and idealistic nature she exaggerated it and gave it an intensity that an ordinary person would not have given to it. At any rate, it did give her a violent shock. The surroundings, too, were dramatic. It was night, and pitch dark, but a storm was coming up, and great peals of thunder and flashes of lightning heightened the emotional effect. It was only by these flashes that she saw her companion. From that time she was changed. She went out and walked the fields at night by the hour ; she became nervous, excitable, and neurasthenic, all her peculiarities became very much exaggerated and her character changed ; she became unstable, developed aboulia, and, in other words, changed into B. I. So that B. I. — or, more correctly. Miss Beauchamp modified into B. I. — dates from the time of that scene outside the hospital that

night. Sally, too, who knows the inmost soul of Miss Beauchamp, says she changed after that night.

So it follows that the Miss Beauchamp who has been the object of this study, has been educated in college, and been the solicitude of many friends, is not, properly speaking, the original Miss B., but a modified personality rightfully designated as B. I.

On the afternoon of June 7th, 1899, six years later. Miss Beauchamp was in my office. She was not in any way noticeably different from her usual condition. After leaving the office she went to the public library, as was her custom. In the library she met a messenger, who quite unexpectedly brought her a letter, and this letter was from the person whom we have agreed to call Jones. The letter was couched in almost the same language as was his conversation at the time of the hospital incident in 1893. It threw her into a very highly-excited state, and she actually saw a vision : — the scene outside the hospital with herself and Jones as the actors — and actually saw herself and him, and saw the flashes of lightning and heard the thunder, and through it all his voice. Under the influence of this excitement she went to the reading-room, and there had an illusion. In the evening newspaper she saw my name printed in large letters in the headlines, in place of that which was really printed, the name of a relative of mine who had died that morning. Still further upset by this, she made her way home. It was not until many months after this that I learned of this scene, or of the hospital episode in 1893, so that it was long before I found the key to the sequel. (As will appear, if I had known of it all, I should have been saved many hours and much labour in the attempt to understand the later psychical developments.) All I knew then was this. After returning from the library. Miss Beauchamp was in such a nervous state that I was soon sent for. On arrival I found her in a very nervous, highly-excited condition. She was unable to sit still ; her limbs were in more or less constant motion. Her condition was one that I had frequently seen after she had been exposed to emotional influences. Presently she changed completely. She became quiet, perfectly natural, talked affably, was very sociable, and, in fact, seemed to be in a condition in which I had never seen her before — more natural in many ways than I had ever seen her, quiet and calm, and apparently in a perfectly healthy state of body and mind ; but, to my surprise, I found that she did not know me. She said I was not Dr. Prince, and when I insisted that I was, she laughed and took it just as if I was talking nonsense to her — if I insisted that I was, well, I could have it so, but she knew I wasn't. She said that I was perfectly reckless in coming, that I ought not to have come, and then I discovered that she was under the impression, in fact insisted, that I had come in through the window. As we were in the fourth story, it was plain that she was also under an illusion as to the place where we were. The contrast of these illusions with her normality in other respects was striking. The scene lasted some little time. Finally I showed her my name in my watch. She underwent a slight mental shock. A change came over her. She passed through a brief period of confusion and then became herself again, but without any recollection of what had occurred. The essential points I would emphasise are that — besides appearing perfectly normal — she insisted that I was Jones, imagined we were somewhere else, that I had come in through the window, that I ran great risks in coming because of the publicity, that I ought not to have done it, and that it was a foolish thing to have done. Being ignorant of the preceding events just

234 A] TO CHAPTER II 349

narrated, it was not clear at first whether this was simply Miss B. under an illusion, or whether it was a new personality similarly affected.

To cut a long story short (for it took a long time to unravel the mystery), it turned out to be a new personality^ who had at this moment waked up, and had gone back six years in her life, and now imagined it was the same night and she was in the same room in the hospital where she had seen that face in the window in 1893. The impetus to her awakening had evidently been given by the shock of the letter and the vision in the library a few hours before ; awakening, she went on with her life where she had left off, with the last vestige of memory, which was seeing Jones at the window. Under the influence of this suggestion (she and B. I. are very suggestible) she mistook me for Jones, and, having seen him, as she thought, a moment before (really six years previously) at the window, inferred I had entered by that means. The impropriety and unwisdom of it all was a natural thought. This new personality became known in these studies as B. IV.

The next time I saw B. IV. she was free from all illusion, but I was struck by her formal and distant attitude. It soon transpired that she did not know me or the consulting-room, where B. I. had been time and again. In fact, she knew absolutely nothing of the events of the past six years, knew nothing of B. I.'s life in college, knew nothing of the friends whom B. I. had made during these years, knew nothing of me, knew nothing of any of these events whatsoever, nor later, after she was domiciled as one of the Beauchamp family, did she know anything about the present times when B. I. or Sally was present. From this it follows that she knew, and continued to know, nothing of either B. I. or Sally, or that there ever were such personalities.

It took her a long time to accommodate herself to the new order of things and to take up the thread of events. Like Rip Van Winkle, she did not know that the world had moved since she went to sleep. Sally, who was invaluable as an informer, used to report that she seemed to live in the past, and used to speak to people as if it was still 1893. So the family now was increased by one, and there were three who kept changing with one another.

B. IV. is a very different character from either Sally or Miss Beauchamp. A study of the different habits of thought, tastes, and emotions of these three people, has thrown, I believe, much light upon the psychology of character, but in this report I must limit myself to a mere outline of events. There were, of course, gaps in the memory of B. IV. (as with B. I.) corresponding to the time of the existence of the other two personalities. But this B. IV. was never willing to admit. Unlike the others, she is irritable and quick-tempered, and resented as an impertinence — especially as she regarded most of us as strangers — any inquiry into her private thoughts and affairs, and above all any interference with her habits of life and private conduct. Though anxious to know, she was not willing to ask about what had occurred in the gaps when the others were in the flesh, and so was in the habit of inferring and guessing, at which she was very skilful. She was, as stated, even unwilling for a long time to admit that there were gaps, but it was easy to convict her here by a few questions. After fibbing and inferring and guessing, she would break down and confess she did not know, which was the fact.

Now, Sally, although her mental life is also continuous during that of B. IV. (as with B. I.), and although she knows everything B. IV. does at the time she does it, hears what she says, reads what she writes, and sees what she does, nevertheless Sally does not know B. IV.'' s thoughts. Herein is a very

interesting psychological distinction between Sally's relation to B. I. and to B. IV. She knows B. I.'s inmost soul, she can only infer B. IV. 's thoughts from what she says and does. But Sally studied her closely, and soon discovered for herself that B. IV. knew nothing of the past six years, but was always secretly trying to obtain information, and guessing. Sally, in her astonishment, used to say, " Why, she doesn't know anything, she is always fishing and guessing." For this reason, Sally, until she learned to know B. IV. better, had a great contempt for her, and dubbed her the " Idiot," and whenever after this, she spoke of her, it was as the " Idiot." From this time on, Sally transferred her hatred from B. I. to the " Idiot." She came to regard B. I. as rather a poor sort of creature, and hardly worthy of her consideration anyway, and let her alone ; but B. IV. became the object of her attacks. But B. IV. is more than a match for Sally, who is really afraid of her. They quarrel like cats and dogs. One of the most curious and puzzling things was the cause of Sally's hatred of B. I. It was unmitigated jealousy. She was jealous of the attentions B. I. received, jealous of the fact that people liked B. I. and wanted to keep her in existence instead of herself, and therefore — difficult as it is to conceive of a person jealous of herself — Sally was immensely jealous of herself.

I have said that B. IV. 's memory ceases at Providence with seeing the face in the window. She can tell you nothing after that, and knows nothing of the scene outside the door. Both B. I. and Sally recall and describe similarly that scene, but the last thing B. IV. remembers is the face at the window a few minutes before. i As one method of corroboration of these events, I produced in B. IV. a crystal vision. I gave her a glass globe to look at, and told her to think of Providence. As she looked into the glass she was horrified to see there the scene that took place outside the hospital door. She declared with much excitement that it was not true, that it never had occurred, and this she repeated again and again, and remonstrated against my believing it. Like B. I. in the hbrary, she saw herself by flashes of lightning standing by the door with Jones. She saw his excited manner, and heard his voice between the peals of thunder. She saw it all as a vision, just as it occurred. She was startled by what she saw, and experienced over again all the emotion of the original scene. . . .

Now the most interesting and most important question is, what is the relationship between all the personalities ? What relation do they bear to the normal personality, and, for that matter, which is the normal Miss Beauchamp, or is anyone of them the real and normal individual.-* . . . Sally has been sufficiently emphasised. . . . But B. I. and B. IV., who are they?

One thing must be insisted upon — namely, however normal each may appear superficially, neither is quite normal. In each are missing some of the attributes of the original Miss Beauchamp, but in B. I. the departure from the normal is the least. Her neurasthenic condition, her aboulia, her extreme suggestibility, by which negative hallucination can be produced at will, her exaggerated sensitiveness to emotional influences, like music and religion, which produce certain psychical phenomena, the dominion which ideas acquire

1 The lack of this knowledge was afterwards the cause of much trouble to B. IV., which was strong evidence of her ignorance.

2 A study of Visions based on this case may be found in Brain, 1S9S. See also Proceedings, S.P.R,. vol. xiv. pp. 366 ct seq.

234 A] TO CHAPTER II 351

in her mind, the exaggeration of certain traits always possessed by her, her tendency to disintegration, by which she at times loses temporarily certain, acquirements, like the French language — these and other peculiarities are evidence that a certain amount of disintegration took place in 1893 by which the original personality became fractured and modified. Nevertheless, it would be an exaggeration to affirm that she is a wholly new and distinct personality, or that she is a vigilambulist. It is more correct to say that certain components of her personality have become disintegrated from the rest, certain local areas of her brain, as I have elsewhere put it,i have gone to sleep. The original self has become modified into B. I.

B. IV., notwithstanding her greater stability, is a still greater departure from the original self. Her character is totally different; her general attitude towards her environment has changed, for there is missing the taste for, that is, the normal reactions to music, hterature, and religion. She has also lost her knowledge of music. She has no emotionability, excepting bad temper; in short, she has retained some characteristics and lost others of the original self.

Now any theory we adopt must explain all this, as well as the particular forms of amnesia and continuities of memory. The explanation which I beheve to be the correct one is this : neither B. I. nor B. IV. is strictly the original self, nor are they somnambulistic personalities, but modifications of the original self. The original Miss B. became disintegrated and as a complete psychical composition departed this life in 1893. B. I. and B. IV. are each different disintegrated parts of the complete Miss Beauchamp. In the [first] disintegration of the primary consciousness a certain portion — B. IVo — split itself off and became dormant. The remainder persisted as a modified personality — B. I. Sufficient remained to retain the memories of the past, which from this time became organised with all future experiences and made a continuous memory and personaHty.

The split-off dormant portion was awakened six years later as the result of an intense excitation of its constituent memories by the shock in the librar)'-, and in the awakening wrenched away from B. I. a portion of her mental associations, which thus became common to both. As in 1893, a certain number of groups of psychical associations that belonged to B. I. now remained split off and dormant. Those that remained awake became organised into another personality as B. IV. . . .

Thus the dominant part of B. IV.'s consciousness, being awake up to 1893, remembers her whole life until that date; but being asleep from 1893 to 1899, she has no knowledge of the events of this period. Waking up again suddenly in 1899, she goes back to the day when she went to sleep. . . .

In 1897 B. III., the subliminal consciousness, became developed and acquired an independent existence, and became known as Sally ; so that Sally represents the subliminal consciousness, and B. I. and B. IV. simply certain disintegrated elements in the prfmary supernatant consciousness. The result is that neither B. I. nor B. IV. is the whole original Miss Beauchamp, but — if my studies have led me to the right interpretation — the original self is a combination of the two. If this be true, it should be possible to combine them and obtain the original self. • . .

See " A Contribution to the Study of Hysteria and Hypnosis, &c.," in the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, vol. xiv. p. 95.

There remains B. II. ; who is B. II. ? Now it is possible to hypnotise B. I. and also B. IV. [and] it transpired that B. I. and B. IV. hypnotised became the same person, or B. II. . . . B. II. knows the thoughts of B. I. and equally knows the thoughts of B. IV., but B. I. and B. IV. know nothing of B. II.

Now, if the original complete Miss Beauchamp is a total combination of the whole of B. I. and of B. IV., then if we could put I. and II. together, we ought to get Miss Beauchamp. This I was able to do by suggestion given to the hypnotic self, B. II., and to obtain the original self for a number of hours at a time. I suggested to B. II. that when awake as B. I. she would know all about B. IV., and as B. IV. would know all about B. I. and feel and think as B. I. did. I then waked her up successively as B. I. and as B. IV. In each case she knew all about the times to which I had special reference when I gave the suggestions. As B. I. she told me what she had been doing as B. IV., and as B. IV. what she had been doing as B. I. . . . So that in her sensations, and acquirements, and memory, she^ whejt thus put together, to all appearances was the original Miss Beauchamp.

This new personality is plainly a composite of B. I. and B. IV. ; not only in memory, but in character, tastes, and general make-up. Sally calls her " that new thing," and has very little, if any, control over her. She herself does not know which she is — I. or IV. — but says she is both. When she is present, Sally tends to sink out of sight and go back — as Sally puts it — "to where I came from."

This final synthesis — the construction of what appears to be the original self — seems to me akin to a proof of the correctness of the diagnosis.

236 A. The case of " Mollie Fancher " was recorded in a book by Judge Abram H. Dailey, entitled "Mollie Fancher: the Brooklyn Enigma. An Authentic Statement of Facts in the Life of Mary J. Fancher, the Psychological Marvel of the Nineteenth Century " (Brooklyn, N. Y.). This book consists of a rather disconnected narrative by Judge Dailey, abstracts of a diary kept by Miss Fancher's aunt, a series of signed statements made by friends, and a number of reprints of articles which had originally appeared in the daily papers. I quote a review of it by Dr. William Romaine Newbold, of the University of Pennsylvania, which appeared in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiv. pp. 396-98. Although my main discussion of supernormal phenomena is deferred to later chapters, it will be convenient to include here Dr. Newbold's criticism of the evidence for such phenomena in Miss Fancher's case.

Miss Fancher was born August i6th, 1848. As a child her health was good, but in March of 1864 it began to fail. She had " nervous indigestion," inability to retain food, "fainting spells," " weakness in the chest," and she "wasted away." May loth, 1864, she was thrown from her horse and severely injured. In the course of the following summer the lower part of her body suddenly became paralysed. She seemed to recover from the effects of this accident during the autumn, but on June 8th, 1865, as she was stepping from a street car, the car started too soon, she was thrown to the ground, her skirt caught upon a projecting hook, and she was dragged some yards, again receiving serious injuries. This was followed by weakness, transient paralyses, pain, cough, and hsemorrhages from the lungs. In February 1866 convulsions

236 A] TO CHAPTER II 353

appeared. Soon afterwards she lost, in rapid succession, sight, speech, and hearing. From that date to 1894, when the book was written, her history was that of a hysteric of the worst type — anaesthesias, paralyses, contractures, and convulsions involving now this, now that organ of sense or group of muscles, and succeeding one another in bewildering variety. Her sight, however, was never restored, although in recent years she seems to be recovering some portion of it. Throughout this period normal sleep seemed to be replaced by " trance," in which the whole body became rigid.

In 1875, after a trance lasting a month, it was found that her memory of the nine years immediately preceding had been totally obliterated, the contractures which had marked those years had disappeared, and all the skill in embroidery, &c., which she had acquired .during them was lost.

From 1875 to the date of the book Miss Fancher's memories were approximately continuous, the only exceptions being found in the lives of her secondary selves. She also remembers the events of her early life up to the beginning of the nine-year period. About 1878 a new memory-synthesis appeared, but soon vanished, and was not again observed until 1887. It was then named by her friends " Idol." Others of later date were named " Rosebud," " Pearl," and " Ruby." The " normal" Miss Fancher was named " Sunbeam," to distinguish her from these. Each of these memory-systems or personalities calls itself Mollie Fancher, possesses a portion of Miss Fancher's memories, and remembers its own previous occurrences. No one has any knowledge of any other save in so far as informed by other persons. " Rosebud " seems to be identical with Mollie Fancher as she was at six or seven years. "Idol" and "Pearl" are young girls of about sixteen, but neither recalls the first accident, while " Ruby," who seems to be about the same age, recalls the first, but not the second accident. " Idol" and " Pearl " are quiet, and not markedly unlike one another, while "Ruby" is vivacious, cheerful, and talkative. None of them possesses " Sunbeam's " acquired skill, and all are extremely unstable, appearing only during the night, and lasting but a few minutes.

During her years of blindness Miss Fancher has convinced her friends that she possessed supernormal powers of vi.sion. It is claimed that she has repeatedly read sealed letters, described events at a distance, and found lost articles. She also believes that she sees the world of spirits, but is extremely reticent upon that topic.

One is disappointed to find that Judge Dailey adduces little evidence of value in support of these claims. He has, indeed, recorded the narratives of many witnesses whose truthfulness no one would question, but in not one of these narratives are the facts given with that attention to details and that care to avoid misdescription which the nature of the case demands. Many are vague in the extreme, and very few tell us how much time elapsed between the event and its committal to writing. To glance at only the best of these : Professor Parkhurst submitted to Miss Fancher a sealed envelope containing a slip of printed paper, the contents of which he did not himself know. She told him it contained the words " court," " jurisdiction," and the numerals 6, 2, 3, 4. These he wrote in his notebook, took the envelope away still sealed, read Miss Fancher's statement to two friends, and in their presence opened the envelope. Miss Fancher's statements were found to be correct. But we are not told how large the type was, how many thicknesses of paper covered it, how Miss Fancher handled the envelope, how long she had it in her possession, or whether she had it at any time when Professor Parkhurst was not present.

VOL. I. Z

Dr. Speir states that Miss Fancher once wrote for him upon a slate the contents of a letter which had just been brought to her by the postman, and was as yet unopened. We are not given copies of the two, nor are we told how much time elapsed between the event and the record, nor who wrote the letter, nor whether Miss Fancher could have known that Dr. Speir would be present when the postman came.

