" On February 28th, 1874, and following evening a spirit came by raps, and gave the name of ' Rosamira.' She said that she died at Torquay on January loth, 1874, and that she had lived at Kilburn. She stated that her husband's name was * Lancaster.' At this time I was troubled about details, and so I isked her husband's Christian name, and I got 'Ben,' and then the power iailed. (The obituary showed that the full name was Benjamin.) I then massed under the control of ' Imperator,' and he said that he had tried as far as ic could to bring this spirit to us. Afterwards the truth of the statements was verified by me, and they were found to be absolutely exact ; and it is, perhaps, mportant to say in this connection that not only were they (i.e. the facts) iterally true, but that nothing was said that was not true ; nor was there any urplusage of detail — only plain, definite, positive facts."

[We have verified this death from an announcement in the Daily Telegraph if January isth, 1874, of course published long before the name was given by aps at the stance. It is therefore quite possible that the name should have •een unwittingly seen by Mr. Moses, and here reproduced from his subliminal aemory.— F. W. H. M.]

(7) I will now quote the case given in " Spirit Identity," p. 193 (Appendix II.), of a " Man Crushed by a Steam-roller," as contributed by an eye-witness f the stance [F. W. Percival] to the Spiritualist of March 27th, 1874.

" On the evening of Saturday, February 2ist, a few friends met together at ic house of Mrs. Makdougall Gregory, 21 Green Street, Grosvenor Square, W. 'he party numbered six in all, and included the Baron Du Potet, and le gentleman to whose mediumship we are indebted for the ' Spirit Teachings ' hich have appeared from time to time in your columns. There was no itention of having a seance, and ordinary topics were the subject of conversa-Dn, when suddenly, in the middle of dinner, this gentleman surprised us by .ying that he felt a spirit standing near him between himself and the Baron vho sat on his right); whether good or bad he could not tell, but the influence as by no means pleasant. The spirit was also perceived by the Baron,

whom it conveyed the impression that it was in a state of great distress, ltd that it was the spirit of a person then alive. Nothing more was said

the time, but the medium continued to feel a disagreeable influence tar him, and spoke of it to me when dinner was over. As soon as we lached the drawing-room he was impelled to sit down and write ; and •ien a pencil and paper had been brought, his hand was moved backwards ; d forwards with great rapidity, and an object was roughly drawn on the paper

which resembled a horse fastened to a kind of cart or truck. Several attempt were made to depict it more clearly, and then the following sentences wer written : — * I killed myself — I killed myself to-day — Baker Street — mediun passed.' Here the writing became unintelligible, as the medium grew mon and more agitated, until at length he rose from his seat in a state of trance and exclaimed in broken sentences : ' Yes, yes. Killed myself to-day, unde a steam-roller. Yes, yes. Killed myself — blood, blood, blood.' The contro then ceased, but the medium felt the same unpleasant influence for som< hours afterwards, and could not entirely shake it off for some days. Ii reference to the communication, I may state that, although the medium hac passed through Baker Street in the afternoon, neither he nor any one preserr was aware that a man had committed suicide there in the morning by throwing himself under a steam-roller. A brief notice of the occurrence appeared in the Pall Mall Gazette in the evening, but none of the party had seen that paper, It is worth remarking that on the front of the steam-roller which was used in Baker Street a horse is represented in brass, and this, perhaps, may serve to account for its appearance in the medium's drawing where we should certainly not expect to find it."

[It appears that the deceased was a cab-driver, and the drawing more probably had reference to this, as Mr. Podmore suggests in Studies in Psychical Research, p. 131, footnote. See also the reference to this case in the entry connected with Blanche Abercromby, section 949. — F. W. H. M.j

(8) Out of a profusion of cases here is one of a different kind. In the year 1880, one Thursday afternoon (date unknown), Dr. and Mrs. Speer and I had dined together, and the party included a lady who had been visiting a connection of Dr. Speer's family in that spring. There she had seen, and been much attracted to, a lovely little girl about seven months old. The child used to be brought in after dinner, and the lady in question grew very fond of her. Between the time of leaving her friends and coming to London the child passed away. It is important to notice that none of these points had ever been mentioned to, or were known by, myself. On the occasion to which I refer, this lady had risen from her seat and was about to place herself in another chair, when I suddenly called out, " Don't sit down on it, don't sit down on it. Little Baby Timmins." None of us knew its first name, and the) asked me. I said " Marian ; the grandmother has brought it." I then suddenly came out of the trance in which I had been, and in my own natura voice — so different to the voice in which I had been speaking — said, " Mrs Speer, will you have some coffee ? " quite ignorant of all that had passed. W< wrote, and then found out a fact unknown to any of us, — that the child'^ name was Marian. I do not put this forth as a complete piece of evidence, fo: the lady may have heard and forgotten the name.

[Mrs. Speer has described to me this incident, which is remarkable as th only observed case where Mr. Moses had a sudden access of unconsciousnes during ordinary life, although he himself mentions others.— F. W. H. M.]

As evidence from another point of view, I may mention that I have ha repeated cases of signatures which are veritable fac-similes of those used b the persons in life ; such, for example, are the signatures of Beethoven, Mozar and of Swedenborg, in connection with Judge Edmonds. It is remarkab that his signature, or rather initials, in my book are those which he used, ar that Swedenborg's signature, a very peculiar one, is a fac-simile of his know handwriting ; quite unknown, however, to me.

948B] TO CHAPTER IX 597

948 B. I add two other cases not included by Mr. Moses in his paper on "The Identity of Spirit." (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 100.)

(i) Fanny Westoby. — This case was described by Mr. Moses to Edmund Gurney and myself, while it was still fresh, on our first meeting with him, May Qth, 1874.

On the evening of April 8th, 1874, while at Bedford with his father and mother, Mr. Moses, who had been receiving messages about ancient religions

during the day, began to ask a question, " I should 1 ," when a meaningless

drawing was made in place of intended words.

Q. What is all that ? And why was I stopped ?

A. " A spirit wishes to communicate, and we are commanded to permit her. She is not able to write with ease, but will communicate through us. Her name is Fanny Westoby. Do you know the name ? "

Q. I do not remember.

A. " Your mother knows her well. She is a cousin of hers. She passed from your earth May I5th last.

Q. Was she married ?

A. " Yes, her maiden name was Kirkham."

Q. Fanny Kirkham. Yes, I have a dim remembrance. She used to live at Markby.

A. " She says that she was born in Alford, in the house now occupied by Sam Stevenson. She then lived at Markby, and, having married, at Belchford. She passed away at Horncastle, at 63 years of age. You do not remember her, when, in the year 1845, 7OU went to see her at Markby. Her mother, Elizabeth Kirkham, was then just released from a lingering illness, and your mother had gone to condole with her cousin. You were taken round the farm, and rode on a goat (she is anxious on this point), and she threw you in sport into a heap of wheat which was being threshed. The result was that you were severely bitten by the harvest bug. She is very anxious that you should recall this to your mother."

Q, I will. But is it wise?

A. "You will not be able to induce her to search into this matter, but you nay satisfy yourself that what is said is true."

Q. Has she any message ?

A. "She says, ' I lost much of my opportunity for progress through the gratification of bodily appetite, which cast me back. My course of progress is ^et to come. I find my present life not very different from yours. I am nearly ne same. I wish I could influence Mary, but I can't get near her.' "

Q. Can she assure me that she is F. W. ?

A. "She can give you no further evidence. Stay, ask your father about Donnington and the trap-door."

Q. I have not the least idea what she means. All the better. I will ask. \ny more ? Is she happy ?

A. " She is as happy as may be in her present state."

Q. How did she find me out ?

A. "She came by chance, hovering near her friend [i.e. Mrs. Moses], and liscovered that she could communicate. She will return now."

Q. Can I help her ?

A. " Yes, pray. She and all of us are helped when you devote your talents willingly to aid us."

Q. What do you mean ?

A. "In advocating and advancing our mission with care and judgment. Then we are permeated with joy. May the Supreme bless you." [Book VIII. pp. 78-83.]

" X Rector."

[I have inquired of my mother and find the particulars given are exactly true. She wonders how I remember things that occurred when I was only 5 years old ! I have not ventured to say how I got the information, believing that it would be unwise and useless. My father I can get nothing out of about the trap-door. He either does not remember or will not say.]

[April qth, 1874. My father has remembered this incident. A trap-door led on to the roof in the house he occupied at Donnington. The house was double roofed, and a good view could be had from it. F. K. on a visit wanted to go there, and got fixed half-way amid great laughter.

\ \ Elevation of double roof.]

[We have verified Mrs. Westoby's death in the Register of Deaths.— F. W. H. M.]

(2) President Garfield. — This is a communication made, not by the departed spirit itself, but by friends.

September 2ot/t, 1881, 10 A.M. — This morning, on waking at 5.54 A.M., I was aware of a spirit who desired to communicate. It turned out to be Mentor, with him B. Franklin, [Epes] Sargent and others. They told me in effect " The President is gone. We were with him to the last. He died suddenly, and all our efforts to keep him were unavailing. We laboured hard, for his life was of incalculable value to our country. He would have done more to rescue it from shame than any one now left." I asked why it had been deemed necessary to come to me with the news. It was replied that a period of great activity in the spirit world was now being renewed, and that my sympathies with him and with his work, and their own knowledge of me, had inclined them to bring the news. The Daily News contained no tidings, though the bulletins were bad. It seemed, on the contrary, that the news of the previous night which they contained was a little more favourable. I walked down to the station feeling convinced that the news would come, but up to 11.30 A.M. could not hear of it. About 12.37 I again went and found that a rumour had reached Bedford. The evening papers — Globe and Echo — which I purchased at 4.30 P.M. gave me the first mundane information of the event. It is now stated that he died at 10.50 P.M. on the ipth (yesterday). That in English time is 3.50 A.M. of this day (2oth) or two hours before I woke and got ; the message.

I have since learned that the death was sudden, and the remarkable fluctuations are not inconsistent with efforts such as described.

September 2ist. — The latest reports fix 10.35, not 10.50 P.M. [or 3.35 A.M. English time] as the exact time of death.

956A] TO CHAPTER IX 599

956 A. Reports and discussions on the case of Mrs. Piper have been published in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 436-659 ; vol. viii. pp, 1-167 ; vol. xiii. pp. 284-582 ; vol. xiv. pp. 6-78 ; vol. xv. pp. 16-52 ; vol. xvi. pp. 1—649.

The following passages are quoted from the report by Professor William James, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 651-59 :—

I made Mrs. Piper's acquaintance in the autumn of 1885. My wife's mother, Mrs. Gibbens, had been told of her by a friend, during the previous

f summer, and never having seen a medium before, had paid her a visit out of curiosity. She returned with the statement that Mrs. P. had given her a long string of names of members of the family, mostly Christian names, together with facts about the persons mentioned and their relations to each other, the knowledge of which on her part was incomprehensible without supernormal powers. My sister-in-law went the next day, with still better results, as she related them. Amongst other things, the medium had accurately described the circumstances of the writer of a letter which she held against her forehead, after Miss G. had given it to her. The letter was in Italian, and its writer was known to but two persons in this country.

[I may add that on a later occasion my wife and I took another letter from this same person to Mrs. P., who went on to speak of him in a way which identified him unmistakably again. On a third occasion, two years later, my sister-in-law and I being again with Mrs. P., she reverted in her trance to

, these letters, and then gave us the writer's name, which she said she had not been able to get on the former occasion.]

But to revert to the beginning. I remember playing the esprit fort on that occasion before my feminine relatives, and seeking to explain by simple considerations the marvellous character of the facts which they brought back.

1 This did not, however, prevent me from going myself a few days later, in company with my wife, to get a direct personal impression. The names of none of us up to this meeting had been announced to Mrs. P., and Mrs. J. and I were, of course, careful to make no reference to our relatives who had preceded. The medium, however, when entranced, repeated most of the names of " spirits " whom she had announced on the two former occasions and added others. The names came with difficulty, and were only gradually made perfect. My wife's father's name of Gibbens was announced first as Niblin, then as Giblin. A child Herman (whom we had lost the previous year) had his name spelt out as Herrin. I think that in no case were both Christian and surnames given on this visit. But the facts predicated of the persons named made it in many instances impossible not to recognise the particular individuals who were talked about. We took particular pains on this occasion to give the Phinuit control no help over his difficulties and to ask no leading questions. In the light of subsequent experience I believe this not to be the best policy. For it often happens, if you give this trance-personage a name or some small fact for

1 the lack of which he is brought to a standstill, that he will then start off with a copious flow of additional talk, containing in itself an abundance of " tests." My impression after this first visit was, that Mrs. P. was either possessed of supernormal powers, or knew the members of my wife's family by sight and had by some lucky coincidence become acquainted with such a multitude of their domestic circumstances as to produce the startling impression which she did.

My later knowledge of her sittings and personal acquaintance with her has led me absolutely to reject the latter explanation, and to believe that she has supernormal powers.

I visited her a dozen times that winter, sometimes alone, sometimes with my wife, once in company with the Rev. M. J. Savage. I sent a large number of persons to her, wishing to get the result of as mxny first sittings as possible. I made appointments myself for most of these people, whose names were in no instance announced to the medium. In the spring of 1886 I published a brief " Report of the Committee on Mediumistic Phenomena " in the Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical Research, of which the following is an extract : —

" I have myself witnessed a dozen of her trances, and have testimony at first hand from twenty-five sitters, all but one of whom were virtually introduced to Mrs. P. by myself. Of five of the sittings we have verbatim stenographic reports. Twelve of the sitters, who in most cases sat singly, got nothing from the medium but unknown names or trivial talk. Four of these were members of the Society, and of their sittings verbatim reports were taken. Fifteen of the sitters were surprised at the communications they received, names and facts being mentioned at the first interview which it seemed improbable should have been known to the medium in a normal way. The probability that she possessed no clue to the sitter's identity was, I believe, in each and all of these fifteen cases, sufficient. But of only one of them is there a stenographic report ; so that, unfortunately for the medium, the evidence in her favour is, although more abundant, less exact in quality than some of that which will be counted against her. Of these fifteen sitters, five, all ladies, were blood relatives, and two (I myself being one) were men connected by marriage with the family to which they belonged. Two other connections of this family are included in the twelve who got nothing. The medium showed a most startling intimacy with this family's affairs, talking of many matters known to no one outside, and which gossip could not possibly have conveyed to her ears. The details would prove nothing to the reader, unless printed in extenso, with full notes by the sitters. It reverts, after all, to personal conviction. My own conviction is not evidence, but it seems fitting to record it. I am persuaded of the medium's honesty, and of the genuineness of her trance ; and although at first disposed to think that the 'hits' she made were either lucky coincidences, or the result of knowledge on her part of who the sitter was and of his or her family affairs, I now believe her to be in possession of a power as yet unexplained."

... As for the explanation of her trance-phenomena, I have none to offer. The primd facie theory, which is that of spirit-control, is hard to reconcile with the extreme triviality of most of the communications. What real spirit, at last able to revisit his wife on this earth, but would find something better to say than that she had changed the place of his photograph ? And yet that is the sort of remark to which the spirits introduced by the . mysterious Phinuit are apt to confine themselves. I must admit, however, that Phinuit has other moods. He has several times, when my wife and myself were sitting together with him, suddenly started off on long lectures to us about our inward defects and outward shortcomings, which were very earnest, as well as subtile morally and psychologically, and impressive in a high degree. These discourses, though given in Phinuit's own person, were very different in style from his more usual talk, and probably superior to anything

956A] TO CHAPTER IX 601

that the medium could produce in the same line in her natural state. Phinuit himself, however, bears every appearance of being a fictitious being. His French, so far as he has been able to display it to me, has been limited to a few phrases of salutation, which may easily have had their rise in the medium's " unconscious " memory ; he has never been able to understand my French ; and the crumbs of information which he gives about his earthly career are, as you know, so few, vague, and unlikely sounding, as to suggest the romancing of one whose stock of materials for invention is excessively reduced. He is, however, as he actually shows himself, a definite human individual, with immense tact and patience, and great desire to please and be regarded as infallible. With respect to the rough and slangy style which he so often affects, it should be said that the Spiritualistic tradition here in America is all in favour of the " spirit-control " being a grotesque and somewhat saucy personage. The Zeitgeist has always much to do with shaping trance-phenomena, so that a " control " of that temperament is what one would naturally expect. Mr. Hodgson will already have informed you of the similarity between Phinuit's name and that of the "control" of the medium at whose house Mrs. Piper was first entranced. The most remarkable thing about the Phinuit personality seems to me the extraordinary tenacity and minuteness of his memory. The medium has been visited by many hundreds of sitters, half of them, perhaps, being strangers who have come but once. To each Phinuit gives an hourful of disconnected fragments of talk about persons living, dead, or imaginary, and events past, future, or unreal. What normal waking memory could keep this chaotic mass of stuff together ? Yet Phinuit does so ; for the chances seem to be, that if a sitter should go back after years of interval, the medium, when once entranced, would recall the minutest incidents of the earlier interview, and begin by recapitulating much of what had then been said. So far as I can discover, Mrs. Piper's waking memory is not remarkable, and the whole constitution of her trance-memory is something which I am at a loss to understand. But I will say nothing more of Phinuit, because, aided by our friends in France, you are already systematically seeking to establish or disprove him as a former native of this world.

Phinuit is generally the medium of communication between other spirits and the sitter. But two other soi-disant spirits have, in my presence, assumed direct " control " of Mrs. Piper. One purported to be the late Mr. E. The other was an aunt of mine who died last year in New York. I have already sent you the only account I can give of my earliest experiences with the " E. control." The first messages came through Phinuit, about a year ago, when, after two years of non-intercourse with Mrs. Piper, she lunched one day at our house and gave my wife and myself a sitting afterwards. It was bad enough ; and I confess that the human being in me was so much stronger than the man of science that I was too disgusted with Phinuit's tiresome twaddle even to note it down. When later the phenomenon developed into pretended direct speech from E. himself I regretted this, for a complete record would have been useful. I can now merely say that neither then, nor at any other time, was there to my mind the slightest inner verisimilitude in the personation. But the failure to produce a more plausible E. speaks directly in favour of the non-participation of the medium's conscious mind in the performance. She could so easily have coached herself to be more effective. . . .

The aunt who purported to " take control " directly was a much better personation, having a good deal of the cheery strenuousness of speech of the original. She spoke, by the way, on this occasion, of the condition of health of two members of the family in New York, of which we knew nothing at the time, and which was afterwards corroborated by letter. We have repeatedly heard from Mrs. Piper in trance things of which we were not at the moment aware. If the supernormal element in the phenomenon be thought-transference it is certainly not that of the sitter's conscious thought. It is rather the reservoir of his potential knowledge which is tapped ; and not always that, but the knowledge of some distant living person, as in the incident last quoted. It has sometimes even seemed to me that too much intentness on the sitter's part to have Phinuit say a certain thing acts as a hindrance. . . .

956 B. The next passage I quote from the Introduction by myself— Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 436-442, — to the records of sittings given by Mrs. Piper in England, 1889-90 : —

Mrs. Piper's case has been more or less continuously observed by Professor James and others almost from the date of the first sudden inception of the trance, some five years ago. Mr. Hodgson has been in the habit of bringing acquaintances of his own to Mrs. Piper, without giving their names ; and many of these have heard from the trance-utterance facts about their dead relations, &c., which they feel sure that Mrs. Piper could not have known. Mr. Hodgson also had Mr. and Mrs. Piper watched or " shadowed " by private detectives for some weeks, with the view of discovering whether Mr. Piper (who is employed in a large store in Boston, U.S.A.) went about inquiring into the affairs of possible " sitters," or whether Mrs. Piper received letters from friends or agents conveying information. This inquiry was pushed pretty closely, but absolutely nothing was discovered which could throw suspicion on Mrs. Piper, — who is now aware of the procedure, but has the good sense to recognise the legitimacy — I may say the scientific necessity — of this kind of probation.

It was thus shown that Mrs. Piper made no discoverable attempt to acquire knowledge even about persons whose coming she had reason to expect. Still less could she have been aware of the private concerns of persons brought anonymously to her house at Mr. Hodgson's choice. And a yet further obstacle to such clandestine knowledge was introduced by her removal to England — at our request — in November 1889. Professor Lodge met her on the Liverpool landing-stage, November igth, and conducted her to a hotel, where I joined her on November 2oth, and escorted her and her children to Cambridge. She stayed first in my house ; and I am convinced that she brought with her a very slender knowledge of English affairs or English people. The servant who attended on her and on her two young children was chosen by myself, and was a young woman from a country village whom I had full reason to believe to be both trustworthy and also quite ignorant of my own or my friends' affairs. For the most part I had myself not determined upon the persons whom I would invite to sit with her. I chose these sitters in great measure by chance; several of them were not resident in Cambridge ; and (except in one or two cases where anonymity would have been hard to preserve) I brought them to her under false names,— sometimes introducing them only when the trance had already begun.

In one sitting, for instance, which will be cited below, I learnt by accident

956B] TO CHAPTER IX 603

that a certain lady, here styled Mrs. A., was in Cambridge; — a private lady, not a member of the Society for Psychical Research, who had never before visited my house, and whose name had certainly never been mentioned before Mrs. Piper. I introduced this lady as Mrs. Smith; — and I think that when the reader is estimating the correct facts which were told to her, he may at any rate dismiss from his mind the notion that Mrs. Piper had been able either to divine that these facts would be wanted, — or to get at them even if she had known that her success depended on their production on that day.

Mrs. Piper while in England was twice in Cambridge, twice in London, and twice in Liverpool, at dates arranged by ourselves ; her sitters (almost always introduced under false names) belonged to several quite different social groups, and were frequently unacquainted with each other. Her correspondence was addressed to my care, and I believe that almost every letter which she received was shown to one or other of us. When in London she stayed in lodgings which we selected ; when at Liverpool, in Professor Lodge's house ; and when at Cambridge, in Professor Sidgwick's or my own. No one of her hosts, or of her hosts' wives, detected any suspicious act or word.

We took great pains to avoid giving information in talk ; and a more complete security is to be found in the fact that we were ourselves ignorant of many of the facts given as to our friends' relations, &c. In the case of Mrs.Verrall, for instance [cited in the Report, p. 584], no one in Cambridge except Mrs. Verrall herself could have supplied the bulk of the information given; and some of the facts given (as will be seen) Mrs. Verrall herself did not know. As regards my own affairs, I have not thought it worth while to cite in extenso such statements as might possibly have been got up beforehand ; since Mrs. Piper of course knew that I should be one of her sitters. Such facts as that I once had an aunt, " Cordelia Marshall, more commonly called Corrie," might have been learnt, — though I do not think that they were learnt, — from printed or other sources. But I do not think that any larger proportion of such accessible facts was given to me than to an average sitter, previously unknown; nor were there any of those subtler points which could so easily have been made by dint of scrutiny of my books or papers. On the other hand, in my case, as in the case of several other sitters, there were messages purporting to come from a friend who had been dead many years, and mentioning circumstances which I believe that it would have been quite impossible for Mrs. Piper to have discovered.

I am also acquainted with some of the facts given to other sitters, and suppressed as too intimate, or as involving secrets not the property of the sitter alone. I may say that, so far as my own personal conviction goes, the utterance of one or two of these facts is even more conclusive of supernormal knowledge than the correct statement of dozens of names of relations, &c., which the sitter had no personal motive for concealing.

On the whole, I believe that all observers, both in America and in England, who have seen enough of Mrs. Piper in both states to be able to form a judgment, will agree in affirming (i) that many of the facts given could not have been learnt even by a skilled detective; (2) that to learn others of them, although possible, would have needed an expenditure of money as well as of time which it seems impossible to suppose that Mrs. Piper could have met ; and (3) that her conduct has never given any ground whatever for supposing her capable of fraud or trickery. Few persons have been so long and so

carefully observed; and she has left on all observers the impression of thorough uprightness, candour, and honesty.

On the question of fraud, see also the statements of Professor Lodge, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 443-7 ; of Dr. Walter Leaf, pp. 558-9 of the same Proceedings; pp. 1-9 of the report by Dr. Hodgson in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. ; pp. 6-1 1 of the report by Professor Newbold in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiv. ; and pp. 5-9 of the report by Professor Hyslop in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xvi.

957 A. From the report by Professor Lodge, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 448-53.

The personality active and speaking in the trance is apparently so distinct from the personality of Mrs. Piper that it is permissible and convenient to call it by another name. It does not differ from her as Hyde did from Jekyll, by being a personification of the vicious portion of the same individual. There is no special contrast, any more than there is any special similarity. It strikes one as a different personality altogether, and the name by which it introduces itself when asked, viz., " Dr. Phinuit," is as convenient as any other, and can be used wholly irrespective of hypothesis.

I would not in using this name be understood as thereby committing myself to any hypothesis regarding the nature of this apparently distinct and individual mind. At the same time the name is useful as expressing compactly what is naturally prominent to the feeling of any sitter, that he is not talking to Mrs. Piper at all. The manner, mode of thought, tone, trains of idea, are all different. You are speaking no longer to a lady, but to a man, an old man, a medical man. All this cannot but be vividly felt even by one who considered the impersonation a consummate piece of acting.

Whether such a man as Dr. Phinuit ever existed I do not know, nor from the evidential point of view do I greatly care. It will be interesting to have the fact ascertained if possible ; but I cannot see that it will much affect the question of genuineness. For that he did not ever exist is a thing practically impossible to prove. While, if he did exist, it can be easily supposed that Mrs. Piper took care enough that her impersonation should have so much rational basis.

It can be objected, why, if he was a French doctor, has he so entirely forgotten his French ? For though he speaks in a Frenchified manner, I am told that he cannot sustain a conversation in that language. I am unable to meet this objection by anything beyond the obvious suggestion that Mrs. Piper's brain is the medium utilised, and that she is likewise ignorant. But one would think that it would be a sufficiently patent objection to deter an impersonator from assuming a rdle of purely unnecessary difficulty, and one which it was impossible satisfactorily to maintain.

Admitting, however, that " Dr. Phinuit " is probably a mere name for Mrs. Piper's secondary consciousness, one cannot help being struck by the singular correctness of his medical diagnoses. In fact, the medical statements, coinciding as they do with truth just as well as those of a regular physician, but given without any 'ordinary examination and sometimes without even seeing the patient, must be held as part of the evidence establishing a strong primd facie case for the existence of some abnormal means of acquiring information. Not

957A] TO CHAPTER IX 605

that it is to be supposed that he is more infallible than another. I have one definite case of distinct error in a diagnosis {Report, p. 547).

Proceeding now on the assumption that I may speak henceforth of Dr. Phinuit as of a genuine individual intelligence, whether it be a usually latent portion of Mrs. Piper's intelligence, or whether it be something distinct from her mind and the education to which it has been subjected, I go on to consider the hypotheses which still remain unexamined.

And first we have the hypothesis of fishery on the part of Dr. Phinuit, as distinguished from trickery on the part of Mrs. Piper. I mean a system of ingenious fishing : the utilisation of trivial indications, of every intimation, audible, tactile, muscular, and of little shades of manner too indefinable to name ; all these excited in the sitter by skilful guesses and well-directed shots, and their nutriment extracted with superhuman cunning.

Now this hypothesis is not one to be lightly regarded, or ever wholly set aside. I regard it as, to a certain extent, a vera causa. At times Dr. Phinuit does fish. Occasionally he guesses ; and sometimes he ekes out the scantiness of his information from the resources of a lively imagination.

Whenever his supply of information is abundant there is no sign of the fishing process.

At other times it is as if he were in a difficult position — only able to gain information from very indistinct or inaudible sources, and yet wishful to convey as much information as possible. The attitude is then as of one straining after every clue, and making use of the slightest indication, whether received in normal or abnormal ways : not indeed obviously distinguishing between information received from the sitter and information received from other sources.

The fishing process is most marked when Mrs. Piper herself either is not feeling well or is tired. Dr. Phinuit seems to experience more difficulty then in obtaining information ; and when he does not fish he simply draws upon his memory and retails old facts which he has told before, occasionally with additions of his own which do not improve them. His memory seems to be one of extraordinary tenacity and exactness, but not of infallibility ; and its lapses do introduce error, both of defect and excess.

He seems to be under some compulsion not to be silent. Possibly the trance would cease if he did not exert himself. At any rate he chatters on, and one has to discount a good deal of conversation which is obviously, and sometimes confessedly, introduced as a stop-gap.

He is rather proud of his skill, and does not like to be told he is wrong; but when he waxes confidential he admits that he is not infallible : " he does the best he can," he says, but sometimes "everything seems dark to him," and then he flounders and gropes, and makes mistakes.

It is not to be supposed that this floundering is always most conspicuous in presence of a stranger. On the contrary, if he is in good form he will rattle off a stranger's connections pretty glibly, being indeed sometimes oppressed with the rush and volume of the information available ; while, if he is in bad trim, he will fish and retail stale news (especially the latter) to quite an old hand, and one who does not scruple to accuse him of his delinquencies when they become conspicuous.

This fallibility is unfortunate, but I don't know that we should expect anything else ; anyhow it is not a question of what we expect, but of what we get.

If it were a question of what I for one had expected, the statement of it would not be worth the writing.

Personally I feel sure that Phinuit can hardly help this fishing process at times. He does the best he can, but it would be a great improvement if, when he realises that conditions are unfavourable, he would say so and hold his peace. I have tried to impress this upon him, with the effect that he is sometimes confidential, and says that he is having a bad time ; but after all he probably knows his own business best, because it has several times happened that after half-an-hour of more or less worthless padding, a few minutes of valuable lucidity have been attained.

I have laid much stress upon this fishery hypothesis because it is a fact to be taken into consideration, because it is occasionally an unfortunately conspicuous fact, and because of its deterrent effect on a novice to whom that aspect is first exposed.

But in thus laying stress I feel that I am producing an erroneous and misleading impression of proportion. I have spoken of a few minutes' lucidity to an intolerable deal of padding as an occasional experience, but in the majority of the sittings held in my presence the converse proportion better represents the facts.

I am familiar with muscle-reading and other simulated " thought-transference " methods, and prefer to avoid contact whenever it is possible to get rid of it without too much fuss. Although Mrs. Piper always held somebody's hand while preparing to go into the trance, she did not always continue to hold it when speaking as Phinuit. She did usually hold the hand of the person she was speaking to, but was often satisfied for a time with some other person's, sometimes talking right across a room to and about a stranger, but preferring them to come near. On several occasions she let go of everybody, for halfhours together, especially when fluent and kept well supplied with " relics."

I have now to assert with entire confidence that, pressing the ingeniousguessing and unconscious-indication hypothesis to its utmost limit, it can only be held to account for a very few of Dr. Phinuit's statements.

It cannot in all cases be held to account for medical diagnoses, afterwards confirmed by the regular practitioner.

It cannot account for minute and full details of names, circumstances, and events, given to a cautious and almost silent sitter, sometimes without contact. And, to take the strongest case at once, it cannot account for the narration of facts outside the conscious knowledge of the sitter or of any person present.

Rejecting the fishery hypothesis, then, as insufficient to account for many of the facts, we are driven to the only remaining known cause in order to account for them: — viz., thought-transference, or the action of mind on mind independently of the ordinary channels of communication. Whether " thoughttransference " be a correct term to apply to the process I do not pretend to decide. That is a question for psychologists.

It may be within the reader's knowledge that I regard the fact of genuine " thought-transference " between persons in immediate proximity (not necessarily in contact) as having been established by direct and simple experiment; and, except by reason of paucity of instance, I consider it as firmly grounded as any of the less familiar facts of nature such as one deals with in a laboratory. (Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. p. 189.)

I speak of it therefore as a known cause, i.e., one to which there need be

957 A] TO CHAPTER IX 607

no hesitation in appealing in order to explain facts which without it would be inexplicable.

The Phinuit facts are most of them of this nature, and I do not hesitate to assert confidently that thought-transference is the most commonplace explanation to which it is possible to appeal.

I regard it as having been rigorously proved before, and as therefore requiring no fresh bolstering up ; but to the many who have not made experiments on the subject, and are therefore naturally sceptical concerning even thought-transference, the record of the Phinuit sittings will afford, I think, a secure basis for faith in this immaterial mode of communication, — this apparently direct action of mind on mind.

But, whereas the kind of thought-transference which had been to my own knowledge experimentally proved was a hazy and difficult recognition by one person of objects kept as vividly as possible in the consciousness of another person, the kind of thought-transference necessary to explain these sittings is of an altogether freer and higher order,— a kind which has not yet been experimentally proved at all. Facts are related which are not in the least present to the consciousness of the sitter, and they are often detailed glibly and vividly without delay ; in very different style from the tedious and hesitating dimness of the percipients in the old thought-transference experiments.

But that is natural enough, when we consider that the percipient in those experiments had to preserve a mind as vacant as possible. For no process of inducing mental vacancy can be so perfect as that of going into a trance, whether hypnotic or other.

Moreover, although it was considered desirable to maintain the object contemptated in the consciousness of the agent, a shrewd suspicion was even then entertained that the unconscious part of the agent's brain might be perhaps equally effective.

Hence one is at liberty to apply to these Phinuit records the hypothesis of thought-transference in its most developed state : absolute vacuity on the part of the percipient, acted on by an entirely sub-conscious or unconscious portion of the sitter's brain.

In this form one feels that much can be explained. If Dr. Phinuit tells one how many children, or brothers, or sisters one has, and their names ; the names of father and mother and grandmother, of cousins and of aunts ; if he brings appropriate and characteristic messages from well-known relatives deceased ; all this is explicable on the hypothesis of free and easy thoughttransference from the sub-consciousness of the sitter to the sensitive medium of the trance personality.1

So strongly was I impressed with this view, that after some half-dozen sittings I ceased to feel much interest in being told things, however minute, obscure, and inaccessible they might be, so long as they were, or had been, within the knowledge either of myself or of the sitter for the time being.

1 For instance, in the course of my interviews, all my six brothers (adult and scattered) and one sister living were correctly named (two with some help), and the existence of the one deceased was mentioned. My father and his father were likewise named, with several uncles and aunts. My wife's father and stepfather were named in full, both Christian and surname, with full identifying detail. I only quote these as examples ; it is quite unnecessary as well as unwise to attach any evidential weight to statements of this sort made during a sojourn in one's house.

6o8 APPENDICES [959 A

At the same time it ought to be constantly borne in mind that this kind of thought-transference without consciously active agency has never been experimentally proved. Certain facts not otherwise apparently explicable, such as those chronicled in Phantasms of the Living, have suggested it, but it is really only a possible hypothesis to which appeal has been made whenever any other explanation seems out of the question. But until it is actually established by experiment in the same way that conscious mind action has been established, it cannot be regarded as either safe or satisfactory ; and in pursuing it we may be turning our backs on some truer but as yet perhaps unsuggested clue. I feel as if this caution were necessary for myself as well as for other members of the Society.

On reading the record it will be apparent that while " Phinuit " frequently speaks in his own person, relating things which he himself discovers by what I suppose we must call ostensible clairvoyance, sometimes he represents himself as in communication — not always quite easy and distinct communication, especially at first, but in communication — with one's relatives and friends who have departed this life.

The messages and communications from these persons are usually given through Phinuit as a reporter. And he reports sometimes in the third person, sometimes in the first. Occasionally, but very seldom, Phinuit seems to give up his place altogether to the other personality, friend or relative, who then communicates with something of his old manner and individuality ; becoming often impressive and realistic.

This last, I say, is rare, but with one or two personages it occurs, subject to reservations to be mentioned directly; and when it does, Phinuit does not appear to know what has been said. It is quite as if he in his turn evacuated the body, just as Mrs. Piper had done, while a third personality utilises it for a time. The voice and mode of address are once more changed, and more or less recall the voice and manner of the person represented as communicating.

The communications thus obtained, though they show traces of the individuality of the person represented as speaking, are frequently vulgarised ; and the speeches are more commonplace, and so to say cheaper, than what one would suppose likely from the person himself. It can, of course, be suggested that the necessity of working through the brain of a person not highly educated may easily be supposed capable of dulling the edge of refinement, and of rendering messages on abstruse subjects impossible.

See also the report by Dr. Walter Leaf in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 559-68 ; and the report by Dr. Hodgson in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 46-58.

959 A. [The following account is quoted from the beginning of the "History of the G. P. Communications," given by Dr. Hodgson in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 295-335.]

G. P. met his death accidentally, and probably instantaneously, by a fall in New York in February 1892, at the age of thirty-two years. He was a lawyer by training, but had devoted himself chiefly to literature and philosophy, and had published two books which received the highest praise from competent authorities. He had resided for many years in

959A] TO CHAPTER IX 609

Boston or its vicinity, but for three years preceding his death had been living in New York in bachelor apartments. He was an Associate of our Society, his interest in which was explicable rather by an intellectual openness and fearlessness characteristic of him than by any tendency to believe in supernormal phenomena. He was in a sense well known to me personally, but chiefly on this intellectual side ; the bond between us was not that of an old, intimate, and if I may so speak, emotional friendship. We had several long talks together on philosophic subjects, and one very long discussion, probably at least two years before his , death, on the possibility of a " future life." In this he maintained that in accordance with a fundamental philosophic theory which we both accepted, a " future life " was not only incredible, but inconceivable ; and I maintained that it was at least conceivable. At the conclusion of the discussion he admitted that a future life was conceivable, but he did not accept its credibility, and vowed that if he should die before I did, and found himself "still existing," he would "make things lively" in the effort to reveal the fact of his continued existence.

On March yth, 1888, he had a sitting with Mrs. Piper, one of a series arranged by the Committee on Mediumistic Phenomena connected with the American S.P.R. (See Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 2.) The names of the sitters in this series were very carefully guarded by the Committee, and I may add my own opinion that Mrs. Piper never knew until recently that she had ever seen G. P. At the sitting which G. P. attended, the Rev. Minot J. Savage acted as the supervising member of the Committee, and G. P. was a stranger to him. (See vol. xiii. p. 326.)

G. P.'s conclusion was, briefly, that the results of this sitting did not establish any more than hypersesthesia on the part of the medium.

I knew of G. P.'s death within a day or two of its occurrence, and was present at several sittings with Mrs. Piper in the course of the following few weeks, but no allusion was made to G. P. On March 22nd, 1892, between four and five weeks after G. P.'s death, I accompanied Mr. John Hart [not the real name], who had been an old intimate friend of his, to a sitting.1 I understood from Mr. Hart that he had some articles with him to be used as tests, but he gave me no further information than this, though I surmised that the articles might have belonged to G. P. The

1 I must mention here that towards the end of 1887, at a time when Mrs. Piper's ! sittings were given in a very much more haphazard way than at present, I had taken Mr. Hart to Mrs. Piper on the chance of getting a sitting. Mrs. Piper was just about to give a sitting to a lady, so that our visit was futile. In my own opinion this circumstance is irrelevant, but as Mrs. Piper saw Mr. Hart at that time for a few minutes, ' although his name was not mentioned, it might be regarded by some persons as im-: portant. Further, Mrs. Piper was staying in New York with one of our members, Dr. Anna Lukens (who knew nothing of G. P.), at the time when G. P. met his death. She went to New York February 8th, 1892, and returned to Boston February 2oth, 1892, as I learned from Dr. Lukens, staying with Dr. Lukens all the time, and giving a series of ' sittings. Mrs. Piper independently gave me a concordant account.

VOL. II. 2 Q

6io APPENDICES [959 A

appointment for the sitting was made by myself, and of course Mr. Hart's real name was not mentioned to Mrs. Piper. I abridge from the notes of the sitting made by myself at the time, and substitute, in part, other names for those actually used.1

The sitting began by some remarks of Phinuit concerning the sitter, followed by an incorrect statement about au cousin said to have died some years before with some heart trouble. Mr. Hart presented a. pencil?

Phinuit : Cousin. Heart, through here [clutches throat and about breast and lower] something like pneumonia. Do you know that's a brother? (Sometimes he used to call me brother.) He's very close to you. (He isn't my brother, though we used to say it of each other.) [The pencil had been worn by an uncle of mine who died of inflammation of the bladder.— J. H.] [Phinuit here calls out a name that suggests an attempt at Howards. See later. — R. H.] (I don't know any one of that name.)

[Sitter gives locket, saying, " He also wore this."]

Phinuit [fingering locket hard]: It has hair in it. It is the hair of his father . . . George . . . and of another, his mother, too. (Yes, that's right.) The influences are confusing. (I have something else here) [giving watch]. Yes. George. Ha . . . Har . . . Hart. [All correct. The name of my uncle George is in the back of the watch. When he died, my uncle Albert wore it. I did not remember that the name was engraved on the inner case of the watch.— J. H.]

Lai ... lal ... Albert ... is that the way you pronounce it? He is very fond of you. He says he is notded . . . dead. He will see you again. He is glad to see you. He is very fond of you. [Lal was a pet name my father sometimes called my uncle Albert. — J. H.]

Who is James . . . Jim? (Yes, I know, but he is not dead.) There is

1 Owing to the personal character of many of the incidents referred to in the G. P. communications, I have in nearly all cases substituted other names for the real ones. It has been suggested that the important witnesses in connection with the G. P. evidence may have been in collusion with Mrs. Piper. The absurdity of this suggestion would be at once apparent if their real names were given, but since the only real full names given of actual sitters with G. P. are those of Professors C. Eliot Norton and James M. Peirce, of Harvard University, who are referred to chiefly as cases of being recognised by the communicating G. P. as personally known to him, I state concerning the others that I know personally all but two of the G. P. sitters, and most of them intimately, that they belong to the most cultivated and responsible class in the United States, and that it would be as absurd to suppose any collusion between them and Mrs. Piper as to suppose that the members of the Council of the S.P.R. were in collusion with her. Many of them are also known personally to Mr. Myers, who adds the following statement. — R. H.

1 am well acquainted with fourteen of the principal persons cited in the sittings recorded in connection with " George Pelham." Several of these, indeed, are among my most valued friends. Not only would the idea of their deliberate collusion with Mrs. Piper be absurd, but I also regard them as very unlikely, from their previous opinions and their character, to supply the unconscious collusion — if I may so term it — of prepossessed credulity. — FREDERIC W. H. MYERS.

2 In the accounts of sittings, the sitter's remarks are throughout given in round brackets, and explanatory notes in square brackets.

959A] TO CHAPTER IX 6n

another George who wants to speak to you. How many Georges are there about you any way ?

The rest of the sitting, until almost the close, was occupied by statements from G. P., Phinuit acting as intermediary. George Pelham's real name was given in full, also the names, both Christian and surname, of several of his most intimate friends, including the name of the sitter.

Moreover, incidents were referred to which were unknown to the sitter or myself.

One of the pair of studs which J. H. was wearing was given to Phinuit. . . . " (Who gave them to me?) That's mine. I gave you that part of it. I sent that to you. (When?) Before I came here. That's mine. Mother gave you that. (No.) Well, father then, father and mother together. You got those after I passed out. Mother took them. Gave them to father, and father gave them to you. I want you to keep them. I will them to you." Mr. Hart notes : " The studs were sent to me by Mr. Pelham as a remembrance of his son. I knew at the time that they had been taken from G.'s body, and afterwards ascertained that his stepmother had taken them from the body and suggested that they would do to send to me, I having previously written to ask that some little memento be sent to me."

James and Mary [Mr. and Mrs.] Howard were mentioned with strongly personal specific references, and in connection with Mrs. Howard came the name Katharine. " Tell her, she'll know. I will solve the problems, Katharine." Mr. Hart notes : " This had no special significance for me at the time, though I was aware that Katharine, the daughter of Jim Howard, was known to George, who used to live with the Howards. On the day following the sitting I gave Mr. Howard a detailed account of the sitting. These words, ' I will solve the problems, Katharine,' impressed him more than anything else, and at the close of my account he related that George, when he had last stayed with them, had talked frequently with Katharine (a girl of fifteen years of age) upon such subjects as Time, Space, God, Eternity, and pointed out to her how unsatisfactory the commonly accepted solutions were. He added that some time he would solve the problems, and let her know, using almost the very words of the communication made at the sitting." Mr. Hart added that he was entirely unaware of these circumstances. I was myself unaware of them, and was not at that time acquainted with the Howards, and in fact nearly every statement made at the sitting, during which I was the note-taker, concerned matters of which I was absolutely ignorant.

Meredith, an intimate friend of Mr. Hart and G. P., was mentioned. "Lent a book to Meredith. Tell him to keep it for me. Go to my room where my desk is." In reply to inquiries (April 1892), Meredith stated that the last time he saw Pelham was in Pelham's own room several months before the latter's death. They had spent the greater part of the day together, and Pelham had pressed Meredith to take away some of his

manuscripts and books. Thus far the reference to Meredith seems to have been correct. But Meredith was unable to remember definitely that he took any manuscript or book away.

The only references coming from G. P. that were apparently confused or without special significance were the remarks towards the end of the sitting : " Give me a powder ; my tongue is wet " — which had no meaning for the sitter (but which the Howards thought might have reference to a time when G. P. was ill in their house) — and the statements below about the handkerchief and perhaps the " Uncle Will." He did leave his papers, letters, &c., " mixed up."

John, if that is you, speak to me. Tell Jim I want to see him. He will hardly believe me, believe that I am here. I want him to know where I am. . . . O good fellow. All got dark, then it grew light. Where is Uncle Will ? I met Uncle Willie, William. (I don't know what you mean.) Ask Mother. She'll know. [G. P. had no Uncle William deceased. He had a deceased great-uncle William, on his mother's side, who was thus the uncle of his mother deceased and his stepmother living, who are sisters.]

Go up to my room. (Which room ?) Up to my room, where I write. I'll come. Speak to me, John. (What room ?) Study. (You said something about a desk just now.) I left things all mixed up. I wish you'd go up and straighten them out for me. Lot of names. Lot of letters. I left things mixed up. You answer them for me. Wish I could remember more, but I'm confused. CLUB. Went to the Club. Two things at the Club to make right. (What Club?) His hand-er— (handkerchief). Handkerchief. (What does he want with his handkerchief?) I left it at the Club. (What Club?) OUR . . did you find it ? (Yes, no, you haven't told me at what Club.) I saw you there. It isn't like you, John. [The last time I saw G. was at the Players' Club in New York.— J. H.]

Who's Rogets? [Phinuit tries to spell the real name.] (Spell that again.) [At the first attempt afterwards Phinuit leaves out a letter, then spells it correctly.] Rogers. (What do you want Rogers to get?) I want you to tell Rogers to get my handkerchief. I left it. He found it. Rogers has got a book of mine. (What is he going to do with it ?)

[Both Hart and G. P. knew Rogers, who at that time had a certain MS. book of G. P. in his possession. The book was found after G. P.'s death and given to Rogers to be edited. G. P. had promised during his lifetime that a particular disposition should be made of this book after his death. This action which G. P. living had contemplated with regard to the book was here, and in subsequent utterances which from their private nature I cannot quote, enjoined emphatically and repeatedly, and had it been at once carried out, as desired by G. P., much subsequent unhappiness and confusion might have been avoided. Neither Hart nor Rogers knows anything of the handkerchief incident.]

During the latter part of the sitting, and without any relevance to the remarks immediately before and after, which were quite clear as expressions from G. P., came the words, " Who's James ? Will— William." [It must be remembered that Phinuit was talking throughout.] This was apparently explained by Phinuit's further remarks at the close of the sitting.

959B] TO CHAPTER IX 613

Phinuit: Who's Alice? (What do you want me to say to her ?) [To R. H.] Alice in spirit. Alice in spirit says it's all over now, and tell Alice in the body all is well. Tell Will I'll explain things later on. He [George] calls Alice, too, in the body. I want her to know me, too, Alice and Katharine. . . . Speak to him. He won't go till you say good-bye. [The hand then wrote : George Pelham. Good day (?) John.]

[Phinuit's reference seemed to be quite clear at the time to Professor William James, and the three Alices were discriminated. It seemed as though Phinuit's mention of the other Alices had reminded G. P. of the one well known to him. Alice James, the sister of Professor William James, had recently died in England. The first name of Mrs. James is also Alice. Alice, the sister of Katharine, is the youngest daughter of Mr. Howard and was very fond of G. P.]

As I have already said, the most personal references made at the sitting cannot be quoted; they were regarded by J. H. as profoundly characteristic of Pelham, and in minor matters, where my notes were specially inadequate, such as in the words of greeting and occasional remarks to the sitter, the manner of reference to his mother with him " spiritually," and to his father and [step] mother living, &c., the sitter was strongly impressed with the vraisemblance of the personality of Pelham.

959 B. [Dr. Hodgson's Report continues as follows : — ]

It so happened that appointments had been made for other sitters, and it was nearly three weeks before a special opportunity was given for further communication from G. P., at a sitting when Mr. and Mrs. James Howard were present alone. In the interim I accompanied several different persons to their sittings, and at each of these Phinuit represented G. P. as anxious to see his friends, using some remark as " George says, when are you going to bring Jim?" or " George says he wants to tell you about the philosophy of this life." One only of these sitters, Mr. Vance, had been known to G. P., and at the beginning of his sitting, which was on March 3Oth, 1892, G. P. first wrote a few words to myself expressing a wish to see his father (Mr. P.) about some private matters; then Phinuit spoke for him, saying, " I want to tell you where I am and what I am doing and what this life consists of." Then references were made to two other friends of G. P., who had also been mentioned at John Hart's sitting, and then for the first time the sitter was noticed. " How is your son ? I want I to see him some time." " Where did he know my son? " " In studies, ; in college." This was correct : Mr. Vance had a son who was class-mate of G. P. Mr. Vance then asked : " Where did George stay with us ? " and \ received a correct answer, a description of his country house being given. (See Report, pp. 457-8.)

At the Howards' first sitting, on April nth, 1892, for which I made

the appointment, of course without giving names, Phinuit said very little.

, After a few words at the beginning he gave way for what purported to be

G. P. using the voice, and during nearly the whole of the time of trance

apparently G. P. controlled the voice directly. The statements made were intimately personal and characteristic. Common friends were referred to by name, inquiries were made about private matters, and the Howards, who were not predisposed to take any interest in psychical research, but who had been induced by the account of Mr. Hart to have a sitting with Mrs. Piper, were profoundly impressed with the feeling that they were in truth holding a conversation with the personality of the friend whom they had known so many years. The following passages are from Mr. Howard's notes taken during the sitting, and may serve to suggest to some extent the freedom with which the conversation was carried on. All the references to persons and [incidents] are correct.

G. P, : Jim, is that you ? Speak to me quick. I am not dead. Don't think me dead. I'm awfully glad to see you. Can't you see me ? Don't you hear me ? Give my love to my father and tell him I want to see him. I am happy here, and more so since I find I can communicate with you. I pity those people who can't speak ... I want you to know I think of you still. I spoke to John about some letters. I left things terribly mixed, my books and my papers ; you will forgive me for this, won't you ? . . .

(What do you do, George, where you are ?)

I am scarcely able to do anything yet ; I am just awakened to the reality of life after death. It was like darkness, I could not distinguish anything at first. Darkest hours just before dawn, you know that, Jim. I was puzzled, confused. Shall have an occupation soon. Now I can see you, my friends. I can hear you speak. Your voice, Jim, I can distinguish with your accent and articulation, but it sounds like a big bass drum. Mine would sound to you like the faintest whisper.

(Our conversation then is something like telephoning?)

Yes.

(By long distance telephone.)

[G. P. laughs.]

(Were you not surprised to find yourself living ?)

Perfectly so. Greatly surprised. I did not believe in a future life. It was beyond my reasoning powers. Now it is as clear to me as daylight. We have an astral fac-simile of the material body. . . . Jim, what are you writing now?

[G. P. when living would probably have jeered at the associations of the word "astral."— R. H.]

(Nothing of any importance.)

Why don't you write about this ?

(I should like to, but the expression of my opinions would be nothing, must have facts.)

These I will give to you and to Hodgson if he is still interested in thes< things.

(Will people know about this possibility of communication ?)

They are sure to in the end. It is only a question of time when people ii the material body will know all about it, and every one will be able to cor municate. ... I want all the fellows to know about me. ... What is Rogen writing ?

(A novel.)

959B] TO CHAPTER IX 615

No, not that. Is he not writing something about me ?

(Yes, he is preparing a memorial of you.)

That is nice ; it is pleasant to be remembered. It is very kind of him. He was always kind to me when I was alive. Martha Rogers [deceased daughter] is here. I have talked with her several times. She reflects too much on her last illness, on being fed with a tube. We tell her she ought to forget it, and she has done so in good measure, but she was ill a long time. She is a dear little creature when you know her, but she is hard to know. She is a beautiful little soul. She sends her love to her father. . . .

Berwick, how is he ? Give him my love. He is a good fellow ; he is what I always thought him in life, trustworthy and honourable. How is Orenberg ? He has some of my letters. Give him my warmest love. He was always very fond of me, though he understood me least of all my friends. We fellows who are eccentric are always misunderstood in life. I used to have fits of depression. I have none now. I am happy now. I want my father to know about this. We used to talk about spiritual things, but he will be hard to convince. My mother will be easier. . . .

[As stated above, all the references to persons, incidents, characters, &c., so far as they are known to living persons, are correct.]

Among the private matters referred to was the disposition of the book, concerning which G. P. expressed orally the same desire as before. (See above, p. 612.) The only writing produced at this sitting moreover was confined to this matter, and was a message to his father repeating his wish.

He referred to a tin box of German manufacture which he said was

either in New York or Z [giving the name, a very peculiar one, of the

locality of his father's country residence] . He said that it contained letters from three persons whom he specified/ He wished the Howards to have this box. They replied that the letters were all burned.

G. P. : I think not. I want you to have them. I want you to tell my father about this.

(Can't you give us something that will convince him ? something we don't know and he does ?)

I understand, a test. You can tell him about this tin box that I left in my room. I know they have taken the chest, but this tin box they have not. [The box was found at Z , but there were no letters in it. — R. H.]

[Mr. Vance, the sitter of March 3oth, 1892, had sent me two questions for G. P., which I requested the Howards to put at their sitting. The questions were — " i. What was the purpose of the association you formed two years ago with Miss Helen Vance and two other ladies? 2. Give the names of the two other ladies." My impression is that I gave Mr. Howard my recollection of these questions without having the original letter of Mr. Vance at hand, and probably Mr. Howard put the questions as I gave them to him. His account is as follows : — ]

Then we put two test questions, by request of Mr. Hodgson : ist. What was the nature of the Society formed by you and some other young people? He was obviously confused, and in trying to answer said " development." We told him not to bother about it now, but to tell us at next sitting, a proposal which

Phinuit recommended, but he himself in his gruff voice suggested "Theosophic." I told him no. He made a try at question 2nd. Names of members of Society, " Helen Bering — Derrich, or Herrick." [The questions were ar> parently not asked until towards the end of the sitting, and Phinuit haa evidently taken control of the voice and was acting as intermediary. The answer must be called wrong, although Helen was the first name of one of the members. — R. H.]

959 C. [The following is from Dr. Hodgson's report in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 353-57-]

I close this section of my Report by a brief account of the case of the friend whom I have called Mr. Hart, to whom in the first instance G. P, manifested (see 959 A), and who himself died in Naples on May 2nd, 1895. As in G. P.'s case, I substitute other names for the real ones. I had not been having regular series of sittings at this time, and heard incidentally on May 3rd that a cablegram had been received by a relative announcing the death of Hart. My assistant, Miss Edmunds, went out to Mrs. Piper at my request to arrange a sitting for me for the next day, May 4th, and to say that it was extremely important that I must have the sitting. I did not tell Miss Edmunds the reason, and she made a totally erroneous conjecture concerning it. The announcement of the death, however, with the place and cause of death (inflammation of the heart), appeared in a Boston evening paper on May 3rd. At the sitting on May 4th, after a few words from Phinuit, G. P. wrote and gave several messages from friends, and then asked what he could do for me. I replied that I had something for him to do, but could not tell him what it was. He made a brief reference to his father and mother, and then to a friend of my own, and then came the following : —

Hold, H. See all of these people bringing a gentleman. [R. H. thinks this is unintentionally written, and doesn't repeat the words aloud.]

Read ... do you see them, H. ? (No.) He is coming here. I think I knew him. [R. H. can't decipher after think.'} That I knew him. Come here and listen, H. He has been here before and I have seen him since I passed out. (Who is it?) John. " Do you see me, H. ? " He says this. (No.) "What about my health ? Oh, George, I am here, do not go away from me," . . . not to you, H., to me. (Yes, I understand.) "I thought I should see you once more before I came here." (What is the full name?) John H. (Give me the second name in full.) Did you speak ? (Write the second name in full.) Hart. (That's right, Hart, old fellow.) "Will you listen to me, Hodg . . . [Much excitement in hand, and letters jumbled over. G. P. writing throughout, but at times apparently much perturbation introduced.] George knew I was here and met me, but I was too weak to come here and talk, H ." . . . Yes, H., but the dear old fellow is short-breathed. ..." I expected to see you before I came here, H. (Yes, I hoped to have met you in the body again) but you see I was failing. How are you ? "

What [apparently from G. P. to Hart.]

" I brought Ge here first." (Yes, you did.)

Yes, I do [from G. P. to Hart.] [More probably from Hart to G. P., in

959C] TO CHAPTER IX 617

answer to some such question as " Do you mean me ? " from G. P. to Hart.

Oh, what about me, H. ?

(He means your first messages came to him.)

Oh, I see ! but I was . . . but (you were out of the body) yes. ..." I am a little dull, H., in my head." (Isn't the light good, to-day?) Yes, but it is I, H., my (you mean yoti are not in good trim, George?) No no I Hart no, H. I Hart (I see, Hart is dull, Hart can't do so well.) [H. is the initial of Hart's real name. 1898.] [Thump with fist. Much thumping with fist during sitting, indicative of assent at different times.]

The above is transcribed from the type-written copy of the record of the sitting, and the quotation marks were doubtless inserted by myself to make the record clearer. There was much confusion in the rest of the sitting. The cause of death he stated to be inflammation of the stomach, which was not correct, though he had suffered much from this for a year before his death. I may have known of this, but was not consciously aware of it. I knew that he had been ill in Europe, but when I last heard from him several months previously, I understood that he had recovered. There were confused references to the Howards. He referred to two other friends in Europe (whose names had been given in previous sittings by G. P.), mentioned several names unknown to me, and referred to incidents in connection with them, as well as other matters, none of which, for family reasons, I have yet been able to verify. I think it probable that they will be partially, but only partially correct. There seemed to be glimpses here and there of a clear consciousness. He wanted to know if it was Paris (where he had stayed some time while in < Europe). I said it was Arlington Heights.

" Arlington, I remember Arlington — did you not take me here? (Yes, this is the very room where George came to you.) Oh yes, I had his [article of G. P. specifically mentioned] and my watch. . . . Will they send my body on to New York? (I don't know.) I hope they will. They are now talking about it." [I learned later that the desirability of taking the body to America was discussed.]

When I asked, "Why didn't George tell me to begin with?" he replied, " Because I told him to let me come and tell myself." This was like Hart, and so was the statement quoted above that it was he who brought G. P. first.

At this sitting, and several also in the following week, during which the confusion continued, a knowledge was shown of various matters known to me which were specially suggestive of Hart, references to friends and

I relatives, presents which he had given to me, jokes about cigars, magazines which he had entrusted to me just before he went to Europe three years previously, &c., but of course I was anxious to obtain information concerning events in Europe of which I was entirely ignorant, especially any

i that occurred just before his death ; and I have such on record, but have

not yet succeeded in discovering how much correct statement they include. Between the first and second sitting it occurred to me that the announcement of his being there to communicate was " led up to " by G. P., and at the second sitting, when Hart wrote part of the time himself, I said, " I suppose last time you thought I took your coming very coolly." The hand wrote excitedly: "You seemed very inconsiderate to what you used to do." I explained that I had heard of his death by a cablegram which had been received by his " brother-in-law." He then wrote the name of the brother of his sister s husband. I said no, " your wife's brother."

Another incident at the same sitting showed a curious remembrance.

. . . Ask for my cigar case . . . am I dreaming ... I think I know that once I sat in this corner [hand points to other side of the room, to place where Mrs. Piper sat at time when Hart attended his sitting on March 22nd, 1892.] (You mean you sat there ?) Yes I did (yes, I remember) I know where I am now.

As I recall this incident, I did not understand what was meant at first when the hand pointed, as it was more than three years since Mrs. Piper had sat there. That position in the room was not associated specially in my mind with Hart, as various other persons whom I had accompanied to sittings had sat in the same position, both before and after Hart's sitting, and it was only after April 2Qth, 1892 (see Report, p. 292), when I succeeded in getting the hand to write with the blockbook on the table instead of on the top of Mrs. Piper's head, that I requested Mrs. Piper to change her position, so that there might be plenty of room for the table and for a sitter on the other side of it. But the occasion was a very memorable one to Hart, and if he was communicating and waking to a consciousness of his surroundings, it was a natural observation for him to make.

In June and July a friend of mine was having a series of sittings, and Hart sent a message to me through him ; he was becoming clearer, and wished to communicate. There were no opportunities for any further series of sittings, however, and Mrs. Piper stopped sitting for her summer rest, and I visited England later. Few sittings were given in the winter of 1895—6 owing to Mrs. Piper's ill-health. Hart gave brief messages on several occasions; said that he wanted to follow in " G. P.'s tracks," and seemed somewhat aggrieved, so to speak, because he did not have the same opportunity as had been afforded to G. P. Thus, on January 22nd, 1896 : —

. . . What in the world is the reason you never call for me? I am not sleeping. I wish to help you in identifying myself, ... I am a good deal better now. (You were confused at first.) Very, but I did not really understand how confused I was. It is more so, I am more so when I try to speak to you. I understand now why George spelled his words to

959C] TO CHAPTER IX 619

me. [Several sentences, even of ordinary words, were spelt out by Phinuit from G. P. at his first appearance, to Hart.]

He became clearer later on, and purported to take part in an inquiry I was making concerning a person's whereabouts in Mexico. It was during this time that Miss Warner {Report, p. 324) had her two sittings, January 6th and 7th, 1897. She remarked to me during the sitting of January 7th, 1897, that Hart knew one of her brothers, Charlie, and that they went to the Azores together. I asked Phinuit if he or G. P. could get Hart. Shortly afterwards G. P. wrote, and after a short conversation with the sitter came the following : —

Did you have a brother Jack, Hart asks. (Yes.)

[For Hart.] I am here. George, tell her I see her and I long to ask her brother if he recalls the storm we experienced.

(I know he does. I've heard him speak of it.)

Good, and ask him if he still has the stick like mine. Take the pipe, old chap, I do not wish it. Hear you? (R. H. : Yes, it may be the one he gave me) and I have it in my mind. A memento. He ought to have it. [Hart gave me a pipe. It is not clear whether the reference is to this, or to one connected with sitter's brother. — R. H.]

We went to a queer little hotel, at a little hotel together. Charlie had a headache from hunger. We were almost starved when we got there, the food was bad, the food was so bad, poor. I am content here, quite. Do you ever see me as I really am ? (No. I don't see you at all.) Not at all. I do, H. Hear Hart say have a smoke, anything for relief. Ask him [Charlie] about this for me. Hungry. (R. H. : He's still talking about Charlie and their experiences together ?) Yes, H. He is.

(Tell some more.) We went up to the hotel and ask him if he recalls the laugh we had after we got to our room. Give him my love.

(What did you laugh about ?) because of the dirt, &c. . . . very amusing. He has not been well but he is going to be. [Disturbance in hand.] Hold on, old man, I cannot hear if you grab me in this way.

Did you ever have a fever ?

(R. H. : Who says that?) I, J. H.

(Do you mean me?) Yes. (Yes. I had a fever. Pneumonia, and typhoid fever.) Never have another. Going to be well now. I said it. (Do you mean me?) Yes, Charles too. Give him my love and do not forget about the stick. ... \

Miss Warner wrote : —

I had known that Charley and Hart took a trip in a sailing vessel to the Azores, but absolutely no details, except that the boat was driven on the rocks and they watched her break up.

This was all she could recollect in connection with the statements made by Hart about her brother. I remembered also about the shipwreck at the Azores, but had no recollections of any sort connecting Hart with Charley Warner, or about any of the other incidents referred to. I think, however, that as Hart himself told me of the shipwreck

at the Azores, he probably mentioned Warner in connection with it. He may possibly also have spoken of some of the other incidents. But I am unable to recall the vaguest memory of any sort about them. Charley Warner was then in California, and in reply to inquiries he wrote on February 2nd, 1897 : —

J. H. and myself once were hove to on the North Atlantic for about three days during a severe storm. At another time we were at Horta, Fayal Island, and watched our vessel drag ashore and break up on account of a very bad storm, or hurricane. J. H. had a very serviceable stick. As I remember it, a stout little blade dropped out of the ferrule. I never had one like it that I can remember. He thought highly of it and advised me to get one like it. I don't remember anything about a pipe. What he says about the queer little hotel is all true ; I don't remember that I had a headache, but we were hungry. J. H. was extremely amused about something at that hotel and we had a hearty laugh. It was connected with dirt.

960 A. From Dr. Hodgson's Report in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. PP- 335-6.

I pass on now to consider briefly the results obtained from some other communicators, and begin with the case of the lady whom I have called Madame Elisa Mannors. Other names are substituted for the real ones. She was known to G. P., and her first appearance was to her sister, Madame Frederica, on May i;th, 1892 (Report, p. 471). She had died the previous summer. The cause of her death was designated by Phinuit, who also described correctly, purporting to repeat what she was telling him, some incidents which had occurred at her death-bed. The sitter inquired about a watch which had belonged to Madame Elisa, but the statements made at this sitting, and to myself at subsequent sittings, did not lead to its recovery. Some Italian was written by request, the lady being as familiar with Italian as with English, but only two or three common words were decipherable. The first names of sitter and communicator were given, and the last name was both written and afterwards given by G. P. to Phinuit. Some of the writing was of a personal character, and some about the watch, and G. P. stated correctly, inter alia, that the sitter's mother was present (in "spirit") with the communicator, and that he himself did not know her. The real names are very uncommon. The Italian for " It is well. Patience," was whispered at the end of the sitting as though by direct control of the voice by Madame Elisa. Both the sitter and her sister were well known to me, and also to the Howards, and Madame Elisa made several personal communications in the course of the sittings recorded in Appendix I. (see Report,^. 417-19, 423), where further attempts, only partially successful, were made to write Italian clearly, and also to speak it, but not much was said.

She communicated by writing later to three or four other friends or relatives, always in a strongly personal way, and very clearly. In her statements to one very personal friend, at sittings when I was present, she showed on several occasions an intimate private knowledge of her sister and her sister's family in connection with events that were occurring, and also of other relatives to whom she was deeply attached. She also had several " written talks " with myself alone, referred to incidents with which we were both familiar when

962A] TO CHAPTER IX 621

guests at the same house in another part of the country, and appreciated properly other references which I made myself. It always seemed like the woman I knew.

As I have mentioned elsewhere (Report, pp. 293, 332), the intelligence communicating by writing is not conscious of the act of writing. The chief difficulty apparently in getting another language written by the hand is that strange words tend to be written phonetically unless they are thought out slowly letter by letter. The writing is usually much more legible now than it was during the period of the records from which I am quoting, when there was frequently much difficulty in deciphering even the simplest English words. It was therefore not surprising that so little of the " Italian " written by Madame Elisa was decipherable.

962 A. From Dr. Hodgson's report in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 384-5.

There are various references in the records given in Appendix IV. to the twin children of Dr. and Mrs. A. B. Thaw. One of these, Margaret, died a year before their first sitting at the age of six months, and the other, Ruthie, died three months before their first sitting at the age of fifteen months. The communications concerning these children were given almost entirely by Phinuit, who had, however, some difficulty with the names. At the first sitting several attempts were made before the name Margaret was given clearly. Trouble with teeth was mentioned in connection with the children, apparently as the first impression on the appearance of Margaret, but not actually specified as Margaret's. Margaret was teething when she died. Phinuit also said that one of the children wanted baby's beads. Margaret used to play with a necklace of beads belonging to her older sister living. And referring to Margaret, Phinuit said that she had some flowers in her hand, that " she liked them and took them with her." Mrs. Thaw had placed three little flowers in Margaret's hand after her death. Phinuit got much more in connection with Ruthie, whose first appearance seemed to be accompanied by a recurrence of associations connected with the trouble that caused her death, dysentery and sore throat. Phinuit indicated the locality and the distress, and Ruthie's dislike of " the powder." Bismuth was given through the entire illness of two weeks and was always given with trouble. Phinuit spoke of Ruthie as having light golden hair, afterwards adding curly; — correct — but called her a boy. The living Ruthie was very generally mistaken for a boy, but not, of course, by the Thaws. Yet Phinuit had much difficulty in getting the name, and failed to get nearer than Ethie, and the sitters told him it began with R. Phinuit said that she had not learned to talk, but later on he got the name Ruth-ie correctly. He remarked that she only said papa and mamma. Other words that the living Ruthie said were given in later sittings. Phinuit described her as wanting to see the stars. For two or three months before her death Ruthie was fond of pointing at the stars through the window. At the beginning of the sitting Phinuit said she put her hand on Dr. Thaw's head, and afterwards described her as wanting to pat his face, actions which were characteristic of the living Ruthie towards Dr. Thaw. Similarly she wanted to hear the tick tick (watch) in connection with her uncle Aleck, and it was he who chiefly used to hold the watch for her to hear it. And another characteristic action was reproduced in connection with Mr. Melvin W. ;

Phinuit said she wanted him to wave the hand in a certain way to Mr. W., and the living Ruthie waved her hand in that way to Mr. W., and to him only. Reference was also made to her picture, and Mrs. Thaw was painting a picture of Ruthie when she was taken ill. In later sittings Phinuit described her as saying other words, baby, pretty, Bettie, and pussie, with the accent used by Ruthie when living. These were the only words besides the papa and mamma mentioned before, used by Ruthie when living. The first time Mrs. Thaw wore fur at a sitting, the hand stroked it, and Phinuit whispered " pussie " as Ruthie living used to do. But Ruthie had whispered " pussie" at a previous sitting. Two or three times there seemed to be a direct control of the voice by Ruthie who took the place of Phinuit (Report, pp. 564, 576, 578). The first time she whispered pttee and pssee (pretty and pussie) and the second time ///<?<? only, the words being many times repeated. This second occasion was connected with rather a striking incident. Mrs. Piper was visiting the Thaws in New York, and they took her up the river Hudson to their country house and had a sitting on the afternoon of the day of their arrival. I was taking notes, sitting slightly to one side and partly behind Mrs. Piper, while Dr. and Mrs. Thaw were sitting in front of her, with their heads somewhat bowed. Phinuit apparently "left" and his place was taken by Ruthie, who began whispering pttee pttee. The hand rose and turned somewhat diagonally and extended the forefinger and pointed towards a picture on the far side of the room. The Thaws did not see this action until I drew their attention to it, when they looked up, and followed the direction of the pointing. The hand then trembled and sank. Dr. Thaw noted: "During the last month of Ruthie's life it was a regular morning custom to bring her to the room in which this sitting was held — our bedroom — and she would always point, as hand did in sitting, with one finger (unusual with a baby) and say ' pt-tee, pt-tee,' just as in sitting. This little incident had not been in either sitter's conscious mind since baby's death six months before. Mrs. Piper had never been in that room until the actual time of sitting. Many other pictures in the room, two of which Mrs. Piper's hand could have pointed at more easily than the particular one always noticed by the baby."

963 A. I now cite a few instances of prophecies given through Mrs. Piper.

(a) The following account is from Miss W.'s report (made from contemporary notes) of sittings with Mrs. Piper, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viiL P- 34-

In the spring of 1888, an acquaintance, S., was suffering torturing disease. There was no hope of relief, and only distant prospect of release. A consultation of physicians predicted continued physical suffering and probably mental decay, continuing perhaps through a series of years. S.'s daughter, worn with anxiety and care, was in danger of breaking in health. " How can I get her away for a little rest?" I asked Dr. Phinuit, May 24, 1888. " She will not leave her father," was his reply, " but his suffering is not for long. The doctor are wrong about that. There will be a change soon, and he will pass out of the body before the summer is over." His death occurred in June 1888.

E. G. W.

(b) The next incident is from Mr. « M. N.'s " account of Mrs. Piper in

963 A] TO CHAPTER IX 623

Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 120, which was corroborated by Mrs. "M. N."

April $th [1889.].

. . . About end March of last year I made her a visit (having been in the habit of doing so, since early in February, about once a fortnight). She told me that a death of a near relative of mine would occur in about six weeks, from which I should realise some pecuniary advantages. I naturally thought of my father, who was advanced in years, and whose description Mrs. Piper had given me very accurately some week or two previously. She had not spoken of him as my father, but merely as a person nearly connected with me. I asked her at that sitting whether this person was the one who would die, but she declined to state anything more clearly to me. My wife, to whom I was then engaged, went to see Mrs. Piper a few days afterwards, and she told her (my wife) that my father would die in a few weeks.

About the middle of May my father died very suddenly in London from heart failure, when he was recovering from a very slight attack of bronchitis, and the very day that his doctor had pronounced him out of danger. Previous to this Mrs. Piper (as Dr. Phinuit) had told me that she would endeavour to influence my father about certain matters connected with his will before he died. Two days after I received the cable announcing his death my wife and I went to see Mrs. Piper, and she [Phinuit] spoke of his presence, and his sudden arrival in the spirit-world, and said that he (Dr. Phinuit) had endeavoured to persuade him in those matters while my father was sick. Dr. Phinuit told me the state of the will, and described the principal executor, and said that he (the executor) would make a certain disposition in my favour, subject to the consent of the two other executors, when I got to London, England. Three weeks afterwards I arrived in London ; found the principal executor to be the man Dr. Phinuit had described. The will went materially as he had stated. The disposition was made in my favour, and my sister, who was chiefly at my father's bedside the last three days of his life, told me that he had repeatedly complained of the presence of an old man at the foot of his bed, who annoyed him by discussing his private affairs. . . .

["M. N."]

(c) See Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 447-449.

At a sitting with Mrs. Piper on March 7, 1892, the death of her uncle David was foretold to Miss Macleod. Her contemporary note of the statement was : " David will die soon."

She wrote on March 27, 1893 :

