The incident seemed so strange to me that I questioned him about it, and upon three separate occasions, the last one shortly before reaching port, Mr. Tait repeated to me the same account of what he had witnessed. On reaching New York we parted, and I never saw him afterward, but I understand that he died a number of years ago in Cleveland.

The day after landing I went by rail to Watertown, Conn., where my children and my wife had been for some time, visiting her parents. Almost her first question when we were alone together was, " Did you receive a visit from me a week ago Tuesday ?" "A visit from you ? " said I, "we were more than a thousand miles at sea." " I know it," she repHed, " but it seemed to me that I visited you." " It would be impossible," said I. " Tell me what makes you think so."

My wife then told me that on account of the severity of the weather and the reported loss of the Africa, which sailed for Boston on the same day that we left Liverpool for New York, and had gone ashore at Cape Race, she had been extremely anxious about me. On the night previous, the same night when, as mentioned above, the storm had just begun to abate, she had lain awake for a long time thinking of me, and about four o'clock in the morning it seemed to her that she went out to seek me.' Crossing the wide and stormy sea, she came at length to a low, black steamship, whose side she went up, and then descending into the cabin, passed through it to the stern until she came to my state-room. " Tell me," said she, " do they ever have state-rooms like the one I saw, where the upper berth extends further back than the under one ? A man was in the upper berth, looking right at me, and for a moment I was afraid to go in, but soon I went up to the side of your berth, bent down and kissed you, and embraced you, and then went away."

The description given by my wife of the steamship was correct in all particulars, though she had never seen it. I find by my sister's diary that we sailed October 4th ; the day we reached New York, 22nd ; home, 23rd.

With the above corrections I can very willingly subscribe my name.

S. R. WiLMOT.

Mr. W. B. H. adds :—

The files of the Herald show that the City of Limerick left Liverpool October 3rd, 1863, Queenstown October 5th, and arrived at New York early on the morning of the 22nd of October, 1863. Herald, October 14th, 1863, says : —

" Steamer Africa from Queenstown on the 4th inst. put into St. John's N.F., yesterday afternoon, on her voyage to Boston by way of Halifax. The Africa struck on the rocks near Cape Race at ten o'clock last Monday night (October 12th) during a dense fog. She was put about before she struck, but took ground, fore, aft, and amidships. There was considerable sea running, with a southerly wind at the time. The steamer's boats were got ready, but not launched. The Africa floated off after an hour, and was speedily cleared of water by her pumps. Captain Stone then headed her for Halifax, but soon deemed it prudent to put into St. John's, Newfoundland. Both cargo and vessel were badly damaged. When our last despatch was forwarded from St. John's, the Africa was making a large quantity of water."

Found no report of severe storm. A. H.

fuly 1889.

In answer to inquiries Mr. Wilmot writes to Mr. Hodgson : —

Bridgeport, February 2^tk, 1890.

As to whether I and my wife have ever had any analogous experiences, will say for myself, Yes, dreams revealing subsequent events, but nothing of such ■& joint tiature.

I only spoke of my dream and Mr. Tait's experience to my sister (who was with me then, and is now), as I could not quite divest myself of the thought that Mr. T. might have invented his part from witnessing something unusual in me while asleep, therefore my questions to him when about to disembark at N.Y. I do not think it likely that Mr. Tait mentioned to others on board ship, or if he had, that it could now be ascertained. I did not mention these things to any but my sister till after reaching home and learning what I did from my wife. That astonished me ; it almost took my breath away. S. R. Wilmot.

Miss Wilmot writes : —

In regard to my brother's strange experience on our homeward voyage in the Limerick, I remember Mr. Tait's asking me, one morning (when assisting me to the breakfast table, for the cyclone was raging fearfully), if I had been in last night to see my brother; and my astonishment at the question, as he shared the same state-room. At my '■'■No, why.'"' he said he saw some woman, in white, who went up to my brother (who was too seasick to leave his berth for several days). I soon went in to see [my brother], who told me that Mr. Tait had wondered at my coming in to see him, and I think he said he had dreamed of seeing his wife there, but in the imminent danger that loomed over us, I did not fix my mind on their after conversations.

I think my brother must have written to Mr. Tait the share my sister had in the vision — shall I call it? AVhen visiting at the Taits' in Cleveland, two or three years after, he spoke of the wonderful coincidence. It evidently impressed him. If he were still living, I would refer you to to him.

Eliza E. Wilmot.

667 A] TO CHAPTER VI 685

Mrs. Wilmot says : —

Bridgeport, Conn., February zyth, 1S90.

... In reply to the question, Did I " notice any details about the man I saw in the upper berth ? " I cannot at this late day positively say that I did, but I distinctly remember that I felt much disturbed at his presence, as he leaned over, looking at us.

I think that I told my mother the next morning about my dream ; and I know that I had a very vivid sense all the day of having visited my husband : the impression was so strong that I felt unusually happy and refreshed, to my surprise. . . . [Signed] Mrs. S. R. Wilmot.

In commenting on this case, Mrs. Sidgwick observes : —

This case differs from those that precede it. In them the clairvoyant person was apparently a passive recipient of the telepathic impulse from the agent which led to the clairvoyant perception. But here Mrs. Wilmot seems, as it were, to have actively sought communication with her husband. I should still hold with Mr. Gurney that this is no reason for regarding the incident as other than telepathic, for there is as little ground for supposing that Mrs. Wilmot could have perceived psychically any cabin as there is for thinking that Mrs. Paquet [see 663] could have had a vision of atiy death scene. In other words, it is probable that the presence of the husband and brother respectively were essential conditions of the percipience, which, therefore, depended on some unknown process of communication from mind to mind. The fact that Mr. Wilmot at the same time dreamt of his wife seems to me, if anything, to strengthen the telepathic hypothesis, because it shows that there was actually a community of mental impressions.

But it may be said that it is more difficult thus to account for Mr. Tait's seeing a figure at the same time as Mr. Wilmot, and that this at least tends to show that Mrs. Wilmot was actually there in some sense other than a purely mental one. The question here raised is the difficult one of the significance of collective psychical experiences. . . . Briefly, . . . besides the possibility of a direct telepathic communication between the primary agent and both percipients, there are two hypotheses to account for collective hallucinations,— assuming of course that they are not due to suggestion by word or gesture. One is that there is some kind of objective presence, some centre of " phantasmogenetic efficacy," located in space and within range of the operation of the percipient's senses. The other is that the primary percipient, B, whether his own impression is due to telepathy or is purely subjective, becomes an agent as regards the secondary percipient C, who receives his impression by thought-transference from or through B.

It is this second view which I agree with Mr. Gurney in thinking the most probable. . . .

667 A. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. i, p. 527. The next account was from a lady known to Mr. Gurney, whose only reason for withholding her name and address was her fear that a near relation might object to their publication.

December lyth, 18S3.

Years ago, a friend and myself made the time-worn arrangement that whichever died first would endeavour to return to visit the other. Some years after, I asked this man's sister to remember me to him and say, did he remember his promise, and having received for answer " Perfectly, and I hope I shall appear

to , and not she to me," the whole matter passed out of my mind. My

friend was in New Zealand, his sister I don't know where. One night I awoke with a feeling some one was in the room. I must tell you that I always have a bright light burning on a table, not far from my bed. I looked about, and presently saw something behind the little table ; felt myself grow perfectly cold ; was not in the least frightened, rubbed my eyes to be sure I was quite awake, and looked at it steadfastly. Gradually a man's head and shoulders were perfectly formed, but in a sort of misty material, if I may use such a word. The head and features were distinct, but the whole appearance was not substantial and plain ; in fact it was like a cloud, formed as a man's head and shoulders. At first I gazed and thought, who is it, some one must be here, but who 1 Then the formation of the head and forehead (which are most marked in my friend) made me exclaim to myself " Captain W ." The appearance faded away.

I got up and put the date down ; and waited until news from New Zealand was possible. I made inquiries about my friend, never doubting but that he was dead. The answer always came " No news." At last this also, " We are so anxious, it is so long since we have heard. We shall again wait another mail, and write to so-and-so." And then came the news, a mere scrap, " Have had a severe fall off the coach ; can't write ; head all wrong still." That was all, and pretty much the exact words as far as I can remember. In due time we heard more. He had fallen off the coach, and was insensible for some time, and then, as he had said, his head was not clear for a while. I have never had the shghtest doubt but that, while insensible, his spirit came here. The appearance to me was coincident with the time of his insensibility, I have never had but this one experience of an apparition. E. W. R.

In a subsequent letter, Miss R. adds : —

Jattuary 1st, 18S4. I put the date down in a book I use daily : there is a page for every day in the month. I mentioned it to several people — quite three or four. One was extremely amused because my friend had not died ; which she always used to assure me was — she was sure — a cause of sincere regret to me.

" The present writer (says Gurney) has seen the book, which is one containing reading for every day of the month. The words written in pencil, on the page of the 15th day, are : 'Night of this clay, March, '74. ' "

The following corroborative note was obtained from Miss R.'s sister : —

DiTCHINGHAM, May isf, 1884.

As far as I can remember, my sister told me of heV vision soon after it occurred, and before the news of her friend's accident arrived. It is so many years ago that I cannot speak more positively. Mother C.

In conversation. Miss R. especially, and unasked, confirmed the fact that the feeling of a presence in the room preceded the vision. She described the formation of the figure as like a cloud taking a definite shape.

667 B] TO CHAPTER VI 687

She further said that the hair of the head which appeared was distinctly grey, and that this was the chief reason why she did not sooner recognise the face. Her friend had black hair when she last saw him, and she had never thought of him otherwise ; but she found out afterwards that he had become grey, and was so at the time of his accident. She also stated that she had ascertained beyond a doubt that her vision fell during the period of her friend's insensibility.

See also another "compact" case in Fhaniastns of the Living, vol. ii. P- 253-

667 B. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 227. The next account is from Commander T. W. Aylesbury (late of the Indian Navy), of Sutton, Surrey. The case, at first sight, (says Gurney) may seem as if it belonged to the reciprocal class ; but Commander Aylesbury's vision did not include enough detail to justify us in regarding it as other than subjective, the scene being apparently such as he might naturally have

conjured up.

December 1882.

The writer, when thirteen years of age, was capsized in a boat, when landing on the island of Bally, east of Java, and was nearly drowned. On coming to the surface, after being repeatedly submerged, the boy called his mother. This amused the boat's crew, who spoke of it afterwards, and jeered him a good deal about it. Months after, on arrival in England, the boy went to his home, and while telling his mother of his narrow escape, he said, " While I was under water, I saw you all sitting in this room ; you were working something white. I saw you all — mother, Emily, Eliza, and Ellen." His mother at once said, " Why, yes, and I heard you cry out for me, and I sent Emily to look out of the window, for I remarked that something had happened to that poor boy." The time, owing to the difference of E. longitude, corresponded with the time when the voice was heard.

Commander Aylesbury adds : —

I saw their features (my mother's and sisters'), the room and the furniture, particularly the old-fashioned Venetian blinds. My eldest sister was seated next to my mother.

I think the time must have been very early in the morning. I remember a boat capsized the day before, and washed up. The mate said we would go and bring her off in the morning, but the exact time I cannot remember. It was a terrible position, and the surf was awful. We were knocked end over end, and it was the most narrow escape I ever had — and I have had many ; but this one was so impressed on my mind with the circumstances — the remarks and jeers of the men, — " Boy, what was you calHng for your mother for? Do you think she could pull you out of Davy Jones's locker," &c., with other language I cannot use.

The following is an extract from a letter written to Commander Aylesbury by one of his sisters, and forwarded to us, in 1S83 : —

I distinctly remember the incident you mention in your letter (the voice calling " Mother ") ; it made such an impression on my mind, I shall never

forg-et it. We were sitting quietly at work one evening ; it was about nine o'clock. I think it must have been late in the summer as we had left the street door open. We first heard a faint cry of " Mother " ; we all looked up, and said to one another, " Did you hear that ? Some one cried out ' Mother.' " We had scarcely finished speaking, when the voice again called, " Mother," twice in quick succession, the last cry a frightened, agonising cry. We all started up, and mother said to me, " Go to the door and see what is the matter." I ran directly into the street and stood some few minutes, but all was silent and not a person to be seen ; it was a lovely evening, not a breath of air. Mother was sadly upset about it. I remember she paced the room, and feared that something had happened to you. She wrote down the date the next day, and when you came home and told us how near you had been drowned, and the time of day, father said it would be about the time nine o'clock would be with us. I know the date and the time corresponded.

The difference of time at the two places is a little more than seven hours ; consequently nine in the evening in England would correspond with "very early in the morning" of the next day at the scene of the accident. But the incident happened too long ago for memory to be trusted as to the exactitude of the coincidence.

668 A. From the Rev. Clarence Godfrey. This case first appeared in the second edition of Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. Ixxxi., having been sent to Mr. Podmore by the experimenter, a friend of his. I quote the somewhat briefer account given in Mr. Podmore's Apparitions and Thought-transference, Y^. 228-230. Mr. Godfrey wrote to Mr. Podmore on November i6th, 18S6, as follows : —

I was so impressed by the account on p. 105 [of Phantasms of the Living'], that I determined to put the matter to an experiment.

Retiring at 10.45 (on the 15th November 1886), I determined to appear, if possible, to a friend, and accordingly I set myself to work vi^ith all the volitional and determinative energy which I possess, to stand at the foot of her bed. I need not say that I never dropped the slightest hint beforehand as to my intention, such as could mar the experiment, nor had I mentioned the subject to her. As the " agent " I may describe my own experiences.

Undoubtedly the imaginative faculty was brought extensively into play, as well as the volitional, for I endeavoured to translate luysetf spiritually, into her room, and to attract her attention, as it were, while standing there. My effort was sustained for perhaps eight minutes, after which I felt tired and was soon asleep.

The next thing I was conscious of was meeting the lady next morning {i.e. in a dream, I suppose?) and asking her at once if she had seen me last night. The reply came, " Yes." " How ? " I inquired. Then in words strangely clear and low, like a well-audible whisper, came the answer, " I was sitting beside you." These words, so clear, awoke me instantly, and I felt I must have been dreaming; but on reflection I remembered what I had been "willing" before I fell asleep, and it struck me, "This must be a 7rfex action from the percipient." My watch showed 3.40 a.m. The following is what I wrote immediately in pencil, standing in my night-dress : " As I reflected upon those clear words, they struck me as being quite inttiitive I mean subjective., and to

668 A] TO CHAPTER VI 689

have proceeded yy^w? within, as fny own conviction, rather than a communication from any one else. And yet I can't remember her face at all, as one can after a vivid dream."

But the words were uttered in a clear, quick tone, which was most remarkable, and awoke me at once.

My friend, in the note with which she sent me the enclosed account of her own experience, says : " I remember the man put all the lamps out soon after I came upstairs, and that is only done about a quarter to four."

Mr. Godfrey received from the percipient on the i6th November an account of her side of the experience, and at his request she wrote it down as follows : —

Yesterday — viz., the morning of November i6th, 1886 — about half-past three o'clock, I woke up with a start and an idea that some one had come into the room. I heard a curious sound, but fancied it might be the birds in the ivy outside. Next I experienced a strange, restless longing to leave the room and go downstairs. This feeling became so overpowering that at last I rose and lit a candle, and went down, thinking if I could get some soda-water it might have a quieting effect. On returning to my room I saw Mr. Godfrey standing under the large window on the staircase. He was dressed in his usual style, and with an expression on his face that I have noticed when he has been looking very earnestly at anything. He stood there, and I held up the candle and gazed at him for three or four seconds in utter amazement, and then, as I passed up the staircase, he disappeared. The impression left on my mind was so vivid that I fully intended waking a friend who occupied the same room as myself, but remembering that I should only be laughed at as romantic and imaginative, refrained from doing so.

I was not frightened at the appearance of Mr. Godfrey, but felt much excited, and could not sleep afterwards.

On the 2 1st of the same month (says Mr. Podmore) I heard a full account of the incident given above from Mr. Godfrey, and on the day following from

Mrs. . Mrs. told me that the figure appeared quite distinct and

life-like at first, though she could not remember to have noticed more than the upper part of the body. As she looked it grew more and more shadowy, and

finally faded away. Mrs. , it should be added, told me that she had

previously seen two phantasmal figures, representing a parent whom she had recently lost.^

Mr. Godfrey at our request made two other trials, without, of course, letting Mrs. -~ — know his intention. The first of these attempts was without result, owing perhaps to the date chosen, as he was aware at the time, being unsuitable. But a trial made on the 7th December 1886 succeeded completely.

Mrs. , writing on December 8th, states that she was awakened by hearing a

voice cry, " Wake," and by feeling a hand rest on the left side of her head. She then saw stooping over her a figure which she recognised as Mr. Godfrey's.

In this last case the dress of the figure does not seem to have been seen distinctly. But in the apparition of the i6th November, it will be observed that the dress was that ordinarily worn in the day-time by Mr. Godfrey, and

1 These details are taken from notes made by the writer immediately after the interview.

VOL. T. 2 X

that in which the percipient would be accustomed to see him, not the dress which he was actually wearing at the time. If the apparition is in truth nothing more than an expression of the percipient's thoughts, this is what we should expect to find, and as a matter of fact in the majority of well-evidenced narratives of telepathic hallucination this is what we actually do find. The dress and surroundings of the phantasm represent, not the dress and surroundings of the agent at the moment, but those with which the percipient is familiar,

668 B. The next case is taken from the " Report on the Census of Yi3\\vicim.i\ons,'^ Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 270. It is to be observed that the agent in this case — Mr. Kirk — seems to possess an unusual capacity for impressing other minds telepathically, as shown by his experiments in thought-transference, some of which are given in 630 D. His own account is as follows : —

2 RiPON Villas, Upper Ripon Road, PlumsteaDj/m/j/ -jth, 1890.

I have to inform you that from the loth to 20th June I tried a telepathic experiment each night upon Miss G. I did so, as suggested by you in your letter of June 3rd, without her knowledge, as a preliminary to entering upon experiments with her under conditions of expectancy and the recording of dates and hours. Each trial had for its object the rendering myself visible to her — simply visible. With the exception of one — which was made one afternoon from my office in the Arsenal — each trial -took place at my house between the hours of II P.M. and i a.m.

Up to June 23rd I heard nothing direct from my " subject." Indirectly, however, I learnt that my influence was acting rather strongly. Each time Miss G. came to my house, while the experiments were in progress, she complained of being kept sleepless and restless from an uneasy feeling which she was unable to describe or account for. On one night so strong was this uneasy feeling, she was compelled to get up, dress herself, and take to some needlework, and was unable to throw off the sensation and return to bed until two o'clock. I made no comments on these complaints — never dropped a hint, even, as to what I was doing. Under these circumstances it seemed probable to me that, although my influence was telling upon her, to her discomfort, I had not succeeded in the object of my experiments. Supposing this to be the case, and that I was only depriving her of rest, I thought it best to discontinue the trials for a time.

I felt disappointed at this apparently barren result. But, on June 23rd, an agreeable surprise was sprung upon me, in that I learnt I had most effectually succeeded on one occasion — the very occasion on which I had considered success as being highly improbable — in presenting myself to INIiss G. As you will find in her statement, herewith enclosed, the vision was most complete and realistic. The trial which had this fortunate result was that I had made from my office and on the spur of the moment. I had been rather closely engaged on some auditing work, which had tired me, and as near as I can remember the time was between 3.30 and 4 p.m., that I laid down my pencil, stretched myself, and in the act of doing the latter I was seized with the impulse to make a trial on Miss G. I did not, of course, know where she was at the moment, but, with a flash, as it were, I transferred myself to her bedroom. I cannot say why I thought of that spot, unless it was that I did so because my first experi-

668 B] TO CHAPTER VI 691

ment had been made there. As it happened, it was what I must call a "lucky shot " for I caught her at the moment she was lightly sleeping in her chair — a condition which seems to be peculiarly favourable to receiving and externalising telepathic messages.

The figure seen by Miss G. was clothed in a suit I was at the moment wearing, and was bareheaded, the latter as would be the case, of course, in an office. This suit is of a dark reddish-brown check stuff, and it was an unusual circumstance for me to have had on the coat at the time, as I wear, as a rule, an office coat of light material. But this office coat I had, a day or so before, sent to a tailor to be repaired, and I had, therefore, to keep on that belonging to the dark suit.

I tested the reality of the vision by this dark suit. I asked, " How was I dressed ? " (not at all a leading question). The reply of Miss G. was, touching the sleeve of the coat I was then wearing (of a light suit), " Not this coat, but that dark suit you wear sometimes. I even saw clearly the small check pattern of it; and I saw your features as plainly as though you had been bodily present. I cottld Jioth.z.v^ seen you more distinctly."

Miss G.'s account is : —

June 2%th, 1890.

A peculiar occurrence happened to me on the Wednesday of the week before last. In the afternoon (being tired by a morning walk), while sitting in an easy-chair near the window of my own room, I fell asleep. At any time I happen to sleep during the day (which is but seldom) I invariably awake with tired uncomfortable sensations, which take some little time to pass off ; but that afternoon, on the contrary, I was suddenly quite wide awake, seeing Mr. Kirk standing near my chair, dressed in a dark-brown coat, which I had frequently seen him wear. His back was towards the window, his right hand towards me ; he passed across the room towards the door, which is opposite the window, the space between being 15 feet, the furniture so arranged as to leave just that centre clear ; but when he got about 4 feet from the door, which was closed, he disappeared.

My first thought was, " had this happened a few hours later I should have believed it telepathic," for I knew Mr. Kirk had tried experimenting at different times, but had no idea he was doing so recently. Although I have been much interested by his conversation about psychical phenomena at various times during the past year, I must confess the element of doubt would very forcibly present itself as to whether telepathic communication could be really a fact ; and I then thought, knowing he must be at the office at the time I saw him (which was quite as distinctly as if he had been really in the room), that in this instance, at least, it must be purely imaginary, and feeling so sure it was only fancy, resolved not to mention it, and did not do so until this week, when, almost involuntarily, I told him all about it. Much to my astonishment,

The first experiment of this series was on the night of the loth, the successful experiment on the afternoon of June nth (Wednesday). Mr. Kirk tells us that he made a note at the time on his blotting-paper of day and hour. Mr. Kirk had on four occasions durmg the previous four years tried from a distance to produce an impression of presence on Miss G. with considerable success, but had not tried to appear to her. These experiments and others are described in ihe Journal S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 21-30, and briefly summarised in 630 D.

Mr. Kirk was very pleased with the account, and asked me to write it, telling me that on that afternoon, feeling rather tired, he put down his pen for a few moments, and, to use his own words, " threw himself into this room." He also told me he had purposely avoided this subject in my presence lately, that he might not influence me but was anxiously hoping I would introduce it.

I feel sure I had not been dreaming of him, and cannot remember that anything had happened to cause me even to think of him that afternoon before falling asleep.

Mr, Kirk writes later : —

I have only succeeded once in making myself visible to Miss G. since the occasion I have already reported, and that had the singularity of being only my features — my face in miniature, that is, about three inches in diameter.

In a letter dated January 19th, 1891, Mr. Kirk says as to this last appearance : —

Miss G. did not record this at the time, as she attached no importance to it, but I noted the date (July 23rd) on my office blotting-pad, as it was at the office I was thinking of her. I say "thinking," because I was doing so in connection with another subject, and with no purpose of making an experiment. I had a headache, and was resting my head on my left hand. Suddenly it occurred to me that my thinking about her might probably influence her in some way, and I made the note I have mentioned.^

Mrs. Sidgwick had a talk with Mr. Kirk and with Miss G. on April 8th, 1892, about the above incidents and other experiments in thoughttransference between them, and writes : —

Mr. Kirk's appearance to Miss G. evidently impressed her very much. It was extremely realistic. She is quite sure she was awake. It was as if she had waked up to see it, but she had not been dreaming of Mr. Kirk. The figure did not look towards her or appear to take any interest in her. The other time she saw his face it was like a miniature. She did not think so much of that experience.

668 C. The following case is quoted from an article by Dr. R. Hodgson in the Forum for March 1900. He writes : —

Dr. G., a cultured lady, an M.D., some of whose experiences as percipient have been recorded in the Proceeditigs of the American S.P.R., drew my attention some time ago to an account which she had given in The Herald of Health, of an experience where she herself was the agent, and a friend of hers, whom I shall call Mrs. C, the percipient. According to the account, which I abridge, Dr. G. arranged, early in October of 1885, to try voluntarily to appear or cause a vision of herself to appear to Mrs. C. at a distance. Soon afterwards Dr. G. went to a city 500 miles from where Mrs. C was living, and at intervals endeavoured (vainly) to go to her friend m.entally; but no written communication took place between them, nor had any hour been fixed for the experiment.

Mr. Kirk enclosed the piece of blotting-paper with the note.

668D] TO CHAPTER VI 693

"... One night I went to bed in a high fever consequent upon a sudden but slight indisposition. My mind was idly but nervously occupied by a great number of topics. Among other things I thought of a certain reception which I had to attend in a few days, of having no dress suitable for the occasion, but of one which I had at home and wished for. And then I wandered, by association of ideas, to think of a certain evening company which I had attended with the friend with whom I wished to try my experiment in telepathy. I thought of this idly, without volition, but as in fever the mind seems to cling to idle thoughts with great persistence, so these thoughts kept repeating themselves. I became weary of their persistence, yet could not escape them. I finally began to wonder why I could not appear to my friend, but did not try — only kept thinking of it.

" Suddenly my body became slightly numb, my head felt light, my breathing became slow and loud, as when one goes to sleep. I had often been in a similar state. When I came out of it I lit the candle and looked at my watch. The next day I thought of the experience of the night as meaningless, and was ashamed of having considered a change of breathing as anything more than a premonition of going to sleep.

" A few days after this experience I received a letter from my friend, forwarded from where she supposed I was, in which she stated that I had appeared to her on a certain evening, giving the time; that I wore a dress she had never seen before, but which she perfectly described ; that I stood with my back to her and remained but a moment or two.

" As I had not written to her of my efforts to appear to her, and as the opportunities of two months for guess-work or deception had elapsed, I felt that my proof was as positive as I could desire. Not proof, however, of the outgoing of an astral body. Had I appeared to my friend as I was at the moment, in bed in my night-dress, the case would have simply paralleled many of which we have read; but my appearance in a dress that was 200 miles away, and which had never been seen by the percipient, forms proof of the best theory that has yet been propounded by students of telepathy. . . ."

I have received a corroborative account from the lady who had this vision, and her original letter has also been kindly forwarded to me for my inspection. It reads thus : —

New York, November zist, 1885.

" Deak , Did you come to me last evening, Friday, November 20th ?

Somebody did, near ten o'clock. She wore a blue velvet dress, handsomely draped, with white cuffs at the wrist. But I only saw the figure. The face was not revealed to me. I had gone to bed and put out the light. It was with the interior sight I saw. It was gone in an instant. — Yours,

668 D. The experiment in the following case succeeded on the first trial. The agent was Miss Edith Maughan (now Mrs. G. Rayleigh Vicars), and the account is taken from the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 273. Miss Maughan writes : —

September 1890.

One night in September 1888 I was lying awake in bed reading. I forget what the book was, but I had recently been studying with interest various cases of astral projection in Phantasms of the Living, and I distinctly remember making up my mind that night to try whether I could manage to accomplish a projection of myself by force of will-concentration.

The room next to mine was occupied by a friend of mine [Miss Ethel Thompson], who was an old acquaintance, and not at all of an excitable turn of mind. This room had formerly been used as a dressing-room, and there was a door connecting it with mine. For some years, however, it had been absolutely separated by the locked door, on my side of which stood a very heavy wardrobe, which would require two strong men to move it away. The only available exit from my room was the other door which opened on to the landing, as was also the case with the dressing-room. That night I perfectly recall lying back on my pillow with a resolute but half-doubtful and amused determination to make Miss Thompson see me. The candle was burning on a chair at the side of my bed, and I heard only the ticking of the clock in my room as I " willed " with all my might to appear to her. After a few minutes I felt dizzy and only half-conscious.

I don't know how long this state may have lasted, but I do remember emerging into a conscious state and thinking I had better leave off, as the strain had exhausted me.

I gave up, and changing into an easy position I thought I had failed and needlessly fatigued myself for an impossible fancy. I blew out my candle ; at the instant I was startled by hearing an indistinct sound from the next room.

It was Miss Thompson's voice raised slightly, but I could not distinguish more than the actual sound, which was repeated, and then there was silence. I wondered whether she had had a bad dream, and listened a short time, but did not seriously imagine that it was more than an accidental coincidence. Soon after my clock struck two (a.m.), and I fell asleep.

Next morning I noticed that Miss Thompson looked rather tired at breakfast, but I asked no questions. Presently she said, " Had I gone into her room to frighten her during the night ? " I said I had not left my room. She declared that I seemed to her to come in and bend over her. From what she said I concluded it must have been between i and 2 a.m. Her own account is in the possession of the Psychical Society. All I have to add is, that I was in my ordinary state of health, and not at all excited, but merely bent on trying an experiment.

In a letter accompanying this, Miss Maughan says : —

I can't find the fact noticed in my diary for 1888. I only keep a very tiny one, just for the sake of entering letters, &c., and have no allusions to what happens as a rule. I fancy, though, that it was on the night of September loth. Does Miss Thompson give any exact date ? for if it approximates to that, it would be the correct one. I know it was just at that time, because it was during her last visit at this house.

668 E] TO CHAPTER VI 695

Miss Thompson writes : —

The Chimes, Grove Park, Chiswick, December Tpik, 1889. During the summer of 1888 (end of August) I was staying with the Miss Maughans in Lincolnshire. We were interested in Theosophy, and had been discussing the phenomena of people leaving their bodies and appearing in their astral forms. I am not a good sleeper, but not at all of a nervous temperament. I stayed awake one night until two or three. I was perfectly wide awake, when suddenly I saw Miss Edith Maughan standing by my bedside in her ordinary dark dressing-gown. The moonlight came in at the window sufficiently for me to distinguish her face clearly, and her figure partially. I sat up in bed, and said, rather crossly, " What do you want here, Edith ? " I thought she had come for some joke. As she didn't answer, I iitmiediately struck a light, but she was gone. It is a mistake that I screamed out. I may have spoken sufficiently loudly to be heard in the next room. I thought she had got out of the room with astonishing rapidity, but I didn't trouble much about it. The next morning I asked why she came into my room. She denied having done so, but said she had thought of coming, but that as it might disturb me she decided not. She said she sat up in bed, and for the sake of something to do was willing herself to go out of her body and come to me, and mentioned about the time I saw her. Although it is more than a year ago, I remember the. incident clearly, as it made a distinct impression upon me.

Ethel Thompson.

Mrs. Sidgwick talked over this experience with Miss Maughan and Miss Thompson separately, and questioned them specially as to the possibility that Miss Maughan had really gone into Miss Thompson's room unconsciously. They were both quite certain that she had not done so, Miss Thompson dwelling on the impossible rapidity of the disappearance, and Miss Maughan on the fact that, when she roused herself, she was lying in the same position as before — hands clasped and feet crossed in a special manner, which, she had been told, is adopted by Eastern people wishing to concentrate themselves on anything, and which she adopted deliberately on this account.

In connection with this incident, it is interesting that Miss Maughan has appeared, but unintentionally, on other occasions to other percipients (see 645 E).

668 E. From the "Report on the Census of Hallucinations," Appendix G. " A Proposed Scheme of Apparitions," by F. W. H. Myers, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 418.

The following is an account of an experiment made between two ladies well known to me, whom I will call Miss Danvers and Mrs. Fleetwood, which I here quote as well illustrating some of the points to which I wish to call attention. I asked Miss Danvers to endeavour to appear to Mrs. Fleetwood, without forewarning that lady, and to send me a letter-card (the best vehicle for such communications, as it carries the postal date impressed on what remains, nevertheless, a private letter), — to tell me of the attempt before she knew whether it had succeeded or no.

On June 20th, 1894, I received the following letter, dated June 19th, from Miss Danvers, with two enclosures: — -

"On Sunday night at 12P.M. I tried to appear to Mrs. Fleetwood [at a distance of about nine miles] and succeeded in feeling as if I were really in her room. I had previously written my statement, which I enclose, together with Mrs. Fleetwood's, which she has just sent me. She wrote it also at the time, not knowing I was trying to appear. I was lying down, not kneeling, but the other details are correct."

A memorandum, signed by Miss Danvers, was enclosed, as follows : "June 17th, 1894, 12 P.M. I write this just before trying to appear to Mrs. Fleetwood. My hair is down, and I am going to lie down and try to appear with my eyes closed."

Also a memorandum, signed by Mrs. Fleetwood, as follows: "Sunday night, June 17th, 1894. — I woke from my first sleep to see Edith Danvers apparently kneeling on an easy chair by my bedside, her profile turned towards me, her hair flowing, and eyes closed, or looking quite down. I felt startled at first, as I always do, on seeing visions in waking moments, but determined to keep quiet ; and after I was fully awake and able to reason with myself, the figure still remained, and then gradually faded like a dissolving view. I got up and looked at the clock. It was just twelve. I was alone in the room. As I now write, it is about two minutes after twelve."

In conversation on June 23rd Miss Danvers told me that she had seen, in a sort of flash, Mrs. Fleetwood start up in bed, rest on her elbow, and look towards her. She had not been clearly aware of her own attitude in Mrs. Fleetwood's room, although she seemed aware of her position, which corresponded to the place towards which Mrs. Fleetwood gazed. Miss Danvers had never previously made notes of an experiment, and had not seen the importance of writing down this point at once, nor had she felt confident that Mrs. Fleetwood really saw her. Mrs. Fleetwood also sent me a letter of Miss Danvers to herself, dated June i8th, in which, among various other matters. Miss Danvers asks, "Have I appeared to you at all? I tried last night, but you may not have been alone." There is, of course, therefore, no proof that Miss Danvers' sense of invasion of the room was more than subjective; but the point is worth mention in connection with the experiment presently to follow. As regards Mrs. Fleetwood's " visions in waking moments," that lady herself believes them to have been all in some sense veridical, but they have not been recorded. They included two visions of Miss Danvers, at moments when Miss Danvers on her part was strongly directing her attention to Mrs. Fleetwood. So, at least, both ladies believe ; but the visions were not recorded at the time.

Miss Danvers then made a second experiment, in which, through some misunderstanding of the due conditions, she informed Mrs. Fleetwood beforehand of her intended invasion. It turned out, however, that Mrs. Fleetwood saw nothing whatever ; — so that we have at least the negative assurance that mere expectation on her part does not necessarily produce a vision. Miss Danvers then made a third (unannounced) experiment of a rather different kind, which she describes to me as follows in a letter dated June 27th, 1S94.

" On Monday, June 25th, at 12.15 a.m., I thought I would try to go to Mrs. Fleetwood's room, but did not think she could see me. I succeeded in seeing her room, and saw the third volume of Marcella, lying on a chair by the bedside. I did not know she was reading it, as I thought she had finished it long ago, so I was surprised. Mrs. Fleetwood did not appear to see me, or make

668 F] TO CHAPTER VI 697

any sign. The room was otherwise much as usual. On the same day I saw Mrs. Fleetwood, and asked her if what I saw was correct, and she said it was perfectly so. She also said she was suffering from toothache and could not see me, but felt a presence in the room."

Mrs. Fleetwood writes, June 27th : " When Miss Danvers came to lunch with me, on Monday last, she asked me if I had taken the third volume of Marcella up to my room the night before (the 24th); as she had been there in the spirit, and had seen it lying on a chair by my bed. This was precisely what had happened. I had taken up the book to read in the early morning, but I am sure Miss Danvers did not know of my often doing so {i.e. taking a book to her bedroom], as it is not my usual habit." On June 30th, Mrs. Fleetwood adds : " Miss Danvers did know we had had Marcella in the house, for she read it when here; but she quite thought it had been sent away long before she saw it in my room. She did not know that I had laid it aside, being busy, and had kept back the third volume."

668 F, From the Journal S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 99. This case is specially interesting in being reciprocal, as well as experimental. It must be observed, however, that the attempt to produce an apparition of himself seems to have been only a secondary object on the part of the agent ; his main desire being to discover himself something of the percipient's condition. It will be observed that he did not appear in the clothes which he was actually wearing at the time, but in a garb familiar to the percipient.

The case was sent to us by Dr. M. L. Holbrook (an Associate of the American Branch of the S.P.R.), who writes concerning it to Dr. Hodgson : —

{June 1894.]

I think the enclosed case is a very good one. I have known of it for years, and got it written out a day or two ago, when in Lakewood, N.J. The son's testimony (Geo. Sinclair) was written out without any consultation with his parents, or knowledge of what they had said. M. L. Holbrook.

The following is the account of the agent, Mr. B. F. Sinclair : —

Lakewood, yi/w^ X2th, 1894. On the 5th of July, 1887, 1 left my home in Lakewood to go to New York to spend a few days. My wife was not feeling well when I left, and after I had started I looked back and saw her standing in the door looking disconsolate and sad at my leaving. The picture haunted me all day, and at night, before I went to bed, I thought I would try to find out if possible her condition. I had undressed, and was sitting on the edge of the bed, when I covered my face with my hands and willed myself in Lakewood at home to see if I could see her. After a little, I seemed to be standing in her room before the bed, and saw her lying there looking much better. I felt satisfied she was better, and so spent the week more comfortably regarding her condition. On Saturday I went home. When she saw me, she remarked, " I don't know whether I am glad to see you or not, for I thought something had happened to you. I saw you standing in front of the bed the night (about 8.30 or before 9) you left, as plain as could be,

and I have been worrying myself about you ever since. I sent to the oiifice and to the depSt daily to get some message from you." After explaining my effort to find out her condition, everything became plain to her. She had seen me when I was trying to see her and find out her condition. I thought at the time I was going to see her and make her see me. B. F. Sinclair.

Mrs. Sinclair writes : —

I remember this experience well. I saw him as plain as if he had been there in person. I did not see him in his night-clothes, but in a suit that hung in the closet at home. It made me very anxious, for I felt that some accident or other had befallen him. I was on the rack all the time till Saturday, and if he had not come home then, I should have sent to him to lind out if anything was wrong. H. M. Sinclair.

Mr. George Sinclair, in answer to Dr. Holbrook's request for his testimony, wrote to him : —

27, 7TH Street, N. Y. City, N. Y.,Jtme \\th, 1894.

Dear Sir, — Yours of the 13th inst. at hand, and I will with pleasure give you whatever information I can. At the time in question I was living at the Seven Stars house in Lakewood, going to and from my work and stabling my horse at father's. I do not remember the date, but think it was about the middle of the week that mother told me in the morning that " she had seen father the night before just before she retired for the night." " His face was drawn and set as if he were either dead or trying to accomplish something which was beyond him." She watched very anxiously the balance of the week for a letter or telegram, but none came, and when no word came on Saturday she was almost crazy. He unexpectedly returned Saturday night, saying that it was just as cheap to come home as to stay in N.Y. over Sunday at a hotel.

When mother questioned him in regard to the incident at the middle of the week, he said " that he made up his mind to see her that night if possible, and had concentrated his will power on that one object," with the result which you know. It gave him pleasure and her a good deal of uneasiness.

Geo. Sinclair.

668 G. Experiinents of H. M. Wesermann. — The following account of Wesermann's experiments is quoted from the Jotcrnal S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 217, being there taken from a book called Mesmerism and the Universal Language"^ published in 1822, by H. M. Wesermann, Government Assessor and Chief Inspector of Roads at Diisseldorf, &c. By " the universal language " Wesermann means thought-transference and clairvoyance, and his book is a review of the German literature on "Animal Magnetism," mainly of the second decade of this century, from a psychical point of view, with some experiments and observations of his own. The book is fully discussed in \.hG Journal, but I have space only to refer to an experiment of which an account was quoted in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 101, and about which we here find some valuable additional evidence. Mesmer's opinion that all might know what was happening to a friend

1 Der Magnetistnus und die allgemeine Weltsprache.

668 G] TO CHAPTER VI 699

who was thinking of them, were it not for the stronger impressions received through the senses, suggested to Wesermann to try to transfer mental images to sleeping friends at a distance ; and accounts of four experiments in which he was successful in thus imposing dreams on his friends are given in Phantasms. His fifth experiment, at a distance of nine miles, is the one about which his book gives additional evidence — in fact, a first-hand account from one of the percipients, of which the existence was not known to Gurney. The following is the account in full, translated from his book (p. 28).

A lady, who had been dead five years, was to appear to Lieutenant n

in a dream at 10.30 p.m. and incite him to good deeds. At half-past ten, contrary to expectation, Herr n had not gone to bed, but was discussing the

French campaign with his friend Lieutenant S in the ante-room. Suddenly the door of the room opened, the lady entered dressed in white, with a

black kerchief and uncovered head, greeted S with her hand three times in

a friendly manner ; then turned to n, nodded to him, and returned again

through the doorway.

As this story, related to me by Lieutenant n, seemed to be too remarkable from a psychological point of view for the truth of it not to be duly established, I wrote to Lieutenant S , who was living six miles away, and asked

him to give me his account of it. He sent me the following reply: —

. . . On the 13th of March 181 7, Herr n came to pay me a visit at my

lodgings about a league from A . He stayed the night with me. After

supper, and when we were both undressed, I was sitting on my bed and

Herr n was standing by the door of the next room on the point also of

going to bed. This was about half-past ten. We were speaking partly about indifferent subjects and partly about the events of the French campaign. Suddenly the door out of the kitchen opened without a sound, and a lady entered,

very pale, taller than Herr n, about five feet four inches in height, strong and

broad of figure, dressed in white, but with a large black kerchief which reached to below the waist. She entered with bare head, greeted me with the hand three times in complimentary fashion, turned round to the left towards Herr

n, and waved her hand to him three times ; after which the figure quietly,

and again without any creaking of the door, went out. We followed at once in order to discover whether there were any deception, but found nothing. The strangest thing was this, that our night-watch of two men whom I had shortly before found on the watch were now asleep, though at my first call they were on the alert, and that the door of the room, which always opens with a good deal of noise, did not make the slightest sound when opened by the figure.

S. D N, January wth, 1818.

From this story (Wesermann continues) the following conclusions may be drawn : —

I. That waking persons, as well as sleeping, are capable of perceiving the mental pictures of distant friends through the inner sense as dream images. For not only the opening and shutting of the door, but the figure itself — which,

moreover, exactly resembled that of the dead lady — was incontestably only a dream in the waking state, since the door would have creaked as usual had the figure really opened and shut it.

2. That many apparitions and supposed effects of witchcraft were very probably produced in the same way. . . .

For other cases of experimental apparitions, see Phantastns of the Living, vol. i. p. 103, and vol. ii. p. 675 ; also the Journal S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 307.



Volume Two



Syllabuses



Chapter VII

700. From the actions and perceptions of spirits still in the flesh, and concerned with one another, we must now pass on to inquiry into the actions of spirits no longer in the flesh, and into the forms of perception with which men still in the flesh respond to this unfamiliar agency.

701. There has been no clear consensus of opinion as to the kind of evidence which ought to be demanded if human survival is to be proved. My object is to make that evidence at once clear in itself and continuous with knowledge already acquired.

702. Considering in the first place the vague term "ghost," we cannot accept the popular notion of a ghost as " a deceased person permitted by Providence to hold communication with survivors."

703. What we must rather look for is a " manifestation of persistent personal energy," continuing after the shock of death. Such manifestations are not specially likely to correspond with the romances of popular fancy.

704. We ought rather to look for possible analogies to such cases as we already know where communication has been effected between widely different phases of personality — as between wakers and somnambulists, &c.

705. And reviewing both our experiments in automatism and our spontaneous phenomena, we find in each group three main classes of messages — namely, sensory hallucinations, emotional and motor impulses, definite intellectual messages.

706. The same three classes meet us again in our analysis of apparently post-mortem communications also.

707. Yet, though with these analogies in our favour, we need a somewhat close discussion of the conditions which a visual or auditory phantasm is bound to fulfil before it can be regarded as indicating primd facie the influence of a discarnate mind. Such a discussion, based mainly on the time-relation between the death and the apparition, is here quoted from Edmund Gurney.

708. Further inquiry into the limits of possible latency in the percipient's mind of an impression received from a still living agent.

709. Consideration of special cases in which a hallucination occurring shortly after a death already known might possess evidential validity.

710. Cases of recurrence of a phantasm, first about the time of death (the death being unknown to the percipient), and then decidedly after the death had occurred.

711. Cases where the phantasm first occurs some hours after death. Examination of the hypothesis of latency in these cases.

712. It will be seen that we have here no simple problem of time-relations between death and apparition. The ghost is a function of two variables : the incarnate spirit's sensitivity, and the discarnate spirit's capacity of self-manifestation. The latter of these two factors affords the easier method of arrangement; and we may arrange our apparitional communications in a descending series, from cases showing the fullest knowledge or purpose to cases where the indication of intelligence becomes feeblest.

713. We may begin with a case, anomakms and non-evidential, which claims to represent the subjective sensations accompanying the transition from earthly to spiritual life. 713 A. Case of Dr. Wiltse.

714. Repeated apparitions indicating continuous knowledge of the affairs of earth after the spirit's departure ; case of Mr. Mamtchitch. 714 A. Case of Miss Adie.

715. Single apparitions indicating knowledge of some post-mortem fact, such as place of burial, &c.

716. Similar apparitions implying knowledge of the affairs of surviving friends. Cases of: 716 A. Mrs. P. 716 B. Mr. D. 716 C. Mrs. V.

717. Cases where a departed spirit seems to show knowledge of the impending death of a survivor; case of Mr. G. Cases of: 717 A. Miss Pearson. 717 B. Mr. Kingsbury. 717 C. Captain Norton.

718. " Peak in Darien " cases ; where a dying man perceives as spirits certain persons of whose previous death he was not aware. Cases of: 718 A. Colonel . 718 B. Colonel Hicks.

719. Cases where departed spirits manifest their knowledge that some friend who survived them has passed into the spirit world ; case of Miss Dodson. Cases of : 719 A. Mrs. Smith. 719 B. Mrs. Palliser. 719 C. Miss Hawkins-Dempster.

720. Case of Mrs. Bacchus, in which the apparition of a deceased person is seen in the house where the dead body of his wife is lying.

721. Cases where the deceased person manifests knowledge of some fact connected with his own earth-life, especially his death and events connected therewith; case of Miss Conley.

722. Cases where the deceased person shows knowledge of his previous relations with a survivor (case of Baron von Driesen) ; or of intentions not fulfilled. Cases of: 722 A. Mrs. Nery. 722 B. Dr. Binns.

723. In the case of Mrs. Storie, previously given, there are indications of an intelligence other than the decedent's as concerned in the presentation of her complex dream.

724. Cases where a compact to appear, if possible, had been made before death ; the compact thus forming a definite fact which the deceased person remembers. Possible mode in which such a compact may tend to fulfil itself.

725. Instances of such compacts more or less precisely fulfilled. 725 A. Case of Captain Colt.

726. Case of Mr. Reeves, in which the deceased person's impulse seemed to be the fulfilment of an immediate engagement.

727. Further cases of engagement or compact fulfilled, although in a deflected fashion; that is, by an appearance to some one other than the

special person to whom the promise was made ; case of Countess Kapnist. Cases of: 727 A. Mr. Bellamy. 727 B. Miss Money.

728. Persistence of effort on the part of the deceased person (728 A. Case of Mr. Cabral) ; and case where the apparition indicates knowledge of the deceased person's funeral. 728 B. Case of Mrs. B.

729. Cases where a vision presents to a survivor the aspect of the chamber of death.

730. Cases where the condition of the deceased person's body is thus presented ; case of Mr. D.

731. Cases where there are successive phantasmal pictures of a death and of the subsequent arrangement of the body. 731 A. Case of Miss Hall.

732. Discussion of a case previously given (Mrs. Green's) where there is apparently a mingled telepathic agency, proceeding both from the departed and from the living, and presenting the scene of death.

733. Cases where the departed spirit seems preoccupied with the spot where his bones are laid. Cases of : 733 A. Miss Atkinson. 733 B. Mr. Tyre.

734. Case of Mr. Tandy, where the departed spirit seems to be aware of the arrival at a friend's house of the news of his own death.

735. In some cases depression is felt by the percipient from the time of his friend's death until the news thereof reaches him ; in others a happy vision preludes the news. 735 A. Case of Mr. King.

736. Further cases indicating some knowledge of this kind on the part of the departed spirit ; case of Miss Q. Cases of : 736 A. Mrs. Davies. 736 B. Mr. Cameron Grant. 736 C. Miss M.

737. Apparitions which communicate no definite message. These may be subdivided into personal and local, according as they appear to be intended to impress special survivors, or, on the other hand, seem mere recurrences to accustomed haunts.

738. Cases where a spiritual presence appears to seek out a surviving friend.

739. Similar cases where the deceased person's phantasm appears in scenes unfamiliar to him while on earth. Cases of: 739 A. Mr. Elliott. 739 B. Mrs. Clark. 739 C. Mr. Keulemans.

740. Occasional appearance of phantasms of the dead (of all types) to several persons collectively. 740 A. Case of Miss W.

741. Cases where the impulse prompting to appearance may have been at once personal and local; case of Mr. Letts. 741 A. Case of Mrs. Crans.

742. Further cases of appearances to friends in familiar surroundings ; case of M. Gore Booth. 742 A. Case of Mrs. Judd.

743. A phantasmal voice giving the news of death. 743 A. Case of Sister Bertha.

744. Cases where the phantasmal figure, although sometimes recognised by acquaintances in a familiar scene, may be thought to have obeyed a local rather than a personal attraction; case of Mr. Bard. Cases of : 744 A. Miss Farquharson. 744 B. Mr. J.

745. Apparitions locally conditioned, or hauntings. Cases of: 745 A. General Becher. 745 B. Mrs. M. 745 C. Mr. Husbands. 745 D. Mrs. Clerke.

746. Such apparitions may possibly be due to the results of past mental action.

organic modifications. Cases of : 817 A. Dr. N. 817 B and C. Mrs. Hadselle. 817 D. Lady de Vesci.

818. The inhibitory impulses may sometimes relate to exceedingly trivial matters. Cases of : 818 A. Mrs. Verrall. 818 B. Mrs. Elliott.

819. Or a sudden inhibition may be combined with a corresponding impulse; case of Dr. Hodgson finding five-leaved clover. 819 A. Case of Dr. Guebhard finding bifid fern.

820. Sometimes the impulse may conceivably be explained by a subconscious perception or interpretation. — Case of Mr. Wyman.

821. A similar case where the sense of smell may have played a part. — Case of Mr. C. W. Moses. 821 A. Case of Mrs. Gray.

822. Another case, possibly due to smell or sense of varying resistance in the air.— Mr. Wait.

823. A similar case, perhaps attributable to excessive tactile sensibility. — Mr. W.

824. A case of inhibition which seems beyond explanation by hyperaesthesia, and suggests telaesthesia or spirit guardianship. — £)r. Parsons.

825. We next come to cases involving massive motor impulses to various actions. Case of Mr. Garrison. 825 A. Case of Mr. Skirving.

826. Innate predisposition to motor automatisms of various kinds. Scheme of increasingly specialised motor phenomena. Rise of automatic writing. — Edmund Gurney and W. Stainton Moses. My own experience.

827. Automatic writing a mode of experiment harmless in itself.

828. Classification of contents of messages.

829. Most automatic script originates in the automatist's own brain. — Mr. H. A. Smith's cases.

830. Reference to anagrams in the " Clelia " case. 830 A. The " Clelia " case.

831. Case of Professor Sidgwick's friend.

832. Mr. Schiller's case (832 A) ; — appearance of fictitious personalities, although neither invited nor credited by the automatist. 832 B. Case of Sceur Jeanne.

833. Case of Madame X. An unusual combination of various motor automatisms.

834. The cases just described lead up to Professor Flournoy's case of " Helene Smith."

835. Mile. Smith an example of continuous and complex subliminal mentation going on in a perfectly healthy and normal organism.

836. Her alleged reincarnations.

837. The Martian language.

838. Reversion to previous epochs of life.

839. Possible sport of spirits.

840. Mile. Smith's " teleological " automatisms.

841. Indications of supernormal faculty.

842. Possible telepathy from the dead. The Chessenaz case.

843. We now pass on to cases of phenomena much more clearly supernormal. Telepathy obtained through table-tilting. Cases of: 843 A. Professor Richet. 843 B. Mr. G. M. Smith.

844. I give next cases of automatic writing, the first of which (Mrs. Moberley's) shows indications of telepathy.

845. Telepathic cases simulating prophecy ; e.g., that of Miss Summerbell.

846. Answers to questions written correctly, although not as the agent supraliminally intended; case of Mr. Allbright.

847. Another telepathic case, involving the agent's subliminal thoughts. — Mr. Riddell.

848. Our most striking case is a long series of telepathic communications between Mr. and Mrs. Newnham.

849. Mrs. Newnham writes automatically answers to unspoken questions by Mr. Newnham. 849 A. Case of Mrs. Newnham.

850. A similar but shorter series is given in the next Appendix. 850 A. Case of Mr. Buttemer.

851. The next case shows occasional telepathy, mingled with fragments of apparent clairvoyance and premonition. 851 A. Case of Lady Mabel Howard.

852. A case of communication through table-tilting from a distant agent. — Mrs. Kirby. 852 A. Case of M. Auguez ;— prediction of death. 852 B. Signer Bonatti's automatic writing; telepathy from a distant living agent.

853. Transitional cases ; — information purporting to come from deceased persons, but more probably derived telepathically from the living ; case of Mr. Lewis.

854. Message purporting to come from a deceased person who was found to be living ; case of Mr. Long.

855. Case of automatic writing reproducing experimentally the thoughts of the persons present.

856. Statement through table-tilting of incident occurring at the time in a neighbouring house. — Professor Alexander's case.

857. Telepathy may produce erroneous statements through the agent's thoughts being reproduced as matters of fact. 857 A. Case of Professor H.

858. Dr. Ermacora's experiments with a sensitive, — Maria Manzini. 858 A. Her automatic writing gives the contents of a letter which reached her next morning.

859. The information may be derived from discarnate spirits — though not necessarily from those alleged in the communications. The communicators may deliberately veil their identity, and may also have access to sources of knowledge remote even to themselves. 859 A. These problems are exemplified in the automatic writings of Miss A.

860. In these and other retrocognitive cases, it is difficult to decide between the hypotheses of " cryptomnesia " and spirit-control.

861. Mr. Wedgwood's experiments with Mrs. R. ; — case of communications purporting to come from Colonel Gurwood (who died in 1845).

862. Another retrocognitive case of the same kind through Mrs. R., namely :— 862 A. The " David Brainerd " case.

863. But retrocognitive messages referring to matters easily accessible in print (e.g. Mr. Moses' case of musical composers, giving dates of their lives), even if genuine, may be attributed to clairvoyance on the part of the automatist.

864. A resemblance of the handwriting to that of the deceased person is sometimes alleged, but must be received with caution. 864 A. Professor Rossi-Pagnoni's experiments at Pesaro.

865. Another case of alleged resemblances of handwriting, which also illustrates the spontaneous recurrence of the same problems with automatists of many different types, namely :— 865 A. Case of Mrs. Underwood.

866. Cases where the Writing announces a death unknown to the persons present ; — instance reported by Dr. Lidbeault.

867. In another case, partially correct details about the death are added. 867 A. Case of Mdlle. Stramm.

868. Sometimes telekinetic phenomena seem to be associated with the announcement of a death. 868 A. The Pereliguine case. 868 B. Case of Mr. F. Hodgson. 868 C. Ref. to " Woodd knockings."

869. Cases where correct details unknown to the automatist are given regarding a death which is known to him. 869 A. Case of Mrs. Fitzgerald. 869 B. The Skrytnikoff case.

870. A communication corresponding, not to the knowledge of the sitters, but to what was known to the alleged communicator before death. 870 A. Case of Signer Cavalli.

871. Automatic writing by a child, showing faculties superior to those she normally possessed, with some writing in languages unknown to her. 871 A. Mr. Junor Browne's case.

872. Writing by a young child who had no knowledge of her letters. 872 A. Mr. Hempstead's case.

873. A series of writings by Mr. W., with indications of subliminal telaesthesia, and telepathy both from the living and from the dead. 873 A. Another experience of Mr. W.'s.

874. A prediction given through table-tilting of the precise date of a death. 874 A. Dr. Suddick's case.

875. Example pointing to continued terrene knowledge on the part of a deceased person ; case of Mrs. von Wieseler.

876. A test message planned before death and communicated afterwards; case of Mrs. Finney. 876 A. Case of Prince Emile Wittgenstein ; message about missing will. 876 B. Dr. Knorr's case : message about missing note.

877. Desirability of planning beforehand communications to be made after death as a test of personal identity. 877 A. Note on posthumous letters.

878. The evidence as to motor phenomena here set forth confirms and extends the conceptions to which the cognate sensory phenomena pointed ; — the expansion of normal leading on to the development of supernormal faculties. The motor phenomena suggest more strongly than the sensory the hypothesis of " psychical invasion," which, if sufficiently prolonged, becomes a persistent " control" or "possession."

879. When the subliminal self is affected by a telepathic impact which works itself out by automatic movements, it becomes a question whether the movements are executed by the subliminal self or by the external agent.

880. This leads us on to the problem to be discussed in the next chapter; — in what ways may two spirits co-operate in the possession and control of the same organism?



Chapter IX

900. Possession may be defined as a development of Motor Automatism, resulting at last in a substitution of personality ; there has recently been a great advance in the evidence for this theory.

901. Further, it coheres with modern notions of personality, — of the control of organism by spirit. It implies that the spirit of the entranced automatist partially quits his organism, and allows an invading spirit to occupy and use it.

902. The conception — similar as it is to primitive beliefs — will be found to co-ordinate and explain many of our earlier groups of phenomena.

903. First, the alternating use of brain-centres by alternate personalities seems to form a link in the series which ends in possession.

904. Genius suggests a possession of the brain-centres by the subliminal self.

905. In sleep it appears that the spirit may sometimes travel away from the body and perceive distant scenes clairvoyantly.

906. In the hypnotic trance or in spontaneous somnambulism, we often find a quasi-personality occupying the organism, while the sensitive's own spirit often claims to have been absent elsewhere, and sometimes exhibits real clairvoyant power. Telepathic intercourse, if carried far enough, corresponds to possession or to ecstasy.

907. In telepathy we encounter an influence which suggests an intelligent and responsive external presence, and telepathy between the living leads on to telepathy from the dead ; which implies that the communication does not depend on vibrations from a material brain.

908. When motor automatism develops into possession, there is apparently no communication between the discarnate mind and the mind of the automatist, but rather with the latter's brain.

909. Even in ordinary cases of telepathy, the percipient's brain may sometimes be influenced by his own mind, and sometimes directly by the agent's ; in the latter case, the influence may be termed telergic. Veridical apparitions also show traces of the spiritual and the physical elements mingling in various degrees as we pass from clairvoyant visions to collective apparitions.

910. The same stages are to be seen in the case of apparitions of the dead — leading up to complete possession of the automatist's brain by an extraneous spirit.

911. Possession by spirits is difficult to distinguish from cases of secondary personality, where the organism is controlled by another synthesis of its own spirit. We must not ascribe to spirit-control cases where no new knowledge is shown in the trance state.

912. In reputed savage cases of possession, the hostility of the control to the automatist is no proof of its being other than a secondary personality. 912 A. Dr. Nevius on demon possession in China.

913. It is sometimes claimed that these controls show supernormal knowledge, but the cases recorded may generally be explained by heightened memory, with possible traces of telepathy. In cases where there is good evidence of supernormal knowledge, the controls have always been both human and friendly.

914. We should expect spirit-control to be subject to the same limits that we find in controls by secondary personalities ; e.g. the external spirit is not likely to be able to produce utterance in a language unknown to the automatist.

915. In both cases, and also in dreams, memory seems to fail and change in a capricious way.

916. Again, it is hard to get into continuous colloquy with a somnambulist,

who generally follows his own train of ideas, and similar difficulties seem to occur in conversing with spirit-controls.

917. Our expectations will thus be very different from the commonplace or even the poetic notion of what communication with the dead is likely to be.

918. The actual phenomena fail to comply either with the orthodox or traditional line of expectation, or with romantic anticipations, or with the notion that they should subserve some practical purpose.

919. The problems of possession, on the other baud, form the natural sequence of our earlier problems ; the actions of the possessed organism show the furthest stage of motor automatism ; the incursion of the possessing spirit is the completest form of telepathic invasion.

920. We must now briefly consider the relation of spiritual influences to the world of matter. In some telergic cases, it appears that the agent's spirit acts directly on the percipient's brain.

921. In cases of possession, it is possible that the controlling spirit may impel the organism to more forcible movements than its usual ones.

922. It may also be able to use the organism more skilfully and emit from it an energy which can move objects not in contact with it ; this phenomenon is termed by Aksakoff telekinesis.

923. The interest excited in the ordinary public by the " physical phenomena of spiritualism," or telekinesis, has, as is well known, fostered much fraud, to expose and guard against which has been one of the main tasks of the S.P.R. 923 A. References to exposures of Madame Blavatsky. 923 B. References to exposures of other spiritualistic frauds.

924. In this work, telekinesis is only dealt with where it appears as an element in spirit-possession, especially in the cases of D. D. Home and Stainton Moses.

925. Telekinesis may begin as a form of automatism, initiated by the subliminal self, and there may occasionally, though not provably, be an element of it in table-tilting or automatic writing. This may develop into raps or into movements of distant objects. 925 A. Case of Mr. Vaughan.

926. The right comprehension of telekinetic phenomena must depend on a knowledge greater than we at present possess of the relations between matter and ether. A tentative sketch of what may be done by future inquiries is given in a " Scheme of Vital Faculty " (926 A). 926 B. References to accounts of telekinetic cases.

927. Sporadic cases of ecstacy or possession seem not infrequent in some private circles. 927 A. Mr. O.'s case. Cases of: 927 B. Miss White; 927 C. Miss Lottie Fowler.

928. All such cases are difficult to classify precisely, but the more developed forms of possession throw light on the more rudimentary ones.

929. The most rudimentary form seems to be a momentary possession by the subliminal self : e.g. case of Mrs. Luther.

930. Or there may be a brief psychical excursion in which some knowledge is gained and uttered automatically by the subliminal self : e.g. case of Professor Thoulet.

931. The next case— that of Mr. Goodall— suggests a kind of telepathic conversation between the subliminal self, controlling the utterance of the sleeper, and some perhaps discarnate spirit.

932. The next— Mr. Wilkie's— is a miniature case of possession.

933. These cases illustrate the development of the incipient stages of trance into ecstacy or possession, the control in different cases being by the incarnate or by the discarnate spirit, or by a combination of the two.

934. In one form of trance the automatist is completely controlled by his own subliminal self or incarnate spirit; e.g. 934 A. case of Mr. Sanders.

935. In the famous case of Swedenborg, on the other hand, direct intercourse during ecstasy with discarnate spirits was claimed.

936. Swedenborg's personal experiences are in accord with those described — apparently independently — by other sensitives since his time ; on the other hand, his dogmatic writings have been discredited by later knowledge. 936 A. Kant on Swedenborg. 936 B. The Seeressof Prevorst. 936 C. Case of Mr. Skilton.

937. Cahagnet's subject, Adele Maginot, was also apparently, when in trance, controlled by her own subliminal self. 937 A. Mr. Podmore's account of this case.

938. In the case of D. D. Home telekinetic phenomena are alleged, as well as trance manifestations. 938 A. References to information about Home. 938 B. Review of Mme. Home's Life of Home.

939. Home's trances varied a good deal on different occasions.

940. Comparison of the trance-manifestations of Home with those of Moses and of Mrs. Piper.

941. In the case of Moses, as in that of Home, the telekinetic phenomena formed an integral part of the general manifestations, but were regarded by him as merely subsidiary to the religious teachings of his " controls."

942. This ethical preoccupation was natural to his character and time.

943. His relation to the S.P.R. 943 A. References to printed records of his phenomena, and biography.

944. The two series of phenomena — physical and trance — were intimately connected in his case, and purported to be produced by the same alleged discarnate spirits.

945. These belonged to three classes : (a) persons recently dead ; (b) distinguished persons of past generations ; (<:) more distinguished and more remote persons, who called themselves by pseudonyms, e.g. " Imperator."

946. General account of Moses' automatic writings. 946 A. His description of the process of writing.

947. The evidence for the identity of the remote spirits is very dubious. 947 A. Case of Rector's copying from a closed book.

948. Possible explanation of some of the cases by subliminal observation and memory. 948 A. Cases from " Spirit Identity." 948 B. Other cases of veridical communications.

949. Case of " Blanche Abercromby," in which a recent death — unknown normally to Moses — was announced by his automatic writing, some of which was alleged to have a close resemblance to hers.

950. Discussion of the possible or alleged functions of the remote controls.

951. Classification of messages according to their evidential quality.

952. In some of Moses' cases, the messages were accompanied by apparitions or by telekinetic phenomena.

953. In the case of Mrs. Piper, the verbal messages from persons recently dead are of much greater evidential value ; she is also alleged to be controlled by the " Imperator " group.

VOL. n. b

954. Her case differs from those of Home and Moses in presenting no telekinetic phenomena, and in the fact that she shows no supernormal powers except when in trance.

955. Brief history of the case.

956. The hypothesis of fraud. 956 A. Report by Professor James. 956 B. Report by the present writer.

957. Discussion of the personality of " Phinuit." 957 A. Description by Professor Lodge.

958. During the dominance of the " Phinuit " control, the evidence for the personal identity of the alleged communicators was generally slight.

959. In the next stage — that of the " G. P." control — the evidence greatly improved. 959 A. Mr. Hart's sitting. 959 B. Mr. and Mrs. Howard's sitting. 959 C. Communications from Mr. Hart.

960. Instance of correct information, unknown to the sitter, being given-960 A. Communications from Elisa Manners.

961. Case of attempt to write Hawaiian: Mr. Briggs' sitting.

962. Communications from young children : Mrs. Button's sitting. 962 A. Dr. and Mrs. Thaw's sittings.

963. The discarnate spirits seem occasionally to manifest powers of retrocognitive telaesthesia and of precognition. 963 A. Predictions given through Mrs. Piper.

964. In the last stages of Mrs. Piper's trance manifestations, the chief controls purport to be those of Mr. Moses — the Imperator group — but there is no proof so far of their identity.

965. Trance communications from discarnate spirits must be influenced both by the subliminal self and by the organism of the medium, and perhaps may be impaired by limitations in the powers of the spirits.

966. Possession appears to have no injurious effect on the medium, but rather the reverse.

967. Coming to the part played by the spirit, it seems as far removed from modern philosophical as from ancient savage conceptions.

968. The personal identity of a spirit must connote memory and character.

969. The communications indicate some cognisance of space and time, and some knowledge both of the thoughts and emotions of survivors and of material facts.

970. Consideration of the possible difficulties of communicating on the part of the communicators.

971. They are such as might be inferred from the analogies between possession and alternating personalities, dreams, and somnambulism.

972. The relations between mind and brain may be elucidated by the difficulties shown by the spirit in using the medium's brain.

973. The spirits sometimes appear more eager to communicate than the sitters are to receive communications.

974. Conclusions which may be drawn from the phenomena recorded.

975. One obstacle to our inquiry has been the apparent want of dignity in this mode of acquiring knowledge ; but the apparently trivial experiments and observations have led to generalisations of immense importance.

976. Further discussion of ecstasy.

977. It is a phenomenon common to all religions, and hence of special importance from a psychological point of view.

978. We must now deal briefly with the subject of retrocognition and

precognition ; these suggest powers even more remote than telepathy or telaesthesia from ordinary methods of acquiring knowledge.

979. Retrocognition begins with hypermnesia, leading on to cases where the knowledge seems to come from the memories of other minds, embodied or disembodied, or from a direct perception of the cosmic record.

980. Precognition, starting from promnesia, leads on through self-suggestion and organic prevision, gradually involving more and more of the percipient's environment, as well as of his own history; but may even then be regarded as the result of the wider outlook of the subliminal self. 980 A. Case of Signorina Manzini.

981. Some precognitions, however, may be due to the reasoned foresight of disembodied spirits; and some may possibly be derived from spirits higher than human, or from a sphere where our conception of time no longer holds.

982. Discussion of the evolution of retrocognition from memory.

983. The various stages of precognition : hyperaesthesia, peripheral or central.

984. The wider knowledge of the subliminal self; sometimes transmitted telepathically to others, or itself derived from disembodied spirits.

985. Direct foreknowledge of the future; the relation of this possibility to the problem of Free Will.

986. The conception of Time, as has often been suggested, may be purely subjective.

987. Our evidence seems to indicate that the spiritual world is now just beginning to act systematically upon the material world.

988. The faintness and incoherence of the messages seem an evidence of effort on the part of the communicators ; but to solve the mystery fully will require the labours of many generations.



Chapter X. Epilogue

1000. Some attempt to place these new discoveries in clearer relation to existing schemes of civilised thought and belief is needful for the practical purpose of enlisting help in our inquiry, which has hitherto suffered from indifference rather than from opposition.

1001. The influence of the evidence set forth in this book should prompt towards the ultimate achievement of scientific dominance in every department of human study, including— as never before — the realm of " divine things."

1002. The present age is marked by a deep and widespread dissatisfaction, by a decline of any real belief in the worth of life. A similar crisis which passed over Europe once before was dissipated by the rise of Christianity.

1003. In our age the scientific instinct must be satisfied equally with the religious; any scheme of knowledge to commend itself to our descendants must be one which, while it transcends our present knowledge, steadily continues it. It is only now that this principle is beginning to be applied to the spiritual world.

1004. The conception of Telepathy is seen gradually to enlarge and deepen, proving to us at last that the kinship between souls is more fundamental than their separation.

1005. Let us suppose that whilst incarnate men have risen from savagery into intelligence, discarnate men have become more eager and more able to communicate with earth. Spo adic instances of such communication have always occurred ; but the new^r scientific temper— demanding not miracles, but a higher law — is not perhaps Confined to this earth alone.

1006. Actual increase of our knowledge of the spiritual world, both by discovery and by revelation, is rendering possible a religious synthesis less incomplete than any which has been attained until now.

1007. By a religious synthesis I mean a co-ordination and development of all such response of the human spirit to Cosmic Law as has risen above mere egoism or revolt into co-operation and worship.

1008. I hold that this enthusiasm of response is morally incumbent on us ; since, even though the Cosmos appears imperfect, it may be destined to attain perfection partly through our own work and faith.

1009. The response actually made in the past by human spirits of high type has been, on the whole, concordant in recognising that a spiritual world underlies the material. The two leading World-Religions have developed different sides of this obscure philosophic consensus. Eastern contemplation has dwelt on the vastness of the spirit's ascent up infinite degrees of Being, to be merged at last in an impersonal All. Western worship has based on Jesus Christ's Resurrection the belief that the soul survives bodily death, and on His Revelation the belief that the world is spiritual and is ruled by Love.

1010. This dim and imperfect agreement is now supplemented by nascent discovery and revelation. From the discovery of telepathy we learn that a direct communication passes between incarnate spirits, and from discarnate spirits to incarnate. From the revelation contained in these messages from discarnate spirits, we learn in direct fashion what philosophy had suspected,— the existence and influence of a spiritual world.

1011. Our new knowledge, confirming ancient streams of thought, corroborates analogically for Christianity the record of Christ's appearances after death, and hints at the possibility of the beneficent incarnation of souls previously on a level higher than man's.

1012. Passing on to the further future, it confirms for Buddhism the conception of an endless spiritual evolution, which the whole Cosmos subserves.

1013. And meantime, by its actual and ever-growing reality, the nascent communion with enfranchised spirits offers both immediate sustenance and endless development.

1014. That development must be an increase in holiness ; an intensified interpenetration both of worlds and of souls ; an evolution of Energy into Life, and of Life into the threefold conception of Wisdom, Love, and Joy.

1015. This process, effected for each several soul in different fashion, is in itself continuous and cosmic ; all Life is developing itself from the primal Energy, and divinising itself into the ultimate Joy.

Appendix A. The Function of a Society for Psychical Research. Appendix B. The Decline of Dogmatism. Appendix C. Prayer and Supplication.



Chapter VII. Phantasms of the Dead

OVK€Tl 7TpO<TO>

aftdrav a\a /ctovcov vTrep 'HpaKAcos Trcpav €v/xape?. . . . OvfJLe, rtVa Trpos dAAoSaTray axpav ffJiov irXoov 7rapa/i€i/Jeai ;

— PINDAR.

700. The course of our argument has gradually conducted us to a point of capital importance. A profound and central question, approached in irregular fashion from time to time in previous chapters, must now be directly faced. From the actions and perceptions of spirits still in the flesh, and concerned with one another, we must pass on to inquire into the actions of spirits no longer in the flesh, and into the forms of perception with which men still in the flesh respond to that unfamiliar and mysterious agency.

There need, I hope, be no real break here in my previous line of argument. The subliminal self, which we have already traced through various phases of growing sensitivity, growing independence of organic bonds, will now be studied as sensitive to yet remoter influences ; — as maintaining an independent existence even when the organism is destroyed. Our subject will divide itself conveniently under three main heads. First, it will be well to discuss briefly the nature of the evidence to man's survival of death which may theoretically be obtainable, and its possible connections with evidence set forth in previous chapters. Secondly, — and this must form the bulk of the present chapter, — we need a classified exposition of the main evidence to survival thus far obtained; — so far, that is to say, as sensory automatism — audition or apparition — is concerned ; for motor automatism — automatic writing and trance-utterance — must be left for later discussion. Thirdly, there will be need of some consideration of the meaning of this evidence as a whole, and of its implications alike for the scientific and for the ethical future of mankind. Much more, indeed, of discussion (as well as of evidence) than I can furnish will be needed before this great conception can be realised or argued from with the scientific thoroughness due to its position among fundamental cosmical laws. Considering how familiar the notion — the vague shadowy notion — of " immortality " has always been, it is strange VOL. n. A

indeed that so little should have been done in these modern days to grasp or to criticise it : — so little, one might almost say, since the Phaedo of Plato.

701. Beginning, then, with the inquiry as to what kind of evidence ought to be demanded for human survival, we are met first by the bluff statement which is still often uttered even by intelligent men, that no evidence would convince them of such a fact ; " neither would they be persuaded though one rose from the dead."

Extravagant as such a profession sounds, it has a meaning which we shall do well to note. These resolute antagonists mean that no new evidence can carry conviction to them unless it be continuous with old evidence ; and that they cannot conceive that evidence to a world of spirit can possibly be continuous with evidence based upon our experience of a world of matter. I agree with this demand for continuity; and I agree also that the claims usually advanced for a spiritual world have not only made no attempt at continuity with known fact, but have even ostentatiously thrown such continuity to the winds. The popular mind has expressly desired something startling, something outside Law and above Nature. It has loved, if not a Credo quia absurdum, at least a Credo quia non probatum. But the inevitable retribution is a deep insecurity in the conviction thus attained. Unsupported by the general fabric of knowledge, the act of faith seems to shrink into the background as that great fabric stands and grows.

I can hardly too often repeat that my object in these pages is of a quite opposite character. Believing that all cognisable Mind is as continuous as all cognisable Matter, my ideal would be to attempt for the realm of mind what the spectroscope and the law of gravitation have effected for the realm of matter, and to carry that known cosmic uniformity of substance and interaction upwards among the essences and operations of an unknown spiritual world. And in order to explore these unreachable altitudes I would not ask to stand with the theologian on the summit of a " cloud-capt tower," but rather on plain earth at the measured base of a trigonometrical survey.

