Shortly after we all retired to our beds, and I kept a candle burning in my room until past midnight, as I had an interesting novel to read. I then blew it out and was asleep in a few minutes. Shortly after 2 A.M. (Monday) I was awakened by the sound of a chair being dragged over the floor of the room in which I slept, followed almost immediately by a sound as of some very heavy body being dragged about in a room overhead (a very loud noise which would have awakened anybody). Miss Kamp then called out from the adjoining room, which was only divided from mine by a wooden partition, " Do you hear the noise ? What can it be ? " Just after she had spoken I heard a sound like a half full box of matches falling on the floor. I decided it was about time to get up and investigate, so sprung out of bed and felt for the matchbox in the candlestick and [found] it was not there. I had carefully placed it there on going to bed and was at a loss to account for its disappearance. I had some others, however, in the pocket of my waistcoat, and knowing where I had hung this garment I went to it, and taking the matches out of the pocket, struck a light and lighted the candle. I then found the other box of matches lying on the floor about two feet from the candlestick. It seemed to me also that a chair in the room occupied a somewhat different position to what it had done when I fell asleep, but of this I could not be sure ; but, to be sure whether it moved again, I placed some empty scent bottles, which I found on a shelf, one against each leg of the chair. I then went to sleep again, and on again waking found the chair had been moved quite four inches to the N.W., as all the legs were away from the bottles I had placed against them. Of course, as regards the falling of the matchbox and the actual change of position of the chair, I can only give you my unsupported testimony, but those who slept in the next room will be able to testify to having heard the apparent moving of the chair in my room before they heard me jump up to investigate. This occurred on Sunday night, June I5th.

Now comes the strangest part of the affair. Up to this time none of us could make out why any one of the name of Lewis should disturb our rest, as none of us were or had been intimately acquainted with any one of that name, unless we were prepared to accept the very hypothetical idea that it was the late Mr. Kamp, who had forgotten how to spell his name properly (a theory which would not have said much for the educational establishments of the shadowy land).

On Monday morning, June i6th, I got my copy of the Cape Times as usual, and, among other items of news, found an account of the death of a man, NAME UNKNOWN, who had been killed by an engine, on the night of the I4th, near Woodstock, at about 8.45 P.M. None of us at the time in any way connected this with the noises which had disturbed us, as there was no apparent connection.

In Tuesday's issue of the same paper there was the account of the inquest on this man (still name unknown). On Tuesday evening I was sitting in Mrs. Kamp's shop, when a coloured woman came in and in the course of conversa-

tion said, " Did Mrs. Kamp hear of the man that was killed on the railway on Saturday night ? " " Yes ! " said Mrs. Kamp, " I see they don't know who he was." " Oh yes ! " said the coloured woman, " his name is Jim Lewis. I know him, because he lived with my sister." This set us all on quite a new track, and we began to wonder what connection there might be between the events. In favour thereof the facts were these : —

1. This man had been killed at 8.45 P.M. on the night of the i^tk.

2. Mrs. Kamp did not close her shop till ten that night, and retired to rest about eleven, and from that hour the noises commenced.

3. None of us heard of the accident until we read of it on the \6th.

4. Never until the night of the I4th had any nocturnal disturbances occurred in the house.

5. The disturbing spirit on the evening of the i$th gave the name of Lewis. I should have mentioned, perhaps, that on Tuesday night, iyth inst., we

held another stance, at which Christian Kamp, Mr. Hay, and myself sat. On this night also we got the name of Lewis spelt out, and the message, " / am unhappy because they do not know who I am" On being interrogated further, he said that he was the spirit of the man Lewis killed on the railway. At the time I did not attach much importance to this stance, as we got scarcely anything fresh, but it is as well to mention it.

Thursday's (igth) issue of Cape Times contained the completion of the inquest on this man, and stated that his name was RICHARD YOUNG. Mrs. Kamp then had another interview with the woman (his sister-in-law) who had told her (Mrs. Kamp) previously that the man's name was Jim Lewis, and asked her why she had said his name was Lewis, when it turned out his name was Young. On this the woman got quite indignant, and declared positively that his name was Jim Lewis, no matter what name the paper might give him ; that she had known him a long time, as he was her brother-in-law.

I am finishing this on July 24th, 1890, and the nocturnal disturbances still continue in the house of Mrs. Kamp, and no amount of investigation can assign any but a spiritual origin to them.

We, the undersigned, having read the above, declare it to be a true account of the occurrences therein described.

FREDERICK HODGSON.

SOPHIA ALIDA KAMP.

ALIDA SOPHIA KAMP.

KATE MAHONEY.

We, the undersigned, declare that we sat at a stance in the house of Mrs. Kamp (Alida Sophia Kamp) on the night of June i5th, 1890, and that we heard raps which spelt out the name of Lewis and the words TO WARN.

F. HODGSON.

ALIDA SOPHIA KAMP.

C. F. KAMP.

J. S. KAMP.

We, the undersigned, sat at a stance in the house of Mrs. Kamp (Alida Sophia Kamp) on the night of Tuesday (June I7th), and the name of Lewis was then spelt out by raps, and the message, " I am unhappy because they don't know who I am," and the communicating influence further stated that he had been killed by an engine on the night of the I4th.

FREDERICK HODGSON. C. F. KAMP.

869A] TO CHAPTER VIII 477

We, the undersigned, sat at a stance on the night of Wednesday, June i8th, in the house of Alida Sophia Kamp, and the communicating influence rapped out the name of Lewis, and stated that it was the spirit of a man of that name who had been killed by an engine on the night of June I4th.

FREDERICK HODGSON.

J. P. CRUSE.

C. A. LIETHAR.

C. F. KAMP.

868 C. I may here briefly refer to the case of the " Woodd knockings," given in full in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 538-42. In several families there is a tradition that some special sign precedes or accompanies the transition of the head of the house, or of certain of its members ; and in the case of the Woodd family I have received evidence of the persistence of the same type of " warning " — which took the form of knocks — during a period of three centuries. Seven cases were recorded in detail respectively in about 1661, 1664, 1674, 1784, 1872, 1893, and 1895. Of the three most recent instances circumstantial and corroborative evidence is given, which seems to make it clear that the knocks were not ordinary sounds misinterpreted. Such cases suggest that there may be in some families a hereditary aptitude for the same type of percipience.

869 A. The following is part of an account which was printed in the Journal S.P.R., vol. iii. pp. 216-19 (February 1888), having been furnished to me at that time by Mrs. FitzGerald of 19 Cambridge Street, Hyde Park Square, London, W., and her son Mr. Desmond FitzGerald, at one time a member of the Council of the S.P.R. Mrs. FitzGerald revised the abstract of her papers before they were printed in the Journal.

Mrs. FitzGerald and her daughter-in-law, Mrs. Desmond FitzGerald, have been for some years in the habit of sitting quietly together to receive messages by slight tilts of a table. Mr. FitzGerald has occasionally joined the group, but strangers have rarely been admitted, and the communications have been throughout of a very private kind. . . .

I cite a case in connection with a Mr. E., — an intimate friend of Mrs. FitzGerald's, — whose true name has been communicated to me.

Mr. E., when on his deathbed, sent for Mrs. FitzGerald to come and see Lim. She visited him in his chambers in the Albany and said farewell, he being then past hope, and his death expected at any moment. He blessed her and promised to watch over her. Afterwards his spirit was one of the habitual and most trusted communicants, and Mrs. F. believed herself able to feel sure of his identity when he came. After many such messages, she alluded one day to his death in the Albany. " I did not die in the Albany," was tilted out. Shocked at what seemed the intrusion of some lying spirit in the friend's name, Mrs. F. solemnly repeated the question, "You died in the Albany, did you not?" The answer was an emphatic No. This was repeated several times, and then Mrs. F. was so pained and bewildered at the breakdown of her cherished belief in this spirit's identity and trustworthiness that for a con-

siderable time she sought no further communication. She had no thought of testing the truth of the message, as she considered that she absolutely knew that Mr. E. had died in his chambers. It was not till some months later that a common friend accidentally mentioned that Mr. E. had been removed from the Albany at his own wish, when almost at the point of death, with the idea that he would be better nursed in a private house.

It is deeply to be regretted that Mrs. F. did not inquire from the communicating spirit where he had died. If the address had been given the test would have been excellent. No further facts, it appears, can now be got from Mr. E.'s spirit. The coincidence is therefore reduced to a single fact ; but that one fact is a striking one, and cannot be said to have been in Mrs. FitzGerald's mind.

B. The following case was printed in the Journal S.P.R., for May 1899 (vol. ix. pp. 65-8), having been sent to us by Mr. Michael Petrovo-Solovovo, of St. Petersburg, now Hon. Secretary for Russia to the S.P.R.

Mr. Solovovo writes : —

In the following pages I have endeavoured to present all the evidence obtainable concerning an instance of an automatic message, which appears at first sight to be due to some other cause than " unconscious cerebration."

The amount of information unknown contained in the following message is certainly very slight, but still the unexpectedness of the fact that it was in the sea and not in a river that the soldier was drowned may be considered entitled to some weight. The most interesting feature of the case, however, appears to me to have been the circumstance that the mediums did not see the letters of the alphabet. This is stated by both of them as well as by the third person present at the sitting. . . .

Now, a message obtained under such conditions would involve at the very least telepathy in a strangely continuous form from M. Starck [to his wife and daughter] ; and makes it increasingly possible that the " veridical " part of the communication may have sprung from a supernormal source too ; whilst otherwise we might have put it down with more plausibility either to unconscious reasoning or to chance coincidence.

Most of the " Skrytnikoff case " as presented here appeared in No. 48 of the Rebus (a Russian Spiritistic paper, the editor of which is well known to me), in

DOCUMENT I.

Extract from a letter by Lieut.-Col. Starck to Baron N. Rausch von Traubenberg. Rtbus, No. 48, 1898, p. 417.

On January 22nd, 1898, I made Z and J 1 sit down at a table. I

wrote down the alphabet, placed upon it a saucer with a pointer and their hands upon it — and the writing began. Though a firm believer, from what I had read, in mediumistic phenomena, I was still amazed. I bandaged their eyes with the same result ; the letters are pointed out exactly and correctly ; the mental contents are present. No trance. All the writers are in a perfectly normal state. They are keeping their hands on the saucer with eyes blind-

1 M. Starck's daughter and wife.

869B] TO CHAPTER VIII 479

folded ; I read and write down. I put down questions aloud or in writing, and get answers which I do not expect, and the contents of which do not correspond to either Z.'s or J.'s mental level. I am looking upon it as a mystification— by whom, I do not know ; —then suddenly we get: " I have the honour to present myself, Your High Nobility,1— Skrytnikoff." This appeared so unexpectedly and had such a meaning that I had to get up from [sheer] emotion and to suspend the sitting for about five minutes. Skrytnikoff was a soldier who had served in my regiment here, in Caucasia, and was drowned in Pzezuappe river in June or July of last year when I was no more on active service ; I had learnt about this event by accident, and had only once spoken about it in the autumn. We sit down at the saucer again and get : " I was drowned in the sea, far away." I feel perplexed. From what had been communicated to me at the time of the occurrence I thought he had been drowned in the river. Then I get: " Doubovik (the local chief of district, i.e. pristav). Go to him." In the morning I go to Doubovik, and without saying what the matter was, I ask whether he knows anything about Skrytnikoff who was drowned — and receive, as I expected, a negative answer, because in such cases inquests, &c., are held by the military authorities themselves. During our conversation in the office the secretary interferes and says : " No, I think there is something about Skrytnikoff in the papers." A search is made in the papers and a proces verbal found by the bailiff or desiatnik of Lazarevskoe village, of no special importance, but in which the sentence occurred : " The horse swam out, but he [Skrytnikoff] was carried into the sea." Now this is very natural : the river, which is generally shallow, but swift and deep during high water, must have carried him into the sea.

DOCUMENT II.

Extract from Lieut.-CoL Starch's letter to M. Aksakoff, dated Sept. $th [i7///], 1898. Sotchi [Black Sea province — Tchernomorskaya Youbernia]. Rebus, No. 48, 1898, p. 417.

SIR, — My relative, Baron N. A. Rausch von Traubenberg, has informed me of your wish to print the contents of my letter to him concerning the soldier Skrytnikoff who was drowned, and has asked me to send you my consent. This I do at present with, of course, my whole signature ; and beg you — should it be of interest — to append to my letter : (i) An attestation by Doubovik, the then chief of the Sotchi district ; (2) a copy of the proces verbal j and (3) the original leaf of paper with the notes of the sitting. ... In the original [account] of the sitting the signature [S.'s] is unfinished because I got up from the table in great excitement; I was struck by the unexpectedness and the reality of the message, though I had read almost everything on the subject and felt quite sure of the possibility of such phenomena. The following words were obtained after I had sat down at the table again; my wife and daughter having not left the table at all. I only told them there was something convincing in the message. Then I was extremely astonished by the information as to his having been drowned in the sea, whilst I was quite sure this had occurred in the river, as the only information I had accidentally had on the subject from a former colleague of mine was to the effect that Skrytnikoff was drowned in Pzezuappe river, his chiefs being convinced of it till now. I knew no details whatever about . . . Skrytnikoff, and only the idea as to his having been drowned in a

1 A Russian military formula.

river could have originated in my head and among my household— and this only as a transitory long since forgotten impression ; it was once mentioned in the autumn, and I am not even quite sure of it.

The graces verbal gave me but little that was new, but the words " he was carried away by the water into the sea," gave my thoughts an impulse [in the direction] that it had actually been so, i.e. that he was drowned in the sea : there is not more than half a verst from the spot where the river is crossed to the sea, it being a mountain stream and in high water. Of course he was quickly carried into the sea ; his weapon (a sabre, I think) being found cast ashore on the sea coast, not far from the river. A year before I had been his chief, and am sure he felt kindly towards me as the other soldiers did.

The present message was, I think, obtained at the third seance. The conditions were as follows : the alphabet written, not in order, on a leaf of paper, and a saucer with a pointer upon it ; my wife and daughter, with eyes blindfolded, kept their hands upon the saucer, and I wrote down the letters. . . .

[M. Starck further states that his daughter is now sixteen and in good health.] [Signed] N. STARCK.

M. Starck's letter was followed in the Rebus by a copy of the proces verbal drawn up by Mouhortoff, a police official, which states that in the night of September 7th (iQth) Peter Skrytnikoff, a soldier of the Vardony military post, when crossing Pzezuappe river, was carried away by the water together with the horse, which, however, escaped and was taken charge of by soldiers of the Lazarevskce post ; as for S., " he was carried away by the water into the sea," and his body never found, though carefully searched for.

The Rebus also gave a statement by M. Doubovik confirmatory of M. Starck's account of his visit to him the day after the sitting : proces verbal of Skrytnikoff's death found, &c.

In reply to Mr. Solovovo's questions, M. Starck informed him that his wife and daughter knew Skrytnikoff, having seen him several times ; also that he himself did not touch the saucer during the communication. Mme. and Mdlle. Starck also sent Mr. Solovovo statements which he combined into one as follows : —

January 12/24, 1899. SOTCHI.

We find M. Starck's account concerning a communication from the soldier Skrytnikoff who was drowned, printed in Rebus, No. 48, 1898, to be correct. During the incident described our eyes were bandaged and we positively could not see the alphabet.

re- *A^ 5 JEANNETTE STARCK. \ ZENAIDE STARCK.

870 A. The following account (taken from thejournat S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 284) is translated and abridged from the Vessillo Spiritista for June 1900, where it appeared under the title of "A Good Proof of Spirit Identity."

NAPLES, January 2Oth [1900].

On the evening of January I2th, 1900, during the usual weekly sitting, in the presence of Sig. G. V. de Simone, his wife and two young daughters, C.

870A] TO CHAPTER VIII 481

Orsini and the present writer, a good proof of identity which had been asked for was received from the spirit of Arturo de Capua. It had been asked for under conditions which excluded every possibility of voluntary or involuntary, conscious or unconscious suggestion, as it was impossible that what was unknown and always had been unknown to all present should be suggested, and this makes it of more value than a volunteered proof, which might have been prepared beforehand by the medium.

This spirit of Arturo has given in many sittings many moral and intellectual proofs of his personality which were recognised by his mother and brother Avo. G. de Capua. The Neapolitan verses which he improvised (and I say improvised, because the suggestion was made at the moment), written with extreme rapidity through the medium Signorina O. de S., resemble closely in form and matter those written by him during his life on earth.

Proofs of this sort, however, although perhaps convincing to those present are of little value to strangers, who want records of facts which exclude any such hypothesis as telepathy or self-suggestion on the part of the medium. Therefore on this evening I asked the spirit of Arturo if he had any precise recollections of his earthly existence, and if he could give me some fact, of his own choice.

He answered me by automatic writing thus : " My dear Cavalli, I have, it is true, advanced; but I recognise you, in a state of calm which I have acquired, and which formerly I did not possess ; as for my remembrances, know that not only does it give me great fatigue to recall them, but it also causes me great pain ; and it is for this reason that I rarely seek to revive them."

Then I replied that I did not wish to cause him pain, and would content myself with asking him to give the names he remembered of his dearest friends.

None of those present had known Arturo when living, much less the persons or names of persons with whom he was acquainted. So this would be a good proof. The spirit willingly assented. After a short time he wrote with his accustomed rapidity : " Emilia, Paolo, Elena, Annina, and the lady who gave me the cigarette, and whose name I cannot recall. Those are the people of whom I was very fond, after my intimate friends, and who are still dear to me." " So far good, but the best part is still wanting,"— I observed—" the surnames. Do you remember them ? " " Yes." " Can you and will you give them ? " " I cannot." "At least tell me if the four names have different surnames." He answered that the two first had different surnames, and the two last the same. Immediately afterwards he expressed a desire to write again and wrote, " I add to these Carlo Ricci, whom I still love so much ; do not be so exacting, do you understand ? " The spirit insisted that all this was correct and expressed anger when I doubted it.

As soon as I saw his brother, Guglielmo, I showed him the communications. They were all absolutely correct, the names given, and the lady of the cigarette, but Carlo Ricci struck him above everything ! " He was Arturo's dearest friend," his brother told me.

Although older than Arturo, Carlo Ricci and his father had always had the greatest consideration for him, and Arturo was devoted to them both and preferred their company to any other.

Arturo's mother, whom I also questioned, confirmed everything that her son Guglielmo had said. . . .

VOL. n. 2 H

But to return to the communication given by the spirit of Arturo on the evening of the I2th, we can add another valuable particular. He gave the names of four persons, as we have said; among these was one Paolo. When asked about him at a following sitting he answered by automatic writing: " Paolo is the father of the lovely Nanninella." This was correct, and when asked for some further particulars of the lady who gave him the cigarettes — amongst other things, whether there were dear friends of the lady's living in the same place with her, — he answered : " The lady has dear friends near her, and they are of my family." Both these facts had been absolutely correct at the time of his death. But the interesting point is this — that when asked to name friends living in the same place as the lady, he named his family. Those present at the sitting, and all who knew Arturo's family, knew that for some months they had changed their home. The spirit, however, apparently judging from the past, did not think of their present changed habitation, and concluded that they were still living near the lady. V. CAVALLI.

As witness of the facts narrated above, I affirm that they are perfectly true. C. ORSINI.

Similar testimonies are given by Vincenzo de Simone and Guglielmo de Capua.

871 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 124-27, quoted from The Holy Truth, by Hugh Junor Browne, pp. 63-71.

In this [automatic writing] we were unsuccessful, until it came to the turn of my eldest daughter, a girl of eleven years of age, to take the pencil in hand. Immediately on her doing so her hand was influenced to write, causing her to be considerably alarmed. She called out, " Oh, mamma ! I am so frightened, my hand is moving." We all pacified her as much as possible, and on taking up the paper we found her hand had written on it quite legibly, though in rather tremulous characters, quite different from her ordinary writing, the following sentence : " Helen, Grace, Browne, I am come to see you. Your beloved aunt. You will," &c., &c. The remainder of the writing was too faint to decipher. The name written above is that of my second daughter, between five and six years of age, who is called after two of her aunts, my sisters; one of whom, the wife of an officer in the Indian army, passed away many years ago, having died on her passage home from India, and whose spirit we afterwards ascertained influenced the girl's hand to write this message to her little niece and namesake. We had a number of communications through the same source that evening from different spirit-friends, and since that time, except on two occasions, when she said she felt no influence (a reason for which afterwards was given), whenever my eldest girl sits down for the purpose of communicating with our spirit-friends, her hand is almost immediately influenced to write. Her hand has written as many as forty pages of large notepaper within half-an-hour, which in her ordinary handwriting would take her several hours to copy.

My daughter is quite unaware of what she is writing and describes the sensation of the influence as though electricity were running down her arm from the shoulder. This is what is termed mechanical writing mediumship. She often writes far beyond her own powers of comprehension on subjects of which she has not the least conception, spelling words correctly which she does

871 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 483

not understand, and of which, when read over, she inquires the meaning — such words as clairvoyantly, physically, £c. At other times she spells small words incorrectly which in her ordinary writing she would spell correctly. She has written in French, of which language she knows but the rudiments ; she has written in Chinese characters, and also in the Kaffir language, of neither of which does she understand a word. She has written in blank verse, which, though it would not stand the scrutiny of a critic, is decidedly beyond her powers in this line, she being more of a romp than a student.

My daughter has frequently been influenced to write messages to strangers from their spirit-friends, giving them particulars about things of which she could not possibly know anything, and signing correctly the names of their spirit-friends in spirit-life of whom she had never before heard. Her mother and I have thought of a question to put to one of our spirit-friends when she was not present, and calling her into the room have given her a pencil and paper, and she has written a correct reply to the question mentally asked, and signed the name of the spirit-friend of whom we thought. She can write either looking away from or on to the paper. A difference can be seen in the writing from each of our spirit-friends. If I see even the word " yes " written through her, I can generally tell what spirit is influencing the medium's hand. I have seen her write the letters upside down, backwards, left-handed, and in various ways quite impossible for the child to do herself, and sometimes so fast you can hardly see her hand join the letters, and at other times slow ; sometimes in a very small hand, at others in bold text-writing.

On one occasion it was written through my daughter's hand that I was to take a bottle of a specific I have for rheumatism to a Mr. Reed, directing me to inquire at a shop in the next street to where he used to live and I would be directed to where he then resided. I had formerly given a man of this name some of this mixture, which had relieved him of the pain, but had not seen or heard of him for months, and I was not aware that he had removed from where he then lived. On calling at his former residence I found he had removed, and on calling as instructed at the shop indicated I was told where Reed then lived. I found him confined to his bed, suffering acutely from rheumatism, and gave him the specific.

I may mention another incident which occurred. One day when out walking with my wife I met a black man whom I had never seen before, but whom I recognised as a Kaffir from large holes made in his ears peculiar to that race. I accosted him in his native tongue, at which he seemed rather surprised, and I gave him my address, telling him to call on me. This he did just as we were sitting down to investigate this subject. I told the servant to show him into the room, and on asking if any of his spirit-friends were present, my daughter's hand wrote out several Kaffir names, which on my reading out to him he recognised, and which evidently caused him great astonishment. On asking if they had any message for him, a sentence was written in the Kaffir language, some of the words of which were beyond my comprehension. On my reading the message out to the Kaffir he understood every word of it except one. This I pronounced in various ways to try to make him comprehend, but all to no purpose, when my daughter's hand was influenced to write, " Click with the mouth." This reminded me of a peculiar click which frequently accompanies the sounding of the letter " T " in the Kaffir language, and on my pronouncing this word he understood the meaning of it at once. I may state

my daughter does not know a word of Kaffir, having been born several years after I was last in that country. I inquired who influenced her hand to write, as the art of writing is generally unknown to Kaffirs, and was informed my old friend H. S., whose native name was " Nonquambeen," had written the message at the request of the Kaffir's spirit-friends. I may add H. S. was a well-educated man, whose memory I hold in regard, and who when in this life could talk the Kaffir language fairly, having been an old settler in Natal. I explained to my Kaffir visitor that the Insleseea, or souls of his friends, were present, at which he seemed rather terrified. I assured him there were numbers of my spirit-friends present also, and that my children frequently described both the spirits of my friends and of some of his countrymen who were in my employ, and others whom I knew many years ago. This only seemed to increase his fear. I think I have referred to Chinese having been written through my daughter's hand imperfectly, and on my remarking that I did not think it was like the Chinese characters, I was informed by one of my Anglican spirit-friends that it was the first time the Chinese spirit had influenced a medium to write, and that he would improve by practice. On showing it to a Chinese (there were thirteen or fourteen pages of it) he could not make out many of the characters, but here and there he said, " That means sound," "That means twenty," and so on, and remarked, "This like little China boy's writing, not know write good."

One day, while receiving communications through my daughter's hand, I observed written, " Put down that balloon." I remarked to my wife, " What on earth have they to do with balloons in spirit-life ? " She smiled, and told me that our daughter had in her left hand one of those pink india-rubber toy balloons, which she, childlike, had been trying to inflate with her breath whilst her right hand was writing the communications. I was sitting on the medium's right-hand side, and was so interested in the communications as written that I had not taken notice what she was doing with her left hand, on which side my wife sat. At another time, in reply to a query by me on some deep theological matter, through my daughter's hand it was written, " How can you expect an answer to such a question through a child's organisation?" I have several reams of paper filled with communications received through my daughter's hand.

The incident of the young child's writing is given in the same book (p. 71), being then of quite recent date. I will, however, give here the account, of course much later, but concordant, and in some points fuller, which was given to me at the interview mentioned in section 871.

October yd, 1891.

When our daughter Nelly was nearly five years old, she had not learned a single letter of her alphabet. She had certainly received no instruction whatever. One day her elder sister was writing automatically. To please the child, we put a pencil in her hand. Presently we observed that she had written some words, and on looking we saw that the words were, "I am a mesmeric medium." [Words " I am a " not present in earlier account.] She had been under our eyes all the time. The words were written in a small angular lady's handwriting. I then asked my elder daughter's " guide," the late Dr. Godfrey Howitt, to explain this. Instead of the accustomed writing, a message came

872A] TO CHAPTER VIII 485

in the writing of my elder sister, the late Mrs. Colonel Kelso, to the effect : [here I give the correct wording as in earlier record] " She will be very mediumistic, but is too young to be influenced; do not let her sit until she is older, or you will injure her health." We did not let her write automatically for some years afterwards ; then she did write for some little time, and then the power left her. HUGH JUNOR BROWNE.

ELIZABETH BROWNE.

872 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 122-24.

The following case came to Dr. Hodgson from a group of persons who may not be very critical, but who are plainly sincere. The phenomenon alleged, however surprising, involves but a simple act of observation, and should have been easy to note and remember.

FLUSHING, July igth, 1890.

MR. RICHARD HODGSON, — DEAR SIR, — It affords me pleasure to respond to your inquiry concerning the item of spirit writing through the hand of a little child just four years of age who had no knowledge of its letters, unaided and untaught.

My wife had a niece who passed to spirit-life twenty years ago, who was in life strongly attached to her, and whenever we come in contact with a mediumistic person she invariably makes her presence known to us. My daughter, fifteen years of age, and another young lady of the same age, opened a school for small children in a little room used for a Sunday School by the Baptist society, where the event took place. It was approaching Easter, and to add to the coming exercises, the little girl was especially invited to join them in rehearsing their pieces, as most all the pupils were members of the Mission Sunday School. The first morning of her attendance a slate and pencil were given her to keep her quiet ; she scribbled awhile, when it was noticed that she had written very distinctly the name Emma. As it was known that the child had never been inside of a school before, and that she knew no single letter of the alphabet, it was a great surprise. The slate belonged to some of the pupils, hence was not preserved by the young ladies. I regretted the loss of such a rare test of spirit control, and urged them, should such a thing ever occur again, to preserve it. The child attended the day following, and instead of slate a leaf from a tablet and lead pencil were given her. After she had amused herself awhile she returned the paper, and it was seen that a number of attempts to write the name Emma had been made. As she handed in the paper she said, " Nozer," and another sheet was given, with an improvement ; the third was given, when upon either side was written with bold running hand, " your aunt Emma," quite as large and perfect as the above.

True, she was aunt to the little one whose little hand she was holding. The pressure upon the paper of the first two sheets was uneven, and it requires close attention to follow some portions of the first attempt, but in the last she seems to have overcome all difficulties and accomplished her purpose of giving us a fact of spirit control.

Little Etta has passed on to the higher life within a year of this event.

It is fair to say her parents were not Spiritualists. They took the child and gave her paper and pencil, but failed to get satisfactory results.

That little circle of innocent children singing their songs had created an atmosphere of harmony favourable for that sensitive little child to receive

the impress or control of a decarnate spirit. Those familiar with phenomena of this kind will readily appreciate the difference in conditions. — Yours truly, A. E. HEMPSTEAD.

This is to certify that we were present and witnessed the writing of little Etta, as described in the foregoing statement, and know that neither Etta nor any other pupil present at the time could have written the messages of their own abilities. [Signed] LAURA HEMPSTEAD.

L. A. K.

I am the mother of little Etta, and know she had not been taught the alphabet, or how to hold her pencil. [Signed] MRS. B. W. TERRY.

In another letter Mr. Hempstead adds : —

NEWTOWN, N.Y., October i6tA, 1890.

In reply to your last inquiry I will say Etta's message was written just before Easter.

The messages we still have, although somewhat difficult to read, as they were in pencil, and the uneven pressure upon the paper requires close attention. We did not ink it over, as we wished to preserve its purity. Remember she held the pencil between the middle fingers of her left hand, as she was not taught the art of holding her pencil. I have written in ink upon their margins in the order that she wrote them.

Will gladly loan them to you, trusting they will be duly returned.

NEWTOWN, November \tyh, 1890.

DEAR SIR,— By a strange grouping of circumstances your letter, little Etta's mother, the young lady who witnessed the writing, all came into our home here in Newtown together, bringing the mail with them, as if unconsciously directed, so I am prepared to return your paper promptly. They all read it, and without hesitation gave their signatures. In the case of Miss K., she said she would rather not have her name mentioned publicly on account of her connection with the church, &c., which you may readily understand.

The mother explained that the child was left-handed, and L. did not remember about the manner in which she (Etta) held the pencil. But my daughter is positive, and one not likely to forget so novel a feature. Hoping the above will suffice, I remain, very truly yours for humanity, A. E. HEMPSTEAD.

Dr. Hodgson adds : —

October y>tk, 1890.

Mr. Hempstead has kindly sent me the writings by the little girl Etta for my inspection. There are three small sheets of paper with several attempts at writing on both sides of each sheet. There are indications of "Aunt" and " Emma " on the first and second sheets ; Emma being written tolerably well on the second sheet. The enclosed tracing is of the last attempt.

An account (seen by me and concordant with the above) had been sent by Mr. Hempstead to the Banner of Light immediately after the incident, and was printed May 4th, 1889. I nave seen tne tracing of the last-written phrase, " your aunt Emma." It is a free scrawl, resembling the planchettewriting of an adult rather than the first effort of a child.

873A] TO CHAPTER VIII 487

873 A. The following experience of Mr. W.'s is quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 463 :—

October zbth, 1894.

. . . The following is an account of an experience I had last April.

In the afternoon, I was riding eastward towards Schenectady, N.Y., on the N.Y.C. and H.R. road. I intended to get off at Schenectady, and take a train from there to Troy, and at Troy get a train on the Fitchburgh and Hoosac Tunnel Road. I asked the conductor whether I would be able to make good connections at Schenectady, also at Troy. He informed me that I would at Schenectady, but at Troy I would not, for the reason that I would not arrive in Troy until five minutes after the departure of the train on the F. and H. T. He told me that I would not arrive in Troy until 5.5, and my train departed at just five o'clock, and that it was the last one for the week. This was Saturday. I asked him if he could suggest any way for me to get my train or reach my desired place of destination, but he said he could not. It seemed certain that I must lay off in Troy over Sunday. The conductor passed on, and I meditated, but to no purpose. After some time I took a pencil and paper, and thought, but did not write, " Well, I think I shall not get through to-night, I am very sorry." Instantly the

pencil wrote, " You will reach to-night," naming the place I was bound

for. I replied, by thought, " Why, it's impossible, how can I ?— the train out of Troy leaves five minutes before my train arrives." The answer was,

"Yes, but you will get to to-night," again naming my place of destination.

Again I thought, " Pray, tell me how I am to do so." The answer was, " Oh,

never mind how, I tell you you will arrive in all right to-night." I urged

the impossibility of the matter, but that was stoutly denied. I pleaded for an explanation, but it was written that I needed none, and that none would be given me. I asked for instruction and it was written that they had none to give. I insisted on the fact that I could not get the train, but this was not conceded.

On arriving at Schenectady I found my train for Troy, and as I boarded it, I asked the trainman if we would arrive in Troy in time for me to get a train on the Fitchburgh and Hoosac Tunnel Road. He replied, " No," very promptly, and added, "it leaves five minutes before we arrive." I took my seat. When the conductor came along I tried hard to appear innocent, and asked him if I would get to Troy in time to get a train out on the Fitchburgh and Hoosac Tunnel Road. I said I hoped to, for I was very anxious to

arrive at that night. His reply was, " We do not arrive in Troy until

five minutes after five, and the train on that road pulls out at just five, and it's the last train." He passed on picking up tickets, and I settled back into my seat. It seemed as if the last chance was gone, and I could not help but wonder what would be written, so I observed mentally, " Well, you see your prediction is wrong, do you not ? " And then came to me what seemed to be the height of foolishness, " Why, you will get there all right, just as I told you." No explanation being vouchsafed, I fell to planning what I would do in the city of Troy over Sunday, for I had no hope of getting out.

After a while the conductor came back and took a seat just behind me, and leaning over towards me he said, " So you would very much like to get that train, would you?" "Yes, sir," I said. "Well," continued he, "there

is just one way that is possible for you to do it, if you are a good runner and willing to take chances." Of course I asked how. Said he, " I don't advise any one to do it, but it is possible to jump off this train, for we stop before we reach the Troy Dep6t, and run and jump on to that train while it is going out.'* And he took a pencil and drew the railroads and the dep6t (a Union one) about like this [diagram omitted here].

And then he went on to explain : " We are not allowed to run into tht depot until the train for Saratoga and the one on the Fitchburgh and H. T. A have both pulled out, which they both do at just five o'clock. We should arrive at our stopping place X at about five. You could get off there and run across the Saratoga track and over to Z [a point on the Fitchburgh line] and jump on to that train. There is a street from a point near X to Z."

At X, as our train stopped, I jumped from it and ran to point Z and caught my train which was passing at that point.

When seated in the car I gave the pencil one more chance, and it was written : " I see you are on board all right; don't you think I knew what I vras telling you ? "

I had no further trouble in reaching the desired place that night.

I will say that I was not aware of any of the material facts prior to their appearing as I have stated them. I had not consulted any time-table or otherwise learned as to the times on which these trains were to arrive or depart : and / knew nothing of the train stopping outside the Troy Depot or of the possibility of getting from it and running up the street and catching the train I wished to take. I never had the slightest idea of such a thing until the conductor laid the plan before me just as I have stated it. I was travelling alone. I did not know the conductor or anybody that I saw.

I had no occasion to look up or inform myself as to trains at Troy for the reason that I expected to travel on the West Shore Road instead of the N.Y.C. and H.R.R. ; but I missed the train on the West Shore Road and so took the N.Y.C. and H.R.R. as the best thing possible under the circumstances. On the West Shore Road my journey would not have been through Schenectady and Troy, but would have been to Rotterdam Junction on the West Shore Road, and there I would have connected with a train on the Fitchburgh and Hoosac Tunnel Road, all very nicely.

I think this experience is quite unique. Perhaps some one can explain it.

W.

N.Y., Nwcmber 8tb, 1894.

In accordance with your suggestion, I send you herewith a further statement that you may subjoin. I think it covers your inquiry.

C W .

About two years prior to that I had travelled from Schenectady to Troy, and out of Troy on F. and H. T. R. ; but at that time the train did not stop outside of Troy Dep6t. I had travelled in years previous, that is, from five to twenty years ago, several times on trains between Schenectady and Troy, but none of them ever stopped outside of Troy Dep6t. I had not been in

since the trip of two years before. Prior to that I had been in that place

perhaps once in two years, for a day.

It might be well to add that no friend of mine at or elsewhere knew

any of these facts, to the best of my knowledge and belief. After arriving at

874 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 489

I told my friends, but none of them had known of the matters. I feel

confident that no friend or acquaintance of mine knew I was to travel from Schenectady to Troy, and that none of them had made or heard of a connection in that way. From talks with them I know they did not.

874 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 432~37-The following appeared in the Religio- Philosophical Journal for November ist, 1890: —

STATEMENT OF DR. SUDDICK.

For some time past we have been holding spiritual stances, or circles, regularly every Tuesday and Friday evening at our home in Cuba, Mo., and have gotten and are getting many messages, truthful and otherwise, although the untruthful ones are few comparatively and are generally so from known causes, such as misunderstanding of question asked, inharmony in circle, &c., &c. Most remarkable was a " Prophecy and its Fulfilment," a hurried statement of which appeared in the Better Way of October i8th. Two friends had called in, namely, Charles H. Cottnam, bookkeeper for the firm of Newman and Jones, general merchants, and James E. Hollow, jun., of the firm of Hollow & Son, dealers in stoves, hardware, and furniture, both doing business at this place. Then my wife and I sat around a small walnut centre table, placing our hands on its top surface in the usual manner, and in about ten or fifteen minutes the table began to move, indicating the presence of our spirit friends, or some intelligence with the power to move it, and answer questions intelligently, as we found by asking. The lamp was sitting on a piano in the corner of the room, turned down so as to make a subdued or mellow light, but not so low but that we could see what time it was by our watches as we sat at the table, or jot down the communications as they were spelled out.

Mr. Cottnam had a friend, Mr. Chris. Varis, a prominent hotel-keeper of St. James, Phelps County, Mo., and a former resident of this place. His disease was a chronic affection of the throat. Mr. C. had called on him a few days previous and found him very weak and sinking fast. He could take no solid food, and all the nourishment he got was by painful swallowing a little eggnog or milk. His attendant physician, Dr. Headlee, of St. James, told Mr. Cottnam that he thought Mr. Varis could live but a few days at most, and from his appearance Mr. Cottnam was of the same opinion. After many other questions were asked and answered, the table answering by tipping two of its feet two or three inches off the floor, and then striking it again, once for no, twice for don't know, and three times for yes, Mr. C. asked, " Do you know my friend Chris. Varis, of St. James, Mo.?" "Yes." "Is he any better than when I was with him last?" "No." "Is he worse?" " Yes." " Will I have time to get to him before he passes out if I take the next train?" "Yes." " Will he live over to-morrow ?" "Yes." " Do you know when he will pass out?" "Yes." Then the table rocked back and forth slowly, the feet striking the floor forty times, making forty distinct raps, much to the surprise of all present, as we were expecting him to pass out much sooner. We counted, and found that the time indicated would be October 8th ; so to make sure we were right we asked, " Will he pass out on October 8th ? " " Yes." " In the forenoon ? " " Yes." " Will a telegram be sent to me on the morning of the 8th to that effect? " " Yes."

A night or two after the above-described seance Mr. Cottnam sat at another house with different sitters, and received the following confirmation of the above. He says : " We had been sitting only a few minutes when the table began to move. I asked,  Is the spirit demonstrating a friend of mine ? ' ' Yes.' (Indicated by three distinct tips of the table.) ' Will you spell your name?' 'Yes.' The alphabet was called in the usual way, and the letters signalled by tips spelled Ben Walker. ' Are you my friend, Ben Walker, of St. Louis ? ' ' Yes.' ' I was not aware of your demise ; when did you pass out ? ' Three distinct tips. ' Does that mean that it has been three days since you passed out ?' 'Yes.' ' Is your body buried ?' 'No.' ' Will it be buried to-morrow ? '  Yes.' ' Do you know my friend Chris. Varis ? ' ' Yes.' « Will he pass out on October 8th ?' 'Yes.' ' Are you sure of this ?' 'Yes.'"

Mr. Cottnam was not aware of the death of Mr. Walker, and rather doubted the truth of the message about him. The Globe Democrat of the next day, however, confirmed the truth of his death, and stated that the interment was deferred until his son arrived from a distant city.

The prediction about Mr. Varis became an open secret, and was talked of freely through the town from the morning of August 3oth until October 8th, when a telegram came over the wires informing Mr. C. that Mr. Varis died that morning at six o'clock.

I append a letter from Dr. Headlee, the physician who attended Mr. Varis, which corroborates the account just given. I also send the signatures of twelve of our best citizens in further confirmation, and the signatures of the sitters. Many more names could be obtained, but I judge the following to be sufficient. S. T. SUDDICK, M.D.

CUBA, Mo.

ST. JAMES, Mo., October i&Vfc, 1890.

DEAR DOCTOR, — About a week previous to the death of Mr. Chris. Varis I was in Cuba, and a friend was inquiring about him. I told him that on the evening before I did not think he would survive the night, but on that morning he had rallied a little, that the chances all were that he would not last twenty-four hours. He then told me that he (Mr. V.) would live until the eighth day of October, and that he would die on that day ; this he did, dying at 6 A.M.

Mr. Varis was sick about seven or eight months, and for the last three was expected to die at any time.— Respectfully yours, S. H. HEADLEE.

CUBA, Mo., October \$th, 1890.

To ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN : — This is to certify that we, the undersigned citizens of Cuba, Mo., did, prior to the death of Mr. Chris. Varis, of St. James, Mo., which occurred on the morning of the 8th of October 1890, hear a prophecy to the effect that he would die on the morning of that day.

We heard that his death was foretold at a stance, at the house of Dr. S. T. Suddick, in the town of Cuba, Mo., on the night of August the 29th, or forty days prior to that event. S. T. SUDDICK, M.D.

I received message for Cottnam October 8th, from St. James.

CHAS. C. KENT, Telegraph Operator at Cuba.

JAS. E. HOLLOW, Jun., one of the circle of August 29th. LONGSTREET SIMPSON, Clerk in Store.

874A] TO CHAPTER VIII 491

I. P. BRICKEY, Proprietor, Cuba Hotel.

E. A. EVANS, Real Estate Agent.

F. R. HARDESTY, Druggist. W. T. HUNTER, Blacksmith.

C. H. COTTNAM, one of the circle of August 29th.

Dr. V. L. SHELP, Dentist.

Dr. J. H. MARTYN, Physician and Surgeon.

GEO. ASKINS, Hotel Clerk.

Mrs. LOUISE FARLEY SUDDICK, one of the circle of August 29th.

J. A. ROST, Shoemaker.

J. A. CAIMS, Clerk in Store.

B. F. JOHNSON, Notary Public.

The letter from which the following is an extract, and of which the original was sent to Dr. Hodgson by Dr. Suddick, fixes the date of the

seance.

CUBA, Mo., August 2$tA, 1890.

D. E. PERRYMAN, Bonne Terre, Mo.

DEAR FRIEND, — . . . 30th. We had a nice little circle last night, in our parlour, and good phenomena, so far as table-tipping goes. Myself, wife, and two neighbours composed the circle. There were about a hundred questions asked, and all were answered correctly, so far as we know.

One gentleman was requested to go to a sick friend, and was told the number of days he would live, &c. &c. S. T. SUDDICK.

(This extract appeared in the Religio- Philosophical Journal.) Dr. Suddick says that the letter was returned to him at his own request, and writes : —

You will find that the first seven or eight lines were written August 29th and the remainder of the letter on the 3oth, or part before and part after the sitting.

Mrs. Suddick sends the following account of the sitting : —

CUBA, Mo., November qth, 1890.

Replying to your favour of the 5th inst., requesting my confirmation of the " prophecy " of which my husband wrote, I can say that I was one of the sitters : the se'ance having taken place at our house. There were two other sitters besides my husband (Dr. Suddick) and self, namely, J. E. Hollow, jun., and C. H. Cottnam. The message was given in answer to questions put by Mr. Cottnam concerning his friend Mr. Varis. He did not call the name of the latter at the time of the sitting, but only spoke of him as " my friend," and I, for one, did not know at the time to whom he referred. (I think perhaps the other sitters did.) I heard casually the next day through a neighbour lady that Mr. Varis, of St. James, was expected to die at any time, and associating the two incidents, I concluded he was the sick friend of whose demise Mr. C. had been questioning the " spirits," and on inquiring found that I had surmised correctly.

At the sitting Mr. Cottnam asked a number of questions about his sick friend, among which were, " Will he be alive when I arrive there ? " " Will he

die to-morrow?" "Will he die the day after?" &c. After receiving negative answers to the last two — and perhaps the question whether he would live a week was asked, — I do not distinctly remember — he requested the controlling power to rap once for every day that his friend would yet live, and the table rapped forty times: each of the sitters counted the raps as they were given distinctly by the table rising on one side off the floor and striking down again. On counting the forty days from that date we found that the time of his death as prophesied would fall on the 8th of October. (The date of the prophecy was August 29th.) Mr. C. asked if the 8th of October was the day on which he would die, and the table rapped three times, the conventional signal for " Yes." He then asked if the demise would take place in daytime or at night ; in the forenoon or afternoon, &c., and received answers that it would be in the daytime, and in the forenoon.

At several other stances, held at the home of Mr. Brickey and other places, these questions were again asked, and the answers repeated that Mr. Varis would die on the morning of October 8th, as at the first sitting. Of these dates I am perfectly confident.

It may, and it may not, be superfluous to add, that, unlike my husband, I am not a confirmed believer in the spiritual origin of those phenomena which we have from time to time witnessed, such as movements of the table by some unknown power ; intelligent answers to questions ; messages given through the alphabet, &c., but have been undecided whether to attribute them to telepathy, thought-transference, or some other unknown mental or magnetic quality residing in the sitters themselves, or whether, as so many believe, it is really through the direct agency of the disembodied.

Wishing your Society much success in its rational and most scientific way of dealing with these occult problems,— I am, very truly,

LOUISE F. SUDDICK.

Dr. Hodgson has also received letters from Mr. I. P. Brickey, Mr. E. A. Evans, and Mr. J. A. Rost, confirming the authenticity of their testimony quoted above. Mr. Brickey states that it was at his house that the seance at which the prophecy was confirmed was held.

Mr. Evans writes : —

CUBA, Mo., November 8th, 1890.

Touching the matter cited in yours of the 4th inst., I desire to say that my signature subscribed to the published statement of Dr. Suddick, relative to the prophesied death of Chris. Varis, of St. James, Mo., is authentic. Further, in this connection I desire to say that I never attended a se'ance, as it is called, I believe, in my life, have no experience in that line, and have no personal knowledge upon which to base belief nor unbelief of Spiritualism. But I was told by parties that met at Dr. Suddick's residence, some weeks before the demise of Chris. Varis, that by raps with, or on a table, I do not know which, they were told that Varis would die in forty days, or October 8th, and he did die on the date as given. EUGENE A. EVANS.

There remained an important question to determine : whether Mr. Varis had known of the prophecy, making it possible that it had brought

876A] TO CHAPTER VIII 493

about its own fulfilment. The following letter and statement give the result of Dr. Suddick's inquiries on this point :—

CUBA, Mo., December 2yd, 1890.

I received your recent letter several days ago, but thought it would perhaps be more satisfactory to you and your Society for me to go and see Mrs. Varis, widow of Mr. Chris. Varis, myself. So yesterday (Sunday) I boarded the noon train, and on arriving found Mrs. Varis and her two daughters, young ladies, very intelligent and clever people. On introducing the subject, just a shade of vexation passed over Mrs. V.'s face, and she made haste to say, " We are not Spiritualists, and knew nothing of the prophecy until we saw it in the Crawford Mirror, at least two weeks after Mr. Varis' death. I was very much vexed, as we believe nothing in such foolishness. ..."

I explained that the parties who had signed their names to the paper had not intended it to appear in the local press. Mrs. V. said she had felt very badly about having her husband's name bandied about in that way in a newspaper, but when Mr. Cottnam explained the matter, and Dr. Headlee said he knew of the prophecy, and that the morning of the 8th of October had been specified as the time in which he should die, a week or more before his death occurred, she felt that there must be some truth in it, as she could not doubt Dr. Headlee.

" Mrs. Varis, did your husband know anything about the prophecy before his death ? "

" No, indeed," she said, " none of us knew anything about it until two weeks after his death."

" Might not Dr. Headlee have said something to him about it during one of his visits, without your knowing it ?"

" Oh dear no," she said, " I was always present at these visits, and know no such talk occurred at any of them. No, I am positive Dr. Headlee never mentioned it, and that Mr. V. never knew it."

I then wrote up the little memorandum enclosed, and she signed it, or rather her daughter did, at her request, in my presence. . . .

I then went out and found Dr. Headlee, and he said in answer to my questions : —

" No, I know positively that Mr. V. knew nothing of the prophecy ; no one in St. James knew anything of it but myself, and I did not want him to find it out-" S. T. SUDDICK.

To ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN :— This is to certify that I am positive that my husband knew nothing whatever of the prophecy of his death, made at a spiritual circle held at the home of Dr. S. T. Suddick, in Cuba, Mo., on August 29th last. We did not hear of it for about two weeks after his death. We are not Spiritualists. [Signed] MRS. A. VARIS.

876 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 353-55. In an article in Psychische Studien, March 1889 (p. 131), the editor (Mr. Alexander Aksakoff), writes : —

I am personally acquainted with the following case :— My friend and fellowstudent at the Lyceum, Privy Councillor (Geheimrath) Baron Konstantin K., told me, twenty years ago, that at the time of the death of his uncle, Baron

Paul K., at Warschau, his will could not be found, though it was thoroughly searched for ; and that it was discovered in a secret drawer (Fache), entirely in consequence of a communication received by Prince Emile Wittgenstein, in which the place was described.

In Psychische Studien for December 1889 (pp. 568-69), M. Aksakoff gives further particulars as follows : —

Since the previous notice of this case, I have made the acquaintance of Paul von Korf, a son of Baron von Korf, who resides in the Port Strasse, St. Petersburg. He has given me the following account of the circumstances : —

His father, General Paul von Korf, died at Warschau on April ;th, 1867. It was known that he had made a will, but after his death it could not be found. In the month of July 1867 his sister, the Baroness Charlotte von Wrangel, was living with her sister-in-law, Madame D. von Obuchow, in the town of Plock (pronounced Plozk), not far from Warschau. Her mother, the widow of General von Korf, was travelling abroad ; and in her mother's absence she was entrusted with the opening of her correspondence. Among the letters thus received and opened was one from Prince Emile von Wittgenstein (also abroad) addressed to the widow of General von Korf, in which he informed her that a spiritualistic communication had been received by him in the name of her deceased husband, indicating the place where his will would be found. The Baroness von Wrangel, who knew how much trouble the absence of this will had given to her elder brother [Baron Joseph Korf] who was engaged in the administration of the property, and who was at that time in Warschau, went at once, with her sister-in-law, to Warschau, to inform him of the important contents of the letter of Prince von Wittgenstein. Her brother's first words were that he had just found the will ; and when the letter of Prince von Wittgenstein was read, it was apparent, to the astonishment of those present, that the place indicated in the spiritualistic communication where the will would be found was precisely that in which the Baron had at last found it.

Baron Paul von Korf promised me that he would look for this letter of Prince von Wittgenstein's, which he had in his hand less than two years ago, when arranging the family papers. But up to the present time he has not been able again to find it. He fears it may have been unintentionally destroyed with, useless correspondence.

In a letter dated St. Petersburg, February 26th, 1890, M. Aksakoff adds the following particulars, with two letters, of which translations are here given : —

I. Original letter from Baron Paul Korf (son of the Baron Korf whose will is concerned) to M. Aksakoff, countersigned by Baron Paul's sister, Baroness Charlotte Wrangel, and testifying to the exactness of the fact as stated in Psychische Studien, 1888, p. 568.

PETERSBURG, January zgfb, 1890.

SIR, — I have read with great interest your communication, inserted in Psychische Studien (p. 568), concerning the will of my late father. The facts are there related with perfect accuracy. I am afraid that I burnt the letter o£

876B] TO CHAPTER VIII 495

Prince Emile Wittgenstein about a year ago, when I was arranging the papers of my late father, which were at his country seat. — Accept, &c.,

(BARON) PAUL KORF.

I add my signature to that of my brother, to confirm the contents of his letter. BARONESS C. WRANGEL, NEE BARONESS KORF.

II. Copy of a letter from Prince Emile de Sayn-Wittgenstein, published in the work, Souvenirs et Correspondance du Prince Entile de Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berlebourg (Paris, 1889), vol. ii. p. 365.

WARSAW, July ijtk, 1867.

It seems an age, my dear parents, since I have had any news of you ; my mother's last letter was dated June 5th. I have occupied myself much with Spiritualism of late, and my mediumistic faculties have developed themselves in an astonishing way. I write often with great facility in various kinds of writing ; I have had direct communications from the spirit which haunts Berlebourg, a woman of our family who killed herself 102 years ago. I have, moreover, obtained a very singular result. One of my friends, Lieut.-General Baron de Korf, deceased some months since, manifested himself to me (without my having thought of him the least in the world), to enjoin upon me to indicate to his family the place where his will had been maliciously hidden ; that is to say, in a chest of drawers in the house where he died. I did not know that the family were looking for this will, and had not found it. Well, they found it in the very place which the spirit had indicated to me. It is a document of great importance for the management of his property, and for the settlement of questions which will arise when his children attain their majority. Here are facts which can stand criticism. EMILE WITTGENSTEIN.

III. Prince Emile Wittgenstein died in 1878, at Tegernsee, in Bavaria.

IV. As to the date of the letter of Prince Sayn-Wittgenstein to the widow of Baron Korf. Here is what I have been able to learn in a last interview with his son, Baron Paul Korf. The marriage of his daughter, Baroness Charlotte Korf, with Baron Wrangel took place at Warsaw, June I7th, 1867. A week after that event the Baroness Wrangel left, with her sister-in-law, Madame Obuchow, for the town of Plock, and her mother went abroad. At that date the will had not been found. And since the letter of Prince Emile Wittgenstein to his parents, in which he informs them of the finding of the will by spiritual communication, is dated July I7th, 1867, it follows that the letter of Prince Emile Wittgenstein to the widow of Baron Korf, enclosing that communication, and consequently the communication itself, must have been received between June I7th and July I7th, 1867.

V. As to the place where the will was found. I asked Baron Paul Korf : " Is it a fact that the will was found ' in a chest of drawers ' (armoire) as was predicted in the communication?" He answered: "That is what both my sister and I heard."

VI. The elder son of Baron Korf, who busied himself at Warsaw with the affairs of the inheritance, was named Baron Joseph Korf, and has since died.

876 B. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 238-42.

The following case of a communication indicating the whereabouts

of a missing note of hand was sent to Dr. Hodgson by Judge W. D. Harden, of Savannah, Georgia, who is well known to him : —

October yd, 1888.

DR. RICHARD HODGSON, — My DEAR SIR,— Thinking that you may possibly be back from your vacation, I send you with this the account of the finding of the note by Mrs. B. and the letter to me from Dr. Knorr.

W. D. HARDEN.

SAVANNAH, GA., September i6tA, 1888.

Judge W. D. HARDEN,

DEAR FRIEND, — This morning, when I paid a professional visit to Mrs. B.'s sick son, she showed me a rough draft of the statement she intended to send to you. . . .

I think I need to add very little to Mrs. B.'s statements. You are acquainted with the modus operandi of the communications with the sliding rod, the rod and the alphabet board being at B.'s house, the same you saw at Miss Maggie R.'s. In order to facilitate your description for Dr. H. I send you a paper model of the rod and a printed alphabet (with other convenient inscriptions), that is to be pasted near the two (right and left) edges, leaving a space between of sufficient width for the points of the rod to point out the desired letters.

I have to remark that a couple of days after the death of Miss Nina B.'s fiance (Mr. N. H.) I assisted her to get into communication with him. We succeeded, Miss Nina turning out to be feebly mediumistic, and many communications were received from him.

This attracted Major B.'s attention. He tried then with me (the major was then an agnostic), and found that he also was mediumistic, and he got communications from his father and his uncle that were so characteristic that he became convinced of the reality of spirit communion. So when the major departed, last spring or summer, he was well acquainted with the modus operandi of spirit communion ; and therefore the very day after his departure we could receive a few words from him. Later on we received many messages from him.

I think I was present at the stance when he stated that the note was deposited somewhere, but could not tell where. It looks as if at that time he had not yet discovered the whereabouts of the note, but continued hunting for it, and at last discovered it.

L. KNORR, Savannah.

Judge HARDEN, — In compliance with your request I will state : After my honoured husband Major Lucius B.'s departure from this life, I was in distress of mind that none could understand but one surrounded by similar circumstances. Of his business transactions I knew but little. After a week or two of stunning agony, I aroused myself to look into our financial condition. I was aware that he had in his keeping a note given by Judge H. W. Hopkins to some several hundred which was due, and I searched all the nooks and corners of his secretaire, manuscript, letters, memorandum-books, read several hundred letters ; but all for naught. For two months I spent most of the time going over and over, but with the same result. I finally asked him at a stance about the note.

876B] TO CHAPTER VIII 497

Q. " Have you deposited the note anywhere ? " A. " I have." Q. " Where ? " No answer.

Finally I wrote to Judge H. (who had written me about it) : " I had as well tell you the note has not been found. I cannot imagine where it is." This was on Friday. The following Sunday, about four o'clock, my daughter Nina, who possesses some singular power, proposed we try if we could not get a communication from our loved ones. While she went to get a little arrangement (a rod that worked on a board upon which the letters of the alphabet were printed) I sat in my room alone, thinking, if it were possible for Major B. to see the heart filled to overflowing with anguish, and added to this the mind distressed by business cares, would he not communicate with me and try to give some consolation or assistance.

But I did not express my thoughts to any one. Nina returned, and after a little conversation we put our hands on the rod and it promptly spelt " Look in my long drawer and find Willie." I became excited, ran to the bureau and pulled out the bottom drawer, turned the contents upon the floor, and commenced to search. Under all the things was a vest; in its little breast pocket was the note.

Major B. was in the habit of calling the bottom drawer, where only his under-garments were kept, " My long drawer," to designate it from several small drawers set aside for his use. The vest was the only garment, other than underwear, in the drawer. The vest was the one taken off him when he first became ill. He was unconscious during the first day of his illness. The vest was put in the drawer after or during his illness by my friend, I think, who assisted in caring for him while sick.

The drawer had not been opened that we knew of after he left us until the note was discovered. Although I had moved to another room, I gave instructions that the bottom drawer was not to be disturbed.

As soon as the rod spelt " Look in my long drawer and find Willie," I was perfectly electrified with the knowledge that Willie H.'s note was in that drawer, although I never would have thought of looking in such a place for a valuable paper.

Major B. and myself always spoke to and of Judge H. as " Willie," he being a relation of mine and a favourite of Major B. from Willie's childhood.

I have just read the above to my daughter, and she says she will endorse the statement as being correct.— I am, very respectfully,

Mrs. E. F. B. B., widow of the

late Major Lucius C. B. N. H. B.

SAVANNAH, GA., September i6M, 1888.

The two signatures have been made in my presence, and I corroborate many of the facts and circumstances mentioned in the above report. I am now requested by the ladies to say that they do not wish their names to appear in public. Louis KNORR, M.D.

SAVANNAH, October 27 th, 1888. Judge W. D. HARDEN,

MY DEAR FRIEND, — The delay in answering yours of the 9th inst. was caused by Mrs. B., who sent me her answer only an hour ago, notwithstanding my having reminded her a dozen times.

VOL. II. 2 I

As you see from her statement, the exact date of the memorable seance cannot be given by her. But some coincidental occurrences [mentioned in detail, show that it was most likely] the I3th or the 2oth of May last. It is certain that it was a Sunday, as Mrs. B. states, for I remember that, when I returned from Wilmington Island that Sunday, Mrs. K. told me that Miss Nina B. had been here and had told her to inform me that something important had happened that afternoon, and she had pleasant news to communicate to me. I guessed at once what it referred to ; for they had all along been so anxious to get some information about that note, and I was present at the several previous stances, when ineffectual attempts had been made to get that information. . . .

I see Mrs. B. does not answer No. 2 of Dr. H.'s questions (date of sitting where question about the note was first asked) at all ; so I will do so as far as I can. It was about a week after Major B.'s demise that the question was put in my presence, and further at several subsequent stances at which I was present ; but no exact dates could be given, further than that it occurred, say, between the 6th of April and the I3th of May, on several occasions in my presence, and in the presence of Mrs. B., Miss Nina B., and sometimes of the youngest child (Lettie, eight or nine years).

In answer to No. 5 of Dr. H.'s questions (" Is Mrs. B. certain that neither she nor her daughter put the vest away?") I have to state that I have the repeated assurance of both the ladies that they feel sure that they did not put the vest away, nor that they had the least suspicion that there could have been so valuable a paper in that vest-pocket, or else they would have hunted for the vest in that drawer, among others where clothing might have been stowed away, and thus should have discovered what they hunted for.

And as to question No. 4 (" Can any more definite statement be obtained concerning the putting away of the vest ? ") I have to state that Mrs. B. and Miss B. always thought that their cousin (Miss Mel Thomas), who had with the most self-sacrificing devotion nursed the major during his sickness and had the entire management of the sick room, had put it away. But on questioning her she said she had no recollection of so trifling an occurrence.

In answer to question No. 6 (" Who were present ? ") Mrs. B. says, " Possibly one of the children." I have to explain this answer. She ought to have answered, " Possibly my youngest child, Lettie." For of her children, besides Miss Nina, it is only Lettie who has something to do with these stances — she being a far stronger medium than Mrs. B. or Miss B. — but at the same time does not feel the least interest in the matter ; on the contrary, hates to be called away from her dolls, puts her hands on the sliding-rod with a great deal of grumbling, and is always very glad to get off, the sooner the better.

Miss Nina reported to me that that Sunday she and her sister Lettie were first holding communication with their father and received some pleasant and convincing messages from their father ; then Lettie would not continue any longer. It was then that Miss N. called her mother to take Lettie's place, and the result was the getting of that message in regard to the note. So, you see, it may have been possible that Lettie had not left the room yet at the time. " Louis KNORR.

October 27^, 1888.

MR. RICHARD HODGSON, — DEAR SIR, — In answer to your questions I w say: i. Major B. died just at sunrise (Easter morning), first day of April, 188

877A] TO CHAPTER VIII 499

2. I told all I know about putting away the vest. 3. About three o'clock, Sunday, the first or second week in May. Myself and daughter were the only ones present that I remember — possibly one of the children. It happened just as I stated. To me there is but one solution. — In great haste, very respectfully,

[Signed] E. F. B.

877 A. Note. — I think it very desirable that as many persons as possible should provide a decisive test of their own identity, in case they should find themselves able to communicate through any sensitive after their bodily death. The simplest plan is to write down some sentence embodying an idea or a name which you feel it probable that you will , remember, if you remember anything, and then to seal this sentence up in an envelope, without communicating it to any person whatever. Then label the envelope " Posthumous letter," and send it, accompanied by a letter giving name and address, to the Secretary, Society for Psychical Research, 20, Hanover Square, London, W. The Secretary will acknowledge receipt, and store the letter safely, with others of the kind. If, then, the writer (it may be many years afterwards) finds himself capable of sending a message from the other world, let him mention this test sentence, and try to reproduce it. The sealed envelope can then be opened ; and if the spirit's message should be found to coincide with the words therein written, there will be as good a proof as we can get that that message has at any rate not emanated from any living mind ; and has emanated, therefore, from some unlimited source of knowledge, or — which will seem to most persons more probable — from the surviving mind of the original writer.

[912 A



Appendices to Chapter IX

912 A. The following account of Dr. John L. Nevius's book on Demon Possession and Allied Themes (and Edition. Fleming H. Revell Co., Chicago, New York, Toronto, 1896) is taken from a review by Professor W. Romaine Newbold in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. p. 602.

Dr. Nevius was for forty years a missionary in China. Early in his ministry he found that demon possession is a common occurrence among the Chinese, and although he was able to observe in person one case only, he succeeded in collecting a large amount of information about the phenomena and the construction put upon them by the natives. This material forms the basis of his book.

A few illustrations will serve to give a conception of its general character. The second case is that of a mountaineer, Kwo by name, who gives an account of his own experiences. He had been arranging for the household worship of the Goddess Wang-Muni ang, when one night he dreamed that the goddess appeared to him and announced that she had taken up her abode in his house. This was followed after the lapse of a few days by a feeling of restlessness coupled with an irrational impulse to gamble ; his mind became confused, memory was impaired. He was then seized by an epileptiform attack, to which succeeded mania with homicidal impulses. The "demon" proclaimed its presence, demanded worship. Upon compliance with its demands it departed. For some months the "demon" reappeared at intervals, promised to heal disease. Kwo notes that "many diseases were not under its control, and it seemed as if it could perfectly cure only such as were inflicted by spirits " — a significant remark. When the sufferer became a Christian, the " demon " disappeared, saying " This is no place for me."

Case 3 is narrated by a native Christian. He described the patient as " sitting up, her eyes closed, with a fluttering motion of the eyelids, her countenance like one weeping and the fingers of both hands tightly clenched. She would allow no one to straighten her closed fingers. I then, hardly expecting an answer, as the woman had hitherto been speechless, said to the demon : 1 Have you no fear of God? Why do you come here to afflict this woman?' To this I received instantly the following reply: 'God and Christ will not interfere. I have been here seven or eight years ; and I claim this as my resting-place. You cannot get rid of me.'" This patient was relieved by prayer.

In several instances the u demon " claims identity with the spirit of some

923A] TO CHAPTER IX 501

deceased human being. Thus in case 24 a bride on her wedding night was seized by what purported to be the spirit of a girl to whom her husband had been engaged, and who had drowned herself on account of the ill-treatment of her future mother-in-law. In other cases the " demon " claims to be one of the lower animals — e.g. in one which occurred in Japan (page 105) it professed itself a fox.

The entire collection gives a most interesting glimpse of Chinese spiritism. We find the cult of spirits a recognised institution. " Physical phenomena " are alleged to be matters of daily occurrence. Every village has its " medium." The " developing seance " has its counterpart (page 67). The medium sometimes goes into " quiet trance," and sometimes communication with the unseen world is effected by means of an instrument essentially identical with planchette (pages 48, 69).

Evidence of this sort is not without its value as going to show that spiritism is a growth indigenous to many countries, that it is a plausible interpretation of phenomena which occur spontaneously among all races, and is not merely a mass of imposture based upon the " Rochester knockings " and peculiar to the last half of the nineteenth century. But if one asks what Dr. Nevius has done towards vindicating the popular interpretation of these phenomena, the reply cannot but be unfavourable.

Every page bears witness to the author's desire to be exact in description, unbiassed in interpretation, and just in criticism; it is rather his misfortune than his fault that he has fallen so far short of the mark in all three respects. Practically all his material rests upon the evidence of native — Chinese or Mongolian— witnesses. All are fully convinced of the diabolical origin of the phenomena, and Dr. Nevius himself takes the same view, so that we can scarcely accept the accounts as literally true and uncoloured by preconceptions. Such evidence can scarcely do more than supply illustrations of facts already independently established.

Of alleged supernormal phenomena the book is almost barren. One case of a " Poltergeist " rests solely upon the evidence of Mongolians, whom the missionary transmitting the account stigmatises as " so imbued, one and all, with the spirit of lying that I have found it useless to repeat what the most respectable say." In a few other cases it is claimed that the demoniac was possessed of supernormal knowledge and of the gift of healing, but no definite facts are given.

923 A. For accounts of the impostures of Madame Blavatsky and other members of the Theosophical Society, see : —

( i ) " Report of the Committee appointed to Investigate Phenomena connected with the Theosophical Society," in Proceedings S.P.R. (vol. iii. pp. 201-400). This Committee was appointed in 1884 by the Council of the Society for Psychical Research. It consisted of the following members : Messrs. E. Gurney, R. Hodgson, F. W. H. Myers, F. Podmore, Professor and Mrs. H. Sidgwick, and Mr. J. H. Stack. The report is prefaced by the " Statement and Conclusions of the Committee " ; next comes Dr. Hodgson's " Account of Personal Investigations in India, and discussion of the authorship of the ' Koot Hoomi ' letters " ; numerous facsimiles of the letters are given, together with a report by the expert,

Mr. F. G. Netherclift, on the character of the handwritings. An account of some other phenomena — four cases of letters received in a mysterious manner, and four cases of supposed " astral " apparitions — was contributed by Mrs. Sidgwick.

(2) "The Defence of the Theosophists," by Dr. R. Hodgson, in Proceedings S.P.R. (vol. ix. pp. 129—159). This consists of replies to attacks on the above Report.

(3) A Modern Priestess of Isis : abridged and translated on behalf of the Society for Psychical Research from the Russian of V. S. Solovyoff, by Walter Leaf, Litt. D. (Longmans, Green & Co., London, 1895). To Mr. Solovyoffs narrative are added in appendices a defence of Madame Blavatsky by her sister, Madame Jelihovsky, and Mr. Solovyoffs reply to the latter.

(4) Isis very much Unveiled: being the Story of the great Mahatma Hoax, by Edmund Garrett; reprinted from the Westminster Gazette,

(5) The chapter on " Madame Blavatsky and Theosophy," in Mr. F. Podmore's Studies in Psychical Research (Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner & Co., London, 1897).

See also, for reviews of (3) and (4), Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp.

923 B. The following articles in the Proceedings S.P.R. relate to work done by members of the Society in exposing fraud in connection with some alleged "physical phenomena" of spiritualism, and in showing what conditions are necessary in order to guard against it.

" Results of a Personal Investigation into the Physical Phenomena of Spiritualism, with some critical remarks on the evidence for the genuineness of such Phenomena," by Mrs. H. Sidgwick * (vol. iv. p. 45).

" Accounts of some so-called « Spiritualistic ' Seances," by Professor H. Carvill Lewis and others (vol. iv. p. 338).

" The Possibilities of Mai-observation and Lapse of Memory from a practical point of view," by R. Hodgson and S. J. Davey (vol. iv. p. 381).

The two last-named articles relate chiefly to the " slate-writing " performances of the medium Eglinton, and Mr. Davey's successful imitation of them by conjuring. Numerous discussions on the same subject appeared in the Journal S.P.R. during 1886 and 1887 (vols. ii. and iii.)-

"On Spirit Photographs," by Mrs. H. Sidgwick (vol. vii. p. 268).

"Mr. Davey's Imitations by Conjuring of Phenomena sometimes attributed to Spirit Agency," by R. Hodgson (vol. viii. p. 253).

" Indian Magic and the Testimony of Conjurers," by R. Hodgson (vol. ix. p. 354).

"Resolute Credulity," by F. W. H. Myers (vol. xi. p. 213).

" Eusapia Paladino," an account by Professor Sidgwick of sittings held with her at Cambridge in 1895, in the Journal S.P.R. (vol. vii. p.

1 See also Mrs. Sidgwick's article on " Spiritualism " in the Encyclopedia Britannica.

'.tannica.

925A] TO CHAPTER IX 503

I may further refer ray readers to the following books : —

Studies in Psychical Research, by Frank Podmore (Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner & Co., London, 1897).

Modern Spiritualism : a History and a Criticism, by Frank Podmore (Methuen & Co., London, 1902).

Preliminary Report of the Commission appointed by the University of Pennsylvania to investigate Modern Spiritualism, in accordance with the request of the late Henry Seybert (J. B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia,

The Death-Blow to Spiritualism : being the true story of the Fox Sisters, as revealed by authority of Margaret Fox Kane and Catherine Fox Jencken, by Reuben Briggs Davenport (New York : J. W. Dillingham Co., 1888; also 1897).

Revelations of a Spirit Medium ; or Spiritualistic Mysteries Exposed: a detailed explanation of the methods used by fraudulent mediums. By a Medium (St. Paul, Minn. : Farrington & Co., 1891).

The Bottom Facts concerning the Science of Spiritualism derived from careful investigations covering a period of twenty-five years, by John W. Truesdell. With many descriptive illustrations (New York : G. W. Carleton & Co. ; London : S. Low & Co., 1884).

Confessions of a Medium (Griffith & Farran, London, 1882).

Spirit Slate-writing and Kindred Phenomena, by William E. Robinson (New York : Munn & Co., 1898 ; London : Sampson Low, Marston & Co.) . This contains a good account by a professional conjurer of various methods of producing slate-writing by trickery.

Some Account of the Vampires of Onset, Past and Present (S. Woodberry & Co., Boston, 1892).

Modern Spiritualism, by J. N. Maskelyne (London : F. Warne & Co.).

925 A. An instance of a supposed telekinetic phenomenon which was probably to be attributed to motor automatism is that mentioned in the case of Mme. X. (see 833) when, as she was standing on a chair, " the chair was violently snatched from under her feet and pushed to a distance " by — as she believed — some " invisible force." Some incidents of a similar kind are described in Professor Flournoy's history of Mdlle. Smith (but not referred to in my account of this sensitive in 834-842).

Raps are mentioned in the case of Professor Rossi-Pagnoni (864 A) ; in the Pereliguine case (868 A) raps and the movement of a heavy untouched table are described ; and in the case of Mr. F. Hodgson (868 B) there seem to have been various telekinetic movements besides raps. In these last two cases the telekinetic phenomena were apparently connected with a recent death, and it will be remembered that many of the better evidenced groups of supernormal phenomena seemed to cluster about the point of death, some occurring shortly before and some shortly after it, while others more closely coincide with the death itself. I quote here a simple case of an isolated movement, occurring shortly before a death

under circumstances which seem to give it a kind of coincidental or purposive character. The reader should compare with this the account of the " Woodd knockings " to which I have briefly referred in 868 C.

From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 154. The account is given by the Rev. Edward T. Vaughan, of Langleybury Vicarage, King's Langley, who writes : —

August 2$t/i, 1884.

Some three or four years back, I had occasion to visit a parishioner who was seriously ill, one afternoon in the winter time as it was growing dark. I had seen him several times before since his illness commenced, and had always found him in the same bedroom. On this occasion I had been praying with him, and his wife was kneeling at the opposite side of the bed to myself. As I was saying the last words of the prayer, we (the woman and myself) distinctly saw a small table, which stood about a yard from the foot of the bed, rise two or three inches from the ground and come down with a violent thump upon the floor, so loudly that the man, who was lying with his eyes closed, started up and asked, with some terror, what had occasioned it. On examining the table, I found that a glass with medicine in it, which stood upon the table with several other articles, had been so shaken that some of the contents were spilt. My first idea was that something had been thrown down in the room below, where my wife, a sister of the woman's, and an aged uncle were sitting. On going downstairs and inquiring, I found that this was not so ; that they had been all sitting perfectly quiet in the room, and thought we had thrown down something in the bedroom. There was no one else in the house. The man died about a week after this took place.

E. T. VAUGHAN, Vicar of Langleybury.

Mr. Vaughan writes later : —

June 21th, 1888.

I enclose according to your wish a statement from Mrs. Vaughan of what she remembers of the curious incident. I am sorry to say the widow, though she still lives in this village, is not capable of writing down a statement of what she saw and heard that evening, though she can give a very clear account of the circumstances to any one who examines her orally. The man's name was John Wilson, a bricklayer in the employ of the Earl of Clarendon. He died on December 7th, 1881, about a week after the strange occurrence. I have never since experienced any similar phenomenon.

EDWARD T. VAUGHAN.

Mrs. Vaughan writes under the same date as follows : —

In confirmation of the story of Wilson's deathbed, I can say I was sitting in the room below the sick man's with two other people (his sister-in-law and uncle), in perfect silence, as every word read in the room above could be distinctly heard by us. Just as the last words of the prayer were being said, we were startled by a loud and sudden noise, as if some heavy piece of furniture had fallen in the room above. My first impression was that the man was taken worse, and that his wife, moving hastily to him, had knocked over a table. None of us spoke, though we started and looked at each other, and expected to hear some one called ; but almost the next minute I heard Mr. Vaughan address the man on leaving, and come downstairs with the wife. I went to

926 A] TO CHAPTER IX 505

meet them with her sister, and though nothing more was said by any of us than " good-bye," I saw by all the faces that something unusual had happened. As soon as we were out of the house I said to Mr. Vaughan, " What was that noise just as you were reading the prayers ? " and he told me the story you have heard, and it formed the principal topic of our long walk home, wondering what it was, and trying to explain it, without in the least coming to any conclusion but greater wonder. E. L. VAUGHAN.

This is a brief and simple incident; but it is particularly hard to explain by ordinary causes — such as an earthquake or a mistaken memory.

The following scheme is not put forth as expressing deliberate convictions, supported by adequate evidence. Its speculative character has, in fact, excluded it from my text, yet I hope that it may not be without its use. For many men the difficulty of belief is not so much in defect of trustworthy evidence as in the unintelligibility, the incoherence of the phenomena described, which prevents them from being retained in the mind or assimilated with previous knowledge.

