The family consists of Captain M. himself ; his wife, who is a great invalid ; neither of whom saw anything ; a married daughter, Mrs. K., then about twenty-six, who was only a visitor from time to time, sometimes with, but more often without, her husband; four unmarried daughters, myself, then aged nineteen, who was the chief percipient and now give the chief account of the apparition; E. Morton, then aged eighteen; L. and M. Morton, then fifteen and thirteen ; two sons, one of sixteen, who was absent during the greater part of the time when the apparition was seen ; the other, then six years old.

My father took the house in March 1882, none of us having then heard of anything unusual about the house. We moved in towards the end of April, and it was not until the following June that I first saw the apparition.

I had gone up to my room, but was not yet in bed, when I heard some one at the door, and went to it, thinking it might be my mother. On opening the door, I saw no one ; but on going a few steps along the passage, I saw the figure of a tall lady, dressed in black, standing at the head of the stairs. After a few moments she descended the stairs, and I followed for a short distance, feeling curious what it could be. I had only a small piece of candle, and it suddenly burnt itself out; and being unable to see more, I went back to my room.

The figure was that of a tall lady, dressed in black of a soft woollen material, judging from the slight sound in moving. The face was hidden in a handkerchief held in the right hand. This is all I noticed then; but on further occasions, when I was able to observe her more closely, I saw the upper part of the left side of the forehead, and a little of the hair above. Her left hand was nearly hidden by her sleeve and a fold of her dress. As she held it down a portion of a widow's cuff was visible on both wrists, so that the whole impression was that of a lady in widow's weeds. There was no cap on the head but a general effect of blackness suggests a bonnet, with long veil or a hood.

During the next two years — from 1882 to 1884 — I saw the figure about half-a-dozen times ; at first at long intervals, and afterwards at shorter, but I only mentioned these appearances to one friend, who did not speak of them to any one. During this period, as far as we know, there were only three appearances to any one else.

1. In the summer of 1882 to my sister, Mrs. K., when the figure was thought to be that of a Sister of Mercy who had called at the house, and no further curiosity was aroused. She was coming down the stairs rather late for dinner at 6.30, it being then quite light, when she saw the figure cross the hall in front of her, and pass into the drawing-room. She then asked the rest of us, already seated at dinner, " Who was that Sister of Mercy whom I have just seen going into the drawing-room ? " She was told there was no such person, and a servant was sent to look; but the drawing-room was empty, and she was sure no one had come in. Mrs. K. persisted that she had seen a tall figure in black, with some white about it j but nothing further was thought of the matter.

2. In the autumn of 1883 it was seen by the housemaid about 10 P.M., she declaring that some one had got into the house, her description agreeing fairly with what I had seen; but as on searching no one was found, her story received no credit.

3. On or about December i8th, 1883, it was seen in the drawing-room by

751A] TO CHAPTER VII 391

-my brother and another little boy. They were playing outside on the terrace when they saw the figure in the drawing-room close to the window, and ran in to see who it could be that was crying so bitterly. They found no one in •the drawing-room, and the parlour-maid told them that no one had come into the house.

After the first time, I followed the figure several times downstairs into the drawing-room, where she remained a variable time, generally standing to the •right hand side of the bow window. From the drawing-room she went along the passage towards the garden door, where she always disappeared.

The first time I spoke to her was on January 29th, 1884. " I opened the drawing-room door softly and went in, standing just by it. She came in past •me and walked to the sofa and stood still there, so I went up to her and asked her if I could help her. She moved, and I thought she was going to speak, but she only gave a slight gasp and moved towards the door. Just by the door I spoke to her again, but she seemed as if she were quite unable to speak. She •walked into the hall, then by the side door she seemed to disappear as before." (Quoted from a letter written on January 3ist.) In May and June, 1884, I tried some experiments, fastening strings with marine glue across the stairs at different heights from the ground — of which I give a more detailed account later on.

I also attempted to touch her, but she always eluded me. It was not that there was nothing there to touch, but that she always seemed to be beyond me, and if followed into a corner, simply disappeared.

During these two years the only noises I heard were those of slight pushes against my bedroom door, accompanied by footsteps ; and if I looked out on hearing these sounds, I invariably saw the figure. " Her footstep is very light, you can hardly hear it, except on the linoleum, and then only like a person walking softly with thin boots on." (Letter on January 3 1 st, 1 884. ) The appearances during the next two months — July and August, 1884 — became much more frequent; indeed they were then at their maximum, from which time they seem gradually to have decreased, until now they seem to have ceased.

Of these two months I have a short record in a set of journal letters written at the time to a friend. On July 2ist I find the following account. " I went into the drawing-room, where my father and sisters were sitting, about nine in the evening, and sat down on a couch close to the bow window. A few minutes after, as I sat reading, I saw the figure come in at the open door, cross the room and take up a position close behind the couch where I was. I was astonished that no one else in the room saw her, as she was so very distinct to me. My youngest brother, who had before seen her, was not in the room. She stood behind the couch for about half-an-hour, and then as usual walked to the door. I went after her, on the excuse of getting a book, and saw her pass along the hall, until she came to the garden door, where she disappeared. I spoke to her as she passed the foot of the stairs, but she did not answer, although as before she stopped and seemed as though about to speak." On July 3 ist, some time after I had gone up to bed, my second sister E., who had remained downstairs talking in another sister's room, came to me saying that some one had passed her on the stairs. I tried then to persuade her that it was one of the servants, but next morning found it could not have been so, as none of them had been out of their rooms at that hour, and E.'s more detailed description tallied with what I had already seen.

On the night of August ist, I again saw the figure. I heard the footsteps outside on the landing about 2 A.M. I got up at once, and went outside. She was then at the end of the landing at the top of the stairs, with her side view towards me. She stood there some minutes, then went downstairs, stopping again when she reached the hall below. I opened the drawing-room door and she went in, walked across the room to the couch in the bow window, stayed there a little, then came out of the room, went along the passage, and disappeared by the garden door. I spoke to her again, but she did not answer.

On the night of August 2nd the footsteps were heard by my three sisters and by the cook, all of whom slept on the top landing — also by my married sister, Mrs. K., who was sleeping on the floor below. They all said the next morning that they had heard them very plainly pass and repass their doors. The cook was a middle-aged and very sensible person ; on my asking her the following morning if any of the servants had been out of their rooms the night before, after coming up to bed, she told me that she had heard these footsteps before, and that she had seen the figure on the stairs one night when going down to the kitchen to fetch hot water after the servants had come up to bed. She described it as a lady in widow's dress, tall and slight, with her face hidden in a handkerchief held in her right hand. Unfortunately we have since lost sight of this servant ; she left us about a year afterwards on her mother's death, and we cannot now trace her. She also saw the figure outside the kitchen windows on the terrace-walk, she herself being in the kitchen ; it was then about eleven in the morning, but having no note of the occurrence, I cannot now remember whether this appearance was subsequent to the one above mentioned.

These footsteps are very characteristic, and are not at all like those of any of the people in the house ; they are soft and rather slow, though decided and even. My sisters would not go out on the landing after hearing them pass, nor would the servants, but each time when I have gone out after hearing them, I have seen the figure there.

On August 5th I told my father about her and what we had seen and heard. He was much astonished, not having seen or heard anything himself at that time — neither then had my mother, but she is slightly deaf, and is an invalid. He made inquiries of the landlord (who then lived close by) as to whether he knew of anything unusual about the house, as he had himself lived in it for a short time, but he replied that he had only been there for three months, and had never seen anything unusual. . . .

On the evening of August nth we were sitting in the drawing-room with the gas lit but the shutters not shut, the light outside getting dusk, my brothers and a friend having just given up tennis, finding it too dark ; my eldest sister, Mrs. K., and myself both saw the figure on the balcony outside, looking in at the window. She stood there some minutes, then walked to the end and back again, after which she seemed to disappear. She soon after came into the drawing-room, when I saw her, but my sister did not. The same evening my sister E. saw her on the stairs as she came out of a room on the upper landing.

The following evening, August I2th, while coming up the garden, I walked towards the orchard, when I saw the figure cross the orchard, go along the carriage drive in front of the house, and in at the open side door, across the

751 A] TO CHAPTER VII 393

hall and into the drawing-room, I following. She crossed the drawing-room and took up her usual position behind the couch in the bow window. My father came in soon after, and I told him she was there. He could not see the figure, but went up to where I showed him she was. She then went swiftly round behind him, across the room, out of the door, and along the hall, disappearing as usual near the garden door, we both following her. We looked out into the garden, having first to unlock the garden door, which my father had locked as he came through, but saw nothing of her.

On August 1 2th, about 8 P.M., and still quite light, my sister E. was singing in the back drawing-room. I heard her stop abruptly, come out into the hall, and call me. She said she had seen the figure in the drawing-room close behind her as she sat at the piano. I went back into the room with her and saw the figure in the bow window in her usual place. I spoke to her several times, but had no answer. She stood there for about ten minutes or a quarter of an hour; then went across the room to the door, and along the passage, disappearing in the same place by the garden door.

My sister M. then came in from the garden, saying she had seen her coming up the kitchen steps outside. We all three then went out into the garden, when Mrs. K. called out from a window on the first storey that she had just seen her pass across the lawn in front and along the carriage drive towards the orchard. This evening, then, altogether four people saw her. My father was then away, and my youngest brother was out.

On the morning of August I4th the parlour-maid saw her in the diningroom, about 8.30 A.M., having gone into the room to open the shutters. The room is very sunny, and even with all the shutters closed it is quite light, the shutters not fitting well, and letting sunlight through the cracks. She had opened one shutter, when, on turning round, she saw the figure cross the room. We were all on the look-out for her that evening, but saw nothing; in fact, whenever we had made arrangements to watch, and were especially expecting her, we never saw anything. This servant, who afterwards married, was interviewed by Mr. Myers at her own house. . . .

On August i pth we all went to the seaside, and were away a month, leaving three servants in the house.

-. When we came back they said that they had heard footsteps and noises frequently, but as the stair-carpets were up part of the time and the house was empty, many of these noises were doubtless due to natural causes, though by them attributed to the figure.

The cook also spoke of seeing the figure in the garden, standing by a stone vase on the lawn behind the house.

During the rest of that year and the following, 1885, the apparition was frequently seen through each year, especially during July, August, and September. In these months the three deaths too|c place, viz. : — Mr. S., on July i4th, 1876; the first Mrs. S. in August, and the second Mrs. S. on September 23rd.

The apparitions were of exactly the same type, seen in the same places and by the same people, at varying intervals.

The footsteps continued, and were heard by several visitors and new servants who had taken the places of those who had left, as well as by myself, four sisters and brother; in all by about twenty people, many of them not having previously heard of the apparition or sounds.

Other sounds were also heard in addition which seemed gradually to increase in intensity. They consisted of walking up and down on the second-floor landing, of bumps against the doors of the bedrooms, and of the handles of the doors turning. . . .

During this year, at Mr. Myers's suggestion, I kept a photographic camera constantly ready to try to photograph the figure, but on the few occasions I was able to do so, I got no result ; at night, usually only by candle-light, a long exposure would be necessary for so dark a figure, and this I could not obtain. I also tried to communicate with the figure, constantly speaking to it and asking it to make signs, if not able to speak, but with no result. I also tried especially to touch her, but did not succeed. On cornering her, as I aid once or twice, she disappeared.

Some time in the summer of this year (1886), Mrs. Twining, our regular charwoman, saw the figure, while waiting in the hall at the door leading to the kitchen stairs, for her payment. Until it suddenly vanished from her sight, as no real figure could have done, she thought it was a lady visitor who had mistaken her way. Mr. Myers interviewed her on December 29th, 1889, and has her separate account.

On one night in July 1886 (my father and I being away from home), my mother and her maid heard a loud noise in an unoccupied room over their heads. They went up, but seeing nothing and the noise ceasing, they went back to my mother's room on the first storey. They then heard loud noises from the morning-room on the ground floor. They then went half-way downstairs, when they saw a bright light in the hall beneath. Being alarmed, they went tip to my sister E., who then came down, and they all three examined the doors, windows, &c., and found them all fastened as usual. My mother and her maid then went to bed. My sister E. went up to her room on the second storey, but as she passed the room where my two sisters L. and M. were sleeping, they opened their door to say that they had heard noises, and also seen what they described as the flame of a candle, without candle or hand visible, cross the room diagonally from corner to door. Two of the maids opened the doors of their two bedrooms, and said that they had also heard noises; they all five stood at their doors with their lighted canales for some little time. They all heard steps walking up and down the landing between them ; as they passed they felt a sensation which they described as " a cold wind," though their candles were not blown about. They saw nothing. The steps then descended the stairs, re-ascended, again descended, and did not return.

In the course of the following autumn we heard traditions of earlier haunting, though, unfortunately, in no case were we .able to get a first-hand account. . . .

We also now heard from a carpenter who had done jobs in the house in Mrs. S.'s time, that Mrs. S. had wished to possess herself of the first Mrs. S.'s jewels. Her husband had called him in to make a receptacle under the boards in the -morning-room on the ground-floor, in which receptacle he placed the jewels, and then had it nailed down and the carpet replaced. The carpenter showed us the place. My father made him take up the boards ; the receptacle was there, but empty. . . .

During the next two years, 1887 to 1889, the figure was very seldom seen, though footsteps were heard ; the louder noises had gradually ceased. From

751A] TO CHAPTER VII 395

1889 to the present, 1892, so far as I know, the figure has not been seen at all ; the lighter footsteps lasted a little longer, but even they have now ceased. The figure became much less substantial on its later appearances. Up to about 1886 it was so solid and life-like that it was often mistaken for a real person. It gradually became less distinct. At all times it intercepted the light ; we have not been able to ascertain if it cast a shadow.

Proofs of Immateriality.

1. I have several times fastened fine strings across the stairs at various heights before going to bed, but after all others have gone up to their rooms. These were fastened in the following way : I made small pellets of marine glue, into which I inserted the ends of the cord, then stuck one pellet lightly against the wall and the other to the banister, the string being thus stretched across the stairs. They were knocked down by a very slight touch, and yet would not be felt by any one passing up or down the stairs, and by candle-light could not be seen from below. They were put at various heights from the ground from six inches to the height of the banisters, about three feet. I have twice .at least seen the figure pass through the cords, leaving them intact.

2. The sudden and complete disappearance of the figure, while still in full view.

3. The impossibility of touching the figure. I have repeatedly followed it into a corner, when it disappeared, and have tried to suddenly pounce upon it, but have never succeeded in touching it or getting my hand up to it, the figure eluding my touch.

4. It has appeared in a room with the doors shut.

On the other hand, the figure was not called up by a desire to see it, for on every occasion when we had made special arrangements to watch for it, we never saw it. On several occasions we have sat up at night hoping to see it, but in vain, — my father, with my brother-in-law, myself with a friend three or four times, an aunt and myself twice, and my sisters with friends more than once ; but on none of these occasions was anything seen. Nor have the appearances been seen after we have been talking or thinking much of the figure.

The figure has been connected with the second Mrs. S. ; the grounds for which are : —

1. The complete history of the house is known, and if we are to connect the figure with any of the previous occupants, she is the only person who in any way resembled the figure.

2. The widow's garb excludes the first Mrs. S.

3. Although none of us had ever seen the second Mrs. S., several people who had known her identified her from our description. On being shown a photo-album containing a number of portraits, I picked out one of her sister as being most like that of the figure, and was afterwards told that the sisters were much alike.

4. Her step-daughter and others told us that she especially used the front drawing-room in which she continually appeared, and that her habitual seat was on a couch placed in a similar position to ours.

5. The figure is undoubtedly connected with the house, none of the percipients having seen it anywhere else, nor had any other hallucination.

In writing the above account, my memory of the occurrences has been

largely assisted by reference to a set of journal letters written [to Miss Campbell] at the time, and by notes of interviews held by Mr. Myers with my father and various members of our family. R. C. MORTON.

Of the accounts given by the other witnesses, I quote only part of Miss Campbell's statement, as follows : —

March 31 j/, 1892.

... On the night on which Miss Morton first spoke to the figure, as stated in her account, I myself saw her telepathically. I was in my room (I was then residing in the North of England, quite one hundred miles away from Miss Morton's home), preparing for bed, between twelve and half-past, when I seemed suddenly to be standing close by the door of the housemaid's cupboard, so facing the short flight of stairs leading to the top landing. Coming down these stairs, I saw the figure, exactly as described, and about two steps behind Miss Morton herself, with a dressing-gown thrown loosely round her, and carrying a candle in her hand. A loud noise in the room overhead recalled me to my surroundings, and although I tried for some time I could not resume the impression. The black dress, dark head-gear, widow's cuffs and handkerchief were plainly visible, though the details of them were not given me by Miss Morton till afterwards, when I asked her whether she had not seen the apparition on that night. (Signed) CATHERINE M. CAMPBELL.

To this account Miss Morton adds : —

Miss Campbell was the friend to whom I first spoke of the apparition. She suggested to me that when next I saw her I should speak ; but of course she had no idea when this would be. She wrote an account to me the next day of what she had seen, and asked me if I had not seen the figure that night; but naturally did not know that I had done so, until she received my reply. Miss Campbell asks me to say that this is the only vision she has had, veridical or otherwise.

751 B. In the Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 146, November 1893, an account was given by Miss M. W. Scott, of Lessudden House, St. Boswell's, Roxburghshire, of an apparition seen several times by herself, and occasionally by others, on a country road near her home. Her first experience was in May 1892, when, walking down a short incline on her way home, she saw a tall man dressed in black a few yards in front of her. He turned a corner of the road, being still in view of her, and there suddenly disappeared. On following him round the corner, Miss Scott found a sister of hers, also on her way home, who had just seen a tall man dressed in black, whom she took for a clergyman, coming to meet her on the road. She looked away for a moment, and on looking towards him again could see no one anywhere near. Miss Scott on overtaking her found her looking up and down the road and into the fields in much bewilderment. It appeared that they had not seen the man at exactly the same moment nor in exactly the same place, but from their description of the surroundings it seems impossible that it could have been a real person, who had contrived to get away unnoticed.

751 B] TO CHAPTER VII 397

In July of the same year at about the same place, Miss Scott, walking with another of her sisters, saw a dark figure approaching them, dressed in black, with a long coat, gaiters and knee-breeches, a wide white cravat and low- crowned hat ; the sister also saw the upper part of the figure, which seemed to fade away into the bank by the side of the road as they looked at it.

Again, in June 1893, walking alone on the road in the morning, Miss Scott saw a dark figure some way in front, which she recognised as the apparition when she got nearer to it. She made a determined effort to overtake it, but could not get nearer than a few yards, as it then seemed to float or skim away. At length, however, it stopped, turned round and faced her ; then moved on a few steps, and turned and looked back again, finally fading from her view by a hedge. She was able to notice fully the details of the dress, — knee-breeches, black silk stockings and shoe-buckles, — like the dress of Scottish clergymen about a century ago.

The apparition was also said to have been seen at different times by some children and other persons in the neighbourhood ; but of this no first-hand accounts were forthcoming. There was also a legend that a child had been murdered close by ; " but," Miss Scott wrote, " this fact is quite beyond the recollection of the oldest inhabitant of the neighbourhood," and it seems not unlikely that it was invented to account for the ghost.

We received later several other accounts of a similar apparition having been seen by various persons at different times in the same place ; and in the Journal S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 299-306, all the further evidence on the subject that had reached us up to that date (October 1900) was printed. I proceed to quote some of this.

Miss Louisa Scott — the sister who shared Miss M. W. Scott's first experience — wrote as follows : —

LESSUDDEN HOUSE, ST. BOSWELL'S, August \^th, 1894.

... A young lady, who is a governess in this neighbourhood, told me this afternoon of a meeting she had had with [the ghost] this spring. She was returning home along the haunted road at about a quarter-past four in the afternoon, when she was attracted by seeing in front of her a rather tall old man, dressed in a long black cloak, with one cape which came to a little below his shoulders ; his hat, as on the occasions when my sisters and I saw him, was low-crowned, and the brim slouched over his eyes. My informant was much interested in this peculiar-looking person, and did not take her eyes off him, whilst she watched him walk backward and forward between the turn of the road and a heap of stones about a hundred yards lower down ; he repeated this six times, the last time stopping as if he were speaking to a man who was cutting the hedge at the time. What struck Miss Irvine as peculiar was that the man who was hedge-cutting did not look round, and seemed quite unconscious of the other's presence. Miss Irvine walked on, and was going to pass the old man, when, to her astonishment, he vanished when she was only about three yards from him. . . .

APPENDICES [751 B

Miss Irvine sent soon after her own account of her experience. By an unfortunate accident, the first sheet of her letter was lost ; but the latter part is as follows : —

GREYCROOK, ST. BOSWELL'S, ROXBURGHSHIRE.

This seemed to me stranger than ever and I wondered what I had seen, for he was nowhere in the field. On returning home I described the old gentleman to some friends who were likely to know if a person answering my description lived in the neighbourhood, but was told, "No." He was dressed rather like a clergyman, wore a long black cloak with cape and slouched hat, his hands in his coat pockets. I had never seen anything of the kind before, though I had frequently walked the same road and at all hours. This happened about four o'clock in the afternoon. I have not again seen him. . . .

MARY BLAMIRE IRVINE.

In August 1898, Miss M. W. Scott wrote that about a fortnight earlier, when coming down the " haunted " road in the dusk, she had heard footsteps walking beside her, but could see nothing. She had also seen the apparition again in the spring of 1897. She described this in December 1899, as follows : —

. . . My sister and myself were paying an afternoon visit at a friend's house situated near the haunted road, and having rather overstayed our time, the dusk was just beginning to fall . . . ; it being then suggested that we should take a shorter cut home, we gladly availed ourselves of the permission to walk through the park and wood which open out of and enter the evil-reputed road. Upon coming to the end of the park, there is a small gate and narrow pathway, separated from the road by a hedge and some trees ; the space between being only a few yards, a pedestrian on the other side is distinctly visible. At the other end of the wood, again, there is another gate, which [leads to] the small incline and angle of the road, and, looking either way, the whole expanse is clearly defined. Just about this time we had nothing supernatural in our thoughts and were talking and laughing gaily together. Suddenly . . . our conversation seemed gradually to cease, for when we were quite half-way down the wood, I noticed a man's figure walking alongside of me between the hedge on the other side, which, either real or unreal, I was determined not to lose sight of. ... In a moment I recognised the ghastly featyres of the apparition. I cannot tell how he was clothed, or if he wore a hat; my eyes seemed fixed only on the profile from just below the forehead. Instinctively I felt he moved beside me, but heard no sound or footsteps of any kind. My sister saw nothing, and not being equal to the occasion, I made no remark, until we had almost reached the end of the boundary, then exclaimed in French, "L'hommeJ" At that moment the ghost must have vanished, for when we opened the gate to pass through not a living soul was there ; had it been a person of either sex, we were perfectly certain to have met. It was very strange my companion should perceive nothing unusual, though she remarked about me " staring into space." It is quite impossible to account for this phantom— it is no illusion formed by a disordered brain or based upon imagination or defective light ; the sun had certainly set, the dusk slightly fallen, but giving quite sufficient power for mutual recognitions. The man had walked calmly on, looking straight in front of him, never appearing to notice anything, as though engaged in deep meditation.

751 B] TO CHAPTER VII 399

On August i yth, 1900, Miss Scott wrote to say that she had recently seen the apparition twice, the most recent occasion having been " only last night." She describes it as follows : —

July 24^, 1900. — I am writing to let you know the dates that I have again seen the apparition. ... On the evening of July 24th I was standing speaking to a friend, exactly upon the part known as the property of that " mysterious he." I had forgotten the very existence of our supernatural neighbour, and while we conversed upon indifferent subjects, I inadvertently glanced carelessly down the expanse beyond, when I perceived the tall black figure walking on in advance with his back towards us. How he came to be there I had not the faintest idea, not having remarked his advent. I made no comment to my companion, but, wishing her a hasty adieu, hurried away as quickly as possible to try and make up upon him, but he instantly vanished — there was no one to be seen either high or low. It was just eight o'clock in the evening, as I heard the hour chime in the village almost at the same time. He was dressed in the same way, namely, all in black, and was only proceeding about twenty yards away. . . .

My second illustration of last night, August i6th, 1900, can tell you something more definite than the previous one, for I certainly believe the man to be a clergyman of the ancient school, but why this " Father of the Church " frequents that road is an unexplained mystery. On this occasion the outline of his head and shoulders were completely visible — all black, with a wide white muffler-looking thing wound round his throat; his hair seems light, face cleanshaven and very pale, but he was not quite near enough for the features tobecome clearly defined ; the hat looked like an ordinary clerical wide-awake, only the crown seemed much higher than those used in the present day. The lower part of his body [was] overshadowed, as he was advancing towards me up the incline, while I was on the level above.

There was a man with a pony and trap cutting grass by the roadside within a few feet of where I saw the apparition appear, who had his back to the worker ; yet the most wonderful part of it all is that when I questioned the man he declared he had seen "no one." "But," I said, "he was close beside you." He still declared he saw "no person there," so I let the matter endr though I expect that he, like the whole village, knows well the reputation of the road, for he looked slightly nervous and remarked, " It was not a safe place to come down alone. ..." M. W. SCOTT.

In the above case it will be seen that there is no evidence whatever for the identity of the apparition ; the whole force of the case rests on the repetition of the appearance, and its being seen independently by several different persons. A good many other cases of the same general type have appeared in the Proceedings and Journal S.P.R. I may refer as an example to that recorded by Mr. and Mrs. Dauntesey in the Journal, vol. vii. p. 329. Another very complete and typical instance of what is commonly called " haunting," — consisting of unexplained noises, generally heard by all within earshot and continued at intervals through a series of years, in the course of which various visual phantasms were seen by different people, — was the Willington Mill case, an account of which was given by Mr. Procter in the Journal, vol. v. pp. 331-352.

[811 A



Appendices to Chapter VIII

811 A. The following is a typical case of automatic drawing, recorded at a time when the subject of automatism was almost unknown, not only to the educated layman but also to psychologists and physiologists. I quote the account from Spirit Drawings: a Personal Narrative, by W. M. Wilkinson. Second edition (1864), pp. 9-11.

In August, 1856, a heavy and sudden affliction came upon us, in the removal of a dear boy — our second son — into the spiritual world. He had passed about eleven years in this world of ours, and was taken from us in the midst of the rudest health, to commence his spirit-life under the loving care of his Heavenly Father.

Some weeks afterwards his brother, then about twelve years old, went on a short visit to Reading, and whilst there, amused himself as boys of his age are used to do. One morning he had a piece of paper before him, and a pencil in his hand, with which he was about to draw some child's picture ; when gradually he found his hand filling with some feeling before unknown to him, and then it began to move involuntarily upon the paper, and to form letters, words, and sentences. The feeling he described as of a pleasing kind, entirely new to him, and as if some power was within him apart from his own mind, and making use of his hand. The handwriting was different to his own, and the subject-matter of the writing was unknown to him till he read it with curiosity as it was being written.

On frequent occasions, whilst on this visit, his hand was similarly moved in writing ; and afterwards he went to stay with some other friends in Buckinghamshire, with whom he did not make a trial of this new power ; but on his return home, after some weeks' absence, we, for about two months, watched, with deep emotion, the movement of his hand in writing; for sometimes, when he wished to write, his hand moved in drawing small flowers, such as exist not here; and sometimes, when he expected to draw a flower, the hand moved into writing. The movement was, in general, most rapid, and unlike his own mode of writing or drawing ; and he had no idea of what was being produced, until it was in process of being done. Often, in the middle of writing a sentence, a flower or diagram would be drawn, and then suddenly the hand would go off in writing again.

I have not mentioned the nature, or subject-matter of the words thus written ; nor is it in this place necessary to do so, further than this, that they purported to be chiefly communications from his brother, our dear departed

815A] TO CHAPTER VIII 401

child, and were all of a religious character, speaking of his own happy state, and of the means by which similar happiness is alone to be attained by those who remained here to fight out their longer battle of life.

A few weeks later the boy's mother, who had never learnt to draw, found that she possessed the same faculty, and by devoting about an hour a day to the practice, produced a large series of drawings of flowers, geometrical forms, and various objects which her family regarded as symbolical. They often obtained also automatic writing purporting to come from the dead child and to explain the meaning of the drawings. The latter developed into architectural sketches and landscapes, and Mrs. Wilkinson gradually began to paint, as well as draw, automatically. Mr. Wilkinson also developed the faculty of automatic writing and drawing.

815 A. The following account is extracted from Mr. Andrew Lang's "The Voices of Jeanne d'Arc " in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 198-212.

Mr. Lang gives evidence taken from the Proces of her trial at Rouen and other original sources which he mentions. Her own account given at her trial was that her " voices " were first heard when she was about thirteen — telling her to behave well and go to church, and afterwards they used to tell her to go into France to her mission. Jeanne kept objecting that she was a poor girl who could not ride, or lead in war, and resisted the voices with all her energy.

Turning to the Maid's own evidence in court, we must remember that she was most averse to speaking at all, that she often asked leave to wait for advice and permission from her voices before replying, that on one point she constantly declared that, if compelled to speak, she would not speak the truth. This point was the King's secret. There is absolutely contemporary evidence, from Alain Chartier, that, before she was accepted, she told Charles something which filled him with surprise, joy, and belief. (Proch V., 131 . Letter of July, 1429.) The secret was connected with Charles's doubts of his own legitimacy, and Jeanne at her trial was driven to obscure the truth in a mist of allegory, as, indeed, she confessed. [The] tale of an angel and a crown was mere allegory. Jeanne's extreme reluctance to adopt even this loyal and laudable evasion is the measure of her truthfulness in general. Still, she did say some words which, as they stand, it is difficult to believe, to explain, or to account for. She asserted that she knew the Dauphin, on their first meeting, by aid of her voices. (I. 56.) She declared that the Dauphin himself "multas habuit revelationes et apparitiones pulchras." In its literal sense, there is no evidence for this, but rather the reverse. She may mean, " revelations " through herself, or may refer to some circumstance unknown. " Those of my party saw and knew that voice," she said, but later would only accept them as witnesses if they were allowed to come and see her. (I. 57.)

This is the most puzzling point in Jeanne's confession. She had no motive for telling an untruth, unless she hoped that these remarks would establish the objectivity of her visions. Of course, one of her strange experiences may have occurred in the presence of Charles and his court, and she may have believed that they shared in it.

VOL. IT. 2 C

She said that she heard the voice daily in prison, " and stood in sore need of it." The voice bade her remain at St. Denis (after the repulse from Paris, in September 1429), but she was not allowed to remain.

On the next day (the third of the trial) she told Beaupere that she was fasting since yesterday afternoon. " Yesterday she had heard the voices in the morning, at vespers, and at the late ringing for Ai>e Maria, and she heard them much more frequently than she mentioned.'1 " Yesterday she had been asleep when the voice aroused her. She sat up and clasped her hands, and the voice bade her answer boldly. Other words she half heard before she was quite awake, but failed to understand."

She denied that the voices ever contradicted themselves. On this occasion, as not having received leave from her voices, she refused to say anything as to her visions.

At the next meeting she admitted having heard the voices in court, but in court she could not distinguish the words, owing to the tumult. She had now, however, leave to speak more fully. The voices were those of St. Catherine and St. Margaret. They were crowned with fair crowns, as she had said at Poictiers two years before. Seven years ago (that is, when she was twelve) she first saw the saints. On the attire of the saints she had not leave to speak. They were preceded by St. Michael " with the angels of Heaven." " I saw them as clearly as I see you, and I used to weep when they departed, and would fain that they should have taken me with them.".

As to the famous sword at Fierbois, she averred that she had been in the church there, on her way to Chinon, that the voices later bade her use a sword which was hidden under earth,— she thinks behind, but possibly in front of the altar, — at Fierbois. A man unknown to her was sent from Tours to fetch the sword, which after search was found, and she wore it.

Asked whether she had prophesied her wound by an arrow at Orleans, and her recovery, she said "Yes."

This prediction is singular in that it was recorded before the event. The record was copied into the registre of Brabant, from a letter written on April 22nd, 1429, by a Flemish diplomatist, De Rotselaer, then at Lyons.1 De Rotselaer had the prophecy from an officer of the court of the Dauphin. The prediction was thus noted on April 22nd, the event occurred on May 7th. On the fifth day of the trial Jeanne announced that, before seven years were gone, the English would lose a dearer gage than Orleans ; " this I know by revelation, and am wroth that it is to be so long deferred." As prophecies go, their loss of Paris (1436) corresponds very well to the Maid's announcement. Asked, on March ist, whether her liberation was promised, she said, "Ask me in three months, and I will tell you." In three months exactly her stainless soul was free.

She had once disobeyed her voices, when they forbade her to leap from the tower of Beaurevoir. She leaped, but they forgave her, and told her that Compiegne (where she was captured on May 23rd, 1430) would be relieved "before Martinmas." It was relieved on October 26th, after a siege of five months. She told the touching story of how, at Melun, on April 1430, the voices had warned her that she would be taken prisoner before midsummer ; how she had prayed for death, or for tidings as to the day and hour. But no tidings were given to her, and her old belief, often expressed, that she " should

1 Proch, IV., 425.

815A] TO CHAPTER VIII 403

last but one year or little more," was confirmed. The Due d'Alen9on had heard her say this several times ; for the prophecy at Melun we have only her own word.

She was now led into the allegory about the Angel (herself) and the Crown (the coronation at Rheims). This allegory was fatal, but does not bear on her real belief about her experiences. She averred, returning to genuine confessions, that her voices often came spontaneously ; if they did not, she summoned them by a simple prayer to God. She had seen the angelic figures moving, invisible save to her, among men. The voices had promised her the release of Charles d'Orleans, but time had failed her. This was as near a confession of failure as she ever made, till the day of her burning ; if she really made one then. But here, as always, she had predicted that she would do this or that if she were sans empeschement. She had no revelation bidding her attack Paris when she did, and after the day at Melun, she submitted to the advice of the other captains. By the way, if this be so, not she, but the captains, displayed the strategy admired by Captain Marin in the Oise campaign of 1430. As to her release, she was only bidden "to bear all cheerfully; be not vexed with thy martyrdom, thence shalt thou come at last into the kingdom of Paradise."

For the rest, Jeanne recanted her so-called recantation, averring that she was unaware of the contents or full significance of the document. Her voices recalled her to her duty, for them she went to the stake, and, as I have shown, if there was a moment of wavering on the day of her doom, her belief in the objective reality of the phenomena remained firm, and she recovered her faith in the agony of her death.

Of external evidence as to these experiences, the best is probably that of d'Aulon, the Maitre d'Hotel of the Maid, and her companion through her whole career. He and she were reposing in the same room at Orleans, her hostess being in the chamber (May 1429), and d'Aulon had just fallen asleep, when the Maid awoke him with a cry. Her voices bade her go against the English, but in what direction she knew not. In fact, the French leaders had begun, without her knowledge, an attack on St. Loup, whither she galloped and took the fort (Proofs III. 212). It is, of course, very possible that the din of onset, which presently became audible, had vaguely reached the senses of the Maid. Her page confirms d'Aulon's testimony.

D'Aulon states that when the Maid had any martial adventure in prospect, she told him that her " counsel " had given her this or that advice. He questioned her as to the nature of this "counsel." She said "she had three councillors, of whom one was always with her, a second went and came to her, and the third was he with whom the others deliberated." D'Aulon "was not worthy to see this counsel." From the moment when he heard this, d'Aulon asked no more questions. Dunois also gave some evidence as to the " counsel." At Loches, when Jeanne was urging the journey to Rheims, Harcourt asked her, before the King, what the nature {modus) of the council was ; how it communicated with her. She replied that when she was met with incredulity, she went apart and prayed to God. Then she heard a voice say, Fille De, va, va, va,je serai a ton aide, va / " And when she heard that voice she was right glad, and would fain be ever in that state." " As she spoke thus, ipsa miro modo exsultabat, levando suos oculos ad calum" (III., 12). Finally, that Jeanne maintained her belief to the moment of her death, we learn from the

priest, Martin Ladvenu, who was with her to the last (III., 170). There is no sign anywhere that at the moment of an " experience," the Maid's aspect seemed unusual, or uncanny, or abnormal, in the eyes of those who were in her company.

These depositions were given twenty years later (1452-56), and, of course, allowance must be made for weakness of memory and desire to glorify the Maid. But there is really nothing of a suspicious character about them. In fact the "growth of legend" was very slight, and is mainly confined to the events of the martyrdom, the White Dove, the Name of Christ blazoned in flame, and so forth. It should also have been mentioned that at the taking of St. Pierre de Moustier (November 1429), Jeanne, when deserted by her forces, declared to d'Aulon that she was " not alone, but surrounded by fifty thousand of her own." The men therefore rallied and stormed the place.

This is the sum of the external evidence as to the phenomena. I have already indicated what is known as to the mental and physical characteristics of the Maid. Her extreme temperance should also perhaps be remembered.

As to the contents of the communications to Jeanne, they were certainly sane, judicious, and heroic. M. Quicherat (Aper$us Nouveaux, p. 61) distinguishes three classes of abnormally conveyed knowledge, all on unimpeachable evidence.

(1) Thought-reading^ as in the case of the King's secret; she repeated to him the words of a prayer which he had made mentally.

(2) Clairvoyance, as exhibited in the affair of the sword of Fierbois.

(3) Prescience, as in the prophecy of her arrow-wound at Orleans. According to her confessor, Pasquerel, she repeated the prophecy and indicated the spot in which she would be wounded (under the right shoulder) on the night of May 6th. But this is later evidence given in the Trial of Rehabilitation.

To these we might add the view, from Vaucouleurs, a hundred leagues away, of the defeat at Rouvray ; the prophecy that she " would last but a year or little more; " the prophecy, at Melun, of her capture; the prophecy of the relief of Compiegne; and the strange affair of the bon conduit at the battle of Pathay.1 For several of these predictions we have only the Maid's word, but, to be plain, we can scarcely have more unimpeachable testimony.

817 A. From the Proceedings of the American S.P.R., vol. i. p. 397. Mr. M. writes to Professor Royce as follows : —

BOSTON, Nov. i6tA, 1886.

Some years ago, perhaps eight or nine, while in a city of Rhode Island on business, my house being then, as now, in Boston, I received news which was most unexpected and distressing to me, affecting me so seriously that I retired to my room at the hotel, a large square room, and threw myself upon my bed, face downward, remaining there a long time in great mental distress. The acuteness of the feeling after a time abating, I left the room. I returned next day to Boston and the day after that received a short letter from the person whose statement I enclose herewith, and dated at the town in western New York from which her enclosed letter comes. The note begged me to tell her without delay what was the matter with me " on Friday at two o'clock," the very day and hour when I was affected as I have described.

1 IV., 371, 372. Here the authority is Monstrelet, a Burgundian.

817 B] TO CHAPTER VIII 405

This lady was a somewhat familiar acquaintance and friend, but I had not heard from her for many months previous to this note and I do not know that any thought of her had come into my mind for a long time. I should still further add that the news which had so distressed me had not the slightest connection with her.

I wrote at once, stating that she was right as to her impression (she said in her letter that she was sure I was in very great trouble at the time mentioned) and expressed my surprise at the whole affair. . . . (Signed) M.

The accompanying statement from N., who is a physician by profession and writes from New York State, is as follows : —

{Postmarked, Aug. i&h, 1886.]

In the convalescence from a malarial fever during which great hyperassthesia of brain had obtained, but no hallucinations or false perceptions, I was sitting alone in my room looking out of the window. My thoughts were of indifferent trivialities; after a time my mind seemed to become absolutely vacant; my eyes felt fixed, the air seemed to grow white. I could see objects about me, but it was a terrible effort of will to perceive anything. I then felt great and painful sense as of sympathy with some one suffering, who or where I did not know. After a little time I knew with whom, but how I knew I cannot tell ; for it seemed some time after this knowledge of personality that I saw distinctly in my brain, not before my eyes, a large square room, evidently in a hotel, and saw the person of whom I had been conscious, lying face downward on the bed in the throes of mental and physical anguish. I felt rather than heard sobs and grieving, and felt conscious of the nature of the grief subjectively ; its objective cause was not transmitted to me. Extreme exhaustion followed the experience, which lasted forty minutes intensely and then very slowly wore away. Let me note: (i) I had not thought of the person for some time and there was no reminder in the room ; (2) the experience was remembered with more vividness than that seen in the normal way, while the contrary is true of dreams; (3) the natural order of perception was reversed; i.e. the emotion came first, the sense of a personality second, the vision or perception of the person third. . . . (Signed) N.

Mr. M. was unfortunately not able to find the letters that passed between him and his friend at the time.

817 B. From the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 33.

In this case the conscious desire of the agent seems to have been the predetermining cause of the percipient's impression.

The percipient, Mrs. Hadselle, writes to Dr. Hodgson as follows : —

28 BRADFORD STREET, PITTSFIELD, MASS., May 2%th, 1888.

Less that two years ago a curious thing happened to me. I had been in Wash. Co., N.Y., giving half a dozen readings, and was on my way to Williamstown, where I had spent a part of the summer, and where much of my worldly goods, in the shape of wearing apparel, was safely stowed in my room at the " Mansion House." With ticket purchased, I was serenely seated in the car, box, bundle, and bag beside me, the conductor's " All aboard " was at that instant in my ears, when I sprang to my feet with the force of an inward com-

mand, "Change your ticket and go to Elizabeth (N.J.). Change your ticket

and go to Elizabeth. Change your " Here a gentleman in the opposite

seat — an utter stranger — rose and said: "Madam, have you forgotten something, can I help you?" I said: "Do you think the train will wait for me to change my ticket ? " For there appeared to be no alternative. As I spoke I moved towards the platform ; he followed, and seeing that the office was but a few steps distant said : " Go, I'll see that you are not left." I did go, and in a moment more was on my way to Elizabeth, though I had not before even thought of such a thing. Next morning, on reaching my friend's house, she threw her arms about me and sobbed out : " Oh, I have wanted you so." Then she led me to a room where an only and beloved sister lay in life's last battle. In an hour it was ended.

My poor grief-stricken friend declared then — declares now — that my sudden change of purpose was a direct answer to her repeated though unspoken demand for my presence. And who shall say it was not? I wish to add that while I had learned by letter of the sister's illness of a chronic disorder, I did not suppose her case hopeless; indeed, from the fact that no tidings had reached me lately, was hoping that she was on the road to recovery, and had I been questioned concerning her that loth of November 1886, should have replied confidently, " She will without doubt last through the winter." My friend, by the way, is, much more than I, a believer in psychical phenomena.

(Signed) C. A. C. HADSELLE.

Dr. Hodgson writes : —

Mrs. G. — the friend referred to — has sent me her corroboration, dated March 5th, 1890. The date of the incident, she states, was November nth, 1886. She says :—

" I had not expected Mrs. H. ; did not at that time know where she was, so could not have summoned her had I wished to do so, — but in my trouble there grew upon me a great desire for her presence, and I said many times, * If she would only come. If she were only here. '

" My sister's failure at the last was somewhat rapid, but of this Mrs. H. knew nothing, and when she told me of her sudden change of purpose, hundreds of miles away, I said : * The impulse was sent you in answer to my wish,' or words to that effect."

The gentleman who helped Mrs. Hadselle to change her ticket, the Rev. James Wilson, then of Greenwich, N.Y., writes in answer to Dr.

Hodgson's inquiries : —

March 20th, 1890.

I recollect the circumstance of " assisting a lady " at Greenwich ticket office, who exchanged her ticket at the last moment, because of a change of purpose ; and it was in November 1886. She sent me a few lines afterwards, detailing certain facts touching a sick friend at the point of her destination — not clearly recalled at this moment. J. T. WILSON.

817 C. From the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 35. Mrs. Hadselle sent at the same time as the above another narrative, of which she said : —

I send you with this a bit of experience which I had years ago — so long ago, indeed, as the time Dr. Holland edited the Springfield Republican. He wrote

817 C] TO CHAPTER VIII 407

me that the " Warning " was copied from Maine to California, and that he received many letters asking if it was authentic. To this he could safely reply, as I was an old-time contributor to that and other leading journals. A local paper lately copied it. Many of the then witnesses have, with Dr. Holland and my darling Eddie (Kleber Loomis Hadselle), gone over to the " great majority," but there are several still living who remember the episode, and no one of my acquaintances doubts or thinks the sketch overdrawn.

[The account is taken from the Berkshire County Eagle, May loth, 1888, Pittsfield, Mass., and is there headed " The Unspoken Warning— A Mother's Experience." As above implied, the account itself is nearly contemporary with the incident, being here quoted from a reprint, which the author accepts as correct : — ]

One bitter cold day in winter a merry party of us, nestled down under furry robes, went to meet an appointment with a friend living a few miles distant, with whom we were to spend the afternoon and in the evening attend a concert to be held near by. The sleighing was delightful, the air keen and inspiriting, the host and hostess genial as the crackling fires in the grates, and the invited guests, of whom there were many besides ourselves, in that peculiar visiting trim which only old-time friends, long parted, can enjoy. Restraint was thrown aside;' we cracked jokes; we chattered like magpies, and not a little of the coming concert, which promised a rare treat to our unsophisticated ears. All went merry as a marriage bell, and merrier than some, till just before tea, when I was seized with a sudden and unaccountable desire to go home, accompanied by a dread or fear of something, I knew not what, which made the return appear, not a matter of choice, but a thing imperative. I tried to reason it away, to revive anticipations of the concert ; I thought of the disappointment it would be to those who came with me to give it up, and running over in my mind tbe condition in which things were left at home, could find no ground for alarm.

For many years a part of the house had been rented to a trusty family; our children were often rocked in the same cradle, and half of the time ate at the .same table; locks and bolts were things unused, and in deed as in word we were neighbours. In their care had been left a boy of ten years, the only one of the family remaining at home, who knew that when he returned from school he was expected to bring in wood and kindlings for the morning fire, take supper alone, or with little Clara E., as he chose, and otherwise pass the time as he pleased, only that he must not go into the street to play, or on to the pond to skate. He had been left many times in this way, and had never given occasion for the slightest uneasiness; still, as this nameless fear grew upon me, it took the form of a conviction that danger of some sort threatened this beloved child.

I was rising to go and ask Mr. A. to take me home, when some one said, " You are very pale ; are you ill ? " " No," I answered, and dropping back in the chair, told them how strangely I had been exercised for the last few minutes ; adding, " I really must go home." There was a perfect chorus of voices against •it, and for a little time I was silenced, though not convinced. Some one laid the matter before Mr. A., who replied, " Nonsense; Eddie is a good boy to mind, will do nothing in our absence that he would not do if we were there, and is enjoying himself well at this moment, I'll warrant." This answer was brought to me in triumph, and I resolved to do as they said, " not to think about it." But at tea my trembling hand almost refused to carry food to my lips, and I found it utterly impossible to swallow a mouthful. A death-like chill crept over

me, and I knew that every eye was on me as I left the room. Mr. A. rose, saying in a changed voice and without ceremony, " Make haste; bring the horse round, we must go right away. I never saw her in such a state before; there is something in it." He followed me to the parlour, but before he could speak I was pleading as for dear life that not a moment be lost in starting for home. " I know," said I, "it is not all imagination, and whether it is or not I shall certainly die if this dreadful incubus is not removed shortly."

All was now confusion ; the tea-table deserted, the meal scarce tasted ; and my friends, alarmed as much at my looks as at my words, were as anxious to hurry me off as they had been before to detain me. To me those terrible moments seemed hours, yet I am assured that not more than half-an-hour elapsed from the time my fears first found expression before we were on the road toward home. A horse somewhat noted for fleetness was before us, and with only two in the cutter — the rest stayed to concert, and made Mr. A. promise that if nothing had happened we would return — went over the road at a rapid pace. I knew from the frequent repetition of a peculiar signal that the beast was being urged to his best, yet I grew sick with impatience at the restraint. I wanted to fly. All this while my fears had taken no definite shape. I only knew that the child was in danger, and felt impelled to hurry to the rescue. Only once was the silence broken in that three-mile journey, and that was when the house was in full view. I said, " Thank God, the house is not on fire." " That was my own thought," said Mr. A., but there was no slackening of speed.

On nearing home a cheerful light was glimmering from Mrs. E.'s window ; before the vehicle had fairly stopped we were clear of it, and opening the door, said in the same breath, " Where's Eddie ? " " Eddie ? why, he was here a little while ago," answered Mrs. E., pleasantly striving to dissipate the alarm she saw written on our countenances. " He ate supper with the children, and played awhile at marbles ; then spoke of Libby Rose having a new picture book, and that he wanted to see it. You'll find him over there." With swift steps Mr. A. crossed the street to the place mentioned, but returned with " He has not been there." Eddie was remarkably fond of skating, and my next thought was that he had been tempted to disobedience. I said calmly, " We will go to the pond." I was perfectly collected ; I could have worked all night without fatigue with the nerves in that state of tension ; but Mr. A. said, " No, you must go in and lie down. Eddie is safe enough, somewhere about the village. I'll go and find him." But there was nothing in the tone as in the words to reassure me.

As he spoke he crossed the hall to our own room and turned the knob. The door was locked. What could that mean? Eddie was either on the inside or had taken the key away with him. Mr. A. ran round to a window with a broken spring which could be opened from the outside. It went up with a clang, but a dense volume of smoke drove him back. After an instant another attempt was made, and this time, on a lounge directly under the window, he stumbled on the insensible form of little Eddie, smothered in smoke. Limp and apparently lifeless, he was borne into the fresh cold air, and after some rough handling was restored to consciousness.

Eddie said, on returning from school he made a good fire, and as the wood was snowy thought he would put it in the oven to dry; something he had never done before. Then on leaving Mrs. E.'s room he went in for an apple before going to see Libby Rose's picture book, and it seemed so nice and warm he thought he would lie down awhile. He could give no explanation as to

817D] TO CHAPTER VIII 409

what prompted him to turn the key: it was the first and last time; but this could have made no difference in the result, for no one would have discovered the smoke in time to save his life. The wood in the oven was burned to ashes, but as the doors were closed there was no danger of falling embers setting the house on fire ; and had we stayed to the concert everything would have been as when we left, except that little Eddie's voice would never more have made music for our ears. Every one said that with a delay of five or even three minutes we should have been too late.

(Signed) MRS. C. A. C. HADSELLE.

In reply to inquiries, Mrs. Hadselle informed Dr. Hodgson that the event took place about 1854, Eddie being then nine or ten years old. Mr. A. is no longer living, but the lady at whose house the party met, on being asked by Mrs. Hadselle what she could remember of the circumstances, wrote : —

ALBANY, N. Y., January 6th, 1891.

I remember distinctly the incident described by Mrs. Hadselle in her sketch, "An Unspoken Warning." It was at my house that the little party gathered for the old-fashioned afternoon visit and tea. I remember well her strange condition, arising from anxiety over the child, which had been left at home. The statement made by her I believe to be true. M. W. ROGERS.

817 D. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. v. p. 136. The following account was sent to me by Lady de Vesci in May 1891. Whether the impulse to telegraph was really connected with the dying lady's condition we cannot, of course, say, but the coincidence was certainly remarkable.

May 24//&, 1891.

Madame X. was a very remarkable woman, and I was most deeply attached to her. She had had great troubles and difficulties in her life, an unhappy marriage, and two sons who were entirely educated by her. When they came to London as clerks in the city she followed them to make a home for them there ; but as one was soon sent out to work at Hong-Kong and the other to a business at Bahia, she sought employment for herself in London and came to us as governess in 1864. In 1869 she became ill, and spent the winter alone at Bournemouth. She and I wrote constantly to each other, and when she moved to Norwood for the summer of 1870 my eldest brother and I went often to spent long afternoons with her. He died that summer, and although she had not left her sofa for months she came at once to see me when she heard of our great sorrow ; the doctor said he had never seen such an indomitable spirit as she showed through her illness, and when in the spring of 1871 Sir J. Burrows told her that she had not many months to live she resolved to go out to Hong-Kong and see her eldest son once more. It was not thought that she would survive the voyage. Our deep love for each other was unchangeable, and this final farewell was a great grief to us both. She reached Hong- Kong and spent the last eighteen months of her life with her son there. I heard from her by every mail.

In 1872 I married, and shortly afterwards we were quartered at the Curragh. It was from there that I sent the telegram which she received less than twentyfour hours before her death. Until two years ago I had in my possession a

few faint lines written by her on blue foreign paper, saying she had received my message and that her " fever dreams " were filled with memories of our happy days together at Cannes and elsewhere. Her son is now dead. He came to see me in '76, and told me that my telegram had made his mother very happy.

The impulse that made me communicate with her on that particular day was a very strong one. It came to me suddenly and not in consequence of any increased anxiety from news received. On the contrary, the accounts were quite satisfactory. I had heard from her by the mail a few days before. I asked my husband to go with me to the Curragh Post-Office as I wished to find out the cost of a telegram to China, and he accompanied me to the Post-Office, and we were told it would cost £5 to send twelve words or so, I think. I at once wrote and sent the message containing a few words of loving greeting. These words she received and acknowledged only a few hours before her death.

EVELYN DE VESCI.

Lord de Vesci adds : —

I certify that the account given by Lady de Vesci is correct and accurate.

DE VESCI. June 2nd, 1891.

818 A. From a paper by Mrs. Verrall, entitled " Some Experiments on the Supernormal Acquisition of Knowledge," in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 191.

In these cases a piece of information not consciously possessed at the moment is conveyed to the conscious intelligence by means of an apparent mechanical difficulty, which on examination turns out not to exist. The information thus obtained is usually negative ; that is, this apparent mechanical difficulty prevents my doing something unnecessary or undesirable, which I should know to be such if I thought about it, but which from thoughtlessness I am on the point of doing. An illustration will make my meaning clearer.

Constantly, when using my typewriter, it has happened to me to find a difficulty in pressing a key, so great a difficulty as to oblige me to look to see what is wrong. I then see that what is wrong is that my finger was on the wrong key, but there is, in fact, no difficulty whatever in depressing the key if I determine to do so. The effect of this apparent mechanical difficulty is to draw my attention in time to the mistake I am on the point of making. . . .

[Again,] I wrote, in the afternoon, five letters, and then stretched out my left hand to the stationery case to take the necessary envelopes. I wanted five, and as I can usually take a small number without error expected to take five. But I did not get enough ; I found that I only had three, and tried to take a couple more. But one of these two slipped through my fingers, and I only held one. I was quite vexed at my maladroitness, gave up a further attempt for the present and proceeded to fold my letters, put them into envelopes, and address them. When I came to the fifth letter, I remembered that I had an envelope ready addressed for this letter, as I had written the night before, but torn up the letter after receiving a letter by the late post, which decided me to wait for fuller information. I had kept the envelope, and it was actually lying on my table while I was trying to take the five envelopes. I may have seen it, but if I did, it was unconsciously ; it was only when I found that I could not get five envelopes that I discovered that I did not require more than four.

819A] TO CHAPTER VIII 411

818 B. From the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 344.

The following is a case in which, as I conceive, the subliminal self has observed what the supraliminal has failed to notice, and has generated a hallucination, in order to check the mistaken action to which that inadvertence was leading. In this case, all that needs correction is a mere act of distraction — a failure to look carefully at an object fully in sight.

From Mrs. E. K. ELLIOTT, wife of the Rev. E. K. Elliott.

About twenty years ago I received some letters by post, one of which contained ^15 in bank notes. After reading the letters I went into the kitchen with them in my hands. I was alone at the time, no one being near me, except the cook, and she was in the scullery. Having done with the letters, I made a motion to throw them into the fire, when I distinctly felt my hand arrested in the act. It was as though another hand were gently laid upon my own, pressing it back. Much surprised, I looked at my hand, and then saw that it contained not the letters I had intended to destroy, but the bank notes, and that the letters were in the other hand. I was so surprised that I called out, " Who is here ? " I called the cook and told her, and also told my husband on the first opportunity. I never had any similar experience before or since.

Statement by Rev. E. K. ELLIOTT.

I remember my wife describing the above adventure to me at the time, and also that she was nearly fainting from the excitement caused by it.

E. K. ELLIOTT.

819 A. In the following case the hypothesis of a subliminal hyperaesthetic discernment of the bifid fern by ordinary eyesight is possibly applicable. The account is a translation of that given in the Annales des Sciences Psychiques (May-June, 1895), by M. Adrien Guebhard, Professeur agrege" a la Faculte" de Medecine.

On the 3oth May 1893, I was on a geological excursion in the environs of Nice. After a very uneasy night, passed in the village of Contes, I set out in a rather bad humour in the direction of Escarene by an old road, where my disgust was heightened by seeing on my right a long mound of absolutely no interest, either palaeontological or stratigraphical. In vain I tried to console myself by seeking in the crevices of the moist, dripping stone, or under the tufts of green maidenhair, some rare snail-shell for a collection belonging to my friends. I had already resigned myself to the uninteresting walk of the ordinary tourist, when suddenly a flash of recollection arrested my wandering attention — a memory dating from my old passion of long ago for botany, revived for a short time in 1889 by the publication of a work on the abnormal partitions of ferns, but certainly long since abandoned. Promptly, and with all the intensity of an old longing never satisfied, I conceived a great ambition for an object which, having been vainly sought, had almost passed into a myth, namely, the Asplenium Trichomanes, or Common Maidenhair Spleenwort abnormally bifurcated, which I had often seen mentioned in a book, but which I had never once, during thirty years, been able to discover, in spite of the great abundance of the normal species.

Hardly was this mental picture evoked, before my eyes, as if drawn by the real image, were arrested by one amongst all the green tufts which surrounded me, and amongst all the fronds which composed it, — by one alone, which, two yards off, had the exact appearance of a bifurcation.

Purely appearance, I said to myself, drawing near. Simply the juxtaposition of two neighbouring fronds, which I have so often mistaken for it.

Sceptical even while gathering it, I could not believe my eyes. But the evidence was undeniable, and when, much astonished but highly delighted, I had plucked the fern, I said to myself half-aloud, as though uttering a challenge, "Well, I only want now to find the Get—" I had not finished my sentence when my gaze, leaving the high wall on the right where it was still mechanically searching, fell below the footpath on the left, at the foot of the buttress, on a poor sickly plant of Ceterach Officinarum (Common Scale-Fern or Scaly Spleenwort) crowded into the midst of the Asplenium (Spleenworts) as if dejected at finding itself in this damp shady corner instead of a crevice in a dry and sunny wall, which is the usual abode of this species.

And this plant, which ordinarily I should never have dreamed of seeking in such a spot, this fern of quite simple venation, edges very slightly divided, and under surfaces all scaly, in fact with an appearance so opposed to the idea of partition that (never having come across a specimen either in my youthful researches, in the splendid collections of the Museum, or in any herbal or rare book) I had concluded it to be non-existent — an impossible anomaly — it was, I say, a frond of this fern that appeared before me to-day at my bidding, as in Perrault's stories, as clearly bipartite as the Asplenium close by had been.

Being at once led on, and covetously pushing my reasoning straight to the principal conclusion of my old observations on the somewhat epidemic and at the same time local character of these freaks of nature, I argued : " If I have found one, and even two bifurcated fronds, certainly the third is not far to seek." And in less time than it had taken to announce this decision, without any hesitation, amongst all the attractive groups of fern, I distinguished immediately one frond of maidenhair showing two clearly-marked points.

I should never have made up my mind to put this incident in writing, at the risk of occasioning the reader's sceptical smile, if the recurrence of the same adventure twice in the course of this same year had not confirmed the reality and demonstrated the importance of the psychological problem.

On the 8th August 1893, at Lausanne (Switzerland) I had just accompanied some friends returning to the country, whose gay conversation was anything rather than botanical, and the last good-byes were hardly said, when all at once, as I walked along the path we had taken a minute or two earlier, there shot into my head, without rhyme or reason, the idea of a divided maidenhair, and immediately I put my hand on a frond, then further on on a second, and again on another, always making my choice at once without groping in the long green mantle of the great wall. Afterwards I in vain retraced my steps to explore conscientiously, with attention, and at length, the fifty yards of pathway ; there was nothing more, or I could see no more.

Ten days later I was visiting near Chambdry with a gay and numerous party the celebrated country house Charmettes, still alive with memories of Jean Jacques Rousseau. As I crossed the threshold, the thanks of the caretaker still in my ears, and before my eyes the pictures of the Confessions, I instinctively felt my gaze drawn towards the little wall of the terrace, where,

819A] TO CHAPTER VIII 413

at the first glance amongst several stunted tufts, which were afterwards to furnish me with several similar specimens, I discovered an extremely curious plant of maidenhair, such as I did not yet possess, with fronds not merely bifurcated, but really ramified.

Was it this time a reminiscence of " Lettres sur la botanique " which had given the suggestion ? Was it not, as well as the time before, simply an echo at a relatively shorter distance of the exciting experience in the month of May? I do not think so, for with regard to the latter nothing of the sort could be argued, and it seems, on the contrary, that it was precisely the absence of all appreciable cause, the apparently complete spontaneity of the first vision, to which was due the intensity of the second — a real second sight which leads infallibly straight to the mark. That mark is evidently preexistent, of a real kind, and perhaps — one might defend this view ! — is itself by its simple presence, and by a sort of self-discharge at a distance, the unsuspected and unperceived cause of the sudden internal revival of a similar image, stored-up long ago ; — the spontaneous exteriorisation of which, and the placing of it in coincidence with the corresponding object, would constitute precisely the fact of the discovery — that is to say, simply the proof of the existence — of that object. Whatever may be the cause, it seems certain that only the abruptness, the suddenness of the cerebral awakening is capable of giving momentarily to the sensorial faculties that acuteness in some sort prophetic, which automatically attracts the material object of the mental evocation, not out of nothing, as a superstitious mind might believe, but simply out of the relative obscurity in which it would have remained under other circumstances.

No normal tension of the mind, no effort of will, no abilities exercised at their best could attain to the results of these rapid moments of temporary hyper-stimulation. Never, except on the three occasions I have recorded, have I been able to find the abnormal Asplenium, still less the abnormal Ceterach, although every year, sooner or later, thousands of specimens have passed before my eyes, amongst which I have often tried on solitary walks in the most varied localities, with all the concentration of attention of which I am capable, and the fullest use of a faculty of discovery developed by old naturalistic habit, to discover the rare object, the eternal ambition of the collector. I often found other things, but never that. . . .

ADRIEN GUEBHARD.

[In answer to the following question by the Editor of the Annales,} As to the fact of finding three [abnormal ferns] in a small space, is it possible that this monstrosity may be determined by certain local causes in such a manner that in a very limited area many may occur, whilst for several hundreds of yards not one may be met with ? [Professor Guebhard replied :]

I can reply at once "Yes," for such was exactly the conclusion I came to on my first study of this subject, confirmed by my last find at Contesles-Pins.

These abnormal growths are almost always in little groups, forming welldefined islands, as it were, in the midst of normal plants, proving the external, local, and non-individual character of the original causal lesion, which might be due, as I think, to some micro-organism, either vegetable or animal, a parasite fungoid or gnawing insect. . . .

821 A. In the following case, as in that of Mr. C. W. Moses, quoted in the text, some subliminal sense of smell may be conjectured. It is taken from the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 421.

March 3U/, 1893.

Fifteen or sixteen years have elapsed since I had the following clairvoyant experience, but at the time I was much struck by it, and described it minutely to several of my friends, so that I feel sure I can remember the facts accurately. The circumstances were most prosaic, and I a matter-of-fact individual, with little interest and less faith in psychical phenomena. I was about eighteen years of age, at home for my winter holiday, but taking no interest in household matters, and I question whether on that particular evening I knew that it had been the washing-day.

I had gone upstairs to look for a missing knitting needle, and was returning to the parlour wondering whether I had dropped it there, when suddenly I was arrested by a strange feeling, and saw before me a vision of flames, and felt irresistibly impelled to go through a door at the end of the passage and down some steps into the kitchen. There all was quiet, and I came partially out of the trance-like state, and found myself thinking, "Why am I here? I'll go upstairs." But again I saw the fire, and felt I must go into the adjoining laundry. On opening the door, I was in no way surprised to see just such a scene as had during the preceding moments been distinctly before my mental vision. A jointed gas bracket had just fallen on to a dry heap of sheets and towels, which were blazing almost to the ceiling. With a little difficulty I extinguished the flames, and went to tell the rest of the household what had occurred. I remember I had a strange feeling in my head, as if I had just awakened out of an unnatural state.

No other person was near at the time, the washerwoman having gone home, and the servants being upstairs. Nor could I even unconsciously have smelled burning, as two doors were closed between, and the gas-pipe had evidently fallen only a few moments before I entered, or the flames would have spread further. The laundry was situated just under a wooden staircase in the middle of a very dry house, so if the fire had been undiscovered for even a few minutes the consequences must have been disastrous to the house.

Several members of the family remember the occurrence, and I have still an old servant of the family who distinctly remembers it. I have never had any recurrence of such a phenomenon, and was at the time much surprised that I should have been the subject of an experience so strange and so real.

M. H. GRAY.

The gentleman who sends this case writes that he has received orally the confirmatory testimony of Jessie, the old servant, and encloses the corroborative statement of Mrs. Elizabeth White, stepmother of the percipient

Mrs. Elizabeth White does not remember that she was told at the time of the fire part of the vision. She writes : —

My daughter, at home from school, not naturally domesticated, seldom went near the kitchen, which was shut off from the hall by a swing-door. On the night above mentioned she came into the parlour looking so pale and agitated—

825A] TO CHAPTER VIII 415

being naturally nervous — that I at once asked what was the matter, and when she could speak she said, " Mamma, it is a wonder the house was not on fire," and then told of having the strong impression that she must go down to the laundry, that there was fire. She had to go through two closed doors to get there, and was not aware that no one was in the laundry at the time. Her promptitude in stamping out the fire of the burning sheets no doubt saved the house, and accounted for her pallid look on returning to the parlour. This occurred about fifteen years ago. ELIZABETH WHITE.

NORWOOD, THIRM.

825 A. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 285.

CATHEDRAL YARD, WINCHESTER, January 3U/, 1884.

I respectfully beg to offer you a short statement of my experience on a subject which I do not understand. Let me premise that I am not a scholar, as I left school when twelve years of age in 1827, and I therefore hope you will forgive all sins against composition and grammar. I am a working foreman of masons at Winchester Cathedral, and have been for the last nine years a resident in this city. I am a native of Edinburgh.

It is now more than thirty years ago that I was living in London, very near where the Great Western Railway now stands, but which was not then built. I was working in the Regent's Park for Messrs. Mowlem, Burt, & Freeman, who at that time had the Government contract for three years for the masons* work of the capital, and who yet carry on a mighty business at Millbank, Westminster. I think it was Gloucester Gate, if I mistake not. At all events, it was that gate of Regent's Park to the eastward of the Zoological Gardens, at the north-east corner of the park. The distance from my home was too great for me to get home to meals, so I carried my food with me, and therefore had no call to leave the work all day. On a certain day, however, I suddenly felt an intense desire to go home, but as I had no business there I tried to suppress it,— but it was not possible to do so. Every minute the desire to go home increased. It was ten in the morning, and I could not think of anything to call me away from the work at such a time. I got fidgety and uneasy, and felt as if I must go, even at the risk of being ridiculed by my wife, as I could give no reason why I should leave my work and lose 6d. an hour for nonsense. However, I could not stay, and I set off for home under an impulse which I could not resist.

When I reached my own door and knocked, the door was opened by my wife's sister, a married woman, who lived a few streets off. She looked surprised, and said, "Why, Skirving, how did you know?" " Know what?" I said. " Why, about Mary Ann." I said, " I don't know anything about Mary Ann" (my wife). "Then what brought you home at present?" I said, " I can hardly tell you. I seemed to want to come home. But what is wrong ? " I asked. She told me that my wife had been run over by a cab and been most seriously injured about an hour ago, and she had called for me ever since, but was now in fits, and had several in succession. I went upstairs, and though very ill she recognised me, and stretched forth her arms and took me round the neck and pulled my head down into her bosom. The fits passed away directly, and my presence seemed to tranquillise her, so that she got into sleep, and did well. Her sister told me that she had

4i6 APPENDICES [830 A

uttered the most piteous cries for me to come to her, although there was not the least likelihood of my coming. This short narrative has only one merit; it is strictly true. ALEXANDER SKIRVING.

In answer to the question whether the time of the accident corresponded with the time when he felt a desire to go home, Mr. Skirving says : —

I asked my wife's sister what time the accident occurred, and she said " An hour and a half ago " — that is, from the time I came home. Now, that was exactly coincident with the time I wanted to leave work. It took me an hour to walk home ; and I was quite half-an-hour struggling in my mind to overcome the wish to leave work before I did so.

[He adds :] You ask me if I ever had a similar impression on any other occasion. I never had. It was quite a single and unique experience.

Mr. Skirving's wife is dead. His sister-in-law, Mrs. Vye, is in New Zealand. Her husband, writing from Otago on July ist, 1885, says that she cannot now give particulars of the occurrence, though she remembers the accident very well.

830 A. From the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. pp. 226-31. In this case, anagrams were written automatically by Mr. A., who describes his experience as follows : —

CLELIA, OR UNCONSCIOUS CEREBRATION.

The experiment was made Easter 1883, upon one day, and, after an interval of a week, continued upon three consecutive days; upon four days in all. Upon the first day I became seriously interested ; on the second puzzled ; on the third I seemed to be entering upon entirely novel experiences, half awful and half romantic; upon the fourth the sublime ended very painfully in the ridiculous.

FIRST DAY.

Q. I. Upon what conditions may I learn from the unseen?

My hand immediately moved, though not to a very satisfying issue. But, as my expectation of the answer had been that the condition was a strict adherence to the absolute rule of right, holiness in short, I took this answer to be at any rate consistent with my expectation, and continued :

Q. 2. What is it that now moves my pen ? A. 2. Religion. Q. 3. What moves my pen to write that answer? A. 3. Conscience. Q. 4. What is religion? A. 4. Worship.

Here arose a difficulty. Although I did not expect either of these three answers, yet when the first few letters had been written I expected the remainder of the word. This might vitiate the result. ... As if to meet the difficulty, ... my next question received a singular reply.

Q. 5. Worship of what? A. 5. wbwbwbwbwb . Q. 6. What is the

meaning of wb? A. 6. Win, buy. Q. 7. What? A. 7. Know(ledge).

Here I knew the letters which were to follow, and the pen made a sudden jerk, as if it were useless to continue.

Q. 8. How ?

Here I was referred to the first answer. . . .

830 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 417

SECOND DAY.

Q. i. What is man? (i.e. What is the nature of his being?) A. I. Flise.

My pen was at first very violently agitated, which had not been the case upon the first day. It was quite a minute before it wrote as above. Upon the analogy of iJub, I proceeded.

Q. 2. What does F stand for ? A. 2. Fesi. Q. 3. 1 ? A. 3. le. Q. 4. i ? A. 4. i v y. Q. 5. s? A. 5. sir. Q. 6. e? A. 6. eye. Fesi le ivy sir eye.

Q. 7. Is this an anagram ? A. 7. Yes. Q. 8. How many words in the answer? A. 8. Four.

I tried for a few minutes to solve it without success. Not caring to spend much time in trying to solve what might have no solution, I gave it up.

THIRD DAY.

Q. i. (rep.) What is man ? A. i. Tefi Hasl Esble Lies.

This answer was written right off.

Q. 2. Is this an anagram? A. 2. Yes. Q. 3. How many words in the answer ? A. 3. V (i.e., five). Q. 4. What is the first word? A. 4. See. Q. 5.

What is the second word? A. 5. Eeeeee . Q. 6. See? Must I interpret

it myself ? A. 6. Try.

Presently I got out, " Life is the less able." Next I tried the anagram given upon the previous day, and at last obtained, "Every life is yes." But my pen signified that it preferred the following order of words, " Every life yes is." . . .

I do not know whether any other interpretations can be given to the letters. But these fulfil the requirements as to the number of words ; and the action of the pen, assisting in the process of interpretation, pointing to the letters, accepting these and rejecting those combinations, left no doubt in my mind that I had hit the meaning.

But now I was so astonished at the apparently independent will and intellect manifested in forming the above anagrams that, for the nonce, I became a complete convert to Spiritualism ; and it was not without something of awe, that I put :—

Q. 7. Who art thou ? A. 7. delta ! ! Q. 8. Thou art a woman ? A. 8. Yes. Q. 9. Hast thou ever lived upon the earth ? A. 9. No. Q. 10. Wilt thou? A. 10. Yes. Q. ii. When? A. n. Six years. Q. 12. Wherefore dost thou speak with me ? A. 12. E if Clelia e 1.

It has been already said that when I experimented I had a certain fever of speculative pessimism upon me. It was, therefore, with increasing excitement that I perceived as an interpretation, " I Clelia feel." But upon my asking whether this was right, " Clelia " wrote again thus : E if Clelia e 1. 20.

Q. 13. Is 20 your age ? A. 13. oo . (She was eternal.) Q. 14. Then 20 what ? A. 14. Words. . . .

FOURTH DAY.

I began my questioning in the same exalted mood, but, to my surprise, did not get the same answer.

Q. i. Wherefore dost thou speak with me ? A. i. [Wavy line. Repetition and emphasis : Wherefore dost thou speak with me ?}

However, I thought this " a solemn and piercing rejoinder," and proceeded to consider my motives, and purify them from all earthly and unspiritual alloy. Then—

Q. 2. Wherefore dost thou answer me ? A. 2. [Wavy line. Wherefore dost

VOL. II. 2 D

thou answer mef\ Q. 3. Do I answer myself? A. 3. Yes. Q. 4. Is Clelia here ? A. 4. No. Q. 5. Who is it, then, now here ? A. 5. Nobody. Q. 6. Does Clelia exist? A. 6. No. Q. 7. With whom did I speak yesterday? A. 7. No one. Q. 8. Why didst thou lie ? A. 8. [Wavy line. Why didst thou lie?] Q. 9. Do souls exist in another world? A. 9. m b. Q. 10. What does m b mean? A. 10. May be. Q. n. What was that last answer of yesterday again? A. u. Eif Clelia o el, i.e. I feel no Clelia; or, the original may have been "I Clelia flee." And the 20 meant no, negativing my interpretation.

My pen now became altogether wild, sometimes affirming and sometimes denying the existence of Clelia. . . . Almost the last anagram I received was : Wvfs yoitet — testify, vow. . . .

Note. — I simply took a pen into my hand. Since, I have tried with the planchette, but without any success.

I have never known any one named Clelia.

I have not been in the habit of writing anagrams, though I have done so in boyhood.

