On April 3Oth Signora M. went to Venice and found that her cousin had really had a third child a few months previously, and after its birth had been ill in a way which had ultimately needed a surgical operation. Another small detail previously communicated to Signora Manzini by Elvira was likewise found to be true. Signora Manzini made no mention whatever of her own experiments, and her cousin at Venice continued entirely ignorant of them.

On that same evening, April 3Oth, on Signora Manzini's return from Venice to Padua, I was anxious to inquire from the " control " as to the effect of the presence in Padua of the letter which had been announced on the evening of the 28th for the following morning. Under the control of Elvira, Signora M. wrote the following answer: " I did not know that the letter had arrived; but I was sure that Maria would receive it next morning, because those who wrote it had intended that it should reach her in the morning. They had intended to post it in the evening, but instead of that they posted it directly it was written. I was, in fact, mistaken ; for it was a mere chance that it was actually received in the morning."

I then requested Signora M. to write to her friends at Venice in the following terms : " I would beg you to satisfy a feeling of curiosity on my part with regard to a presentiment which I had about your last letter. I should like to know whether it was posted at the hour which you originally intended, or whether you changed your intention and posted it at a different hour. Will you please tell me all you remember about this ? "

The following answer was received on May 2nd : —

" I had meant to post my last letter to you in the evening, but, fearing to forget it, I posted it at mid-day v when I had occasion to go out."

To resume the facts. Automatic writing informed us of facts entirely unknown to our ordinary consciousness ; namely, the fact that the invalid had three children, and the fact that she had undergone an operation. Thus far we might invoke telepathy and clairvoyance as the explanation. Then there was a true prediction of the arrival of a letter, and of part of its content. But although the letter was delivered on the morning specified, it had, in fact, already arrived in Padua when the communication was made, and its nondelivery in the evening was due to accident. Clairvoyance would not explain this incident, as that power might have been expected to reveal the presence of the letter in Padua. Neither was there an indication of so-called psychometry — an influence from the nearness of the letter itself. But, lastly, an automatic message explains the incident in the simplest manner, and that explanation turns out to be the true one. DR. G. B. ERMACORA.

859 A. The following account of Miss A.'s experiences is quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. (1893) pp. 73-92.

Statement of Miss A. as to her Automatic Writing.

i . Origin of the Writing.— About eight years ago we first heard that people could sometimes write without knowing what they wrote ; and that it was supposed that departed friends could communicate in this way. We determined to try whether any of us could write thus. We tried first with a

planchette, and when my mother's hand and my hand were upon it we got writing easily. We did not at first get any message professing to come from any spirit known to us.

2. Mode of Writing. — We soon ceased to use the planchette, and I was able to write alone. I can now generally, but not always, write when I sit quiet with a pencil in my hand. The writing often comes extremely fast ; at a much faster rate than I could keep up by voluntary effort for so long a time. I have to turn over the pages of the large paper which I generally use, and to guard the lines of writing from running into each other, but except for this there is no need for me to look at the paper, as I can talk on other subjects while the writing is going on. I can always stop the writing by a distinct effort of will. One curious thing is that my hand is never in the least tired by automatic writing.

3. Character of the Script. — I get various handwritings; I may have had a dozen altogether. I may divide these simply into two classes.

A. Large and scrawly hands, which seem to aim at ease of writing, rather than at indivuality, and do not divide their words, but run on without a break. Such are the hands of the so-called "guides " and of other "spirits " who write frequently. (Whatever the sources of this writing may be, I must use the terms which the writing uses in order to avoid constant roundabout phrases.) These large running handwritings do differ somewhat both from my own handwriting and from each other; but they most of them have a general resemblance to a large, rapid scrawl of my own, with an alteration in the shape of some letters so as to avoid breaks in the continuous scrawl. I can almost always tell who is writing ; but there are differences in energy, in little details of management of the paper, &c., which help me to distinguish, even before the end of the message comes, when the signature shows me who has been writing. When the pronoun "we" is used there is no signature, as that represents "the guides."

B. There are also several handwritings which keep a strongly individual character, sometimes plainly of an assumed kind ; I mean writing in a way in which no one would have written in life. Thus John Longland wrote in an odd, twisted, serpentine way and very small. We unluckily burnt all his writings except one scrap, as we did not believe that he was a real person. A spirit calling himself Detorno makes all the letters square.

Then, again, when the guides are writing in reply to a private question put by some friend of mine they write wrong side up, so that the friend sitting opposite to me can read the writing and I cannot. They seem to write this way just as easily as the other. Sometimes there is mirror-writing. Sometimes each word in a sentence is written backwards, and sometimes the whole sentence is written backwards, beginning with the last letter of the last word. In a few cases only have we thought that the handwriting resembled what the supposed spirit wrote in life. This was especially so in the case of a communication claiming to come from my grandfather, whose handwriting I had never seen. My mother produced an old signature of his, and certainly it was like ; but there was not enough of the automatic writing to make us quite sure. When the " spirit " or " control," or whatever it is, leaves me I cannot make it come again, and writing from spirits known to us on earth is rare in comparison with writing from the guides, or from quite unknown spirits giving fantastic names. Sometimes they give what they say were their real earth-names ; and then we can sometimes identify them ; although there is, of course, this dim-

859A] TO CHAPTER VIII 449

culty, that if they are obscure we cannot find them, or if they are well known, people who give me credit for more knowledge of history than I possess may think that I knew all about them, and that the messages come from my own

mind.

[The Countess of Radnor adds : —

I think Miss A. has considerably understated the number of distinctly and remarkably different types of handwriting that have come through her hand.. I enclose a list of thirteen names of " guides," each one of whom has a characteristic handwriting, invariably the same, however great the length of time that elapses between the communications. In addition to these there have been many instances where personalities — the so-called dead, or occasionally the living — have written in distinct handwrittings. H. M. RADNOR.]

4. Drawings. — Sometimes my hand is moved to draw instead of to write. The impulse in such cases is quite equally distinct. I never know what I am going to draw till the picture is half finished. My hand begins at odd, unexpected places; for instance, with shading in a corner, or at the ear of a profile; and approaches the principal lines in a way which no artist would choose. There is no rubbing out or alteration of what is once done, but if whatever moves my hand does not like the picture, it suddenly scrawls it all over and begins again on another piece of paper. Sometimes twenty or thirty pieces of paper have been spoilt in this way, even when the picture was all but finished ; so that if I think that a picture is pretty I sometimes beg some one to take it away from under my hand for fear it should be scrawled on. I have no natural gift for drawing, and have only received a few lessons as a child. I could not even copy some of these automatic drawings. I have never of myself painted in oils, but sometimes I am moved to paint automatically in water-colour or oils. I put out a number of oil colours in a row, and my brush goes to them automatically and dabs one wet colour on the top of another, making a picture which is odd enough, but much less muddled than might be supposed ; in fact, artists have said that it was curious that a distinct picture could be produced in that way. When I paint thus there is no drawing or outline, only the brush-work. These drawings and pictures have a certain boldness and strangeness about them, but they are certainly not like the work of a regular artist.

5. Connection of Written with other Messages. — The writing sometimes explains or completes other phenomena, as, for instance, figures seen, or sentences begun by raps. Sometimes, on the other hand, raps will come when I wish to have writing. But the writing will hardly ever explain or in any way allude to what really most needs explanation, namely, the crystal-visions. The guides who write seem to know nothing about these visions.

6. Subject of the Writing. — The great mass of the writing consists of teachings as to religion and philosophy. This is what my guides seem to wish to give, and it is strange that it should be so, as my own thoughts have not been much directed to such matters.

Another large part of the writing consists in a kind of fantastic description of the way in which a world was made. The name given with these writings is Gelalius. I suppose that this is a kind of romance. It is very different from anything that I should myself ever write or dream of, nor am I at all fond of reading romances of that kind. The writing professes to be copied from a book open at that particular chapter, and sometimes a passage will be con-

VOL. II. 2 F

tinued weeks or months after the first part of it was written, as if the book had chanced to be open again at that same place.

Some of the messages, however, deal with earthly matters. Some give general advice, some give medical advice, and some show a knowledge of things in the past or present which I do not possess. Some of these messages have been curiously right; some have been partly right, but confused or interrupted; and some have been wrong altogether. The sense of time seems confused, so that it is hard to say whether the incidents are meant to have happened long ago, or lately, or to be still in the future. Many of the messages we have not tested, as they were about things which did not interest us. Often, for instance, there would be messages about events in the newspapers which I had not thought or cared about.

As to what I have called " general advice," I think that this has always been good when it related to the conduct of the automatic writing itself. I should be told, I mean, when to write and when not to write, and what people's presence was desirable, and so forth. The advice is often quite different from what we wish; — forbidding us to ask people whom we had desired to ask. There has been one very curious case where we were repeatedly told [by a deceased relative of his] to " send for " a gentleman whom I will call Mr. C. D., of whom we knew nothing, except that we had seen his name in the papers in quite a different connection. It so chanced that a friend of ours knew Mr. C. D. and brought him to see us, but for some years there seemed to be no particular result. Lately, however, Mr. C. D.'s presence has very greatly helped the phenomena ; and the advice given so long ago has turned out important in a way which we could not possibly have foreseen.

On matters not connected with these phenomena I should always carefully read what the writing told me, but I should not go by it unless it seemed sensible. It does not always advise either what I wish or what I think wise; but generally it is wiser than I.

7. Medical Advice has often been given by a control calling himself " Semirus," and this has been often successful ; which is strange, since I am quite ignorant of medicine, and often do not know the names either of diseases or of drugs mentioned. Of course I cannot be quite sure that I have never read the words, but certainly when I have written them I have often not known what they meant.

At other times the facts relating to the illness have been quite outside my knowledge. One friend has given an instance of this kind [printed later] ; but I have not liked to ask others, as what Semirus says is generally meant for the questioner alone.

8. Thought-transference.— -The writing occasionally, but not often, tells me of thoughts in the minds of persons present. One day a lady handed me a letter, in a handwriting which I did not know. I held the letter in one hand, and the other hand wrote, " Bright metal and brown earth." The letter was from a gentleman whom I had never seen, and who committed suicide by throwing himself on the rails in front of a railway engine. I think that this message came from thought-transference, as I do not find that merely holding letters in my hand tells me anything about their writers unless some one is there who knows the content ; and even then I so seldom succeed that I do not care to try experiments of this kind.

[Lady Brooke (the Ranee of Sarawak), who was present at the time, has

859A] TO CHAPTER VIII 451

given me a written confirmation of this (quite recent) incident, for which I have not pressed the owner of the letter, on account of the painful nature of the circumstance. F. W. H. M.]

9. Clairvoyance. — I sometimes get messages which perhaps may be called clairvoyant, telling me, for instance, where lost objects are, or warning me of some danger at hand. Thus about September 2oth, 1888 [this incident was written down October 2ist, 1889], my sister M. and I had just finished dressing for dinner in the dressing-rooms leading from a large bedroom. The maid had left the room. M. had left her dressing-room, and was standing in the bedroom, when suddenly she called to me: "Get a bit of paper; there are some raps." I came in and took an envelope and pencil, and at once the words came, by raps : " Look to the candle or the house will be on fire." We saw that it was not the candle in the bedroom, so we went into M.'s dressingroom, and found that her candle was so close to a cardboard pocket depending from the looking-glass that it would have been on fire in a moment. It was already smoking. No servant would have come in for some time. [Mrs. A. confirms as follows : " I heard of the incident in my daughter's next letter."]

Again, I was descending a dark corkscrew staircase at Longford, in August or September 1889 [account written October 1889], when I heard a tapping on the stair. It was persistent, and drew my attention. I looked about with a candle, and at last saw a gold pencil-case of Lady Radnor's, with which I was accustomed to write automatically, lying on a dark little landing of the stair. I did not know that the pencil had been lost.

10. But the most puzzling cases are those where the message professes to be from some departed person, and tells some true things, but perhaps mixes up some mistakes with them. . . . But sometimes I do think that the message really comes from the person who professes to communicate.

Another frequent writer is a strange person to have come to us, as I knew nothing about him, and should not have thought that we had anything in common. That is Lord Chancellor Hardwicke. He — or whatever it is that takes that name — has become a sort of family friend. He has a distinct character of his own, which is not quite what I should have expected in a Lord Chancellor, for he is full of jokes and very bluff and outspoken. He has given a number of facts about himself, names of friends, and laws about marriage that he had made.

One reason which makes me think that the messages come from outside myself is the feeling which I have sometimes of rivalry or even conflict between them. When I am writing there will occasionally be sudden changes, as if some new personality had been able to get hold of the pencil. . . .

Again, if I see figures and then have writing which professes to come from those figures, it seems to me natural to suppose that it does so come.

I will now give some examples of motor messages, by writing and raps, given through Miss A. Here, as in the case of Miss A.'s crystal-visions (see vol. i. 625 C), I am obliged to confine myself mainly to cases corroborated by the few friends who have felt in the messages more than a merely personal interest. It must, of course, be remembered, in justice to other friends (who have often carried off messages without even showing them to the writer), that much of what has been thus written has dealt with very private matters.

The first message which I shall quote is evidentially interesting, on account of the mere chance by which its truth was verified. It should be premised that Miss A. has never been to Blankney, and is not acquainted with the Chaplin family.

I. Lady Radnor writes under date January i5th, 1893 : —

The following case has always struck me as particularly curious.

About eight years ago, when Miss A.'s powers had only quite recently shown themselves, her automatic writing told me that I had two guides, " Estelle " and " Silvo " — spirits who accompanied me and took an interest in my welfare. I did not think of this at first as a thing which could be either proved or disproved. But one day, when a question was mooted as to whether " spirit guides " had ever lived on earth, I asked whether mine had done so, and was told that Estelle had. I asked for her earth-name ; and as we were then getting answers by raps (through Miss A.'s power) it was rapped out " Loved voices called me Anne." I asked for the surname. C — H — A was rapped out. As my maiden name was Chaplin I at once jumped to the conclusion that that was the name meant. But the raps said decidedly No, and rapped out Chambers. I had no associations with this name. I asked if connected with my family ? " Yes." Any portrait? " Yes." At Blankney ? (my brother's place). " Yes."

Now I had spent much of my childhood at Blankney, and I had been particularly fond of one picture there, representing a lady whose name I did not know. It used to hang in the morning room, and then on the staircase, and represented a lady in a red velvet gown with a basket of cherries in her hand. As a child I used to sit and talk to this picture, and make a friend of the lady with the cherries.

So when I heard that the picture of my " guide " was at Blankney, I hoped it might be this lady, and asked, " Is it the lady with the cherries? " " Yes," was eagerly rapped out. I at once wrote to my old nurse who was still at Blankney, and who knew a good deal about the pictures, and asked her to get the picture examined for any name which might be on it. She got the picture taken down and carefully examined, but there was no clue. She told me, however, that she thought she had heard a Mrs. S. — a connection of the family, who knew the pictures better than any one — say that the lady with the cherries was a Miss Taylor. This disheartened me ; but I wrote to a friend at the College of Heralds to ask whether the name Chambers occurred anywhere in the Chaplin pedigree. He wrote back that there was no such name in the pedigree.

The same day that I got his letter I happened to meet Mrs. S. (whom I had not seen for many years) in a shop in London. I knew that she had once made a catalogue (which I had never seen) of the Blankney pictures ; so I felt that here was my last chance. I asked her if she knew who the lady with the cherries was. " Oh, that is Lady Exeter," she said, " whose daughter, Lady Betty Chaplin, married an ancestor of yours." " Do you know what Lady Exeter's maiden name was ? " " It was Mellish." I now lost all hope, but I just asked : "Has the name Chambers any association for you?" " How stupid I am!" she exclaimed, " Lady Exeter was a Miss Chambers, of Mellish ! " My friend at the Heralds' College then looked in the Exeter pedigree, and, sure enough, the lady with the cherries was Hannah Chambers. H. M. RADNOR.

I was cognisant of all this, and attest the accuracy of the account.

RADNOR.

859A] TO CHAPTER VIII 453

In a later letter Lady Radnor adds : —

Personally I had always believed " the lady with the cherries " to be some one (name unknown) who had married a Chaplin ancestor. There was no Chaplin pedigree, and it was I who suggested to my brother that he should ask " York Herald " (Mr. Gatty) to draw one up ; and I therefore applied to Mr. Gatty as being the only person who would know the names of the families connected by marriage with the Chaplins. I knew that the great-grandmother was " Lady Betty," nte Cecil : but as in those days pedigrees and family history did not interest me, I had never— and up to the present time never have — seen the Chaplin pedigree. In any case the name Chambers would not appear in it.

II. The next case is typical of many similar trifling incidents.

January i$t/t, 1893.

I have several times had reason to think that some intelligence writing through Miss A. was aware of trifling circumstances happening to myself. A good instance occurred the other day. I came back from hunting and joined in a se'ance, where my so-called " guide " was communicating. I asked, " Well, have you been with me in my run to-day ? "

" Yes," was the answer, " but you should have gone up the hill instead of down." "Was Nancy right, then?" "Yes." Now, in point of fact we had changed foxes that day by going down a hill instead of up, one hound alone, Nancy, running up hill on what was doubtless the original scent.

RADNOR.

January \6th, 1893

III. The following writing was given at Longford, February 27th, 1890, avowedly by " Estelle " : —

" You ask me whom I see in this habitation. I see so many shades and several spirits. I see also a good many reflections. Can you tell me if there was a child died upstairs ? Was there an infant who died rather suddenly? [Why?] Because I continually see the shadow of an infant upstairs, near to the room where you dress. [A shadow f} Yes, it is only a shadow. [What do you mean ?] A shadow is when any one thinks so continually of a person that they imprint their shadow or memory on the surrounding atmosphere. In fact they make a form ; and I myself am inclined to think that so-called ghosts, of those who have been murdered, or who have died suddenly, are more often shadows than earthbound spirits ; for the reason that they are ever in the thoughts of the murderer, and so he creates, as it were, their shadow or image ; for it would be sad if the poor souls suffered, being killed through no fault of their own, — that they should be earthbound; though, remember, they very often are earthbound too."

With reference to the above communication I may say that an infant brother of mine died of convulsions in a nursery which then occupied the part of the house where the figure of the baby was said to have appeared. I do not see any way in which Miss A. could have known either of the death of my infant brother or of the fact that that part of the house had previously been a nursery.

RADNOR.

VII. The following statement is from the Ranee of Sarawak : —

January, 1893.

In September 1892 my maid, who was not known to Miss A., complained of persistent pain in the neck and arm. She told me afterwards that she had been afraid of paralysis. I asked Miss A. to let " Semirus " write what was the matter with her. The maid came into the room. No one said a word as to her symptoms, but Miss A.'s hand at once wrote in " Semirus' " handwriting : " It is not paralysis, as you fear; it is rheumatism; your bed ought to be moved from the window," or words to that effect. I went into the maid's room, which it so happened that I had never seen, as it was in a house which I had only rented for a short time, and I found in fact that the bed was exposed to a severe draught. It was placed against the window. I had it moved, and the rheumatic pain disappeared. MARGARET BROOKE.

[See another case connected with " Semirus " and reported by Sir Lawrence Jones, which I give at the end of this Appendix.]

VIII. I give here an incident of which I was myself witness, and which seems to me typical of a class of communications of which I have already said something, — where information unknown to the automatist is given, on the soi-disant authority of some departed spirit ; but yet this information, so far as true, is known to some person present, and when anything which goes beyond the knowledge of persons present is asked for, the answer goes off into mere guessing and vagueness. Note also the fact that these messages were given by a distinct rapping sound in the table. This phenomenon is often spoken of in spiritist journals as a very common one. For myself I may say that having sat at tables many hundred times, in readiness to welcome raps if they appeared, I have frequently heard raps in the presence of paid mediums, and I have frequently heard creaks of the table in the presence of my own friends ; but only in the presence of some four or five non-professional and trustworthy persons have I heard unmistakable raps, answering questions, and producing upon my mind the conviction that no known agency was concerned in producing them.

On this occasion the messages given were private enough to need an alteration in the initials of the friends present. Besides Miss A., a sister, and myself, there sat at the table Lady B. and the Hon. C. D. A Christian name was clearly rapped out, which was recognised by Mr. C. D. as that of his mother, not consciously known to any of the rest of us. Since, however, the name was in the Peerage, it was of little evidential value. A message then came as to Mr. C. D.'s efforts on behalf of a friend, for whom he was then trying to get a post. " What kind of employment shall I get for him ? " " Island." " What island ? " " Jersey." " Can you mention any one who will help in this ? " " Lang " was rapped out, and then came many confused raps and the message ceased.

Now Mr. D. was in reality trying privately to get a post in Jersey for his friend, — about whom none of us knew anything. How easy, therefore, it vould be to report this sitting as follows: "Mr. D.'s mother announced herself by raps, and gave advice on a private matter."

But now compare the classical case, if I may so term it, of Mr. and Mrs. Newnham (849 A), and consider how these replies might be explained on

859A] TO CHAPTER VIII 455

the theory of mere thought-transference between living persons. In Mr. Newnham's case we found that the automatic writing got at the questioner's ideas gradually and imperfectly, and filled up gaps by random answers made to look as interesting as possible. So here, in my view, some intelligence not necessarily other than some part of Miss A.'s subliminal self readily discerns in Mr. D.'s mind an idea so firmly fixed as his mother's name, and takes that as an interesting source to which to ascribe the replies. It next gets easily at the idea of helping the friend ; but the definite name Jersey is harder to come at, and is preceded by island, a reply which could hardly have been given save by some one groping for the clearer notion. Then when the name of some helpful resident in Jersey is asked for — Mr. D. himself now not knowing any such name — an attempt is made to rap out the name which is in most minds the first which the idea of Jersey would call up. Senseless as this guess was (for Mr. D. certainly did not expect Mrs. Langtry to find posts for his friends), it was quite analogous to the random, dreamlike associations and plays upon words which are characteristic of subliminal messages of all kinds.

The next question, again, received an answer which might have been credited to clairvoyance. Mr. C. D. handed Miss A. a ring (not that I see reason to suppose that the ring made any difference) and simply said, " Tell me about my friend now at a hotel in Paris, with whom this ring is connected." Immediately raps spelt out the sentence, " Case for operation." A few details of the disease were then given, which corresponded with what Mr. C. D. knew, and which, where they went beyond his knowledge, admitted of no proof.

I can hardly myself doubt that this knowledge also came from Mr. C. D.'s mind, and not (as is usually professed in such cases) from actual inspection of the patient.

It may, of course, be asked why experiments like this, which, even if they prove nothing more than thought-transference, do at least seem to prove that so definitely, are not constantly repeated. The answer is that there are very few persons with whom they can be repeated; and that Mr. C. D.'s personality was in this case probably as essential as Miss A.'s. Mr. D., though he cannot by himself obtain raps, has marked power of a psychical kind, and is in fact the gentleman to whom Miss A. has above alluded as having been demanded by her guides before she or her family knew anything of him beyond official mentions of his name in the papers. I can myself vouch for the recurring scrawls, " Bring C. D." — " Bring C. D." which puzzled the A. family some six years ago, when they certainly were not aware of Mr. D.'s gift (then very slightly developed), and when it had not consciously occurred to myself that good might result from the collocation of the two sources of power.

IX. The next case which I shall give is a curious one, as involving (i) raps, (2) a crystal-vision, (3) an apparition seen by two persons, viz. Miss A. herself and Mr. Harry de Windt (brother of the Ranee), well known as a traveller in Russia. Unfortunately no notes were taken, but I heard of the incident a few weeks afterwards from Lady Brooke (the Ranee), Mr. C. D., Mrs. A., and Miss A. (all present at the time), and a letter from Mr. de Windt confirms two of the main points.

In September 1892, on the occasion of the first meeting of Mr. de Windt

and Miss A., the latter wrote the word Doishowalinksky, which at first was thought to be a sentence, but turned out to be a name well known to Mr. de Windt.

On the same day a face appeared near Mr. C. D. which was clearly seen by Miss A. and Mr. de Windt, and recognised by the latter, as stated in a letter to me, dated October fth, 1892: " I can only tell you that I distinctly saw the face of an exile 1 am acquainted with, one Dombrowski, who is (or was) located at Tomsk, in Western Siberia. A message was also sent me" [from a Russian source ; but Mr. de Windt explains the inexpedience of printing further particulars of this].

Miss A., on being afterwards shown a photograph of Dombrowski (not, however, mixed with other photographs, as it should have been), recognised it, but said that the face as seen by her looked older and more worn ; in which Mr. de Windt concurred. It is not known whether Dombrowski is dead or alive.

On the same day Miss A., looking in the crystal, saw a small man with bright red hair and red face, a big stick, a long petticoat, and a fur cap, walking in front of a little hut. Mr. de Windt recognised this figure as resembling a hill-man set to watch an isolated prisoner. These stunted hill-men dye their hair with red clay.

A few days later (September I5th, 1892) a message was given by raps to Lady Brooke (the Ranee) : " Tell your brother (Mr. de Windt) that Shiskine is the man to help him." Neither Miss A. nor Mr. de Windt had ever consciously heard of Shiskine, but in the St. James's Gazette of September 24th they observed that M. Shiskine had received a certain high appointment, which explained the message. His appointment had also been mentioned in the Times of August 3ist. It is, of course, possible that subliminal memory may externalise itself by raps, as by other means.

X. Among the habitual "controls," " Lord Chancellor Hardwicke " is almost the only one of sufficient historical mark to admit of our testing the truth of his statements. He gave a list of the surnames of sixteen of his friends. . . . Most of the names (though not all) appear in Harris's " Life of Lord Hardwicke " ; but in several cases there are reasons, not apparent in the Life, which make it probable that there was more intimacy than the incidental mention in the Life would imply. The case resembles the biographies of musicians written automatically by Mr. Stainton Moses (see 947). The tone of boisterous humour which runs through these messages is unlike Miss A., but it must be remembered that in the " objectivation of types " so often obtained by hypnotic suggestion, a part quite alien to the hypnotised subject's character is often surprisingly well maintained.

In a more recent case connected with the control known as " Semirus," through whom medical advice has often been conveyed to Miss A., a boy's career was saved by the advice thus given. The documents relating to this case were shown to me by Sir Lawrence Jones, who was personally acquainted with all the circumstances.

The boy was at school, preparing for a profession which involved a severe medical examination. In May, 1900, about a year before the examination, a serious physical defect was discovered, and a well-known medical authority advised that the defect could not be sufficiently

862A] TO CHAPTER VIII 457

remedied to enable the boy to pass. Arrangements had actually been made for changing his career when it was suggested that his parents, who were then abroad, should consult " Semirus." They wrote to Miss A., with whom they were slightly acquainted, but who had never seen the boy, and begged her to ask " Semirus " to go to the school — distant about thirty miles from where she was living — look at the affected limb, and give an opinion on the case. " Semirus " insisted that " some really good surgeon could set it right." A specialist was then consulted, and a delicate operation was successfully performed. The boy has since passed his examination without any difficulty.

862 A. The following is another case of planchette-writing communicated by Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood, the operators being himself and Mrs. R. The account is quoted from faz Journal S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 319 (November, 1890).

Extract from Mrs. R^s Journal.

October loth, [1890,] Friday, at , Mr. Wedgwood and I sitting. The

board moved after a short pause and one preliminary circling.

"David — David — David — dead 143 years."

The butler at this moment announced lunch, and Mr. Wedgwood said to the spirit, " Will you go on for us afterwards, as we must break off now ? "

" I will try."

During lunch Mr. Wedgwood was reckoning up the date indicated as 1 747, and conjecturing that the control was perhaps David Hume, who he thought had died about then. On our beginning again to sit, the following was volunteered : —

" I am not Hume. I have come with [Mrs. V., Mrs. R.'s sister]. I was attracted to her during her life in America. My work was in that land, and my earthly toil was cut short early, as hers has been. I died at thirty years old. I toiled five years, carrying forward the lamp of God's truth as I knew it."

Mr. Wedgwood remarked that he must have been a missionary.

" Yes, in Susquehannah and other places."

" Can you give any name besides David ? "

"David Bra— David Bra— David Brain— David Braine— David Brain."

Mr. W. : " Do you mean that your name is Braine ? "

" Very nearly right."

Mr. W. : " Try again."

" David Braine. Not quite all the name ; right so far as it goes ... I was born in 1717."

: Mr. W. : " Were you a native of America ? "

" (Illegible) My native land. The Indians knew many things. They heard me, and my work prospered. In some things they were wise."

Mr. W. : " Are you an American ? "

"America I hold to be my country as we consider things. I worked at " (sentence ends with a line of D.'s).

Here Mr. Wedgwood felt tired, and Miss Hughes proposed that she and I should go for a walk while he rested. When we came in Mr. Wedgwood said he thought it had come into his head who our control was. He had some recollection that in the eighteenth century a man named David Brainard was

45$ APPENDICES [864 A

missionary to the North American Indians. We sat again, and the following was written : —

" I am glad you know me. I had not power to complete name or give more details. I knew that secret of the district. It was guarded by the Indians, and was made known to two independent circles. Neither of them succeeded, but the day will come that will uncover the gold."

It was suggested that this meant Heavenly truth.

" I spoke of earthly gold."

Mr. Wedgwood said the writing was so faint he thought power was failing.

" Yes, nearly gone. I wrote during my five years of work. It kept my heart alive."

Mr. Wedgwood writes : —

I could not think at first where I had ever heard of Brainard, but I learn from my daughter in London that my sister-in-law, who lived with me forty or fifty years ago, was a great admirer of Brainard, and seemed to have an account of his life, but I am quite certain that I never opened the book and knew nothing of the dates, which are all correct, as well as his having been a missionary to the Susquehannahs.

In another letter Mr. Wedgwood writes : —

I see the name is Brainard, not ard, as I had supposed, and this removes a difficulty in the writing. Planchette had written Braine, and said that was right as far as it went, which it would not have been if the name had been Brainard. My daughter has sent me extracts from his life, stating that he was born in 1718, and not 1717 as planchette wrote. But Mrs. R.'s Biographical Dictionary says that he died in 1747, aged 30.

Mrs. R. writes that she had no knowledge whatever of David Brainerd before this.

Extract from Biographical Dictionary sent by Mr. Wedgwood : —

Brainerd, David. A celebrated American missionary, who signalised himself by his successful endeavours to convert the Indians on the Susquehanna, Delaware, &c. Died, aged 30, 1747.

It is perhaps noteworthy in connection with the last sentence of the planchette-writing that in the life of Brainerd by Jonathan Edwards extracts given from his journal show that he wrote a good deal, e.g. " Feb. 3, 1744. Could not but write as well as meditate," &c. " Feb. 15, X745' Was engaged in writing almost all the day." He invariably speaks of comfort in connection with writing.

864 A. Experiments by Professor Rossi- Pagnoni. I give extracts from the report on these experiments by Mr. H. Babington Smith, C.S.I., — a member of the Council of the S.P.R. — published in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 549-65.

Professor Rossi- Pagnoni is Director of the Ginnasio or Public School at Pesaro, a small town on the east coast of Italy, a little to the north

864A] TO CHAPTER VIII 459

of Ancona. In the year 1871 he was led to take an interest in Spiritualism, and began daily to practise automatic writing under the advice and direction of a friend who had frequently obtained communications from spirits, as he believed, by that means. He held a lead pencil in his hand, allowing its point to rest on a sheet of paper, but not touching the table with his arm, and waited for results. For the first forty-three days the movements of the pencil were incoherent and unintelligible. On the fortyfourth a name was written ; and from that time onwards the facility and distinctness of the writing increased, and communications of considerable length were often obtained.

These experiments, and also experiments in table-rapping, which had been tried by Professor Rossi and a small circle of friends, were discontinued in the year 1877, owing to the increased claims of scholastic duties upon the Professor's time. In 1886 he found leisure to resume them and was then joined by Dr. Moroni, Municipal doctor at Pesaro, who brought to the sittings a hypnotic subject of his, named Isabella Carzetti. The sittings gradually developed into spiritualistic seances, with Carzetti in the hypnotic state as speaking medium, purporting to be controlled by the spirits of deceased persons. Mr. Smith, however, after examining the evidence, concluded that the medium showed no proof of any supernormal powers.

In the year 1877 Professor Rossi published a pamphlet entitled, Intorno ai Fenomeni Spiri tici, Lettera air Onorando Signor Conte Terenzio Mamiani. This contains, besides other matter, reports of the more striking results obtained in the earlier series of experiments, which were concerned chiefly with automatic writing.

In November, 1888, Mr. Smith paid a short visit to Pesaro and had the opportunity of seeing and making extracts from the records of the sittings and other documents. Among these were the original automatic manuscripts, which have been preserved from the beginning.

The following are some of the cases of automatic writing : —

In April 1872 a friend asked Rossi to evoke the spirit of a relation, formerly living near Modena, who had been dead about two years. " I had never known her," says Rossi, " and my friend told me what I was to ask her on his account. I did as I was asked, and after the answer was obtained, to my great astonishment (for a similar thing had never happened before) I felt my hand impelled to draw, one after the other, two flowers, with their little leaves. After this addio was written, and the movement ceased. The following day I took the answer to my friend and told him of the curious drawings. * Do not be surprised,' said he. ' Know that she was very fond of drawing, and also every time that she writes by my hand, she makes me draw something.' "

This account is confirmed by a document dated December 28th, 1888, and signed by Cesare Perseguiti, barrister, who states that he is the friend mentioned by Rossi, and that the account of the incident is perfectly true in all particulars.

With regard to the character of the writing produced, Rossi says {Letter to Mamiani, p. 133) : —

It is not necessary for me to say that my ordinary handwriting is ugly and always of one pattern. Nevertheless, when writing as a medium, I have had very various forms of caligraphy according as various beings made communication. When these beings presented themselves again, often unexpectedly and after a long interval, they reproduced their former handwriting. Moreover, in that uncomfortable position of hand and arm I have had caligraphic forms so perfect that I could not reproduce them when writing at ease.

This statement by itself is too vague to be of much value as evidence ; but the following documents confirm it, and give more precise information as to the persons whose writing was reproduced, and as to the degree of likeness obtained : —

PESARO, January isf, 1889.

I have a lively recollection of having come sometimes to your house in 1873, to take part in spiritualistic experiments with the table and with writing. One evening, after some experiments with the table, I asked you to summon my dear writing-master, Luigi Brunetti, to write. He had at that time been dead for some years. . . . You set yourself to try the experiment, the pencil resting vertically upon the paper, and your wrist and elbow raised. When the motion of the hand, which you assured us was spontaneous, began, there appeared, after the signature of Brunetti, some lines of writing of various sizes. The first was extremely small — so that a magnifying glass was necessary to read it and to see its great precision. The following lines were of middle size, and the last large. This, I recollect, was a beautiful verse. I remember that I immediately bore witness to those present — in accordance with the truth — that, specially in the larger character, the manner of writing and the hand of my dear master were clearly to be seen.

So much for the truth, which now, also, I willingly confirm.

(Signed) CLETO MASINI,

Professor of Writing and Book-keeping at the Royal Technical School of Pesaro.

When Mr. Smith was at Pesaro he saw the original MS. here referred to, and states that the writing was pretty and regular, and entirely different from Professor Rossi's usual hand.

PESARO, January 2nd, 1889.

I comply with your wish and willingly declare, as I have a lively recollection of the fact, that towards the end of 1873 I had occasion to go to your house. . . . You showed me certain communications, written in pencil, which you said you had received from the spirit of the lamented Signer Alessandro Paterni, uncle of my wife. I said that the writing of the name and surname j seemed to me very like the real signature of my deceased connection. You asserted that you had never seen his signature, and, in fact, it was very probable that it was entirely unknown to you.

PIETRO BONINI, Captain.

865 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 461

In the following case a message, apparently telepathic, was received by means of raps and automatic writing.

(Letter to Mamiani, p. 143) : —

On November 2ist, 1873, about half-past ten in the evening, Rossi was in his study. He had been correcting proofs for more than an hour, and was tired and rather cold. In consequence he intended, when his work was finished, not to go to the cafe, as was then his custom almost every evening about eleven, but to warm himself a little with a walk through the streets. He then perceived two slight but very distinct raps close to him on a side door opening into an inner room in which there was no one. He paid no attention to these, trying to persuade himself that they were due to natural causes. Half-an-hour afterwards he had finished his work and was going out ; but at the moment when he had his hand upon the door of his rooms, to shut it after him, he heard a loud knock upon it as if given with the fist. He had no doubt that this was spiritualistic in character, and returning at once to his room, sat down to write. He fully expected to receive a warning against going out that evening for fear of some dangerous encounter. Instead, however, of any such warning the following message appeared : " My sincere friendship leads me to warn you that you are desired by S.1 (i.e. Stanislao Cecchi) : go, therefore, to see him." This message was signed with the name of a dead person in whose name messages had been obtained on other occasions. Rossi considered it extremely improbable that Cecchi (an acquaintance with whom he was not then intimate) would wish to see him ; but went at once to the cafe where he was generally to be found at that hour. As he approached, he saw Stanislao and some friends coming out of the cafe. " He had no sooner seen me," continues Rossi, " than he came to meet me, and said he had need of a certain favour from me. Knowing from some conversations which I had had with him that he was a disbeliever (in Spiritualism), I caught at the opportunity and answered that I would willingly do him the service, on condition that he would at once accompany me to my house. . . . We went to my house together, we entered into the room together, and I showed him on my table the message which had caused me to go in search of him. ... He subsequently gave an account of the occurrence to some friends, though without adopting my explanation, and, so far as he was able, loyally bore witness to its truth."

Stanislao Cecchi is now dead, and therefore direct confirmation of this account cannot be obtained; but in a letter written in 1889, a friend of his — Carlo Cinelli — at Professor Rossi's request gives his recollections of what he had heard from Cecchi at the time, and these correspond with Professor Rossi's account.

865 A. The next case is taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 107, being there quoted from an article in the Arena for August 1891, entitled " Psychic Experiences," by Sara A. Underwood ; 2 with In-

1 I believe that the name, and not merely the initial, was written. The initial only is given in the printed account, because at that time Professor Rossi was not at liberty to publish the name. — H. B. S.

2 See also Automatic or Spirit Writing, with other Psychic Experiences, by Sara A. Underwood (Chicago, 1896).

troductory Remarks by B. F. Underwood (known to me), who writes thus:

The statements in this paper as to what was written in my presence purporting to be communications from "spirits," and as to the circumstances under which it was written, are scrupulously correct. The " communications," it is certain, are from an intelligent source. Mrs. Underwood is the person by whose hand they are put in form. That she is not labouring under a mistake in thinking that she is unconscious of the thought expressed until she has read the writing, — if, indeed, such a mistake in a sane mind is possible, — I am certain. Sometimes, owing to the illegibility of the writing, she has to study out sentences. The writing varies in style, not only on different evenings, but on the same evening ; it is apparently the writing of not fewer than twenty persons, and generally bearing no resemblance whatever, so far as I can judge, to Mrs. Underwood's handwriting, which is remarkably uniform. The communications are unlike in the degrees of intelligence, in the quality of thought, and in the disposition which they show. Detailed statements of facts unknown to either of us, but which, weeks afterwards, were learned to be correct, have been written, and repeated again and again, when disbelieved and contradicted by us. All the writing has been done in my presence, but most of it while I have been busily occupied with work which demanded my undivided attention. The views expressed are often different from my own, and quite as frequently, perhaps, opposed to Mrs. Underwood's views.

Mrs. Underwood writes as follows : —

The modus operandi is the simplest possible. As I remembered that Mr. Underwood was rather averse to the planchette experiments of former years, thinking them unwholesome and deteriorating in their tendency, I at first said nothing to him of my new psychical experiments, though these were made oftenest in his presence in the evening when we both sat at one writing table, near each other, busied with our individual literary work. As I experimented in his absence as well as in his presence, I soon found that I got the most coherent writings when he was present. Indeed I could get nothing coherent, and very frequently nothing at all, when he was away, but when he was present the communications began to grow strangely interesting, and as he was called upon repeatedly, I felt obliged to invite his attention, when the most surprising answers were given, which roused his curiosity and interest. It has been explained that his presence is necessary for me to obtain writing, as " blended power is best." Two or three times, at the suggestion of this intelligence, we have asked two of our intimate literary friends — non-Spiritualists — to be present, but each time with comparative failure ; afterwards we were informed that the cause of failure was the introduction of persons unused to the conditions, who broke up the harmonious relations necessary to communication; in time they could be of help.

It would take a volume to present all the interesting statements as to an advanced stage of existence, only hidden from us because of the inadequacy of our sense perceptions, and by the conditions imposed upon us at this stage of our progress, which have been given from this source. Explanations have been made why communication through the agency of certain persons, though not through all, is possible. The conditions, it is alleged, are not entirely dependent upon the superior intelligence or morality of the persons with whom

865A] TO CHAPTER VIII 463

the intelligences can become en rapport. These invisibles declare that they are as seriously and anxiously experimenting on their side to discover modes of untrammelled communication with us, as we on our side ought to be, if what they write be true, and if such a thing is possible. " Spirits " they persistently insist upon being called. In this paper I can give only a statement of some things which do not seem explicable on the hypothesis of mindreading, thought-transference, hypnotism, or subconsciousness. In all these experiments I have been in a perfectly normal state. The only physical indication of any outside influence is an occasional slight thrill as of an electric current from my shoulder to the hand which holds the waiting pen. Step by step I have been taught a series of signals to aid me in correctly reading the communications. I have no power to summon at will any individual I wish. I have repeatedly, but in vain, tried to get messages from some near and dear friends. It has been explained that on their side, as on ours, certain " conditions " must exist in order to get in "control." When " eh ? " is written I know that the operator at the other end of the line is ready to communicate. When in the middle of a sentence or a word " gone " or " change " is written, I understand that the connection is broken, and I must not expect the completion of that message. When a line like this

is drawn, it is a sign that that sentence is completed or the communication

ended. So with other things. Rhymes are often unexpectedly written, especially if the " control " professes to be a poet, and they are dashed off so rapidly that I do not understand their import until the close, when I can read them over. Impromptu rhyming is a feat utterly impossible to either Mr. Underwood or myself. Names persistently recur which are unknown to us. Many different handwritings appear, some of them far superior to my own. When I first began to get communications I destroyed, in a day or two after they were written, the slips of paper containing the writing, but as the developments became more interesting, Mr. Underwood suggested that they be preserved for reference. I acted on this suggestion, and thus in the instances of facts given outside our own knowledge, I am enabled to give the exact wording of each communieation. Our questions were asked viva voce, and as they were often suggested by what had been previously written, I either at the time or soon afterwards wrote them just above the reply. I am not, therefore, trusting at all to memory in the statements I shall make.

A gentleman of this city (whom I will call John Smith, but whose real name was a more uncommon one) with whom Mr. Underwood had been acquainted many years, but of whose family relations he knew little, died here more than a year ago. Mr. Underwood had met him but once in the year previous to his death, he having been away on account of failing health, staying, we understood, with a daughter recently married, whose home was in Florida. The first name of this married daughter, or of any of Mr. Smith's daughters except one, was unknown to Mr. Underwood. I had met one of his daughters whose name I knew to be Jennie. I also knew that there was another named Violet. I was not sure, however, whether this was the name of the married one, or of another unmarried, but had the impression that Violet was unmarried. One evening, while waiting for automatic writing with no thought of Mr. Smith in my mind, and Mr. Underwood sitting near me at the table with his thoughts concentrated on an article he was preparing, this was written : "John Smith will now enter into conversation with

B. F. Underwood." I read this to Mr. Underwood, who laid aside his pen, and in order to test the matter, asked if Mr. Smith remembered the last time they met, soon after his return from the South, and a short time previous to his death. There was some delay in the answer, but soon reply came, " On Madison Street." " Whereabouts on Madison ?" was asked. " Near Washington." " At what hour ? " " About 10 A.M., raining." As it was rarely that Mr. Underwood was in that part of the city at so early an hour, and especially on a rainy day, I doubted the correctness of this reply, blit Mr. Underwood recalled to my rmnd the unusual circumstance which made it necessary for him to be in that vicinity on the day and at the hour named, on which he and Mr. Smith, he distinctly remembered, last met. Only a few words passed between them on account of the rain. After this, writing, purporting to be from Mr. Smith, came frequently. Very soon something was written which induced Mr. Underwood half sportively to inquire whether there was anything which troubled Mr. Smith, anything which he wished he had done, but had omitted, before his death. The answer came, " One thing — change deeds on Violet's account. None of my wife's are at my daughter's disposal. All in her own disposal." Mr. Underwood asked if it was meant that he had not left his property — for he was a man of some wealth — as he now wished he had. " You are right," was written, " want all my girls to share alike." " Which daughter do you refer to ? " was asked. "Went away from her in Florida — Violet," was the answer. I remarked, " Why, I thought Violet was one of the unmarried girls, but it must be that that is the name of the married daughter." Then Mr. Underwood was strongly urged to call on Mr. Smith's married son, James, with whom Mr. Underwood had a slight acquaintance, and tell him of this communication. " Clearly state my desire that my daughter Violet share equally with her sisters." Of course this was utterly out of the question. At that time we had no intention of informing any one of our psychic experience, and if we had, Mr. James Smith would have thought us insane or impertinent to come to him with so ridiculous a story, the truth of which we ourselves strongly doubted. Pages were, however, written concerning the matter in so earnest and pleading a manner that I came to feel conscience-stricken at refusing to do what was asked, and to shrink from seeing Mr. Smith's name appear. Once was written, " Say to James that in my new position, and with my new views of life, I feel that I did wrong to treat his sister Violet as I did. She was not to blame for following out her own convictions, when I had inculcated independent thought and action for all." This and other sentences of the kind seemed to convey the idea that Violet had in some way incurred his displeasure by doing according to her own will in opposition to his. This was puzzling to us, as we knew that in her marriage, at least, the daughter we thought to be Violet had followed her father's wishes.

A few weeks later, however, came an unlooked-for verification of Mr. Smith's messages. In a conversation between Mr. Underwood and a business friend of Mr. Smith, who was well acquainted with all his affairs, regret was expressed that so wealthy a man had left so little for a certain purpose. Mr. Underwood then inquired as to what disposition had been made of his property, and was told that he had left it mainly to his wife and children — so much to this one, and that. " But Violet," continued Mr. Underwood's informant, " was left only a small amount, as Mr. Smith was angry because she married against his wishes." " Why," remarked Mr. Underwood, " I understood that he approved

865A] TO CHAPTER VIII 465

of the match, and the fact that he accompanied herself and husband to Florida, and remained with them some time, would seem to indicate that." " Oh, you are thinking of Lucy, the eldest girl ; her marriage was all right, but Violet, one of the younger daughters, going to Florida with her [Lucy's] husband, fell in love with a young man of whom her father did not approve, so she made a runaway marriage, and on account of his displeasure, Mr. Smith left her only a small sum." The intelligence writing was aware of facts unknown to either Mr. Underwood or myself, and no other persons were in the room when these communications were given.

In the Arena for June 1892 Mr. Underwood continues : —

My presence has been and is now one of the conditions of Mrs. Underwood's getting connected and coherent writing. Only a few words and a sentence or two have been written occasionally in my absence. Once when I was absent from home the peculiar sensation which had always been felt in Mrs. Underwood's right hand before the writing began, was felt in the left hand, with which a name was written with letters reversed, and she could read it only when impressed to do so. She held it before the mirror. It was the name of a person two hundred miles distant, who was still alive, but, as was subsequently learned, in an unconscious state at the time, and very near death, which occurred two or three days afterwards.

The word " death " is never used except with " so-called " before it, or " which is a new birth," or some other explanatory or qualifying expression. The writing purports to be from extra-mediumistic and extra-mundane sources — from invisible human beings who once inhabited this earth. The writing always, whether purporting to be from a person of high or low degree, claims that the controlling intelligence is a spirit — a discarnate human being. Any intimation that the communicating intelligence may be the medium's subconscious ego, a fraction of which only rises to the level of conscious knowledge, is met with responses to the effect that it is strange anybody can believe such a vagary. One claim, to which there has never been exception in any writing purporting to be a message, is that a " spirit," a discarnate human being, moves the hand that holds the pen. Generally names and dates are not given ; and when they are, they are as liable to be wrong as correct. In answer to questions as to the reason of this, it has been said substantially that memories and reminiscences are only gathered up as the departed are able to come in contact with persons and objects of earth. Strange as it may seem, I get tired and nervous when this writing is prolonged ; it exhausts me much more than it does Mrs. Underwood, on whom it never leaves any depressing influence.

The intelligence which seems to be extraneous, which invariably claims to be a departed spirit, now one, now another, is sometimes inferior intellectually to the medium ; at other times, in certain lines of thought, in the use of words, and in the statement of facts, the intelligence that directs the pen evinces larger knowledge than Mrs. Underwood consciously possesses. The spelling is sometimes different from her own, and the style is often stilted, and even grandiose, while her style is simple and natural. In some cases the writing relates to what is entirely unknown to the writer — to her ordinary consciousness — though in some of these cases I can conceive it as possible, and deem it probable, that the writing relates to what has been noted or learned by the passive consciousness, and is evoked therefrom even though there is no recognition of its having been included in the person's experience. VOL. n. 2 G

But in other cases the writing has contained evidence of knowledge that Mrs. Underwood never could have obtained in any known way. She gave one or two instances in the August Arena. I will relate another of her experiences which, in my opinion, proves that there are supernormal methods of obtaining knowledge.

One morning a message purporting to be from a young man recently deceased was received. Neither Mrs. Underwood nor I had ever seen his handwriting. We knew his name only as William S. The message was signed "Z. W. S." At the time I remarked that I did not believe there was any Z in his name, and in this opinion Mrs. Underwood concurred. A few days afterwards we met the father and the mother of the young man, who were so impressed with the resemblance between the handwriting and that of their son that they wished to take the writing with them. There was a Z in the name, but it was the initial of his second name, and not of the first, as it was written. In the presence of the young man's mother, Mrs. Underwood's hand was moved to write, and the lady asked if her father would give a test by writing his name. The first name, Solomon, was written slowly ; and after a pause, the surname was written very quickly. Mrs. Underwood did not know and never had known the name, which was written correctly; and Mr. S., who is a lawyer and a man of critical and discriminating mind, and his wife both declared that the signature closely resembled that of the old gentleman. Some days ago I wrote to Mr. S., asking him whether, after further reflection, he could suggest a possible explanation of what Mrs. Underwood wrote without recourse to any occult theory. He replied and referred to the message purporting to be from his son, thus : " I have compared it with signatures of our boy. As I told you in Chicago at the time, the writing bears a very strong resemblance to his writing. Mrs. Underwood did not, in my opinion, either consciously or unconsciously, have any knowledge of Will's full name. The writing, while quite similar to Will's, is very different from Mrs. Underwood's. My wife's father's name had not been mentioned at all. Never had been in Mrs. Underwood's presence. I don't think she had ever met a member of Mrs. S.'s family by that name, yet she certainly wrote the name of Mrs. S.'s father, Solomon M.} very plainly, when asked to write the name of the person who had just written that he had something to say. This writing was also very, very similar to the handwriting of the old gentleman."

Fully aware that incidents long forgotten may be recalled, that possibly no lapse of memory is irrevocable, and that under certain conditions from the submerged self may be sent up memories which cannot be distinguished from newly-acquired knowledge, still, I am confident that Mrs. Underwood's hand has written names and statements of facts not only once, but several times, which were not and never had been any part of her conscious knowledge.

867 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 343-48.

In Proceedings, vol. v. p. 434, is given a case translated from Psychische Studien, February 1889, pp. 67—9, which describes a communication made to Mdlle. Emma Stramm concerning the death of a M. August Duvanel. M. Aksakoff has kindly sent me additional matter of high interest bearing on this case, which I here translate from his letter dated May 9th, 1889 (new style). It will be well first to reprint the case as it stood in Psychische Studien.

867 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 467

On January iQth, 1887 (says M. Aksakoff), I received a visit from the engineer Kaigorodoff, who resides in Wilna. He narrated to me the following circumstances. He had as governess for his children Mdlle. Emma Stramm, a Swiss, from the town of Neufchatel, who possessed the gift of automatic writing. At a stance held at nine o'clock on the evening of January I5th, at the house of Herr Kaigorodoff, at Wilna, the following communication was given in French in his presence. I have been shown the original, and quote this from a copy of it. The medium, who was in her normal state, asked : —

" Is Lydia here ? " (This was a personality which had manifested itself at previous sittings.)

" No, Louis1 is here, and wishes to impart a piece of news (une nouvelle) to his sister."

"What is it?"

" A person of thy acquaintance passed away (est partie) about three o'clock to-day."

" What am I to understand by this ? "

"That is to say,— he is dead."

"Who?"

"August Duvanel."

" What was his illness ? "

" The formation of a clot of blood (d'un engorge?nent de sang). Pray for the redemption of his soul."

Two weeks later Herr Kaigorodoff, who was again in St. Petersburg, showed me a letter from David Stramm, the father of the medium, dated from Neufchatel, on January i8th, 1887 (new style); thus written three days after the death of Duvanel. This letter was received at Wilna on January 23rd. In it her father informs her of the event in the following words. I copy them literally from the original : —

" My much loved daughter. ... I will now tell thee a great piece of news (uncgrande nouvelle]. August Duvanel died on January 1 5th, about three o'clock in the afternoon. It was, so to speak, a sudden death, for he had only been ill a few hours. He was attacked by blood-clotting (engorgement de sang) when he was at the bank. He spoke very little, and everything that he said was for thee. ... He commended himself to thy prayers. These were his last words."

The difference in time between Wilna and Switzerland is about an hour. It would thus be four o'clock in Wilna when Duvanel's death occurred, and five hours later this piece of news was communicated by automatic writing.

But who was Duvanel ? And why should his death be " a great piece of news " for Mdlle. Emma Stramm ? In reply to questions which I put to him in writing, Herr Kaigorodoff gave me the following explanation: "When Mdlle. Emma Stramm lived with her parents in Neufchatel, this Herr Duvanel wanted to marry her. But he was met with a decided refusal on the part of the young lady. As her parents, on the other hand, were in favour of the marriage, and endeavoured to persuade her to consent to it, she resolved to leave her fatherland and take a situation as a governess. The last communication she had with Duvanel was some time before her departure, in the year 1881. She

1 The name of a deceased brother of the medium, who usually manifests at her seances. Louis died in 1869, aged eleven months. At the beginning of the seances, about the end of 1886, he was the first to communicate, announcing himself as his sister's "spirit protector." — A. A.

did not keep up any correspondence with him. She had seen Duvanel's family only two or three times in all. A year after her departure he left Neufchatel, and remained in Canton Zurich until his death."

To this M. Aksakoff adds, in a letter to me (May Qth, 1889) : —

I have delayed answering your letter of April ist, because on receiving it I wrote to Colonel Kaigorodoff and to Mdlle. Emma Stramm for further details, which seemed to me needful for the completion of our critical judgment on the Duvanel case. I have just received their letters, dated April i6th and April i8th.

I will begin answering your questions.

(1) This case was published in Psychische Studien for February 1889, but it had been written by me in February 1888, which explains my saying that I had lately received it.

(2) I find in my book of memoranda a notice dated January 7th (i9th) of M. Kaigorodoff's visit and his communication concerning the death of Duvanel.

(3) M. Kaigorodoff is a military engineer, living at present at Grodno, a seat of provincial Government in West Russia. In the autumn of 1886 M. Kaigorodoff endeavoured to hypnotise Mdlle. Emma, but soon she began to speak and write in mediumistic fashion. (M. Kaigorodoff was not wholly a novice in Spiritualism, having been present, some ten years earlier, at a very elementary series of stances.) Automatic writing, however, seemed to fatigue the medium, and the method of trance-utterance was usually preferred. The medium saw and described the [deceased] persons in whose name she spoke. M. Kaigorodoff asked questions in Russian, and the medium answered in German or French. M. Kaigorodoff, who was a widower, naturally desired a personal and absolutely conclusive message from his wife. She (the influence speaking through E. S. as Madame Kaigorodoff) replied that she could give such a message only by impressing the medium during her ordinary sleep ; and she effected her purpose by causing the medium to see, in a dream, a series of four scenes [tableaux] ; which Mdlle. Emma described to M. Kaigorodoff and in which he recognised the perfect representation of an episode in his married life. These dream-communications form a special feature in the mediumship of Mdlle. Stramm; the same subject being sometimes thus treated for a week continuously.

[On this point M. Aksakoff adds, February I5th, 1890: "M. Kaigorodoff informs me of the following peculiarity of his wife's (he married Mdlle. Stramm as his second wife in 1889) : — During her ordinary sleep one can enter into conversation with her. She continues to sleep, answering questions, and describing the fantastic dreams which she sees. In her replies she generally uses the third person. On awaking, she remembers nothing. If during her sleep M. Kaigorodoff makes some passes over her face she immediately passes into magnetic (somnambulic) sleep: and the character of her conversation entirely changes. In her ordinary sleep 'spirits' never appear on the scene; in the secondary form of sleep, always. A few reverse passes, and the magnetic sleep gives place, with a sigh, to the ordinary sleep."]

(4) As to your question whether the communications have or have not included " many definite statements found to be untrue," [as is the case with so many similar series,] M. Kaigorodoff cannot recollect any such statements. As an instance to the contrary, he reminded me of a prediction made March 2nd, 1887, of which he informed me in his letter of August 25th, 1887 (still in

867A] TO CHAPTER VIII 469

my hands). It was announced to Mdlle. E. that her sister (who is in Switzerland) would be delivered in five months of a boy, who would not live more than three or four years. Mdlle. Emma did not even know at the time that her sister was expecting a baby. In fact the sister was delivered of a boy at the end of July, iSSy.1

I pass on to the case of Duvanel, which needs some details to complete it.

The first question which presents itself to the mind is as follows : " What proof have we that Mdlle. Emma had not received a telegram announcing Duvanel's death?" I asked this question of M. Kaigorodoff by letter; I give an abstract of his reply.

(1) The death of Duvanel took place (by Wilna time) at about 4.30 P.M. On that day, from 7 P.M. till the beginning of the seance, M. Kaigorodoff, as he positively remembers, was constantly with Mdlle. E. ; and even supposing that the telegram had been despatched half-an-hour after A. D.'s death (!), nevertheless it would have been impossible for a telegram sent from Switzerland to have been received and delivered at Wilna in the short interval between 5 and 7 P.M. On that day, moreover, Mdlle. E. did not leave the house after

(2) All Mdlle. E.'s correspondence was addressed, care of Colonel Kaigorodoff.

(3) The telegram could not have been received without the knowledge of the servants and the children. There would have been no reason for keeping it secret.

(4) The relations of Mdlle. E. are poor persons, and there was not sufficient motive for the immediate communication of this piece of news.

But might not a telegram have been sent by the friends or family of Duvanel? Considering that all relations between Duvanel and Mdlle. E. had been broken off in 1881, such a telegram would have had no reasonable object. Moreover, in my letter to Mdlle. E., I had begged her to tell me what was the exact place of D.'s death and whether those who lived with him could have known her address. To this she replied in her letter of April i6th, 1889. " D. died in a little hamlet of the Canton of Zurich, called, I think, Hirchd, but I am not sure, for my brother [from whom I inquired] had himself forgotten the name. D. lived alone, and had only one brother, who lived in another town." Impossible, therefore, that a telegram should have been despatched immediately from that quarter.

When M. Kaigorodoff came to see me the second time, in January 1887, with the letter of Mdlle. E.'s father, I was struck with the identity of the expression, " un engorgement de sang," employed in the trance-message, which was in French, and also in the father's letter, which was likewise in French, to explain the cause of D.'s death. This identity of phrase appeared very strange, not to say suspicious. I drew M. Kaigorodoff 's attention to it, and begged him to ask the medium about it, as soon as a stance gave the opportunity. This identity of expression suggested a curious action of telepathy.

This is what M. Kaigorodoff' s letter, just received, says on the subject : —

"On the day after the stance of January 3rd (i5th), 1887, Mdlle. E., not expecting to receive a letter from her father with the confirmation of the fact of D.'s death, wrote to her sister in Switzerland, stating that she had had a

1 One prediction has since proved erroneous ; viz., that Madame Kaigorodoff herself would have a boy ;— whereas her child is a girl.

4/0 APPENDICES [867 A

vision as though D. were dead, and asking whether this was really the case. The dream was an expedient used because Emma's relations had no knowledge of Spiritualism, still less of E.'s personal proceedings in that direction. The letter of Mdlle. E.'s sister arrived ten days after her father's letter. The sister, not knowing that their father had already announced D.'s death, desired to hide the fact from her [for a reason presently to be shown] and answered that D. was not dead, but gone to America."

M. Kaigorodoff, after a six weeks' absence, returned to Wilna at the beginning of March 1887. At the first stance held, early in March, he begged of Louis (the controlling spirit) to explain the contradiction between the letters of the father and the sister of Mdlle. E. touching the death of Duvanel. The medium was entranced, and spoke in the name of Louis. M. Kaigorodoff took notes, and this is word for word the answer which was given : —

" He is dead; only [her] sister does not wish that she should know of his death, because it was not of a stoppage of blood (engorgement] as I had written." (The message of January yd Osth) 1887, had been given by automatic writing, in French.) " I could not tell the truth frankly (directemenf), for her health would have been affected by it."

" Where and how, then, did he die ? "

" He died in the Canton of Zurich ; but he killed himself, and she must not know it. She must remain ignorant of this, for if she learns, even indirectly, of his self-inflicted death, her health may suffer. You must not speak to her of the matter, for she suspects the truth."

" How does it happen, then, that the identical expression, stoppage of blood, is found both in your message and in the father's letter ? "

" It is I who inspired him with that expression."

As you perceive, the case becomes increasingly complicated and interesting. In point of fact, Mdlle. E., some days after the message of January 3rd (isth) did in fact see in a dream Duvauel covered with blood (ensanglanti). The contradictory statements in the letters (of her father and sister) led her to suspect that the truth was being concealed from her, and that there had really been a suicide. It was only in the autumn of 1887, when Mdlle. E. made a journey to Switzerland to see her. relations, that she learnt all the truth, confirming the second message.

The fears of Louis and of her relations as to the bad effect which the news of the suicide might have upon Mdlle. E. were in fact exaggerated. For Mdlle. E. had left Switzerland in 1881, and up till the message of January 3rd (i5th), 1887, had received no news of Duvanel. Some time after Mdlle. E.'s departure Duvanel left Neufchitel for Geneva, where he was employed at a bank; — which explains the phrase in the father's letter, saying that D. had died of a stoppage of blood "while he was at the bank." But of late he had lived in a little hamlet of the Canton of Zurich. All this Mdlle. Emma learnt on her visit to her relations.

After all these facts, however, the problem as to the possibility of a telepathic influence from the parents of Mdlle. E. is not yet decided. To clear up this point we must know the exact day when the father of Mdlle. E. learnt the death of Duvanel, and we must know the details he then heard. Mdlle. E.'s relations had heard the news of D.'s suicide on the very day of his death ; and if it had been decided in family discussion that they would conceal from her the manner of his death, and adopt the expression " stoppage of

868A] TO CHAPTER VIII 471

blood"; — then one might still conjecture that there had been a telepathic transmission of thought.

But the father's letter was written January i8th, and, as Mdlle. E. says [in her letter of April i6th, 1889], it is probable that the meeting in the train [when the father heard of Duvanel's death from Duvanel's brother] took place on the i;th, and thus after the sitting of January 3rd (i5th). In that case, if telepathy there were, it would be needful to seek the inspirer (the "agent provocateur!") in some factor outside the minds of Mdlle. E. or her relations.

But this probability is not enough ; and the essential question as to the day when Mdlle. E.'s relations learnt the death of Duvanel is not yet determined. I will write again on this point to the ci-devant Mdlle. Stramm, who is now Madame Kaigorodoff ; for the Colonel in his last letter to me announces his marriage with Mdlle. Emma Stramm. I will beg her to ask her father to fix as precisely as possible the day of his meeting with Duvanel's brother. The reply shall be sent to you at once.

Thus, then, we have in this case of spiritualistic communication : (i) the news of a death at a distance ; (2) the manner of death ; (3) the place of death ; all unknown to the medium.

On June 24th (July 6th) 1889, M. Aksakoff again wrote to me as follows : —

M. Kaigorodoff has had the kindness to send me in original the letter of Madame KaigorodofFs sister. I enclose a copy. As you perceive, the father learnt the news of Duvanel's death on January i/th, two days, therefore, after the death itself, and two days after the news of the death was received at Wilna in Russia. The circumstance that this news was heard by M. Stramm in a merely accidental way, and only on the day of the funeral, proves that in fact all relations between Duvanel and the Stramm family had been suspended. The letter of Mdlle. Bertha is dated from Rochefort ; that is a small town, at twenty minutes' railway journey from Neufchatel; and it is there, strictly speaking, and not at Neufchatel, that the Stramm family reside.

Copy of part of Mdlle. Bertha Stramm's letter to 'her sister, Madame Kaigorodoff, dated Rochefort, June i6th, 1889.

" Duvanel died January i5th, and papa learnt the news on the I7th, for he met Duvanel's brother, who was setting out for the funeral. The brother was to leave for America a few days later. It is I who have recollected this, by searching my memory, for papa is old and feeble and does not now remember anything of the matter. I cannot tell you the name of the village where the death occurred."

868 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 355-57. For the following case also I am indebted to M. Aksakoff.

THE PERELIGUINE CASE.

Document I. — Copy of report of stance held November i8th, 1887, in the house of M. Nartzeff, at Tambof, Russia.

Present: M. A. Nartzeff [landed proprietor, belonging to the Russian nobility, in the Government of Tambof] ; Madame A. Slepzof [aunt of M.

Nartzeff]; Madame Ivanof [M. Nartzeff's housekeeper]; M. N. Touloucheff [official physician of the municipality of Tambof].

The sitting began at 10 P.M. at a table placed in the middle of the room, by the light of a night-light placed on the mantelpiece. All doors closed. The left hand of each was placed on the right hand of his neighbour, and each foot touched the neighbour's foot, so that during the whole of the sitting all hands and feet were under control. Sharp raps were heard in the floor, and afterwards in the wall and the ceiling, after which the blows sounded immediately in the middle of the table, as if some one had struck it from above with his fist ; and with such violence, and so often, that the table trembled the whole time.

M. Nartzeff asked : " Can you answer rationally, giving three raps for yes, one for no ? " " Yes." " Do you wish to answer by using the alphabet ? " " Yes." "Spell your name." The alphabet was repeated, and the letters indicated by three raps — " Anastasie Pe're'liguine." "I beg you to say now why you have come and what you desire." " I am a wretched woman. Pray for me. Yesterday, during the day, I died at the hospital. The day before yesterday I poisoned myself with matches." " Give us some details about yourself. How old were you? Give a rap for each year." Seventeen raps. " Who were you ?" "I was housemaid. I poisoned myself with matches." " Why did you poison yourself ? " "I will not say. I will say nothing more."

After this a heavy table which was near the wall, outside the chain of hands, came up rapidly three times, towards the table round which the chain was made, and each time it was pushed backwards, no one knew by what means. Seven raps (the signal agreed upon for the close of the sitting) were now heard in the wall; and at 11.20 P.M. the stance came to an end.

(Signed) A. SLEPZOF, N. TOULOUCHEFF, A. NARTZEFF, A. IVANOF.

I certify that this copy is in complete accordance with the original.

A. NARTZEFF.

Document II. — The undersigned, having been present at the stance of November i8th, 1887, at the house of M. A. N. Nartzeff, hereby certify that they had no previous knowledge of the existence or the death of Anastasie PeVdliguine, and that they heard her name for the first time at the above-mentioned stance.

N. P. TOULOUCHEFF, ALEXIS NARTZEFF, A. SLEPZOF, A. IVANOF.

TAMBOF, April 6th, 1890.

Document III.— Letter of Dr. Touloucheff to M. A. Aksakoff.

TAMBOF, rue du Stminaire, April i$th, 1890.

SIR,— At the sitting held at M. Nartzeff's house, November i8th, 1887, we received a communication from an intelligence giving the name of Anastasie Pe're'liguine. She asked us to pray for her; and said that she had poisoned herself with lucifer matches, and had died on the I7th of that month. At the first moment I did not believe this; for in my capacity as physician of the municipality I am at once informed by the police of all cases of suicide. But since Pe're'liguine had added that her death had taken place at the hospital ; and since at Tambof we have only one hospital, that of the "Institutions de Bienfaisance," which is in no way within my official survey, and whose authorities, in such cases as this, themselves send for the police or the magistrate ; —

868B] TO CHAPTER VIII 473

I sent a letter to my colleague, Dr. Sundblatt, the head physician of this hospital. Without explaining my reason, I simply asked him to inform me whether there had been any recent case of suicide at the hospital, and, if so, to give me the name and particulars. I have already sent you a copy of his reply, certified by Dr. Sundblatt's own signature. The original is at M. Nartzeff' s house, with the protocols of the seances.

N. TOULOUCHEFF.

Document IV.— Copy of Dr. Th. Sundblatt's letter to Dr. Touloucheff.

November igth, 1887.

MY DEAR COLLEAGUE, — On the i6th of this month I was on duty; and on that day two patients were admitted to the hospital, who had poisoned themselves with phosphorus. The first, Vera Kosovitch, aged thirty-eight, wife of a clerk in the public service . . . was taken in at 8 P.M. ; the second, a servant in the insane ward [a part of the hospital], Anastasie Pe're'liguine, aged seventeen, was taken in at 10 P.M. This second patient had swallowed, besides an infusion of boxes of matches, a glass of kerosine, and at the time of her admission was already very ill. She died at I P.M. on the I7th, and the post-mortem examination has been made to-day. Kosovitch died yesterday, and the postmortem is fixed for to-morrow. Kosovitch said that she had taken the phosphorus in an excess of melancholy, but Pe're'liguine did not state her reason for poisoning herself. TH. SUNDBLATT.

Copy of letter certified by Th. Sundblatt and Alexis Nartzeff.

Document V.— Letter of M. A. Nartzeff to M. Aksakoff, May i6th, 1890.

[M. Nartzeff writes a letter in English and one in French, which I abridge and combine.]

In answer to your letter I inform you that my aunt's housekeeper is not a housekeeper strictly speaking, but rather a friend of the family, having been nearly fifteen years with us, and possessing our entire confidence. She could not have already learnt the fact of the suicide, as she has no relations or friends in Tambof, and never leaves the house.

The hospital in question is situated at the other end of the town, about five versts from my house. Dr. Sundblatt informs me, on the authority of the Proces verbal of the inquest, that Pe're'liguine was able to read and write. [This in answer to M. Aksakoff 's inquiry whether the deceased could have understood alphabetic communication.]

Sittings were held at Tambof, April i885~October 1889, but in no other instance were irrefutable proofs obtained. Generally the manifestations were of a trivial character. Twice or thrice we received communications apparently serious, but on inquiry these were found to be untrue.

It is remarkable that this veridical message should have stood alone, but its correctness obviously was not due to chance.

868 B. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 280-84.

The following case was sent to us by Dr. H. D. R. Kingston, of Macra, Eltham, Kent, an Associate of the S.P.R. Of the narrator, Mr. F. Hodgson, he says : —

Mr. F. Hodgson was then (1889) a photographer at Wynberg. He had at one time been employed as photographer to the Challenger expedition

during part of the voyage, and he had also gone in the same capacity with Mr. Palgrave on a Commission to Great Namaqualand and to Damaraland. I have copies of many of the photographs he then took, the negatives of which are the property of the Colonial Government. I found him a careful and competent man in developing some scientific photographs of my own, and also particularly intelligent, and I should say perfectly trustworthy as a witness. You will see that he has made up the case with some care ...

HENRY D. R. KINGSTON, M.D.

The narrative was enclosed in a letter to Dr. Kingston, dated Wynberg, July 1890, and is as follows : —

Statement re curious manifestations in house of Mrs. Kamp, beginning on night of June I4th, and still continuing, though greatly diminished in power.

On Saturday night, June I4th, 1890, Alida Sophia Kamp, widow, residing in Wolfe Street, Wynberg, her daughter, Sophia Alida Kamp, and Catherine Mahoney, who resides in the same house, retired to rest at a little before ii P.M., and, from the time of retiring to rest until that of rising, were unable to sleep on account of strange and unearthly noises, for which they could find no explanation, although they instituted a rigorous search for the cause. The noises, as they described them to me next morning, resembled the dragging about of chairs in their bedrooms and the dragging about of heavy boxes over an uneven floor in the loft over their heads. This loft, which I know, having been in it, contains absolutely nothing which could account for the noises, even had there been any one upstairs to drag anything it contained about ; but owing to the way in which this loft is fastened up, it would have been quite impossible for any one to enter it. I could not on the Sunday morning, from their description of what they had heard, find any rational solution of the mystery, and, at their request, consented to occupy one of the bedrooms that night (Sunday, i$th).

Before retiring, however, I suggested that we should hold a stance in the room in which I was about to sleep. This was agreed to, and we formed a circle consisting of Christian Kamp (son of Alida Sophia Kamp), Alida Sophia Kamp, Catherine Mahoney, and myself, and Janet Kamp, wife of Christian Kamp (seating ourselves around a small table). The table very shortly showed an inclination to move about, and in fact did sway about considerably, but this was all we could obtain, so we dropped the sitting.

We, however, decided after deliberation to hold a stance in the adjoining bedroom, but this time Catherine Mahoney declined to sit, so that we had only [four] out of the former [five] sitters. The results were, however, better, as we soon had distinct raps and at once asked the communicating influence to rap three times if it could communicate its name to us if we established an easy code. The three raps came at once, and I (who acted as conductor) then asked it to give one rap at each letter forming its name on my going audibly through the alphabet. The result was LEWIS, which caused Mrs. A. S. Kamp to think it was her departed husband, whose name had been Louis. This hypothesis, however, I was not inclined to accept, as I thought her husband, if present, would not have wrongly spelt his name. We, however, could not get the influence to change his orthography, so we had to proceed to ask if it would spell out any message by the same code, to which three raps responded, and we again proceeded. The result was TO WARN, at

868B] TO CHAPTER VIII 475

which stage of the proceedings Mrs. Kamp showed signs of great uneasiness, thinking the message was a warning of her coming death, and being still persuaded that her late husband was communicating. As I did not know positively to the contrary, and was afraid some unpleasant communication was about to be given, we dropped the stance, I intending to resume it at some future time with sitters not related to the family.

