I need hardly say that it is this last hypothesis which I have since adopted, and although it is obvious that the difficulties concerning Phinuit's identity have not been solved, it seems possible to regard him as an intelligence extraneous to Mrs. Piper, — as, in fact, a discarnate spirit. It must not be forgotten, however, that he entirely failed in his professed attempts to establish his personal identity, and could not succeed even in substantiating his claim to be a French doctor. Unfortunately we have no contemporary records of what occurred during Mrs. Piper's earliest trances ; nor practically any information as to the first manifestations of the Phinuit personality. It seems clear at least that the name Phinuit was the result of suggestion at these earliest trances (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 46-58), and many may think it most probable that the Phinuit " control " was nothing more than a secondary personality of Mrs. Piper. But, according to the statements (of which there is of course no evidence) made by " Imperator," Phinuit was an " earth-bound " or inferior spirit, who had become confused and bewildered in his first attempts at communication, and had, as we say, " lost his consciousness of personal identity." That such an occurrence is not uncommon in this life is plain from the cases to which I have drawn attention in Chapter II. of this book, and we cannot prove it to be impossible that profound memory disturbances should be produced in an inexperienced discarnate spirit when first attempting to communicate with us through a material organism. Be that as it may, the Phinuit personality has not manifested either directly or indirectly since January 1897, when "Imperator" claimed the supervision of Mrs. Piper's trances.

958. There were various cases of alleged direct " control " by spirits other than Phinuit during the first stage of Mrs. Piper's trance history. Two of these, the " E." control and the aunt of Professor James, are referred to in the report by Professor James which I have quoted in 956 A. These and several others are also mentioned by Dr. Hodgson in Proceed-

959] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 241

ings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 28-40 ; but even in the most remarkable of these earlier cases of apparent "possession" of Mrs. Piper's organism by other spirits, the evidence available for publication was scanty, and in one or two cases there was scarcely anything to indicate that the supposed communicating personalities were not impersonations by Phinuit.

The most notable case was that of a lady, Miss W., who had forty-five sittings, at forty-one of which the control was taken for at least part of the time by a personal friend, who presented marked characteristics of the friend it purported to be ; showed specific knowledge of private matters known only to that friend and the sitter ; showed a knowledge of facts of which he was reminded by the sitter, and in turn reminded the sitter of facts temporarily forgotten by her ; made some mistakes in matters once known to the friend, and remembered well by the sitter, and told the sitter of facts not known to her and afterwards verified (loc. cit. 43).

Usually, as we have seen, Phinuit acted as intermediary, reproducing the communications made by the " deceased " relatives or friends of the sitters, and in a favourable series of sittings the impression made was generally as described in the following case by Sir Oliver Lodge. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 455.)

One of the best sitters was my next-door neighbour, Isaac C. Thompson, F.L.S., to whose name indeed, before he had been in any way introduced, Phinuit sent a message purporting to come from his father. Three generations of his and of his wife's family living and dead (small and compact Quaker families) were, in the course of two or three sittings, conspicuously mentioned, with identifying detail ; the main informant representing himself as his deceased brother, a young Edinburgh doctor, whose loss had been mourned some twenty years ago. The familiarity and touchingness of the messages communicated in this particular instance were very remarkable, and can by no means be reproduced in any printed report of the sitting. Their case is one in which very few mistakes were made, the details standing out vividly correct, so that in fact they found it impossible not to believe that their relatives were actually speaking to them.

Such cases were not usual, and on the whole, although there seemed to be in this first stage of Mrs. Piper's trance history, in 1884-91, abundant proof of some supernormal faculty which demanded at least the hypothesis of thought-transference from living persons both near and distant, and suggested occasionally some power of telaesthesia or perhaps even of premonition, yet the main question with which we are now concerned, — whether Mrs. Piper's organism was controlled, directly or indirectly, by discarnate spirits who could give satisfactory evidence of their identity, — remained undecided.

959. More important, as regards this question of personal identity, is

the series of sittings which formed the second stage of Mrs. Piper's

trance history, in the years 1892-96, of which a detailed account is given

in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 284-582 and vol. xiv. pp. 6-49, where

VOL. ii. Q

the chief communicator or intermediary was G. P. This G. P., whose name (although, of course, well known to many persons) has been altered for publication into " George Pelham," was a young man of great ability, mainly occupied in literary pursuits. Although born an American citizen, he was a member of a noble English family. I never met him, but I have the good fortune to include a number of his friends among my own, and with several of these I have been privileged to hold intimate conversation on the nature of the communications which they received. I have thus heard of many significant utterances of G. P.'s, which are held too private for print ; and I have myself been present at sittings where G. P. manifested. For the full discussion of the evidence tending to prove the identity of G. P., I refer my readers to the original report in the Proceedings S.P.R. I give in 959 A and B a detailed account of the circumstances of the first communications of G. P., and quote here a general summary, given by Dr. Hodgson several years later, of the whole series of his manifestations. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. PP- 328-330.)

On the first appearance of the communicating G. P. to Mr. Hart in March 1892, he gave not only his own name and that of the sitter, but also the names of several of their most intimate common friends, and referred specifically to the most important private matters connected with them. At the same sitting reference was made to other incidents unknown to the sitters, such as the account of Mrs. Pelham's taking the studs from the body of G. P. and giving them to Mr. Pelham to be sent to Mr. Hart, and the reproduction of a notable remembrance of a conversation which G. P. living had with Katharine, the daughter of his most intimate friends, the Howards. These were primary examples of two kinds of knowledge concerning matters unknown to the sitters, of which various other instances were afterwards given; knowledge of events connected with G. P. which had occurred since his death, and knowledge of special memories pertaining to the G. P. personality before death. A week later, at the sitting of Mr. Vance, he made an appropriate inquiry after the sitter's son, and in reply to inquiries rightly specified that the sitter's son had been at college with him, and further correctly gave a correct description of the sitter's summer home as the place of a special visit. This, again, was paralleled by many later instances where appropriate inquiries were made and remembrances recalled concerning other personal friends of G. P. Nearly two weeks later came his most intimate friends, the Howards, and to these, using the voice directly, he showed such a fulness of private remembrance and specific knowledge and characteristic intellectual and emotional quality pertaining to G. P. that, though they had previously taken no interest in any branch of psychical research, they were unable to resist the conviction that they were actually conversing with their old friend G. P. And this conviction was strengthened by their later experiences. Not least important, at that time, was his anxiety about the disposal of a certain book and about certain specified letters which concern matters too private for publication. He was particularly desirous of convincing his father, who lived in Washington, that it was indeed G. P. who was communicating, and he soon afterwards stated that his father had taken his photograph to be copied, as was the case, though Mr. Pelham had not

959] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 243

informed even his wife of this fact. Later on he reproduced a series of incidents, unknown to the sitters, in which Mrs. Howard had been engaged in her own home. Later still, at a sitting with his father and mother in New York, a further intimate knowledge was shown of private family circumstances, and at the following sitting, at which his father and mother were not present, he gave the details of certain private actions which they had done in the interim. At their sitting, and at various sittings of the Howards, appropriate comments were made concerning different articles presented which had belonged to G. P. living, or had been familiar to him ; he inquired after other personal articles which were not presented at the sittings, and showed intimate and detailed recollections of incidents in connection with them. In points connected with the recognition of articles with their related associations of a personal sort, the G. P. communicating, so far as I know, has never failed. Nor has he failed in the recognition of personal friends. I may say generally that out of a large number of sitters who went as strangers to Mrs. Piper, the communicating G. P. has picked out the friends of G. P. living, precisely as the G. P. living might have been expected to do [thirty cases of recognition out of at least one hundred and fifty persons who have had sittings with Mrs. Piper since the first appearance of G. P., and no case of false recognition], and has exhibited memories in connection with these and other friends which are such as would naturally be associated as part of the G. P. personality, which certainly do not suggest in themselves that they originate otherwise, and which are accompanied by the emotional relations which were connected with such friends in the mind of G. P. living. At one of his early communications G. P. expressly undertook the task of rendering all the assistance in his power towards establishing the continued existence of himself and other communicators, in pursuance of a promise of which he himself reminded me, made some two years or more before his death, that if he died before me and found himself "still existing," he would devote himself to prove the fact ; and in the persistence of his endeavour to overcome the difficulties in communicating ?,s far as possible, in his constant readiness to act as amanuensis at the sittings, in the effect which he has produced by his counsels, — to myself as investigator, and to numerous other sitters and communicators, — he has, in so far as I can form a judgment in a problem so complex and still presenting so much obscurity, displayed all the keenness and pertinacity which were eminently characteristic of G. P. living.

Finally, the manifestations of this G. P. communicating have not been of a fitful and spasmodic nature, they have exhibited the marks of a continuous living and persistent personality, manifesting itself through a course of years, and showing the same characteristics of an independent intelligence whether friends of G. P. were present at the sittings or not. I learned of various cases where in my absence active assistance was rendered by G. P. to sitters who had never previously heard of him, and from time to time he would make brief pertinent reference to matters with which G. P. living was acquainted, though I was not, and sometimes in ways which indicated that he could to some extent see what was happening in our world to persons in whose welfare G. P. living would have been specially interested.

The sitter called Mr. Hart, to whom G. P. first manifested, died at Naples three years afterwards, and communicated, with the help of G. P.,

on the second day after his death. I give an account of his communications in 959 C.

960. There are numerous instances in the reports in the Proceedings, (see vol. vi. pp. 647-50; vol. viii. pp. 15-26; vol. xiii., passim ; and vol. xvi. pp. 131-3), of the giving of information unknown to the sitters and afterwards verified. A striking illustration of this occurred in the case of the lady called " Elisa Manners," whose near relatives and friends concerned in the communications were known to myself. I give a brief account of her first communications in 960 A. On the morning after the death of her uncle, called F. in the report, she described an incident in connection with the appearance of herself to her uncle on his deathbed. I quote Dr. Hodgson's account of this (Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. p. 378. Foot-note).

The notice of his [F.'s] death was in a Boston morning paper, and I happened to see it on my way to the sitting. The first writing of the sitting came from Madame Elisa, without my expecting it. She wrote clearly and strongly, explaining that F. was there with her, but unable to speak directly, that she wished to give me an account of how she had helped F. to reach her. She said that she had been present at his death-bed, and had spoken to him, and she repeated what she had said, an unusual form of expression, and indicated that he had heard and recognised her. This was confirmed in detail in the only way possible at that time, by a very intimate friend of Madame Elisa and myself, and also of the nearest surviving relative of F. I showed my friend the account of the sitting, and to this friend, a day or two later, the relative, who was present at the death-bed, stated spontaneously that F. when dying said that he saw Madame Elisa who was speaking to him, and he repeated what she was saying. The expression so repeated, which the relative quoted to my friend, was that which I had received from Madame Elisa through Mrs. Piper's trance, when the death-bed incident was of course entirely unknown to me.

Rare are the " Peak in Darien " cases (see section 718), but cases like this are rarer still.

961. As will be seen from the account of Elisa Manners in 960 A, some attempt was made in her case to speak and write Italian. In the case which follows there was an attempt to write Hawaiian. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. p. 337.)

This was at a sitting arranged for by Mrs. Howard in October 1893. Mrs. Howard made some notes at the time from which the report was prepared, and I obtained some additional information later from the sitter, Mr. L. Vernon Briggs. The original writing was apparently lost, and Mr. Briggs never had the opportunity of studying it after the sitting. The communication purported to come from a Honolulu boy named Kalua, who became much attached to Mr. Briggs during a six months' stay of Mr. Briggs in Honolulu in 1881, and who followed Mr. Briggs to Boston under somewhat romantic circumstances in 1883. He was soon sent back to his native island, but again returned to Boston, where he was shot in 1886, in a sailor's Bethel, whether inten-

962] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 245

tionally or not was unknown. There was some suspicion against a Swede, who was imprisoned, but there was no evidence against him, and he was finally discharged. The Swede said that Kalua had accidentally shot himself with a revolver, and eventually confessed that after the accident he had himself hidden the revolver behind a flue, where, after taking part of the chimney down, it was found. Mr. Briggs had taken a handkerchief belonging to Kalua to the sitting. Kalua had been shot through the heart, and there was some confusion apparently about the locality of the suffering, "stomach" and "side" being mentioned, under what appeared to be the direct control of the voice by " Kalua," and Mr. Briggs asked if it was Kalua. Phinuit then spoke for " Kalua," who said that he did not kill himself, that he had been gambling with the other man who disputed with him and shot him, but did not mean to, and who threw the revolver "into the hot box where the pepples are" (meaning "the furnace" and the "coals"), and hid his purse under the steps where he was killed. " Kalua " also said there was shrubbery near it. The cellar of the house was examined, but no purse was found, and there was no shrubbery in the cellar. " Kalua " tried to write Hawaiian, but the only " ordinary " words deciphered were "lei " (meaning wreaths, which he made daily for Mr. Briggs) which was written clearly and frequently, and an attempt at " aloha " — greeting. Phinuit tried to get the answer to the question where Kalua's father was, but could only succeed in getting "Hiram." But the writing gave the answer " Hawaiin Islands." In reply to the question which one, the answer in writing was Kawai, but Phinuit said Tawai. The word is spelt Kawai, but is pronounced Tawai by the natives of the island itself and in the island where Kalua was born. The natives of the other islands call it Kawai.

962. Not least important as regards the question of identity are some of the communications purporting to come from young children. I give in 962 A a synopsis of the chief points in connection with the twin children, Margaret and Ruthie, of Dr. A. B. Thaw, and quote here an account of communications coming from the child of Mrs. Katherine Paine Sutton. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 386-9.)

In the two sittings which Mrs. Sutton had in December 1893 (p. 484)^ she had articles which had been used by her recently deceased little girl Katherine. One incident that was characteristic in the case of Ruthie, the patting of her father's face, was repeated in the case of Katherine when it had no special significance. There were only three points that might be described as in part common to the two children, Ruthie and Katherine. Katherine had "lovely curls," mentioned by Phinuit, and also called for the "tick-tick," but Phinuit added correctly that she called it " the clock," and the word babee was given correctly, as Ruthie also used to pronounce it. Apparently the only incorrect statement purporting to come from the child was that she called a lady (Mrs. C., a friend of Mrs. Sutton, who purported to be present in "spirit," bringing the child, and whose Christian name and surname were given correctly by Phinuit) Auntie. The lady was not her aunt. The statements made came through Phinuit Concerning a silver medal it was said that she wanted to bite it, and concerning a string of buttons that she wanted to put them in her mouth, both correct. Phinuit said that she had no sore throat any more, and 1 The references in this passage are to the pages of Dr. Hodgson's Report.

that she kept showing him her tongue. Katherine living had sore throat and her tongue was paralysed. She gave correctly the name by which she called herself, Kakie, the name Dodo by which she called her brother George, the name Bagie by which she called a living sister. Margaret, and the name Eleanor, of another living sister for whom she called much in her last illness. She also asked for Dinah, this being the name of an old rag-doll. She said truly that Dodo used to march with her, " He put me way up." She wanted to go to "wide horsey" — as the living Katherine had pleaded all through her illness, and to be taken " to see the mooley-cow/' the name by which the living Katherine called the cow, which she was taken almost daily to see. She said she had "the pretty white flowers you put on me," and Phinuit described lilies of the valley, which were the flowers that had been placed in the casket (see p. 303). She said she was happy with grandma — Mrs. Sutton's mother had been dead many years — and later on wanted to send her love to her grandma and also apparently to her great grandma who was referred to as Marmie. She had a grandmother and also a great -grandmother then living, and Marmie was the name by which Mr. and Mrs. Sutton spoke of the great-grandmother, but Katherine always called her Grammie. She also referred to two songs she used to sing : " Bye-bye, O baby bye," and " Row Row, my song." This " Row Row " song was sung frequently by Katherine during her illness, and was the last sung by her when living, and she asked Mr. and Mrs. Sutton to sing it at the sitting. They sang the first four lines, and the voice — presumably still " controlled " by Phinuit in imitation of Katherine — sang with them. Phinuit then hushed the sitters, and the voice sang the remaining four lines [alone]. It is, of course, a familiar child's song . (p. 486). At the second sitting a fortnight later, the voice sang all eight lines alone, then asked Mrs. Sutton to sing it with her, as she did, and then at Mrs. Sutton's request also sang with her the other song " Bye-bye," precisely, according to Mrs. Sutton, as the living Katherine sang it. Mr. Sutton, who was present at the first sitting, did not attend the second sitting, and he was asked for immediately after this singing, which came at the beginning of the sitting. " Kakie wants papa." This was a very characteristic expression. There were indications suggesting a knowledge of what was going on in Mrs. Sutton's family. At the first sitting Katherine said she went "to see horsey" every day. The sitters had been staying in the country with Mr. Sutton's parents and had been driving frequently. Margaret, a living sister, was still there, and driving daily. Mrs. Sutton, who has had many psychical experiences herself in seeing the " apparitions " of " deceased " persons (see p. 484) had "seen Kakie" during that visit to Mr. Sutton's parents. At the second sitting Katherine said that she saw Bagie with grandma, and that she played with Eleanor every day and liked the little bed. A lady had recently lent Eleanor a doll's bed, but Mrs. Sutton had not associated this with Kakie. There were incidents at both sittings which showed associations that seemed to be in the mind of the child, which did not awaken the corresponding associations in the minds of the sitters even when the contemporary notes to the sittings were made. Thus in the first sitting she asked for " horsey." Mrs. Sutton gave a little toy horse with which the child had played during her illness. But the child said " big horsey, not this little one," and Mrs. Sutton surmised that she referred to another toy cart-horse that she used to like. At the second sitting came " Kakie wants the horse," and the little horse was again given.

962] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 247

" No, that is not the one. The big horse — so big. [Phinuit shows how large.] Eleanor's horse. Eleanor used to put it in Kakie's lap. She loved that horsey."

These additional particulars, which were true, then reminded Mrs. Sutton of the horse referred to, which was packed away in another city, and which had not occurred to the mind of Mrs. Sutton in connection with Kakie. Similarly at the first sitting she asked two or three times for " the little book." The sitter noted that she liked a linen picture-book. But the remarks made at her second sitting suggest that the little book in the child's mind was not this one. " Kakie wants the little bit of a book mamma read by her bedside, with the pretty bright things hanging from it — mamma put it in her hands — the last thing she remembers." Mrs. Sutton states that this was a little prayer-book with a cross and other symbols in silver attached to ribbons for marking the places, and that it was sent to her by a friend after Kakie had ceased to know any one except perhaps for a passing moment. Mrs. Sutton read it when Kakie seemed unconscious, and after Kakie's death l placed it in her hands to prevent the blood settling in the nails. She adds later that Mrs. Piper's hands, when the book was asked for at the sitting, were put into the same position as Kakie's.

Another book was mentioned at the second sitting which apparently was the one Mrs. Sutton thought of at the first sitting. " Kakie wants the book with red letters and pictures of animals." Correct description.

At this second sitting also Katherine again apparently referred to Mrs. C., — who was not a relative, — as Auntie, and to her great-grandmother as Marmie. At this sitting Mrs. Sutton twice saw the " apparition " of Kakie (and she also saw the figure of Dr. Clarke, another communicator, just as Phinuit said : " Here is an old gentleman who wants to speak to you, Dr. Clarke." See p. 484). On one of these occasions Mrs. Sutton " saw her for a moment standing at the table trying to reach a spool " of silk, and at the same moment Phinuit reached for it, saying : " She wants that, she and Eleanor used to play with. She calls it Eleanor's." This was all true, but the sitter " had not connected it with Eleanor in her thoughts." Another incident I quote here just as it is given in the detailed report of the sitting.

[Kakie asks for her ball. I gave it to Phinuit, who tries to find what she wants to do with it.]

" Bite it ? Toss it ? Roll it ? Throw it ? "

[No, she wants a string. Mrs. H. gave him a string. He tries to tie it around the ball.] [A little red wooden ball with a hole through it. The ball had a string through it when she used to play with it.]

" No, that is not right— through it."

" There, there, be a good little girl. Don't cry. Don't be impatient. You want your mamma to see how you do it, so she will know it is you, don't you, dear ? Old man will do it for her."

[He put the string through, held it up, and hit it with the finger, making it swing.]

" That is it, is it not, darling? Nice little girl as ever was."

[While she was sick it was her great delight to have me hold the string and let her hit the little red ball with her finger or spoon. She made the motions as if doing it, after she became unconscious.]

1 If the human personality survives death, it may be a difficult question to decide in individual cases precisely when the consciousness is finally withdrawn from the body.

963. There are numerous incidents in connection with Mrs. Piper's trances, which indicate not only that articles which have been worn by deceased persons may facilitate communications from such persons, but that articles which have been worn by persons still living may afford clues to long past events ; but how these objects afford aid in the acquisition of knowledge of the past events is still entirely obscure. (See, e.g., Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 460 ; vol. viii. pp. 15-27.) This faculty of what I have called retrocognitive telaesthesia, is, as we have seen, sometimes manifested in cases where there is no reason to ascribe it to any extraneous spirit. (See 572, 572 A, 572 B.)

The alleged controlling spirits sometimes seem to possess a supernormal knowledge of the present bodily state of living persons, with the occasional power of foretelling organic changes, including death, or of foreseeing the future surroundings of a living person. Here, again, we have had instances of similar supernormal knowledge on the part of the subliminal self (see 565 A, 573 F). Some of the most specific instances of predictions of deaths given through Mrs. Piper are quoted in 963 A. In one of these cases a death was predicted to occur " soon," and it occurred a little more than a year later. But in several other cases where deaths were predicted to occur " soon " or " before very long," or where similar expressions were used, the time elapsing before the death has extended from about two to not less than six years. There is little evidence of any true prevision of other events than death through Mrs. Piper's trance. In some cases, events seem to have been partially foreseen, but the predictions made were not completely fulfilled. (See Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 124, and compare 425 C.)

Setting aside the instances explicable by some telepathic or telaesthetic inference, the discarnate spirits claim occasionally to see specific future scenes in connection with particular persons — of the origin of which scenes they seem unable to offer any explanation. They do not profess usually to be aware beforehand of the precise time of death of a dying person, — except perhaps in cases where the death is very near, — when it is claimed that the approaching death becomes known to the incarnate spirit (not necessarily to the supraliminal self) as well as to the discarnate spirit of some near relative, but the real source of the knowledge remains, of course, obscure.1

1 On this point see 425 A, 425 B, 425 E, 717, 717 B, 852 A, 865 A (name of distant dying person written), 874 A and 927 B. Compare the case of " Elisa Manners" in section 960, the cases of Mrs. Alger and Mrs. O'Gorman in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 293-95, ancl tne case from Mrs. Meredith in Journal S.P.R., vol. x. p. 136. In the cases of Mrs. Alger and Mrs. O'Gorman the prediction of death seems to have emanated from the incarnate spirit of the person who died, and the precise date of the death was given, in the first case four days beforehand — though the evidence on this point is somewhat doubtful — and in the second case a week beforehand. In the case quoted in 874 A, the precise date of death was announced forty days beforehand by the tilts of a table, the communication purporting to come from a discarnate spirit.

965] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 249

964. With regard to the last of the three periods of Mrs. Piper's trance-history to which I referred in section 954, the only detailed published accounts are contained in Professor Hyslop's report of his sittings in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xvi. But neither his records nor the manuscript records which I have seen contain any proof of the personal identity of the alleged spirits called " Imperator," " Doctor," " Rector," &c., or any proof of the identity of these intelligences with those claimed by Mr. Moses. (See 945, 950, and Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 408-9.) Whether any such proof will be forthcoming in the future remains to be seen, — or indeed, whether proof or disproof for us at present is even possible.

965. The accounts here quoted are perhaps sufficient to illustrate that theory of possession which seems especially to apply to the case of Mrs. Piper, — according to which her bodily organism is controlled by discarnate spirits who attempt to prove their identity by reproducing recollections of their earthly lives.1

In the case of Mr. Moses the control of the mind or body by discarnate spirits seemed to vary in degree at different times, and the medium's own preconceptions seemed to form an important factor in the communications he received, — and it is obvious that in Mrs. Piper's case also the control must be limited by the idiosyncrasies of the medium. But we must continually bear in mind the impossibility of distinguishing the different elements that may enter into so complex a phenomenon. I have spoken of parallel series of manifestations indicating on the one hand the powers of the subliminal self, which culminate in ecstasy, and on the other the agency of discarnate spirits, leading on to possession. But the phenomena are not, in fact, so simply arranged. It seems probable that when a spirit can control a sensitive's organism, the sensitive's own subliminal self may be able to do the same. The transparency which renders the one possession possible facilitates also the other. This may be one reason for the admixture seen in most trance utterances, — of elements which come from the sensitive's own mind with elements inspired from without. To this source of confusion must be added the influence of the sensitive's supraliminal self also, whose habits of thought and turns of speech must needs appear whenever use is made of the brain-centres which that supraliminal self habitually controls. Further, we cannot draw a clear line between the influence of the organism itself, — as already moulded by its own indwelling spirit, — and the continuing influence of that spirit, not altogether separated from the organism. That is to say, the sensitive's own previous ideas may go on developing themselves during

1 Some ingenious experiments designed to test how living persons can be identified on somewhat similar evidence were carried out by Professor Hyslop, as described in his report, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xvi. pp. 537-623. In these experiments, series of telegraphic messages were sent from one person to another, one person knowing who the other was, but not vice versd.

the trance, which may thus be incomplete. The result may be a kind of mixed telepathy between the sitter, the sensitive's spirit, and the extraneous spirit. I believe that sometimes during one and the same access of trance all these elements are in turn apparent ; and a long familiarity with the sensitive will be needed if we would disentangle the intermingled threads. In the case of Mrs. Piper it may be supposeo^ that in the earliest stages of her trance-history she was not completely controlled by discarnate spirits, but that her subliminal serf was used as an intermediary, — as a hypnotised subject, so to say, following the suggestions of discarnate spirits ; that in the next stage the control by discarnate spirits was of the more direct and complete kind which I have specially called possession ; and that in her last period she has reverted once more to the earlier stage where her subliminal self, or its influence, is not completely excluded.

Whether this be so or not, the apparent distinction between the control by her own subliminal self and that by the alleged spirits is still not less marked than in the early stages. Generally it is even more noticeable, owing to the usual brief intervals of ecstasy (after the control by the discarnate spirit has ceased), when her own spirit or subliminal self resumes control, and appears to see and occasionally to describe scenes in the spiritual world, sometimes transmitting messages of evidential value ; of all which she retains no recollection on her return to the normal state.

•There is much additional evidence yet to be published that has come through Mrs. Piper during the last few years in support of the claim that recently deceased persons are communicating, besides instances of failures and confusion which we must doubtless continue to expect under the conditions apparently involved in the communications. It seems from our experience thus far that the most valuable evidence we can hope to obtain of personal identity is likely to come from spirits who have recently passed over with all their inexperience of that other world, but it may be that these are aided in their task by more remote spirits whose identity we can neither prove nor disprove. It is perhaps more reasonable to suppose that there is such supervision — if we are in actual communication with a spiritual world at all — than to think that the great spirits of the past take no abiding interest in the communication of that spiritual world with ours.

966. We must now try to form some more definite idea — based not on preconceived theories but on our actual observation of trances — of the processes of possession ; though it is hardly necessary to say that the most adequate conception that we can reach at present must be restricted and distorted by the limitations of our own material existence, and can only be expressed by the help of crude analogies.

I may say at the outset that this singular union between two widely different human beings — this possession of the organism — has in it nothing whatever that is weird or alarming. In Mrs. Piper's case the processes of entering and leaving the trance, which used to be accom-

987] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 251

panied, in Professor James' words, by " a good deal of respiratory disturbance and muscular twitching," are now as tranquil as the acts of going to sleep and awaking; and no result of the trance upon her waking state is evident, except a passing fatigue if the trance has been too far prolonged, or. on the other hand, a state of vague diffused happiness such as sometimes follows the awaking from a pleasant dream. There has been no harmful influence on health — possibly a beneficial influence. At any rate, after serious injury from a sleigh accident, and consequent operations, Mrs. Piper is now " a thoroughly healthy woman." In character she has always belonged to a quiet domestic New England type, much occupied with her household and her children.1 In Dr. Hodgson's view, her control by intelligences above her own has increased her stability and serenity. If we look, in fact, at the flesh-andblood side of this strange converse, we seem to watch a process of natural evolution opening upon us with unexpected ease ; so that our main duty is carefully to search for and train such other favoured individuals as already show this form of capacity — always latent, perhaps, and now gradually emergent in the human race. Die Geisterwelt ist nicht verschlossen; these sensitives have but to sink into a deep recueillement, a guarded slumber, and that gate stands manifestly ajar. It is rather on the other side of the gulf that the difficulties, the perplexities, come thick and fast.

967. Let us try to realise what kind of feat it is which we are expecting the disembodied spirit to achieve. Such language, I know, again suggests the medicine-man's wigwam rather than the study of the white philosopher. Yet can we feel sure that the process in our own minds which has (as we think) refined and spiritualised man's early conceptions of an unseen world has been based upon any observed facts ?

In dealing with matters which lie outside human experience, our only clue is some attempt at continuity with what we already know. We cannot, for instance, form independently a reliable conception of life in an unseen world. That conception has never yet been fairly faced from the standpoint of our modern ideas of continuity, conservation, evolution. The main notions that have been framed of such survival have been framed first by savages and then by a priori philosophers. To the man of science the question has never yet assumed enough of actuality to induce him to consider it with scientific care. He has contented himself, like the mass of mankind, with some traditional theory, some emotional preference for some such picture as seems to him satisfying and exalted. Yet he knows well that this subjective principle of choice has led in history to the acceptance of many a dogma which to more civilised perceptions seems in the last degree blasphemous and cruel.

The savage, I say, made his own picture first. And he at any rate

1 She was married in 1881 and has two daughters, one seventeen, the other eighteen years old.

dimly felt after a principle of continuity; although he applied it in crudest fashion. Yet the happy hunting-ground and the faithful dog were conceptions not more arbitrary and unscientific than that eternal and unimaginable worship in vacua which more accredited teachers have proclaimed. And, passing on to modern philosophic conceptions, one may say that where the savage assumed too little difference between the material and the spiritual world the philosopher has assumed too much. He has regarded the gulf as too unbridgeable ; he has taken for granted too clean a sweep of earthly modes of thought. Trying to shake off time, space, and definite form, he has attempted to transport himself too magically to what may be in reality an immensely distant goal.

968. Have we new philosophical conceptions solid enough to withstand the impact of even a small mass of actual evidence ? Have our notions of the dignified and undignified in nature — the steady, circular motion of the planets, for instance, as opposed to the irregular and elliptical — guided us in the discovery of truth ? Would not Aristotle, divinising the fixed stars by reason of their very remoteness, have thought it undignified to suppose them compacted of the same elements as the stones under his feet ? May not disembodied souls, like stars, be of a make rather closer to our own than we have been wont to imagine ?

What, then, is to be our conception of identity prolonged beyond the tomb? In earth-life the actual body, in itself but a subordinate element in our thought of our friend, did yet by its physical continuity override as a symbol of identity all lapses of memory, all changes of the character within. Yet it was memory and character, — the stored impressions upon which he reacted, and his specific mode of reaction, — which made our veritable friend. How much of memory, how much of character, must he preserve for our recognition ?

Do we ask that either he or we should remember always, or should remember all? Do we ask that his memory should be expanded into omniscience and his character elevated into divinity? And, whatever heights he may attain, do we demand that he should reveal to us? Are the limitations of our material world no barrier to him?

969. It is safest to fall back for the present upon the few points which these communications do seem to indicate. The spirit, then, is holding converse with a living man, located in a certain place at a certain moment, and animated by certain thoughts and emotions. The spirit (to which I must give a neuter pronoun for greater clearness) in some cases can find and follow the man as it pleases. It is therefore in some way cognizant of space, although not conditioned by space. Its mastery of space may perhaps bear somewhat the same relation to our eyesight as our eyesight bears to the gropings of the blind. Similarly, the spirit appears to be partly cognizant of our time, although not wholly conditioned thereby. It is apt to see as present both certain things which appear to us as past and certain things which appear to us as future.

970] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 253

Once more, the spirit is at least partly conscious of the thought and emotions of its earthly friend, so far as directed towards itself; and this not only when the friend is in the presence of the sensitive, but also (as G. P. has repeatedly shown) when the friend is at home and living his ordinary life.

Lastly, it seems as though the spirit had some occasional glimpses of material fact upon the earth (as the contents of drawers and the like), not manifestly proceeding through any living mind. I do not, however, recall any clear evidence of a spirit's perception of material facts which provably have never been known to any incarnate mind whatever.

970. Accepting this, then, for argument's sake, as the normal condition of a spirit in reference to human things, what process must it attempt if it wishes to communicate with living men? That it will wish to communicate seems probable enough, if it retains not only memory of the loves of earth, but actual fresh consciousness of loving emotion directed towards it after death.

Seeking then for some open avenue, it discerns something which corresponds (in G. P.'s phrase) to a light — a glimmer of translucency in the confused darkness of our material world. This "light" indicates a sensitive— a human organism so constituted that a spirit can temporarily inform or control it, not necessarily interrupting the stream of the sensitive's ordinary consciousness ; perhaps using a hand only, or perhaps, as in Mrs. Piper's case, using voice as well as hand, and occupying all the sensitive's channels of self-manifestation. The difficulties which must be inherent in such an act of control are thus described by Dr. Hodgson : —

" If, indeed, each one of us is a ' spirit ' that survives the death of the fleshly organism, there are certain suppositions that I think we may not unreasonably make concerning the ability of the discarnate * spirit ' to communicate with those yet incarnate. Even under the best of conditions for communication — which I am supposing for the nonce to be possible —it may well be that the aptitude for communicating clearly may be as rare as the gifts that make a great artist, or a great mathematician, or a great philosopher. Again, it may well be that, owing to the change connected with death itself, the « spirit ' may at first be much confused, and such confusion may last for a long time; and even after the ' spirit ' has become accustomed to its new environment, it is not an unreasonable supposition that if it came into some such relation to another living human organism as it once maintained with its own former organism, it would find itself confused by that relation. The state might be like that of awakening from a prolonged period of unconciousness into strange surroundings. If my own ordinary body could be preserved in its present state, and I could absent myself from it for days or months or years, and continue my existence under another set of conditions altogether, and if I could then return to my own body, it might well be that I should be very

confused and incoherent at first in my manifestations by means of it. How much more would this be the case were I to return to another human body. I might be troubled with various forms of aphasia and agraphia, might be particularly liable to failures of inhibition, might find the conditions oppressive and exhausting, and my state of mind would probably be of an automatic and dreamlike character. Now, the communicators through Mrs. Piper's trance exhibit precisely the kind of confusion and incoherence which it seems to me we have some reason a priori to expect if they are actually what they claim to be."

971. At the outset of this chapter I compared the phenomena of possession with those of alternating personalities, of dreams, and of somnambulism. Now it seems probable that the thesis of multiplex personality — namely, that no known current of man's consciousness exhausts his whole consciousness, and no known self-manifestation expresses man's whole potential being — may hold good both for embodied and for unembodied men, and this would lead us to expect that the manifestations of the departed, — through the sensory automatisms dealt with in Chapter VII., and the motor automatisms considered in Chapter VIIL, up to the completer form of possession illustrated in the present chapter, — would resemble those fugitive and unstable communications between widely different strata of personality of which embodied minds offer us examples. G. P. himself appears to be well aware of the dreamlike character of the communications, which, indeed, his own style often exemplifies. Thus he wrote on February i5th, 1894 : —

" Remember we share and always shall have our friends in the dreamlife, i.e. your life so to speak, which will attract us for ever and ever, and so long as we have any friends sleeping in the material world ; you to us are more like as we understand sleep, you look shut up as one in prison, and in order for us to get into communication with you, we have to enter into your sphere, as one like yourself, asleep. This is just why we make mistakes, as you call them, or get confused and muddled."

972. Yet even this very difficulty and fragmentariness of communication ought in the end to be for us full of an instruction of its own. We are here actually witnessing the central mystery of human life, unrolling itself under novel conditions, and open to closer observation than ever before. We are seeing a mind use a brain. The human brain is in its last analysis an arrangement of matter expressly adapted to being acted upon by a spirit ; but so long as the accustomed spirit acts upon it the working is generally too smooth to allow us a glimpse of the mechanism. Now, however, we can watch an unaccustomed spirit, new to the instrument, installing itself and feeling its way. The lessons thus learnt are likely to be more penetrating than any which mere morbid interruptions of the accustomed spirit's work can teach us. In aphasia, for instance, we can watch with instruction special difficulties of utterance, supervening on special injuries to the brain. But in possession we perceive

973] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 255

the controlling spirit actually engaged in overcoming somewhat similar difficulties — writing or uttering the wrong word, and then getting hold of the right one — and sometimes even finding power to explain to us something of the minute verbal mechanism (so to term it) through whose blocking or dislocation the mistake has arisen.

We may hope, indeed, that as our investigations proceed, and as we on this side of the fateful gulf, and the discarnate spirits on the other, learn more of the conditions necessary for perfect control of the brain and nervous system of intermediaries, — the communications will grow fuller and more coherent, and reach a higher level of unitary consciousness. Many the difficulties may be, but is there to be no difficulty in linking flesh with spirit — in opening to man, from his prisoning planet, a first glimpse into cosmic things? If in such speech as this there be any reality, it is not stumblings or stammerings that should stop us. Nay, already on certain occasions there has been no stumble or stammer — when some experienced communicator has poured out an intimate message under strong emotion. Such, for instance, was a private message written by G. P. to " Mr. Howard," who is, by the way, a well-known and able man of professorial status, and who was a definite disbeliever in a future life until G. P. convinced him. The " holding turn " to that conviction was given by the message which Dr. Hodgson thus describes. It was written in response to a request for some incident, which certainly no one save G. P. and Mr. Howard, his most intimate elder friend and adviser, could possibly have known.

" The transcription here of the words written by G. P. conveys, of course, no proper impression of the actual circumstances. The inert mass of the upper part of Mrs. Piper's body turned away from the right arm, and sagging down, as it were, limp and lifeless over Mrs. Howard's shoulder, but the right arm, and especially hand, mobile, intelligent, deprecatory, then impatient and fierce in the persistence of the writing which followed, which contains too much of the personal element in G. P.'s life to be reproduced here. Several statements were read by me, and assented to by Mr. Howard, and then was written  private,' and the hand gently pushed me away. I retired to the other side of the room, and Mr. Howard took my place close to the hand where he could read the writing. He did not, of course, read it aloud, and it was too private for my perusal. The hand, as it reached the end of each sheet, tore it off from the block-book, and thrust it wildly at Mr. Howard, and then continued writing. The circumstances narrated, Mr. Howard informed me, contained precisely the kind of test for which he had asked, and he said that he was  perfectly satisfied — perfectly.' " (Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii., p. 322.)

973. In this way we may explain certain facts as to the mode of communication which are likely to be at first misinterpreted, and to create an impression of pain or strangeness where, in my view, there is nothing

beyond wholesome effort in the normal course of evolution among both incarnate and discarnate men. One touch of pathos, indeed — though not of tragedy — stands out to my recollection from the trances which I have watched — a kind of savage and immemorial emotion which takes one back to many an old-world legend, and to the Odyssey of Homer above all. Odysseus, at the entrance of the under-world, poured the blood of victims into a trench, that the dim spirits of the dead might drink of it and have force to speak and hear. But it was to learn from Teiresias that he came, and until he had spoken with Teiresias he suffered none of the thronging spirits to draw anigh. There sat he— as Polygnotus' picture showed him — on a heap of stones in the grey light beside the trench, his drawn sword laid betwixt him and his mother's soul ; since, " not even thus, tho' sick at heart, would I suffer her to come nigh the blood, ere I had heard the tale Teiresias had to tell."

' Ov8' Q)S ftaV TTpOTfpTJV, ITVKIVOV TTfp

aa-ffov i/iev irplv Tetpeo-iao

Even in such fashion, through Mrs. Piper's trances, the thronging multitude of the departed press to the glimpse of light. Eager, but untrained, they interject their uncomprehended cries ; vainly they call the names which no man answers ; like birds that have beaten against a lighthouse, they pass in disappointment away. At first this confusion gravely interfered with coherent messages, but through the second and third stages of Mrs. Piper's trances, under the watchful care apparently of supervising spirits, it has tended more and more to disappear.

All this must needs be so ; yet I, at least, had not realised beforehand that the pressure from that side was likely to be more urgent than from this. Naturally ; since often on this side something of inevitable doubt — nay, of shuddering prejudice and causeless fear — curdles the stream of love ; while for them the imperishable affection flows on unchecked and full. They yearn to tell of their bliss, to promise their welcome at the destined hour. A needless scruple, indeed, which dreads to call or to constrain them ! We can bind them by no bonds but of love ; they are more ready to hear than we to pray ; of their own act and grace they visit our spirits in prison.

974. We must now remember that this series of incidents does not stand alone. This case of Mrs. Piper is, indeed, one of the most instructive in our collection, on account of its length and complexity and the care with which it has been observed. But it is led up to by all our previous evidences, and I will here briefly state what facts they are which our recorded apparitions, intimations, messages of the departing and the departed, have, to my mind, actually proved.

(a) In the first place, they prove survival pure and simple ; the persistence of the spirit's life as a structural law of the universe ; the inalienable heritage of each several soul.

975] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 257

(b) In the second place, they prove that between the spiritual and the material worlds an avenue of communication does in fact exist; that which we call the despatch and the receipt of telepathic messages, or the utterance and the answer of prayer and supplication. (See p. 309.)

(c} In the third place, they prove that the surviving spirit retains, at least in some measure, the memories and the loves of earth. Without this persistence of love and memory should we be in truth the same ? To what extent has any philosophy or any revelation assured us hereof till now?

The above points, I think, are certain, if the apparitions and messages proceed in reality from the sources which they claim. On a lower evidential level comes the thesis drawn from the contents of the longer messages, which contents may of course be influenced in unknown degree by the expectation of the recipients or by some such infusion of dreamlike matter as I have already mentioned. That thesis is as follows ; I offer it for what it may be worth : Every element of individual wisdom, virtue, love, develops in infinite evolution toward an ever-highering hope ; toward " Him who is at once thine innermost Self, and thine ever unattainable Desire."

For my own part, the alleged revelation in its general character, so far as yet coherent, seems to me so good and right that I mistrust it on that very ground, fearing lest it be but the reflection of the momentary attitude of the petty minds of men. Many of the messages, no doubt, have been delivered to persons whose own preconceptions were at least partly hostile to the teaching given. But this proves little ; for there may be a kind of sub-conscious consensus of opinion — a Zeit-Geist — in all contemporary minds beneath their superficial differences of Church or philosophical school. We need more tests and more corroborations, a clearer and more continuous control of the channels of utterance, before we can transmit with confidence anything beyond the barest provisional sketch of that Orbis Ignotus. Enough, surely, and more than man had dared to hope, if now a channel of communication is veritably opened, and if the first message is one of love. And I believe that whatever of new revelation may thus be coming to us comes not to destroy but to fulfil. Is there not promise of some fulfilment — of some synthesis of those partial glimpses of the past — even in the few bald phrases in which I have adumbrated what we are beginning to know? .If we define Religion as "man's normal subjective response to the sum of known cosmic phenomena, taken as an intelligible whole," how different will that response become when we know for certain that no love can die ; when we discern the bewildering Sum of Things — beyond all bounds of sect or system, strepitumque Acherontis avari — broadening and heightening into a moral Cosmos such as our race could scarcely even conceive till now !

975. There is, however, one feeling which has done much to deter inquiry in these directions. To many minds there seems to be a want of VOL. IT. R

dignity in this mode of acquiring knowledge of an unseen world. It is felt that even as there is something grand and noble in the object, there ought to be something correspondingly exalted in the means employed. This has, it is thought, been the case with all former revelations which have made any serious claim on the attention of mankind. Religions have been supported by tradition, by miracle, by the deep personal emotion which they have been able to generate. There is something paltry or even repugnant in the notion of establishing a new faith upon a series of experiments dealing mainly with certain kinds of physical sensibility which seem at best to be scattered at random among mankind.

There is real prima facie force in such an objection. It is not fanciful to demand something of manifest congruity between means and end; not fanciful, at any rate, to distrust any powers merely of the flesh as explaining to us the powers of the spirit.

And yet, on a wider view, we shall perceive that what is missing in this new inquiry lies merely in such elements of impressiveness as befit the mere childhood of the world ; while, on the other hand, we are gaining for the quest of spiritual truth that truer dignity which Science has given to man's scattered knowledge ; — the dignity of universal cogency and of unarrested progressiveness. Science, as we know, will not rest with complacency in presence of the exceptional, the catastrophic, the miraculous. Such qualities constitute for her not a claim to reverence but a challenge to explanation. She finds a truer grandeur in the colligation of startling phenomena under some comprehensive generalisation. Her highest ideal is cosmic law ; — and she begins to suspect that any law which is truly cosmic is also in some sense evolutionary.

Now I repeat, — and in the present stage of human thought it can scarcely be repeated too often, — that in the law of telepathy, developing into the law of spiritual intercommunication between incarnate and discarnate spirits, we see dimly adumbrated before our eyes the highest law with which our human science can conceivably have to deal. The discovery of telepathy opens before us a potential communication between all life.

And if, as our present evidence indicates, this telepathic intercourse can subsist between embodied and disembodied souls, that law must needs lie at the very centre of cosmic evolution. It will be evolutionary, as depending on a faculty now in actual course of development. It will be cosmic ; for it may — it almost must — by analogy subsist not on this planet only, but wherever in the universe discarnate and incarnate spirits may be intermingled or juxtaposed.

This surely is a generalisation as vast, as impressive, as the human mind can entertain. Tradition, miracle, personal emotion; — which of these ancient buttresses is any longer needed for the firmer, the scientific faith ? And yet, if it be a question of tradition, what single religion can unite and harmonise oecumenical tradition like this old-new creed? The

976] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 259

legendary lore of all countries,— the sacred books of all religions, — the Bible itself included, — are full of psychical phenomena which thus only are made coherent and intelligible. If there be question of miracle, what sacred history can show such strange apparent contraventions of the physical order, — such victories over the grossness of matter, — as our observations involve? — or (better still) can reduce all these so convincingly under the realm of Higher Law? While as for personal emotion; — what can there be at once more intimate and more exalting than the waking reality of converse with beloved and enfranchised souls? So shall a man feel the ancient fellow- labour deepened, the old kinship closer still ; the earthly passion sealed and hallowed by the irreversible judgment of the Blest.

976. Among the cases of trance discussed in this chapter, we have found intimately interwoven with the phenomena of possession many instances of its correlative, — ecstasy. Mrs. Piper's fragmentary utterances and visions during her passage from trance to waking life, — utterances and visions that fade away and leave no remembrance in her waking self; Moses' occasional visions, his journeys in the " spirit world " which he recorded on returning to his ordinary consciousness ; Home's entrancement and converse with the various controls whose messages he gave ; — all these suggest actual excursions of the incarnate spirit from its organism. The theoretical importance of these spiritual excursions is, of course, very great. It is, indeed, so great that most men will hesitate to accept a thesis which carries us straight into the inmost sanctuary of mysticism ; which preaches " a precursory entrance into the most holy place, as by divine transportation."

Yet I think that this belief, although extreme, is not, at the point to which our evidence has carried us, in any real way improbable. To put the matter briefly, if a spirit from outside can enter the organism, the spirit from inside can go out, can change its centre of perception and action, in a way less complete and irrevocable than the change of death. Ecstasy would thus be simply the complementary or correlative aspect of spirit-control. Such a change need not be a spatial change, any more than there need be any spatial change for the spirit which invades the deserted organism. Nay, further : if the incarnate spirit can in this manner change its centre of perception in response (so to say) to a iiscarnate spirit's invasion of the organism, there is no obvious reason vhy it should not do so on other occasions as well. We are already amiliar with " travelling clairvoyance," a spirit's change of centre of perception among the scenes of the material world. May there not be in extension of travelling clairvoyance to the spiritual world? a sponaneous transfer of the centre of perception into that region from /hence discarnate spirits seem now to be able, on their side, to comnunicate with growing freedom?

The conception of ecstasy — at once in its most literal and in its most lofty sense — has thus developed itself, almost insensibly, from several concurrent lines of actual modern evidence. It must still, of course, be long before we can at all adequately separate, — I can hardly say the objective from the subjective element in the experience, for we have got beyond the region where the meaning of those words is clear, — but the element in the experience which is recognised and responded to by spirits other than the ecstatic's, from the element which belongs to his own spirit alone.

In the meantime, however, the fact that this kind of communion of ecstasy has been, in preliminary fashion, rendered probable is of the highest importance for our whole inquiry. We thus come directly into relation with the highest form which the various religions known to men have assumed in the past.

977. It is hardly a paradox to say that the evidence for ecstasy is stronger than the evidence for any other religious belief. Of all the subjective experiences of religion, ecstasy is that which has been most urgently, perhaps to the psychologist most convincingly, asserted ; and it is not confined to any one religion. From a psychological point of view, one main indication of the importance of a subjective phenomenon found in religious experience will be the fact that it is common to all religions. I doubt whether there is any phenomenon, except ecstasy, of which this can be said. From the medicine-man of the lowest savages up to St. John, St. Peter, St. Paul, with Buddha and Mahomet on the way, we find records which, though morally and intellectually much differing, are in psychological essence the same.

At all stages alike we find that the spirit is conceived as quitting the body ; or, if not quitting it, at least as greatly expanding its range of perception in some state resembling trance. Observe, moreover, that on this view all genuine recorded forms of ecstasy are akin, and all of them represent a real fact.

We thus show continuity and reality among phenomena which have seldom been either correlated with each other or even intelligibly conceived I in separation. With our new insight we may correlate the highest and the lowest ecstatic phenomena with no injury whatever to the highest. The shaman, the medicine-man — when he is not a mere impostor — enters as truly into the spiritual world as St. Peter or St. Paul. Only he enters a different region thereof; a confused and darkened picture terrifies instead of exalting him. For us, however, the very fact that we believe in his vision gives a new reality to strengthen and aid our belief in the apostle's vision of " the seventh heaven."

" Whether in the body or out of the body," whether the seer's spirit be severed for the time from his organism or no, such inlet and introgression does occur.

It is these subjective feelings of vision or inspiration which have to;

977] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 261

many men formed the most impressive and fruitful moments of life. While not allowing an objective truth to their revelations, we shall now be prepared to admit a reality in the subjective experience. There is no special point at which we must assume a barrier interposed to the inward withdrawal and onward urgency of man.

We need not deny the transcendental ecstasy to any of the strong souls who have claimed to feel it ; — to Elijah or to Isaiah, to Plato or to Plotinus, to St. John or to St. Paul, to Buddha or Mahomet, to Virgil or Dante, to St. Theresa or to Joan of Arc, to Kant or to Swedenborg, to Wordsworth or to Tennyson. Through many ages that insight and that memory have wrought their work in many ways. The remembrance of ecstasy has inspired religions, has founded philosophies, has lifted into stainless heroism a simple girl. Yet religions and philosophies — as these have hitherto been known — are but balloon-flights which have carried separate groups up to the mountain summit, whither science at last must make her road for all men clear. It is by breach of continuity, by passing from one element to another, that they have been able to soar so high. For science, on the other hand, the continuity of the Universe is in fact its key. The task of our race in its maturity must be to rise to those same heights with that steady tramp as of legions along a Roman road which has already gathered in the earthly knowledge of earlier ages within the pomcerium of scientific law. The continuity of the universe, ! that is to say, so far as by us comprehensible, must needs be a continuity of objective, and for that very reason of symbolic manifestation. All the objective is symbolic ; our daily bread is as symbolic as the furniture of Swedenborg's heavens and hells. To our embodied souls the matter round us seems real and self-existent ; to souls emancipated it is but the sign of the degree which we have reached, and thus the highest task of science must be to link and co-ordinate the symbols appropriate to our terrene state with the symbols appropriate to the state immediately above us. Nay, one might push this truth to paradox, and maintain that of all earth's inspired spirits it has been the least divinised, the least lovable, who has opened the surest path for men. Religions have risen and die again ; philosophy, poetry, heroism, answer only indirectly the prime need of men. Plotinus, " the eagle soaring above the tomb of Plato," is lost to sight in the heavens. Conquering and to conquer, the Maid rides on through other worlds than ours. Virgil himself, " light among the vanished ages, star that gildest yet this earthly shore," sustains our spirit, as I have said, but indirectly, by filling still our fountain of purest intellectual joy. But the prosaic Swede, — his stiff mind prickly with dogma, — the opaque cell-walls of his intelligence flooded cloudily by the irradiant day, — this man as by the very limitations of his faculty, by the practical humility of a spirit trained to acquire but not to generate truth, — has awkwardly laid the corner-stone, grotesquely sketched the elevation of a temple which our remotest posterity will be

upbuilding and adorning still. For he dimly felt that man's true passage and intuition from state to state depends not upon individual ecstasy, but upon comprehensive law; while yet all law is in fact but symbol; adaptation of truth timeless and infinite to intelligences of lower or higher range.

978. In the course of this book I have several times touched on the difficult questions raised by the incidents which have been classed as retrocognitive and precognitive,1 and which seem to suggest a power yet more remote than telepathy or telesesthesia from our ordinary methods of acquiring knowledge. The consideration of the problems involved was, however, postponed to this chapter, and must now be dealt with here.

In a universe where instantaneous gravitation operates unexplained — where a world of ether coexists with a world of matter — men's minds must needs have a certain openness to other mysterious transmissions ; must be ready to conceive other invisible evironments or co-existences, and in a sense to sit loose to the conception of Space, regarded as an obstacle to communication or cognition. A similar emancipation from the limitations of Time is more difficult. We can, of course, imagine increased powers of remembering the Past, of inferring the future. But we can hardly conceive the Past revived, save in some mind which has directly observed it. And to imagine the Future as known, except by inference and contingently, to any mind whatever is to induce at once that iron collision between Free Will and " Fixed Fate, Foreknowledge absolute," from which no sparks of light have ever yet been struck. Still more unwelcome is the further view that the so-called Future actually already exists ; and that apparent time-progression is a subjective human sensation, and not inherent in the universe as that exists in an Infinite Mind.

Nor shall we in fact find it necessary to insist upon any very revolutionary line of explanation. There is one analogy which will meet

1 A more complete discussion of these phenomena, with numerous cases illustrating apparent stages in their evolution, and a description of the faculties they seem to indicate, summarised in a diagrammatic scheme, are given in my article on " Retrocognition and Precognition " in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 334-593.

For references to retrocognitive cases, see sections 572, 663, 733, 859-863, 963, also 572 A, 572 B. See also the accounts of retrocognitive scenes quoted in the record of Miss A.'s crystal visions in 625 C. For cases bearing on precognition see the case of Anna Winsor (237 A), where there were predictions concerning the course of her disease; refer to 541 F and 564 A, where the difficulty of excluding the agency of self-suggestion is considered ; compare also the cases given in 541 H and 573 F — where prognoses concerning other persons were made correctly by hypnotised subjects — and the prediction of his aunt's death given in Mr. W.'s automatic writing, in 873. See section 425 and the Appendices to that section, also 663 A, the cases in section 717 and 717 B, cases 6, 7, n, and 12 in the experiences of Lady Mabel Howard, 851 A ; also 852 A, 874 A, 927 B, and section 963 with its Appendices. There may have been something of prevision also in Professor Thoulet's case, in 930.

979] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 263

most of our evidence (though not all), and to which we must repeatedly recur as our simplest guide. As is the memory and the foresight of a child to that of a man, even such, I suggest, is the memory and the foresight of the man's supraliminal self as compared to the retrocognition and the precognition exercised by an intelligence unrestrained by sensory limits ; — whether that intelligence belong to the man's own subliminal self, or to an unembodied human spirit, or possibly to spirits higher than human. I maintain that in this thesis there is nothing incredible ; — nay, that it is the necessary corollary of belief in the existence anywhere of any extension of the powers which we habitually exercise.

If there is a transcendental world at all, there is a transcendental view of Past and Future fuller and further-reaching than the empirical ; and in that view we may ourselves to some extent participate, either directly, as being ourselves denizens all along of the transcendental world, or indirectly, as receiving intimations from spirits from whom the shadow in which our own spirits are " half lost " has melted away.

This I believe to be the central reflection to which the study of supernormal knowledge of Past and Future at present points us ; and I shall be well satisfied if the evidence should persuade the reader that in some undefined fashion we share at moments in this transcendental purview. As to the precise manner in which we share it, the difficulties are just those which meet us when, in any other group of our phenomena, we try to distinguish between the activity of the automatist's own spirit, and of other spirits, embodied or unembodied, and perhaps also of a World-Soul or of Intelligences finite, but above anthropomorphic personification.

979. The general characteristic of these occurrences is to show us fragments of knowledge coming to us in obscure and often symbolical ways, and extending over a wider tract of time than any faculty known to us can be stretched to cover. On the one side there is retrocognition, or knowledge of the past, extending back beyond the reach of our ordinary memory; on the other side there is precognition, or knowledge of the future, extending onwards beyond the scope of our ordinary inference.

In each direction, indeed, there are certain landmarks ; the regression and the progression alike seem to develop gradually, and to follow lines which we can learn to recognise. In the direction of the Past we begin with hypermnesia ; — our first step lies in the conception that what has once been presented to our sensory field, although never gathered into what we deem our conscious perception, may nevertheless have been perceived and retained by the subliminal self. It is partly through dream and partly by automatic artifices that this fact is realised ; and those same dreams, those same artifices of script or vision, presently carry us a step further, and reveal a knowledge which must have come from the memories of other living persons, or (as I hold) of departed spirits. Then in another direction a less direct source of knowledge opens out ; living organisms, our own or others', disclose (in ways unknown to biology) the history

implicate in their structure ; objects which have been in contact with organisms preserve their trace ; and it sometimes seems as though even inorganic nature could still be made, so to say, luminescent with the agelong story of its past. Or it may even be that some retrocognitive picture is presented which we may discover to be veracious, but with which we can discern no spiritual or material link ; as though a page of the cosmic record had been opened to us at random, and had closed again without sign or clue.

980. And next let us look forward into the Future ; — across that impalpable, almost imaginary line of the Present Moment, which for us is the greatest reality of all. Naturally enough, the first time-confusion which we find is a confusion affecting that present moment itself; namely, that sensation of already remembering what is happening or is just about to happen to which some authors have applied the too wide term paramnesia, but for which promnesia seems a more exact and distinctive name.1 Next we have the wide range of suggestive phenomena, where the subliminal self possesses knowledge of the future unshared by the supraliminal ; since the subliminal self has in fact wound up the organism to strike a given note at a given hour. Self-suggestion in turn merges into organic prevision; where the subliminal self foresees what will happen — not in consequence of any determining effort of its own, but by virtue of its deeper knowledge of the organism and of the changes which that organism must by physiological laws undergo. This organic prevision may lead us far ; but as it grows more distant and complex, involving more and more of a man's future environment, as well as of his future organic history, it merges into a form of precognition which cannot depend on insight into material bodies alone.

We now proceed, that is to say, along a line which is an extension of ordinary intellectual inference. First comes hypersesthetic inference ; — that enlarged span of anticipation which acuter sensory impressions permit ; as a sensitive patient will be able to predict her doctor's visit when his step is merely heard in the street, although others cannot recognise that step until it is close to the bedroom door. Then comes an obscure point where this hyperaesthesia seems to pass into telsesthesia ; — where sensory perception seems to cease, and supersensory, telepathic, or clairvoyant perception to begin.

Well then, when we have definitely passed from the sensory to the transcendental mode of perception, it is probable that our power of inference as to the future will be greatly enlarged. We cannot, indeed, guess how far this enlargement will extend. There is nothing absolutely to forbid us to regard all precognitions as the result of this wider outlook of the subliminal self. (See 980 A.)

1 For a discussion of this subject with illustrative cases, see pp. 341-347 of my article on " The Subliminal Self : Retrocognition and Precognition," in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi.

982] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 265

981. Nor shall I attempt to draw the line at which this telaesthetic inference ceases. If I do still look further for other sources of precognition, this is partly because in some cases I think that there is actual evidence that the precognition comes from a disembodied intelligence ; and partly also on the wider ground that I distrust all explanations which give to man, embodied or disembodied, any monopoly of the transcendental world. The simplicity of our instinctive anthropomorphism is not the simplicity of truth ; — it is no more so, when we are thus dealing with intelligences which may be far above our ken, than when the savage ascribes to a man-like demon the movements and influences of gross inanimate things.

But first, as I have said, I ascribe some precognitions to the reasoned foresight of disembodied spirits, just as I ascribe some retrocognitions to their surviving memory. I have tried to show ground for believing that some spirits have a continued knowledge of some earthly affairs ; and if they have such knowledge, and can show us that they have it, they may presumably reveal to us also their not infallible inferences from what they know.

Thus far I have been indicating roads along which I fancy that believers in any kind of transcendental faculty will some day be forced to travel. What follows is a speculation, or suspicion, which no record or experiments of ours can prove, but which seems to me to loom behind them all. I suspect, then, that it is not by wider purview, wiser inference alone, that finite minds, in the body or out of it, have attained to knowledge of what yet must be. I imagine that the Continuity of the Universe is complete ; and that therefore the hierarchy of intelligences between our minds and the World-Soul is infinite ; and that somewhere in that ascent a point is reached where our conception of time loses its accustomed meaning. To Plato's " Spectator of all Time and of all Existence " there may be no barrier between Then and Now. The idea, of course, is familiar enough to philosophical speculation. The novelty is that this, with many other ideas which have hitherto floated gaseously inter apices philosophic, like helium in the atmosphere of the sun, may now conceivably be tested in earthly laboratories and used as a working explanation for undeniable facts.

982. Returning now to the question of retrocognition, let us consider to what extent our knowledge of the Past will sometimes open itself beyond the familiar bounds. We may begin by inquiring in what ways we ordinarily and normally acquire our knowledge of the Past. We acquire such knowledge partly from direct personal memory, and partly from retrospective inference based on what we see or hear. We might, indeed, define memory as an acquisition of fresh potential changes of consciousness concomitant with changes in our organism, which imply certain past events as their cause. But this definition, which sounds natural enough when applied to diffused or organic memories, such as the cricketer's

memory of the feel of the bat, would seem pedantic if applied to the minute cerebral changes which accompany the learning of a new fact. In such a case we ignore in common speech the real organic change which the learning of any fact implies in us, and we merely refer to the specialised sensory channel through which the information comes to us — as hearing, reading, and so forth. In a vague but quite intelligible way, we thus mark off organic memory from definite sensory or intellectual memories.

In our inquiry into retrocognition it will be well to keep roughly to some division of this sort, and to begin by inquiring into the extensions which seem to be given to organic memory.

We know, of course, that there is a great difference between our evocable memory — that which we can summon up and use at will — and that much ampler memory which we must suppose to exist, in some potential form at least, imprinted upon our organism. The faint and crude recollections of sensations and movements, which are all that we can call into ordinary consciousness, would be far from enabling us to recognise sensations, or to repeat movements, as we actually do recognise and repeat them. The study of hypnotic suggestion, moreover, has shown us how these potential or latent memories may be grasped and used. The increased power over the organism which the subject under suggestion shows necessarily implies an increased memory of the organism's past ; the hyperboulia, as I have termed it, is hypermnesia as well. That wider will-power, indeed, is probably no more aware of the exact mechanism which it employs in its control of secretions, &c., than I am of the exact mechanism by which I raise my hand to my head. And, similarly, the hypnotic memory is probably itself very shallow as compared to what a complete summation of all the lapsed memories of the organism might be. But already we find it descending deeply to gland and blood-vessel, implicated as these are in stigmatisation and similar phenomena, and we can draw no clear line below which all organic consciousness must cease, and memory must become no more than a metaphor.

We cannot draw such a line, I say, either on the basis of smallness of magnitude or of remoteness in time. We cannot assert that organic memory may not inhere in a single cell or neuron, or even in a single living molecule. Neither can we assert that organic memory cannot be prolonged backwards before birth. Birth, indeed, is but an incident in each organism's history ; that organism has an embryonic life before birth, — and a pre-embryonic life in countless lines of ancestry. Although we no longer say with the " traducianist " schoolmen that Adam's body included not only his own soul but the souls of all his descendants, we still trace to ancestors more remote than Adam characteristics which even now influence our psychical life.

It is a moot point how far the life-experiences of each organism modify by what we regard as purely physiological transmission the characteristics of its descendants. The rude suggestion (so to term it) of the amputated

982] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 267

limb, or other injury, is commonly not accepted by the offspring ; the embryo develops unaffected by the shock which the parent has undergone previously to the act of union. But if that shock fall upon the mother during the embryo's life, and if it chance — (in post-natal suggestions also there seems much of what we must needs call chance in this) — if it chance to reach the mother's subliminal self in effective fashion, it may then transfer itself to the embryo, and imprint upon the child the organic memory of the mother's emotion of admiration, disgust, or fear. No one doubts this form of heredity when it is exhibited on a striking scale, — as with children born during the alarms of a siege, or of the Reign of Terror in France. And I believe that there is evidence enough to show that isolated and momentary suggestions — as the sight of a crushed ankle or missing finger — may produce a definite localised effect on the embryo in much the same way as a hypnotic suggestion may produce a localised congestion or secretion.1

If, then, we thus find imprinted on the child's organism such a conspicuous, specialised memory of perhaps an almost instantaneous emotion of the mother's, we must surely suspect that his organism may contain also some inborn memories less conspicuous and more purely cerebral than such a gross phenomenon as a mark on the face or a deformed finger. And by this new route we shall come round again to something like the innate ideas of certain philosophical systems. Nor can we absolutely limit such influence to the actual parent organism alone. For aught we know, the "germ-plasm" — whatsoever may be the continuous link of all generations — may be capable of reacting to psychical suggestions as sensitively as the embryo. The shaping forces which have made our bodies and our minds what they are may always have been partly psychical forces, — from the first living slime-speck to the complex intelligences of to-day.

This view is not inconsistent with the suggestion which I have made elsewhere, that the human spirit's supernormal powers of telepathy and telaesthesia are survivals from the powers which that spirit once exercised in a transcendental world. It may well be that the spirit, already modified by cosmic experiences dating back to infinity, may inform the body already modified by terrene experiences dating back to the first appearance of life on our planet. Both the old traducianist and the old transmigrationist view would thus possess a share of truth ; and the actual man would be the resultant not only of intermingling heredities on father's and mother's side, but of intermingling heredities, one of planetary and one of cosmic scope.

Passing on from hereditary or pre-natal memories, through the various other types, — e.g. the organic memory of impressions received by each man during his own past life ; the occasional sudden revival of a series of lifememories both swifter and fuller than conscious effort could have supplied ; cases of ecmnesia, where the recent impressions are suppressed in favour 1 See vol. i., 526 and 526 A, B, and C.

of the old j cases where the hysteric under skilful hypnotic treatment can recall and reveal the long-forgotten incident which started her malady ; — we may place next cases of clairvoyant insight into the organic condition of an absent person. Here we come to a definitely supernormal power ; and it is a power which claims to involve both backward and forward knowledge such as actual medical examination of the patient could not attain. There are further cases in which a definite fact in a man's life has become known supernormally ; or sometimes a recent event unconnected with the percipient is revealed ; and there are, of course, numerous trance communications where knowledge of the past is claimed to proceed from some more or less definite disembodied intelligence. Supernormal retrocognition depends, it appears, on the perception by us of knowledge contained in other minds, embodied or disembodied, and possibly on the absorption by us of knowledge afloat, so to say, in the Universe ; — which may be grasped by our spirit's outreaching, or which may fall on us like dew.

983. Coming now to precognitions, we must first observe that there are many where what looks like knowledge of the future can be analysed into an enlarged knowledge of what actually exists.

There are, indeed, certain phenomena — " monitions " as we may term them — which in common parlance are often spoken of as /ranonitions, and used as a type of knowledge of the future, where it is nevertheless plain that all that is needed is a somewhat extended perception of near facts.

These monitions — of which several instances were given in 818-825, — range from incidents so trivial and momentary that it would seem absurd to ascribe them to anything more dignified than a barely subliminal stratum of the percipient's own consciousness, up to important warnings which claim the authority of some departed but still watchful friend.

At the lower end of this series come the obscure intimations which restrain us from action on grounds which perhaps are only just forgotten and still by effort recoverable. The chess player, returning after various trains of calculation to the temptation of a specious move, will dimly feel a sense of restraint ; — " I must not do that, though I cannot recollect why'' Sometimes this subliminal warning presents itself as a physical hesitation ; — the hand refusing to execute an order which is really unreasonable ; — and which is felt to be such so soon as some trivial recent fact is remembered. (See 818 A.)

One step further, and we have an actual externalised hallucination of touch checking the inconsiderate action. (See 818 B.)

Next we come to monitions based upon a fact apparently not forgotten merely, but never known ; a fact lying demonstrably beyond the normal sensory cognisance of the percipient.

A fact beyond his normal sensory cognisance, I say; but obviously before we assume that he has perceived that fact in a transcendental or telsesthetic fashion, we must make the fullest allowance for hyperses-

983] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 269

thesia, — for an extension of the bodily senses which may include this strange knowledge within its range. Nay, more ; our search for possible hypersesthesia is bound to be much wider than any search which the physiologist is likely thus far to have found worth his pains. His interest has lain in definite measurable extensions of the higher senses, rather than in obscure and novel sensations which led to no clear end. It is for these last, on the other hand, that it is our special duty to search. We have obscure and novel facts to explain, and before we confidently assign them to psychical and transcendental causes, we must try and think of everything which the human body might conceivably discern or discover.

I say " the body " rather than " the senses " ; for we must go back in our inquiry (though of course without expectation of immediate success) to an ancestral condition far anterior to any senses which we now know. We must go back to the first germ of life, and in place of merely crediting it with " irritability," which is all the power of reaction which it can actually show us, we must credit it with all the potentialities which the history of its descendants teaches us to infer as already latent in it. We know into how wide a gamut of feeling the germ's vague internal sensation, its vague external sensation, have diffused and specialised themselves in man. We dimly conjecture into what other rays the spectrum of that dim primal gleam of consciousness has been fanned out in animals other than man. And we may feel assured also, as I have already pointed out, that all the known or guessed sensations of men and animals are but a small selection from the range of sensations potentially educible from the vague pan<zsthesia, — so to term it, — of the primal germ. Average experience within average limits — that is all that our known senses cover. If the stimulus be too weak, we are liable to mistake the sense through which it comes to us ; if it be too strong, we are liable to feel a mere distress or bewilderment, not referred to any definite sense. It is surely conceivable, then, that all our known sensibilities may form merely a kind of bull's eye ; — the place where outer and inner influences oftenest touch our central sensorium ; — while round this bull's-eye all kinds of unclassified obscure sensations probably scatter.

