The impression of the dream grew gradually fainter, but it did not leave me ; and I remember that when a little boy came to stay with us some time after, and boy-like drew his stick along the banisters as he went upstairs, the sound brought back the horror of my dream. Two years passed by, and the thought of the dream was becoming less frequent, when I dreamt it again with all its details the same as before, and again with the same profoundly disturbing effect. I told my uncle, and said to him that I felt sure that he had been neglecting his promise, and riding by that field-road alone. He admitted that he had occasionally done so, "although," he said, "I think I have been very good on the whole." He renewed the promise ; and again the impression grew weaker as four years passed by, during which I married and left his home. In the May of 1888 I was in London, expecting my baby. On the night before I was taken ill, I dreamt the same dream again, but with this variation. Instead of dreaming that I was at my uncle's home with my sister, I knew in my dream that I was lying in bed in our London house. But from that bedroom, just as from the drawing-room in the former dreams, I seemed to see my uncle lying dead in the same well-known place. And I seemed also to perceive the same scene of the bringing home of the body. Then came a new point. As I lay in bed, a gentleman dressed in black, but whose face I could not see, seemed to stand by me and tell me that my uncle was dead. I woke in great distress. But as I was ill from then for two days, as soon as the child was born I ceased to dwell on the dream — only I felt an overpowering desire to write at once to my uncle myself and to tell him that I was getting better. I was not allowed to do this ; but afterwards I managed to write a few lines in pencil unknown to any one but the nurse. This note reached my uncle two days before his death.

As I grew better, I began to wonder greatly at not hearing from my uncle, who generally wrote to me every day. Then my dream came back to me, and I was certain that he was ill or dead — but my husband, nurse, and maid (all I saw) seemed cheerful as usual. Then one morning my husband said my stepfather wished to see me, and I at once guessed his errand. He entered the room dressed in black and stood by my bedside. At once I recognised that this was the figure which I had seen in my dream. I said, " The Colonel is dead — I know all about it — I have dreamt it often." And as he was unable to speak from emotion, I told him all about it, place, time of day (morning), and the clothes my uncle wore.

Then I thought of that scene on the staircase, which had always remained in my mind. I asked if there were any bruises on the hands. " No bruises," said my step-father, "either on hands or face." He thought that I fancied that my uncle had fallen from his horse. Soon afterwards my sister — the sister who had been in my dream — came to see me, and brought me a ring which my uncle had always worn on his left hand. I was very thankful for this memento

of him ; and I told my sister how I had feared that the ring would have been forgotten. " I only came just in time," she said, " they were just going to close the coffin." " Was there any bruise on the left hand ? " I asked. At first she said there was not ; but then she said she thought there was a bluish discoloration across the back of the first joints of the fingers. She did not know how it had been caused. When I was well enough to travel, I went to my old home; there I saw my old nurse, who had been in the house when my uncle died. Her account, added to my step-father's, enabled me to realise the events of that day. My uncle had received my pencil-note on the Sunday morning, and had been greatly pleased, feeling that the wished-for heir was born, and that I, whom he loved as a daughter, was through my trouble. He had a few friends to lunch with him, including my step-father, and said that he had seen all that he wished to see in life, and could now die happy at any moment. His guests left him in [the] greatest spirits, and two days afterwards he died, and his body had been brought back as I describe, and he had been found half sitting and half lying on that very field-road, where I had three times seen him. He was dressed in the same homespun suit in which I had seen him in my dream. The cause of his death had been heart-disease, of whose existence neither I nor, I believe, any of those near and dear to him had been aware. He had evidently felt faint, and shpped from his horse. The same two men whom I had seen in my dream as helping to carry the body had in fact done so, and my nurse admitted that the left hand had knocked against the banisters. She seemed afraid lest I should blame the men who carried the body, and did not like to speak of the incident. I do not think that she had seen the incident herself; and I did not like to speak to the men about it. It was enough for me that it was on the back of the left hand, as I had seen it in my dream, and as from the arrangement of the staircase it must have been, had it been caused in the way that I saw. I will add one fact which, although it was purely a matter of my own feeling, made perhaps as much impression upon me as anything in this history. I do not think that any daughter could love a father better than I loved my uncle ; and, as will have been seen, the prospect of his death was always a deeply-lying fear. But as soon as I knew that all had happened as my dream foretold, I somehow felt that all was well, and the death left me with a sensation of complete acquiescence and peace. It may have been noticed that there were two unreal or fantastic points in my original dream : — viz., the multitude oi flowers in the garden, and the thin covering of snow. I think that I can throw some light on these points by narrating the only two other impressive dreams which I have ever had. The first of these two dreams I mentioned to others, and acted upon it. The second I neither mentioned nor acted upon ; so that it has no value as evidence, and is really given as helping to explain the symbolism of snow.

I had heard from several relations (although I cannot quote definite cases), that they had found that dreams oi flowers and of sjiow were followed by deaths in our family. This may have suggested that form of symbolism to my mind ; — or the same cause, whatever it was, which acted with them may have acted with me. In any case, what happened was as follows. In 1S87 I heard from my stepfather that my mother, who had long been an invalid, was seriously worse ; and he asked me when I could go to see her. My mind was therefore occupied with her illness, but the tone of his letter was not immediately alarming; — so that we saw no reason for my not attending some races in the neighbourhood, for which we had friends staying. But one night I dreamt a dream — which, though very impressive, was somewhat confused — about my mother

426 A] TO CHAPTER IV 413

seated in a carriage full of flowers. I remembered the symbolism ; and I felt assured that my mother was dead or dying. I mentioned the dream to my husband, and prepared for an immediate summons, which came directly afterwards. Having all preparations already made, I left immediately and arrived in time to see my mother die. This dream and that of my uncle are the only two dreams on which I ever acted in any way. The second dream to which I have alluded was as follows: In 18 — I saw a gentleman whom I knew lying dead in a red coat on an open field, with snow on the ground. Beside him knelt his mother, who was ahve and well at the time of the dream. I tried to approach and speak to her; but she said, " Don't touch me; I have come for him." I understood that she had died before him. Two years later this lady did in fact die, and in two years more her son was killed, just as I saw him lying, in a scarlet coat. There was, of course, no snow on the ground, as it was in late spring ; so I fancy that the snow may have been symbolical both here and in my dream about my uncle. I may add that I am not of an imaginative temperament; and that these are the only incidents in my life which seem to lie outside ordinary explanations.

My husband and step-father add their confirmation of the incidents which concern them.

The above account is true and accurate in every particular.

[Signatures of Lord and Lady Q.]

[Lord Q.'s signature attests (besides his general concurrence with the account) his presence at the interview with Lady Q.'s step-father, as described.]

January i6th, 1893. The account is correct so far as what happened when I went to London to

inform Lady Q of her uncle's death, which is all that is within my own

personal knowledge. [Signature of Lady Q's. step-father.]

426 A. From Fhatitasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 384. The next account, which first appeared in a letter in the Religio-Philosophical Journal, is from Dr. Bruce, of Micanopy, Fla., U.S.A. The case might be called "collective," but for the fact that one of the dreams, though vivid and alarming, was probably not so distinctive as was afterwards imagined, and moreover, was possibly dreamt on Ithe night ajter that on which the tragic event took place.

February 17 tk, 1884. On Thursday, the 27th of December last, I returned from Gainesville, (twelve miles from here) to my orange grove, near Micanopy. I have only a small plank house of three rooms at my grove, where I spend most of my time when the grove is being cultivated. There was no one in the house but myself at the time, and being somewhat fatigued with my ride, I retired to my bed very early, probably 6 o'clock ; and, as I am frequently in the habit of doing, I lit my lamp on a stand by the bed for the purpose of reading. After reading a short time, I began to feel a little drowsy, put out the light, and soon fell asleep. Quite early in the night I was awakened. I could not have been asleep very long, I am sure. I felt as if I had been aroused intentionally, and at first thought some one was breaking into the house. I looked from where I lay into the other two rooms (the doors of both being open), and at once recognised

where I was, and that there was no ground for the burglar theory ; there being nothing in the house to make it worth a burglar's time to come after.

I then turned on my side to go to sleep again, and immediately felt a consciousness of a presence in the room, and, singular to state, it was not the consciousness of a live person, but of a spiritual presence. This may provoke a smile, but I can only tell you the facts as they occurred to me. I do not know how to better describe my sensations than by simply stating that I felt a consciousness of a spiritual presence. This may have been a part of the dream, for I felt as if I were dozing off again to sleep; but it was unlike any dream I ever had. I felt also at the same time a strong feeling of superstitious dread, as if something strange and fearful were about to happen. I was soon asleep again, or unconscious, at any rate, to my surroundings. Then I saw two men engaged in a slight scufifle ; one fell fatally wounded — the other immediately disappeared. I did not see the gash in the wounded man's throat, but knew that his throat was cut. I did not recognise him, either, as my brother-in-law. I saw him lying with his hands under him, his head turned slightly to the left, his feet close together. I could, from the position in which I stood, see but a small portion of his face ; his coat, collar, hair, or something partly obscured it. I looked at him the second time a little closer to see if I could make out who it was. I was aware it was some one I knew, but still could not recognise him. I turned, and then saw my wife sitting not far from him. She told me she could not leave until he was attended to. (I had got a letter a few days previously from my wife, telling me she would leave in a day or two, and was expecting every day a letter or telegram telling me when to meet her at the depot.) My attention was struck by the surroundings of the dead man. He appeared to be lying on an elevated platform of some kind, surrounded by chairs, benches, and desks, reminding me somewhat of a schoolroom. Outside of the room in which he was lying was a crowd of people, mostly females, some of whom I thought I knew. Here my dream terminated. I awoke again about midnight ; got up and went to the door to see if there were any prospect of rain ; returned to my bed again, and lay there until nearly daylight before falling asleep again. I thought of my dream, and was strongly impressed by it. All strange, superstitious feelings had passed off.

It was not until a week or ten days after this that I got a letter from my wife, giving me an account of her brother's death. Her letter, which was written the day after his death, was mis-sent. The account she gave me of his death tallies most remarkably with my dream. Her brother was with a wedding party at the depot at Markham station, Fauquier Co., Va. He went into a store near by to see a young man who kept a bar-room near the depot, and with whom he had some words. He turned and left the man, and walked out of the store. The bar-room keeper followed him out, and without further words deliberately cut his throat. It was a most brutal and unprovoked murder. My brother-in-law had on his overcoat with the collar turned up. The knife went through the collar and clear to the bone. He was carried into the store and laid on the counter, near a desk and show case. He swooned from loss of blood soon after being cut. The cutting occurred early Thursday night, December 27th. He did not die, however, until almost daylight, Saturday morning.

I have not had a complete account of my sister-in-law's dream. She was visiting a young lady, a cousin, in Kentucky. Theyslept together Friday night, I think, the night of her brother's death. She dreamed of seeing a man with

428A] TO CHAPTER IV 415

his throat cut, and awoke very much alarmed. She awoke her cousin, and they got up and lighted the lamp and sat up until daylight. That day she received a telegram announcing her brother's death.

I cannot give you any certain explanation of these dreams. I do not believe that they are due to ordinary causes, but to causes of which science does not at present take cognisance. Walter Bruce.

In reply to inquiries, Dr. Bruce says : —

July gth, 1884.

I have never had another dream similar to the one related in the letter. I have at times had dreams that were vivid, or from some cause impressed themselves upon my mind for a time, such as any one would be likely to have. I cannot call to mind, though, any of special importance, or with any bearing upon the dream in question.

I did not mention the dream to any one before receiving the letter confirming it. I live in rather a retired place in the country, and if I saw any one during that time to whom I would care to relate the dream, it did not occur to me to do so.

You ask me how my wife knew of the circumstances of her brother's death. She was visiting her relatives in Va. at the time, and was present when her brother died.

The following account is from Dr. Bruce's sister-in-law, Mrs. Stubbing : —

March 2M1, 1885.

Whilst in Kentucky on a visit in the year 1883, I had a dream, in which I saw two persons — one with his throat cut. I could not tell who it was, though I knew it was somebody that I knew, and as soon as I heard of my brother's death, I said at once that I knew it was he that I had seen murdered in my dream ; and though I did not hear how my brother died, I told my cousin, whom I was staying with, that I knew he had been murdered. This dream took place on Thursday or Friday night, I do not remember which. I saw the exact spot where he was murdered, and just as it happened. Annie S. Stubbing.

The Thursday and Friday night mentioned in this account are December 26th and 27th [27th and 28th], 1883. It was upon the Thursday night my dream occurred. Walter Bruce.

In reply to questions, Mrs. Stubbing says : — •

Yes, I saw one man cut the other. The wound was told to me to be just like what I had seen in my dream. I received a telegram announcing the death of my brother on Saturday morning. No, I never had any such dream as that before.

428 A, The following are cases illustrating my hypothesis of "psychical invasion." The first is taken from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. X05. In this case, the words heard were vividly imagined by the agent, and may very probably have been uttered, or half-uttered. The account is from Mr. J. Pike, of 122 Stockwell Park Road, S.W.

October 1883. Travelling some years since from Carlisle to Highbury, by the night mail train, and finding myself alone in my compartment, I lay at full length on the

4i6 APPENDICES [428 A

seat with a view to sleep, having previously requested the guard to wake me at the Camden Town Station. I soon fell into a deep sleep, one of those profound slumbers the awakening from which is almost painful. Roused suddenly by the guard waking me (somewhat roughly and impatiently, because the train was behind its time), I found that I had been dreaming (what proved indeed to be the case) that it was morning; that I was at home, in my bedroom, in the act of dressing, and at the moment of awakening had been on the landing and twice called the servant by her name, "Sarah," and asked her to bring me some hot water.

On actually arriving at home, I learnt that at the time when I had been thus dreaming that I was calling to the servant, she had heard her name called by me twice, distinctly ; that — forgetting for the moment that I was not in the house— she, hastily discontinuing the breakfast preparations, ran upstairs, and afterwards came down again " as white as a ghost" — according to the description given to me by the children who, with astonishment, witnessed her proceedings, and not having themselves heard the call, naturally wondered what it all meant. Sarah subsequently informed me that the "fright" she experienced on realising the fact that I was not there had made her " quite ill."

Mr. Pike's daughter gave the following corroboration on October 30th,

I distinctly remember the incident of our servant being frightened by hearing my father's voice calling from upstairs, at a time when we knew he could not be anywhere near our home. The servant took a poker in her hand and went upstairs, thinking there must be some man there who had imitated my father's voice. Nothing, however, was discovered to explain the mystery until my father's arrival at home, when he told us that at the time the call was heard he had been dreaming that he was at home and calling for hot water.

Alma M. Pike.

The genuineness of this case does not, of course, depend on the servant's evidence, but on the testimony of Miss Pike that the servant mentioned her experience before Mr. Pike's arrival. Gurney observes that his collection of purely subjective hallucinations includes several instances where a servant has seemed to hear her mistress calling her — a fact which of course goes to weaken the force of the described coincidence. But the superior vividness of the impression in the present instance seems proved by the emotion and alarm which followed it, and which had no sort of parallel in the purely subjective cases referred to.

Here, it will be seen, the condition of the agent was not one of distress or crisis, but simply that of vivid dream ; and the case is in this way exceptional. It should be noted that the part of the dream which apparently affected the percipient took place in the very shock of waking ; and such a shock, though not critical or exactly painful, clearly involves a far wider and more sudden change of psychical condition than often occurs to us during waking life.

See also a case given in Phantasms, vol. ii. p. 159. Mr. T. W. Smith relates that his wife told him she had dreamt of finding herself in a house

428 B] TO CHAPTER IV 417

in which she used to live, where she saw a friend of hers going to bed. She went up to her, took her by the hand, and said, " Bessie, let us be friends." Some months later, Mr. Smith was informed by a friend of " Bessie's " that one night, about that time, " Bessie " had told her that she had seen Mrs. Smith — that she had touched her and said, " Let us be friends." They were not, however, able to fix the dates with complete certainty, so that the coincidence was doubtful, and the case is evidentially weak for this reason.

428 B. In the following case (quoted from the Journal S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 100) there seems to have been on the part of the agent, Mrs. Manning, a spontaneous revival of memory of long past and forgotten scenes, such as often occurs in crystal visions, but rarely in ordinary life. Mrs. Manning writes to Professor James as follows : —

105 Winter Street, Portland, Maine, October zZth [1894].

Dear Sir, — At the request of Colonel Woodhull, I send you the following statement, which I hope may be of use to you.

When I was a child at my home in Rochester, N. Y., my elder sister had almost entire care of me. At night, after putting me in bed, she would sit beside me for a few moments until I fell asleep. Frequently I would wake up, and finding myself alone and in the dark, of which I was much afraid, I would call out to her ; she would come and soothe me to sleep again. In 1875, I was living at Fort Hartsuff, Nebraska, a military post, the station of my husband. Our nearest railway station was Grand Island, on the Union Pacific Railroad, 75 miles away. My sister then hved at Omaha, about 300 miles east of Grand Island. Our mail reached us by buckboard from Grand Island every Wednesday and Saturday. One night in November, I awoke from a dreamless sleep, wide awake, and yet to my own consciousness the little child of years ago, in my own room in the old home ; the sister had gone, and I was alone in the darkness. I sat up in bed, and called with all my voice, " Jessie ! Jessie! " — my sister's name. This aroused my husband, who spoke to me. I seemed to come gradually to realisation of my surroundings, and with difficulty adjusted myself to the present. In that moment I seemed to live again in the childhood days and home. I cannot express too strongly the feeling of actuality I had. For days after this the strange impression was with me, and I could recall many little incidents and scenes of child-life that I had entirely forgotten.

I wrote to my sister the next day, and told her of the strange experience of the night before. In a few days I received a letter from her, the date the same as mine, and having passed mine on the way, in which she said that such a strange thing had happened the night before ; that she had been awakened by my voice calling her name twice ; that the impression was so strong that her husband went to the door to see if it could possibly be I. No one else had called her ; she had not been dreaming of me. She distinctly recognised my voice. Mary M. Clarkson Manning.

Captain Manning writes : —

Portland, Me., October 2gtA, 1894. I distinctly recall the circumstances as related above by my wife.

W. C. Manning (Captain 23rd Infantry, U.S. Army). VOL. I. 2D

4i8 APPENDICES [428 C

Mrs. Manning's sister and brother-in-law give their testimony as follows : —

Detroit, Mich., November ist, 1894.

The statement made by my sister is as I remember the experience. That it made a deep impression upon us both is evidenced by each writing of it to the other on the day following its occurrence. The impression made was so forcible, it has never been forgotten. Jessie Clarkson Thrall.

Detroit, Mich., November ist, 1894.

The within statement of a curious coincidence might have been forgotten by me during the past twenty years, had the facts not been recalled to my memory from time to time as they have by the principal actors in it. I have always regarded it as a strange coincidence, but nothing more.

I heard no call, but went to the door to satisfy my wife that her sister was not in the hall. George Thrall.

In reply to Dr. Hodgson's inquiries, Mrs. Manning informed him that the original letters referred to had been destroyed long ago, and that neither she herself nor her sister had ever had any similar experience.

428 C. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 225. The narrator of the following case is the late Rev. P. H. Newnham, of whose telepathic rapport with his wife we had such striking experimental proof (see vol. ii. 849 A), and who described himself as "an utter sceptic, in the true sense of the word."

In March 1854, I was up at Oxford, keeping my last term, in lodgings. I was subject to violent neuralgic headaches, which alwa3's culminated in sleep. One evening, about 8 p.m., I had an unusually violent one; when it became unendurable, about 9 p.m., I went into my bedroom, and flung myself, without undressing, on the bed, and soon fell asleep.

I then had a singularly clear and vivid dream, all the incidents of which are still as clear to my memory as ever. I dreamed that I was stopping with the family of the lady who subsequently became my wife. All the younger ones had gone to bed, and I stopped chatting to the father and mother, standing up by the fireplace. Presently I bade them good-night, took my candle, and went off to bed. On arriving in the hall, I perceived that myyfawf/,? had been detained downstairs, and was only then near the top of the staircase. I rushed upstairs, overtook her on the top step, and passed my two arms round her waist, under her arms, from behind. Although I was carrying my candle in my left hand, when I ran upstairs, this did not, in my dream, interfere with this gesture.

On this I woke, and a clock in the house struck ten almost immediately afterwards. So strong was the impression of the dream that I wrote a detailed account of it next morning to xi^y fiancee.

Crossing my letter., not in answer to it, I received a letter from the lady in question: " Were you thinking about me, very specially, last night, just about ten o'clock? For, as I was going upstairs to bed, I distinctly heard your footsteps on the stairs, and felt you put your arms round my waist."

The letters in question are now destroyed, but we verified the statement made therein some years later, when we read over our old letters, previous to their destruction, and we found that our personal recollections had not varied

428 D] TO CHAPTER IV 419

in the least degree therefrom. The above narratives may therefore be accepted as absolutely accurate. P. H. Newnham.

Asked if his wife has ever had any other hallucinations, Mr. Newnham replied, " No, Mrs N. never had any fancy of either myself or any one else being present on any other occasion."

The following is Mrs. Newnham's account : —

June (^th, 1884. I remember distinctly the circumstance which my husband has described as corresponding with his dream. I was on my way up to bed, as usual, about ten o'clock, and on reaching the first landing I heard distinctly the footsteps of the gentleman to whom I was engaged, quickly mounting the stairs after me, and then I as plainly felt him put his arms round my waist. So strong an impression did this make upon me that I wrote the very next morning to the gentleman, asking if he had been particularly thinking of me at ten o'clock the night before, and to my astonishment I received (at the same time that my letter would reach him) a letter from him describing his dream, in almost the same words that I had used in describing my impression of his presence.

M. Newnham.

It is unfortunate that the actual letters cannot be put in evidence. But Mr. Newnham's distinct statement that the letters were examined, and the coincidence verified, some years after the occurrence, strongly confirms his own and his wife's recollections of the original incident.

428 D. The following account (taken from Phantasjns of the Living, vol. ii. p. 154) was received through the kindness of the late Mr. G. J. Romanes, F.R.S., who was well acquainted with the narrator.

March \%th, 1883. On the night of the 26th of October 1872, I suddenly felt very unwell, and went to bed about half-past nine, an hour earlier than usual, and fell asleep almost immediately, when I had a very vivid dream, which impressed me greatly; so much so, that I remarked to my wife, on waking, that I feared we should shortly receive bad news. I imagined I was sitting in the drawing-room near a table, reading, when an old lady suddenly appeared seated on the opposite side, close to the table. She neither spoke nor moved much, but gazed very intently on me, and I on her, for at least 20 minutes. I was much struck by her appearance, she having white hair, very dark eyebrows, and penetrating eyes. I did not recognise her at all, but thought she was a stranger. My attention was then directed to the door, which opened, and my aunt entering and seeing me and the old lady staring at each other in this extraordinary way, with much surprise and in a tone of reproach exclaimed, " John ! don't you know who this is 1 " and without giving me time to reply said, " Why, this is your grandmother," whereupon my ghostly visitor suddenly rose from her chair, embraced me, and vanished. At that moment I awoke. Such was the impression it made on my mind, that I got my note-book and made a note of this strange dream, believing that it foreboded bad tidings. However, several days passed without bringing any dreaded intelligence, when one night I received a letter from my father, announcing the rather sudden death of my grandmother, which took place on the very night and hour of my dream, half-past ten.

About four months after her death, I went to the Isle of Wight, where she lived, to get information from my relatives as to what my grandmother was really like. My aunt and cousin described her in every particular, and their descriptions of her coincided most marvellously with the figure and face that appeared to me, the white hair and dark eyebrows being a peculiarity in her. This I particularly observed in my dream. I learnt, too, that she was extremely fussy in the arrangement of her cap, always being anxious that no part, even the strings, should be out of place, and curious to relate, I noticed in my dream that she was nervously touching her cap-strings, now and again, for fear they should be out of place. My cousin, who was with her when she died, told me that my grandmother had been delirious for some time previous to her departure ; and for a moment, when in that state, she suddenly put her arms round my cousin's neck, and on opening her eyes and regaining consciousness, she said with a look of surprise, " Oh, Polly, is it you ? I thought it was somebody else." This seems to me very curious, as it was just what she did before she vanished from me in the drawing-room. I must add that I had not seen my grandparent for at least 14 years, and the last time I saw her she had dark hair, but this had gradually changed to white, leaving her eyebrows dark, and I am positive that nobody ever mentioned this peculiarity to me.^

J. H. W.

Mrs. W. says : —

July \st, 1885.

I quite remember my husband telling me, on my going to my room on the evening of the 26th October, of a. remarkable dream he had just had, and also his making an entry in the pocket-book on the following morning. F. W.

We find from the Register of Deaths that Jane W. died at the age of 72, on Oct. 26, 1870 [see below], at Brixton, Isle of Wight. Mr. Podmore says : —

I called on Mr. J. H. W. to-day (July 4th, 1884), and heard the account from him viva voce. His cousin's corroboration, for a reason which he explained to me, cannot be obtained. But he explained to me that he went to see his cousin within three months of the death, and received full particulars of the death-scene from her then. I asked him if he stood by^ the phrase " at least 20 minutes," pointing out that it was difficult to attach any precise meaning to these words ; if they were a correct description of his impressions, a grotesque incident must have been interpolated in the midst of an otherwise realistic dream. He maintains that the words are correct ; it seemed to him that he and the old lady sat staring at each other across the table for a very long time. Mr. W. told me that he dreams very little; and that he has never had another dream which he thought worth noting. He has never dreamt of death.

After a second call Mr. Podmore writes : —

I received an account from Mrs. W. of her husband's dream, as she remembered to have heard it within an hour of its occurrence and subsequently,

1 In respect of this last feature, the case may be classed with those of \^Phantasnis\ chap. xii. § 8. The nervous fidgeting with the cap-strings may possibly be regarded as a distinctive habit, sufficiently deeply organised to be a feature in the person's latent representation of her own physique. — E. Gurnky.

428E] TO CHAPTER IV 421

which tallied precisely with the account here given. I saw also the note made on the following morning. It occurs at the head of the first page of a small pocket sketch-book, the rest of the page being occupied with pen or pencil memoranda of accounts, &c. The entry is " Odd dream, night of October 26th, 1870." The last numeral, which is very indistinct, is apparently o. Mr. W., in writing his original account in March 1883, had referred to this note and read the final numeral as 2. Hence the discrepancy. He has no other memorandum of the death.

I pressed him as far as I could, but he still declines to give his name, fearing that he might acquire the reputation of being "ghostly" and fanciful, and thus injure his professional prospects.

428 E. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 444. Mrs. Tabour writes to Dr. Hodgson : —

2718 Chicago Avenue, Minneapolis, Minn., MayWi, 1895. I have recently learned of a case of remarkable appearance before death, or rather a short time previous to death. A man ill with consumption appeared to a lady (a friend of mine and also a friend of his) in a perfectly natural manner, properly clothed, although he was ill in bed at the time, and was found upon investigation to have been asleep at the time of the appearance. Now, the reason why they were able to establish the above fact so accurately was that the man related to his wife, directly upon awaking, that he had dreamed of this lady in the most vivid manner, and described her appearance and the position of the furniture in her rooms. The two families were about one day's journey apart by rail. The man died about a fortnight later. These people are willing to give dates and names, and if you will have your secretary prepare a list of such questions as you may want answered, and forward to me, I will get all information possible. I think it may be well to see to the matter while I am here. — Very sincerely yours, JosiE L. Fowler Tabour.

Mrs. Tabour adds : —

Mrs. Shagren is a woman of strong clairvoyant powers. All the parties are of Swedish birth, and of unusual intelligence. At the time of this appearance Mrs. Shagren was about thirty-one. Occurred over ten years ago. No appearance at time of death.

Statement of Mrs. Shagren regarding Appearance of Mr. Hendrickson.

This happened one day after I had finished my morning's work, housework. It was about 10 o'clock. I stood before the mirror doing my hair, when I suddenly saw him (Mr. Hendrickson) coming from behind, as if approaching on tip-toe. His hands were outstretched, and I had an impression that he would place them on my shoulders ; I could even hear his last step, like the squeak of a boot, as he put his foot down. I turned in surprise, and faced him, consequently seeing him out of the glass and in the glass. As I turned I exclaimed, " Is that you ? " At least I felt that I said that, but as I spoke he vanished. He was perfectly natural in appearance, and fully dressed, just as I had always seen him.

In the afternoon of the same day, which I know was April 24th, 1884, as I was passing from the room in which I had seen him in the morning, going through a small hallway, I heard steps from behind. Turned and saw him

again, dressed as in the morning, and again as I turned toward him he vanished.

The impression of seeing him was not so strong as in the morning.

The next day a young lady friend of mine, and also a friend of Mr. Hendrickson's family, came to visit me, and knowing of her friendship with Mr. Hendrickson, I asked her if she knew anything of the family, or where they were living, as I had heard nothing from them for about four years, I having been south during that time, and they in the meantime having left the city.

I asked if she knew if Mr. Hendrickson was still living, as I knew he had consumption. She replied that he was living the last time she had heard from them. And then I said, " I saw him yesterday morning."

My friend was not surprised, and regarded the appearance as a warning of death. To my statement she said, " I would not be surprised, as I received a letter from his wife saying he had a hemorrhage of the lungs. Let us write," she continued, " and find out if he is living or dead." Then we wrote we both felt uneasy, and I told of seeing him. In a few days we received a reply saying that he was not dead, but the doctors had said he could not live, and then [Mrs. H.] related his experience of seeing me in a dream, while asleep on the morning he had appeared to me. Although he had never been in the house, he described my room, and said to his wife, when speaking of his dream, " She looked stouter than she used to," which was true, as I had grown much stouter in the four years since they had seen me.

Mrs. Hendrickson and myself were friends from childhood. I had only known Mr. Hendrickson since his marriage. We were just good friends. Mr. Hendrickson once told his wife that I had appeared to him. That was long before my experience of seeing him.

Mrs. Hendrickson has remarried, and is now Mrs. Erickson, of Beresford, South Dakota. (Signed) [Mrs.] C. M. Shagren.

708 South Sixth Street.

Beresford, S.D., May z-jtk, 1895.

Mrs. C. M. Shagren, — Dear Friend, — I received your welcome letter a few days ago, and will now answer it. It was in the morning of April 24th, 1884, when Mr. Hendrickson awoke and said he had been dreaming of you. I said, " I'll mark this down and see if it means something." He slept longer that morning than he used to do, and in five days we had a letter from you, and you said you had seen him in your room that morning and you thought something would happen to him before long. He was dressed in his night clothes at the time. On the 20th of May he died. I wrote to Dora, but I do not remember what I did write or when it was. It was before he died, an)^way. I had not heard from you since you went to Tennessee until this time. I beUeve you said in your letter that you got my address from Dora. . . .

Mrs. F. Erickson.

From private letter written by Miss Dora Edenoff, of Chicago, June 14th, 1895, to Mrs. Shagren : —

I have been trying to think, but cannot remember what you said about

1 Hemorrhage of the lungs has been associated with psychical manifestations oftener than from the relative frequency of that mode of death would seem antecedently probable.

428 FJ TO CHAPTER IV 423

Mr. Hendrickson. It does seem that you did tell me that you had seen him in your room, but I cannot remember any more. — Your friend, Dora.

In reply to Dr. Hodgson's question how Mrs. Shagren remembered that the date was April 24th, 1884, Mrs. Tabour adds : —

There are many reasons why Mrs. Shagren remembered that date. First, because of the young lady, who came from another city, and was on her way to Europe, and other facts which I might tell you if necessary. I looked into it pretty carefully, as I am rather a doubter myself. . . .

428 F. From t\\Q Journal S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 128.

The first account which follows is taken from an article on "Dreams," by Miss Giddings, which appeared in The Metaphysical Magazine for September 1S95.

Some few years ago I was the guest in the home of an intimate friend, whose unmarried sister, also an associate of my own, was away at the time. My hostess, whom I will call Mrs. J., was taken suddenly and seriously ill. The family doctor was summoned, but as he was away, a strange physician was called, and he was in attendance upon Mrs. J. when at midnight her own doctor arrived. Early on the following morning I received a telegram from the absent sister, saying : " Is anything wrong at home ? Answer immediately." I replied, and before the day was over a letter addressed to me, and mailed when the telegram was sent, came from the absent sister, saying : —

" I have had a peculiar and impressive dream of home. I saw A. lying on the bed as if very ill ; while in the dressing-room, as if in consultation, were two doctors — Dr. L. (the family physician) and a stranger, a tall, dark man, whom Dr. L. addressed as Dr. Rice. So impressed am I that something is wrong, that I write to you in order to know as soon as possible the meaning of this strange vision."

Her dream was as vivid a portrayal of what was actually occurring at her home during the night, as I, personally present, could have given. She was almost correct as to the name of the strange doctor, whom she heard addressed as Dr. Rice, but whose name was Reed. It will be offered in explanation that she was anxious about home, and naturally dreamed of her sister. But this explanation will not suffice, for she was a girl much away from home. The married sister was never ill, and no member of the family had ever seen or heard of the strange physician. That the sick sister was thinking of the absent one, I know. She was a woman of determined will and of unusual magnetic power, as her success as a public speaker attests. May she not, through her desires, have unconsciously thrown upon the mind of the absent one certain photographic revelations of what was actually occurring?

Miss Giddings writes : —

37 Walnut Street, Somerville, Mass., January Ztk, 1896. Dr. Richard Hodgson,— Dear Sir, — . . . The dream related occurred to my friend Mabel Jenness at a time when her sister, Annie Jenness Miller, the well-known lecturer on " Dress," was ill at her New York residence. The facts are as I have related them.

I was at that time editing Mrs. Miller's magazine, and the letter to which reference is made came to me. I did not keep it, but Mabel Jenness, now

Mrs. Wm. A. Venter, Coates House, Kansas City, will verify my statement, or so . . . would Mrs. Miller, 114 Fifth Avenue, N.Y. . . .

(Miss) Laura E. Giddings. Mrs, Venter writes : —

CoATES House, Kansas City, Mo. February yd, 1896.

Mr. Richard Hodgson, — Dear Sir,— Your letter of January 28th has just reached me. I will endeavour to give you as nearly as possible the facts concerning the " vision " of which Miss Giddings has told you. I was in the West on a lecture tour, and the last night of my stay in Detroit, Mich., I had a dream in which I saw my sister, Mrs. Miller, lying ill. There were several people about her, and all was excitement. There were two physicians in consultation ; one I recognised as Dr. Louis Sayer, of New York (now deceased), the other I did not recognise, but his name came to me as Rice. In appearance this man was above medium height, very slender, and had dark side-beard.

The exact date of this experience I cannot give, but I should say it was about the middle of December 1889. The dream greatly impressed and annoyed me. I tried to put it from me, but it persistently recurred to my thought — a haunting fear. I could not make it seem a dream, and after several hours I sent the telegram to which Miss Giddings referred. The message was sent from Ypsilanti, Mich., at about noontime, on a Monday (I remember well the day of the week) ; the answer to it was received at about 9.30 o'clock in the evening of the same day. That which to me was a dream actually occurred in detail while I was dreaming; and the physician who was in reality in attendance with Dr. Sayer was the embodiment of the one in my " vision," but his name was Ried, instead of Rice as I dreamed.

I have had other and similar experiences, but none so authentic. The others I cannot prove to have happened. . . .

Mabel Jenness Venter. Mrs. Miller writes : —

St. Denis Hotel, N.Y., February \st, 1896.

Mr. Richard Hodgson, — Dear Sir, — . . . The dream experience related by Miss Giddings occurred just as related in her article. The date of the illness was December '89. She was my guest at the time, and consequently knew the details.

When my sister's telegram arrived Dr. Louis Sayer (he died immediately afterward) was sitting upon the side of my bed, and I remember that he was profoundly impressed by the inquiry, knowing it the result of a psychological impression received from a dream. ... A. Jenness Miller.

429 A. The following case is quoted from Phantasms of the Livhig, vol. i. p. 365. The account is written by Mr. N, T. Menneer, Principal of Torre College, Torquay : —

Deceinber \Zth, 1883.

I thought you would be interested in the following account of a strange dream that came under my notice some twenty-six years ago.

My wife, since deceased, had a brother residing at Sarawak, and at the time to which I refer, staying with the Raja, Sir James Brooke.

The following is an extract from the second volume of The Raja of Sarawak, by Gertrude L. Jacob, p. 238. " Mr. Wellington " (my wife's brother)

429 A] TO CHAPTER IV 425

"was killed in a brave attempt to defend Mrs. Middleton and her children." The Chinese, it appears, taking Mr. Wellington for the Raja's son, struck off his head.

And now for the dream. I was awoke one night by my wife, who started from her sleep, terrified by the following dream. She saw her headless brother standing at the foot of the bed with his head lying on a coffin by his side. I did my best to console my wife, who continued to be much distressed for some considerable time. At length she fell asleep again, to be awoke by a similar dream. In the morning, and for several days after, she constantly referred to her dream, and anticipated sad news of her brother.

And now comes the strangest part of the story. When the news reached England I computed approximately the time, and found it coincided with the memorable night to which I have referred. N. T. Menneer.

In reply to inquiries, Mr. Menneer adds : —

My deceased wife never had, as far as I know, similar distressing dreams of death to which no real event corresponded.

There is no doubt that the Chinese struck off his head. Particulars of his fate were sent to Mr. Wellington's father by the Raja himself.

In saying I calculated the time and found it to correspond approximately, I probably gave you a wrong impression. I did not note down the date of the dream, but when the news reached England I calculated the usual time of such a voyage, and found it corresponded with the time I considered had elapsed since the night of the dream.

Professor Sidgwick, after an interview with Mr. Menneer, on September 17th, 1884, wrote :

He said that Mrs. Menneer had no definite idea where her brother had gone; they had not heard from him since his departure; she had certainly no idea that he would be engaged in military operations at all, still less that he would be engaged with Chinese. In fact she was in no state of alarm about him at all. Mr. Menneer said that they did not put down the date of the dream at the time, and that when the news came he could not remember it exactly ; but he took pains to calculate it at the time, and satisfied himself that it was at the time of the death as nearly as he could reckon. He had not been a believer in dreams previously. He heard the particulars of the death from Mr. Wellington, the father.

"This dream " (said Gurney), " if it is to be telepathically explained, must apparently have been due to the last flash of thought in the brother's consciousness. It may seem strange that a definite picture of his mode of death should present itself to a man in the instant of receiving an unexpected and fatal blow; but, as Hobbes said, 'thought is quick.' The cofifin, at any rate, may be taken as an item of death-imagery supplied by the dreamer's mind."

We have since, however, seen a letter from Sir James Brooke (Rajah of Sarawak) and an extract from the Straits Times of March 2ist, 1857, in the (London) Times for April 29th, 1857, which make it, I think, quite conceivable that the dream was a reflection of

knowledge acquired by Mr. Wellington after death, and that the head on the coffi?i had a distinct meaning. Sir James Brooke says : *' Poor Wellington's remains were consumed [by the Chinese] ; his head, borne off in triumph, alone attesting his previous murder." The Straits Times says : " The head was given up on the following day." The head, therefore, and the head alone, must undoubtedly have been buried by Mr. Wellington's friends ; and its appearance in the dream on a coffin, with the headless body standing beside it, is a coincidence even more significant than the facts which Gurney had before him when he wrote.

429 B, The next case (quoted from- Phatitasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 453) is from Mrs, Lightfoot, a lady who was none the worse witness because she took not the slightest interest in our work. The names and dates were filled in by Gurney, immediately after a personal interview, January 30th, 1884.

51 Shaftesbury Road, Ravenscourt Park, \V., January iitk, 18S4.

In giving the following experience, I may premise that as a child, and since, I have comparatively had but little knowledge (as a personal experience) of fear; and in the existence of ghosts I have always disbelieved. Did I ever see or hear sights or sounds for which, on examination, I could not account, I have always come to the conclusion that they arose from natural causes which were beyond my reach of inquiry — hence I always refused to accept anything without proof, and I may add, that I have rarely been convinced.

Some ten years ago, when in India, I contracted a great friendship, which was reciprocated, for a lady, Mrs. Reed, the wife of an officer. She had not been very strong, but when I parted from her with the intention of returning to England, no danger (the word had not even been mentioned) was anticipated, and for some few months after my return, I heard from her, bright and cheerful letters enough. In them she certainly spoke of her health not being good, but nothing more. Then after a time her letters ceased, but I heard very regularly from others in the same place, and they mentioned that her health was gradually getting worse, and that she would probably be ordered to England for a thorough change, but still I heard no sound of fatal ending, and I was looking forward to her return with a great degree of pleasure.

It was my practice not only to go to bed very late, but also for the last half-hour to pick up a book, the most uninteresting and dry that it was possible to find, and so try to soothe the mind. The moment I commenced to really feel sleepy I would lower the gas to almost a pin's point (for I did not care to extinguish it, as I had a child of three sleeping in the same room), and then I could always compose myself comfortably to a sleep into which I could then fall in a very few minutes.

On the night of Seotember 21st, 1874, I had followed this exact routine. I had put aside my book, lowered the gas, and at a little after midnight I was sound asleep. As I knew afterwards, I must have slept about three hours, when I was suddenly aroused (and was, so far as I know ^perfectlv wide awake) by a violent noise at my door, which was locked. I have some recollection of feeling

429 B] TO CHAPTER IV 427

astonished (of fear I then had none) at seeing or rather hearing within the instant my door thrown violently open, as though by some one in great anger, and I was instantly conscious that some one, something, what shall I call it, was in the room. For the hundredth part of a second it seemed to pause just within the room, and then by a movement, which it is impossible for me to describe — but it seemed to move with a rapid push — // was at the foot of my bed. Again a pause; for again the hundredth part of a second, and the figureshape rose. I heard it, but as it got higher its movements quieted, and presently it was above my bed, lying horizontally, its face downwards, parallel with my face, its feet to my feet, but with a distance of some three or four feet between us. This for a moment, whilst I waited simply in astonishment and curiosity (for I had not the very faintest idea of either who or what it was), but no fear, and then it spoke. In an instant I recognised the voice, the old familiar imperious way of speaking, as my Christian name sounded clear and full through the room. "Frances," it repeated, " I want you; come with me. Come at once." My voice responded as instantaneously, " Yes, I'll come. What need for such a hurry ? " and then came a quick imperative reply, " But you must come at once; come instantly, and without a moment's pause or hesitation." I seemed to be drawn upwards by some extraordinary magnetic influence, and then just as suddenly and violently thrown down again.

In one second of time the room was in a deathly stillness, and the words, "She is dead," were simply burnt into my mind. I sat up in bed dazed, and now, for the first time, frightened beyond measure. I sat very still for a few moments, gradually making out the different forms in the room, then I turned the gas, which was just above my head, full on, only to see that the room was totally unchanged. At the foot of my bed, at some distance from it, was the child's iron cot. I got up and looked at him ; he was sleeping quite peacefully, and had evidently been totally undisturbed. I went to the door, to find it/ast locked. I opened it, and gazed into the passage — total silence and stillness everywhere. I went into the next room, where there were sleeping two other children and their nurse, to find equal quietness there. Then I returned to my room, and I must confess it, with an awful fear oppressing me. She had come once — might she not come again ? I wrote down the date and the hour, and then opening shutter and window only looked out for the welcome dawn.

I went down to breakfast that morning, but said nothing of the details of my dream, only mentioning that I had had a very bad and a very vivid one. Afterwards I found I could settle to nothing, and at last was becoming positively so ill that I was obliged to go back to bed. That same afternoon, curiously enough, a sister came to see me, who had been abroad with me, and whilst there had known and liked this same friend. She saw I was much upset about something of which I did not care to speak, and, by way of cheering me up, began telling me news of various mutual friends. At last, during a slight pause, she said, " By the way, have you heard anything lately of Mrs. Reed ? when last I heard, she was not very well." Instantly came my reply, " Oh, she is dead," and it was only my sister's look of blank horror and astonishment that recalled me to myself. " What do you mean ? when did you hear .? " came from her in rapid utterance, and then I bethought me how indeed did I hear? who had told me? But tell her the dream I could not, so I merely answered, "You will

Though the narrator twice uses this word, she certainly did not regard her experience as a dream.

see that I am right when you look in the newspapers — how I have heard of it I will tell you some other time," and directly I changed the conversation. The visit did good, however, for I got up and went out with her, and I can only say that the impression my manner and words made upon her was so deep that the moment she arrived home she sat down and wrote to a lady in the West of England — one who knew us all, and who heard by every mail from her husband, who was in the same place as our friend. My sister told her exactly what I had said, and begged that she would at once send her particulars, since I had not done so. By return came the reply : —

" I cannot, dear Lady B., in the least understand your letter, nor what your sister can possibly mean. The last foreign mail only came in this morning " (after the date, of course, of my dream), "and so far from being 'dead,' my husband tells me Mrs. Reed is much better ; therefore, where Mrs. L. (myself) can have obtained her news is beyond my comprehension, for it is quite impossible that she can have had later news than mine, in fact, not so late, since my foreign letter arrived after your visit to her." [This is not a copy^ but a reminiscence of the letter.]

And so the matter rested, but within a month from the date of my dream came the news of Mrs. Reed's death, on September 21st.

I have but Httle now to add. The bereaved husband returned to England and called upon me. He gave me some details of the last days, and on my asking whether he remembered her last words, he turned to me with quite a look of surprise, and said, "Why, Mrs. Lightfoot, I h&\\&\& your name was the last she mentioned." Further, it was fuany months afterwards before my sister again broached the subject, but at last one day she said, " I do wish you would tell me how you knew of Mrs. Reed's death." Of course I then told her, and I may add, that so deep was the impression produced upon her that even in her last illness, which occurred seven or eight years afterwards, she spoke of it. For myself I never really recovered the shock for a long time, and even now the impression is as vivid as though it had only happened yesterday.

Frances W. Lightfoot.

Gurney adds to this account : —

Both the Calcutta Etiglishman and the Pioneer Mail (Allahabad) give September 20th, 1874, as the date of Mrs. Reed's death. Mrs. Lightfoot has unfortunately not kept her note of the day and hour. As she has now no itidependent recollection of the date of her experience, but only remembers the fact of the coincidence^ and as it is practically certain that she heard the correct date of the death, the 20th, which has since become converted in her memory to the 2ist, it seems tolerably safe to assume that her experience fell on the night of the 20th, that is, on the early morning of the 21st — not on the night of the 2ist, as stated in the account.

In answer to the question whether this was the only occasion on which she has had a sensory hallucination of this kind, Mrs. Lightfoot answered " Yes." She adds that her sister. Lady B., "mentioned the matter at once to several friends and relatives." This sister has since died.

In conversation, Mrs. Lightfoot confirmed again the fact of having had no sort of visual hallucination on any other occasion. She once, and once only, has had another remarkable auditory experience, when the sudden hearing of her christian name saved her from a terrible fall in the dark. The origin of the sound was carefully inquired into and could not be ascertained.

429C] TO CHAPTER IV 429

As a proof of the absolute conviction produced in her that her friend was dead, she told me that she had prepared a birthday present to send her, and the box was actually soldered up, and had been going by the next mail ; but she felt it impossible to send it.

She had been under the impression that the time of death exactly coincided with her vision ; but she had reckoned difference of longitude the wrong way. Mrs. Reed's husband informed her, on her inquiry, that the death took place at eleven, that is, 11 p.m. (as she thinks of September 21st, but no doubt of September 20th) ; and the vision was probably, therefore, eight or nine hours after it.

My impression of Mrs. Lightfoot entirely corresponds with her own description of herself — that she is a practical person, and without any sort of predisposition to frights or visions. The present one gave her a most severe shock, the effects of which lasted for some time.

429 C. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 199. As to the evidential force of this case, I may point out that the percipient states the experience to have been unique in his life ; and that the violence of the effect produced, leading to the very unusual entry in the diary, puts the vision outside the common run of dreams which may justly be held to afford almost limitless scope for accidental coincidences. The narrative is from Mr. Frederick Wingfield, of Belle Isle en Terre, Cotes du Nord, France.

December 20th, 1883.

I give you my most solemn assurance that what I am about to relate is the exact account of what occurred. I may remark that I am so little liable to the imputation of being easily impressed with a sense of the supernatural that I have been accused, and with reason, of being unduly sceptical upon matters which lay beyond my powers of explanation.

On the night of Thursday the 25th of March 1880 I retired to bed after reading till late, as is my habit. I dreamed that I was lying on my sofa reading, when on looking up I saw distinctly the figure of my brother, Richard Wingfield-Baker, sitting on the chair before me. I dreamed that I spoke to him, but that he simply bent his head in reply, rose, and left the room. When I awoke I found myself standing with one foot on the ground by my bedside, and the other on the bed, trying to speak and to pronounce my brother's name. So strong was the impression as to the reality of his presence, and so vivid the whole scene as dreamt, that I left my bedroom to search for my brother in the sitting-room. I examined the chair where I had seen him seated, I returned to bed, tried to fall asleep in the hope of a repetition of the appearance, but my mind was too excited, too painfully disturbed, as I recalled what I had dreamed. I must have, however, fallen asleep towards the morning ; but when I awoke the impression of my dream was as vivid as ever, and I may add is to this very hour equally strong and clear. My sense of impending evil was so strong that I at once made a note in my memorandum-book of this "appearance," and added the words, " God forbid ! "

Three days afterwards I received the news that my brother, Richard Wingfield-Baker, had died on Thursday evening the 25th of March 1880, at 8.30 p.m.,

1 This expression cannot be excluded when the words of our informant are quoted. We, ourselves, of course, regard all these occurrences as strictly natural.

from the effects of the terrible injuries received in a fall while hunting with the Blackmore Vale hounds.

I will only add that I have been living in this town some twelve months ; that I had not had any recent communication with my brother ; that I knew him to be in good health, and that he was a perfect horseman. I did not at once communicate this dream to any intimate friend — there was unluckily none here at that very moment — but I did relate the story after the receipt of the news of my brother's death, and showed the entry in my memorandum-book. As evidence, of course, this is worthless ; but I give you my word of honour that the circumstances I have related are the positive truth.

Fred. Wingfield.

February i,th, 18S4. I must explain my silence by the excuse that I could not procure till to-day a letter from my friend the Prince de Lucinge-Faucigny, in which he mentions the fact of my having related to him the particulars of my dream on the 25th of March 1880. He came from Paris to stay a few days with me early in April, and saw the entry in my note-book, which I now enclose for your inspection. You will observe the initials R. B. W. B., and a curious story is attached to these letters. During that sleepless night I naturally dwelt upon the incident, and recalled the circumstances connected with the apparition. Though I distinctly recognised my brother's features, the idea flashed upon me that the figure bore some slight resemblance to my most intimate and valued friend, Colonel Bigge, and in my dread of impending evil to one to whom I am so much attached, I wrote the four initials, R. B. for Richard Baker, and W. B. for William Bigge. When the tidings of my brother's death reached me I again looked at the entry, and saw with astonishment that the four letters stood for my brother's full name, Richard Baker Wingfield-Baker, though I had always spoken of him as Richard Baker in common with the rest of my family. The figure I saw was that of my brother ; and in my anxious state of mind I worried myself into the belief that possibly it might be that of my old friend, as a resemblance did exist in the fashion of their beards. I can give you no further explanations, nor can I produce further testimony in support of my assertions. Fred. Wingfield.

" With this letter " (writes Gurney) " Mr. Wingfield sent me the notebook, in which, among a number of business memoranda, notes of books, &c., I find the entry — ' Appearance — Thursday night, 25th of March 1S80. R. B. W. B. GodVorbid!'"

The following letter was enclosed : —

COAT-AN-Nos, zfhj7-ier, 18S4.

MoN CHER Ami, — Je n'ai aucun effort de mdmoire k faire pour me rappeler le fait dont vous me parlez, car j'en ai conservd un souvenir tres net et tr^s precis.

Je me souviens parfaitement que le dimanche, 4 avril, 1880, ^tant arrivd de Paris le matin nieme pour passer ici quelques jours, j'ai ^t^ ddjeuner avec vous. Je me souviens aussi parfaitement que je vous ai trouv^ fort dmu de la douloureuse nouvelle qui vous dtait parvenue quelques jours auparavant, de la mort de I'un des messieurs vos fr6res. Je me rappclle aussi comme si le fait s'dtait passd hier, tant j'en ai €\.€ frappd, que quelques jours avant d'apprendre la

429 D] TO CHAPTER IV 431

triste nouvelle, vous aviez un soir, dtant ddjk couchd, vu, ou cru voir, mais en tous cas tr^s distinctement, votre fr^re, celui dont vous veniez d'apprendre la mort subite, tout pres de votre lit, et que, dans la conviction oil vous dtiez que c'dtait bien lui que vous perceviez, vous vous dtiez lev^ et lui aviez adressd la parole, et qu'k ce moment vous aviez cess^ de le voir comme s'il s'dtait evanoui ainsi qu'un spectre. Je me souviens encore que, sous I'impression de I'^motion bien naturelle qui avait 6t6 la suite de cet evenement, vous I'aviez inscrit dans un petit carnet oii vous avez I'habitude d'dcrire les faits saillants de votre trfes paisible existence, et que vous m'avez fait voir ce carnet. Cette apparition, cette vision, ou ce songe, comme vous voudrez I'appeler, est inscrit, si j'ai bon souvenir, k la date du 24 ou du 25 fevrier,i et ce n'est que deux ou trois jours apres que vous avez recu la nouvelle officielle de la mort de votre fr^re.

J'ai etd d'autant moins surpris de ce que vous me disiez alors, et j'en ai aussi conserve un souvenir d'autant plus net et precis, comme je vous le disais en commencant, que j'ai dans ma famille des faits similaires auxquels je crois absolument. . . . Faucigny, Prince Lucinge.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Wingfield adds : —

I have never had any other startling dream of the same nature, nor any dream from which I woke with the same sense of reality and distress, and of which the effect continued long after I was well awake. Nor have I upon any other occasion had a hallucination of the senses.

The Times obituary for March 30th, 1880, records the death of Mr. R. B. Wingfield- Baker, of Orsett Hall, Essex, as having taken place on the 25th, The Essex Independent gives the same date, adding that Mr. Baker breathed his last about g o'clock.

429 D. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 420.^

From Miss Richardson, 47 Bedford Gardens, Kensington, W.

The writer is a very worthy wife of a shopkeeper, who told me the occurrence some years ago, then with more detail, as it was fresh in her memory, and her husband can vouch for the facts told him at the time, and the strange " uncanny " effect of the dream on her mind for some time after.

From Mrs. Green to Miss Richardson.

Newry, 2\st First Mo7tth, 1885.

Dear Friend, — In compliance with thy request, I give thee the particulars of my dream.

I saw two respectably-dressed females driving alone in a vehicle like a mineral-water cart. Their horse stopped at a water to drink ; but as there was

1 The words " quelques jours auparavant," coupled with the fact that the number of the day is right, suggest \.\\zX fevrier is a mere slip of the pen for inars.

"^ This case was admitted to Phantasms of the Living as a death coincidence by mistake. (Case 138, vol. i. p. 375.) The death took place at the Antipodes, and the coincidence between it and the percipient's experience was represented by the narrator as exact, through the not very uncommon error of reckoning the difference of time made by difference of longitude the wrong way. We did not discover this error till the first edition of the book had been published. In fact, the percipient's experience followed the death by more than twelve hours.

no footing, he lost his balance, and in trying to recover it he plunged right in. With the shock, the women stood up and shouted for help, and their hats rose off their heads, and as all were going down I turned away crying, and saying, " Was there no one at all to help them ? " upon which I awoke, and my husband asked me what was the matter. I related the above dream to him, and he asked me if I knew them. I said I did not, and thought I had never seen either of them. The impression of the dream and the trouble it brought was over me all day. I remarked to my son it was the anniversary of his birthday and my own also — the loth of First Month, and this is why I remember the date.

The following Third Month I got a letter and newspaper from my brother in Australia, named Allen, letting me know the sad trouble which had befallen him in the loss, by drowning, of one of his daughters and her companion. Thou wilt see by the description given of it in the paper how the event corresponded with my dream. My niece was born in Australia, and I never saw her.

Please return the paper at thy convenience. Considering that our night is their day, I must have been in sympathy with the sufferers at the time of the accident, on the loth of First Month, 1878.

It is referred to in two separate places in the newspaper.

From the Inglezvood Advertiser.

Friday evening, January iitk, 1878. A dreadful accident occurred in the neighbourhood of Wedderburn on Wednesday last, resulting in the death of two women, named Lehey and Allen. It appears that the deceased were driving into Wedderburn in a spring cart from the direction of Kinypanial, when they attempted to water their horse at a dam on the boundary of Torpichen Station. The dam was 10 or 12 feet deep in one spot, and into this deep hole they must have inadvertently driven, for Mr. W. McKechnie, manager of Torpichen Station, upon going to the dam some hours afterwards, discovered the spring cart and horse under the water, and two women's hats floating on the surface. . . . The dam was searched, and the bodies of the two women, clasped in each other's arms, recovered.

Extract from Evidence given at the Inquest.

Joseph John Allen, farmer, deposed: " I identify one of the bodies as that of my sister. I saw her about 1 1 a.m. yesterday. . . . The horse had broken away and I caught it for her. Mrs. Lehey and my sister met me when I caught the horse. . , . They then took the horse and went to Mr. Clarke's. I did not see them afterwards alive." William McKechnie deposed: "About 4 p.m. yesterday I was riding by the dam when I observed the legs of a horse and the chest above the water."

Mr. Green confirms as follows : —

Newry, i^tk Second Month, 1885. Dear Friend, Edith Richardson, — In reference to the dream that my wife had of seeing two women thrown out of a spring cart by their horse stopping to drink out of some deep water, I remember she was greatly distressed about it, and seemed to feel great sympathy for them. It occurred on the night of the 9th of January.

429 EJ TO CHAPTER IV 433

The reason I can remember the date so well is that the loth was the anniversary of my wife and our son's birthday. As the day advanced she seemed to get worse, and I advised her to go out for a drive ; when she returned she told me she was no better, and also said she had told the driver not to go near water, lest some accident should happen, as she had had such a dreadful dream the night before, at the same time telling him the nature of it. As my wife's niece did not live with her father, he was not told of it until the next morning, which would be our evening of the loth, and which we think accounted for the increased trouble she felt in sympathy with him. Thos. Green.

Mrs. Green has had no other experience of the sort.

Inglewood is in Queensland, on the border of New South Wales.

429 E. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 341. Communicated by Fraulein Schneller, sister-in-law of the percipient, and known to F. W. H. M., January 1890.

DoBER UND Pause, Schlesien, December \zth, 1889.

About a year ago there died in a neighbouring village a brewer called Wiinscher, with whom I stood in friendly relations. His death ensued after a short illness, and as I seldom had an opportunity of visiting him, I knew nothing of his illness nor of his death. On the day of his death I went to bed at nine o'clock, tired with the labours which my calling as a farmer demands of me. Here I must observe that my diet is of a frugal kind ; beer and wine are rare things in my house, and water, as usual, had been my drink that night. Being of a very healthy constitution, I fell asleep as soon as I lay down. In my dream I heard the deceased call out with a loud voice, " Boy, make haste and give me my boots." This awoke me, and I noticed that, for the sake of our child, my wife had left the light burning. I pondered with pleasure over my dream, thinking in my mind how Wiinscher, who was a good-natured, humorous man, would laugh when I told him of this dream. Still thinking on it, I hear Wiinscher's voice scolding outside, just under my window. I sit up in my bed at once and listen, but cannot understand his words. What can the brewer want ? I thought, and I know for certain that I was much vexed with him, that he should make a disturbance in the night, as I felt convinced that his affairs might surely have waited till the morrow. Suddenly he comes into the room from behind the linen press, steps with long strides past the bed of my wife and the child's bed; wildly gesticulating with his arms all the time, as his habit was, he called out, " What do you say to this, Herr Oberamtmann ? This afternoon at five o'clock I have died." Startled by this information, I exclaim, " Oh, that is not true ! " He replied : " Truly, as I tell you ; and what do you think ? They want to bury me already on Tuesday afternoon at two o'clock," accentuating his assertions all the while by his gesticulations. During this long speech of my visitor I examined myself as to whether I was really awake and not dreaming.

I asked myself: Is this a hallucination? Is my mind in full possession of its faculties ? Yes, there is the light, there the jug, this is the mirror, and this the brewer; and I came to the conclusion: I am awake. Then the thought occurred to me. What will my wife think if she awakes and sees the brewer in our bedroom? In this fear of her waking up I turn round to my wife, and to my great relief I see from her face, which is turned towards me, that she is still asleep ; but she looks very pale. I say to the brewer, " Herr Wiinscher, we VOL. I. 2 E

will speak softly, so that my wife may not wake up, it would be very disagreeable to her to find you here." To which Wiinscher answered in a lower and calmer tone : " Don't be afraid, I will do no harm to your wife." Things do happen indeed for which we find no explanation— I thought to myself, and said to Wiinscher: " If this be true, that you have died, I am sincerely sorry for it ; I will look after your children." Wiinscher stepped towards me, stretched out his arms and moved his lips as though he would embrace me ; therefore I said in a threatening tone, and looking steadfastly at him with frowning brow: " Don't come so near, it is disagreeable to me," and lifted my right arm to ward him off, but before my arm reached him the apparition had vanished. My first look was to my wife to see if she were still asleep. She was. I got up and looked at my watch, it was seven minutes past twelve. My wife woke up and asked me: "To whom did you speak so loud just now?" "Have you understood anything?" I said. " No," she answered, and went to sleep again.

I impart this experience to the Society for Psychical Research, in the belief that it may serve as a new proof for the real existence of telepathy. I must further remark that the brewer had died that afternoon at five o'clock, and was buried on the following Tuesday at two. — With great respect,

Karl Dignowity

(Landed Proprietor).

The usual time for burial in Germany, adds Fraulein Schneller, is three days after death. This time may be prolonged, however, on application. There are no special hours fixed.

In conversation Fraulein S. described her brother-in-law as a man of strong practical sense and of extremely active habits.

We have received the " Sterbeurkunde " from the " Standesbeamte " Siegismund, Kreis Sagan, certifying that Karl Wiinscher died Saturday, September 15 th, 1888, at 4.30 p.m., and was buried Tuesday, September i8th, 1888, at 2 P.M.

Herr Dignowity writes again, January i8th, 1890 : —

Frau Wiinscher told me that the time of the burial was settled in the deathroom immediately after Wiinscher's death, because relations at a distance had to be summoned by telegram. Wiinscher had suffered from inflammation of the lungs, which ended in spasm of the heart. During his illness his thoughts had been much occupied with me, and he often wondered what I should say if I knew how ill he was.

Finally, Frau Dignowity (born Schneller) writes from Pause, January 18th, 1890 : —

I confirm that my husband told me on the morning of September i6th, 1888, that the brewer Wiinscher had given him intimation of his death.

429 F. From \h& Journal '$).V.^., vol. viii. p. 123. The account was sent to Dr. Hodgson by Mr. A, E. Dolbear, Professor of Physics in Tufts College, Mass.

Tufts College, Mass., April 11///, 1S95.

Dr. R. Hodgson, — Dear Sir, — . . . Periiaps I have told you before that I have had a great many such or hallucinations, but I am reminded of one which

429 F] TO CHAPTER IV 435

happened last summer. I was a lecturer at Greenacre, Me., where Miss Farmer, daughter of the late electrician, Moses G., had a summer hotel, and many of the prominent occult folks of the country gathered. I stopped for the night at the house of Miss Farmer — the old homestead. During the night I dreamed that Mr. Farmer was in the room and talked with me, though I couldn't see him. I said to him, " How shall I know it is you, and not some one else.'"' He replied, " I'll show you my hand; " so his left hand was extended to me, and I took hold of it. It was very cold, and made me so shudder that I was at once awakened. I found myself uneasy, and turned over in bed to ease my uncomfortableness. Directly I slept again and dreamed over the same occurrence ; when Farmer showed his hand, I asked him how I should know it to be his hand. He replied, " I'll move my fingers so," and he straightened out his first and third fingers, while the second and fourth were bent in a very uncommon way. I can't move my fingers in such positions without the aid of the other hand. After that the " seance " ended, and I forgot all about it, till next morning at breakfast with Miss F. I chanced to recall it, and told her I had dreamed of her father, and I related the above to her ; when I came to the finger business she dropped her fork, and with much earnestness said, " That was one of his tricks. He could get the fingers of his left hand into uncommon positions, and for the amusement of visitors and intimate acquaintances would do it." I never knew he had any such trick, so I was surprised. I recorded the above facts the same day. Those whom I told, and especially Miss F., who were spiritualists, seemed sure I had had a visit from Mr. Farmer. ... A. E. Dolbear.

Tufts College, Mass., April \Zth, 1895. Dr. R. Hodgson, — Dear Sir, — I had met Mr. Farm.er two or three times. Was not intimately acquainted, and have no recollection of ever seeing him do any kind of a trick, or indeed that he could do any. Each time when I did meet him it was on electrical business, and I knew nothing about him socially. It does not seem probable to me that I ever saw him twist his fingers in any way. ... A. E. Dolbear.

Miss Farmer writes as follows to Professor William James in corroboration of Professor Dolbear's statement : —

Eliot, Maine, June \^th, 1896.

. . . My father had great regard for his friend (Prof. Dolbear), and respect for his valuable contributions to science. After reading his book, Matter, Ether, and Motion, he said, " I would like to talk with Dolbear and tell him some of the experiences that have come to us since mother went, and see what he would say to them." . . . Callers coming in, the subject was dropped.

In 1894 Professor Dolbear kindly consented to become one of the speakers at Greenacre. The inn being full, I took him to Bittersweet, and he occupied the library chamber. In course of conversation the next morning, he said, " I had a strange dream last night — I dreamed of your father." That did.not seem strange, as he had looked at his life-sized portrait before retiring. I asked about the dream, and he said he dreamed he heard his voice, and was told it was my father. He asked how he should know it was he. The reply was, " I will show you my left hand and arm," and he did so twice. The professor still questioned, " How shall I know it is your hand and arm rather than some one

else's ?" The reply was, " I will show you a trick with my fingers," and then the professor described and tried to imitate it, but could not. I was dumb with astonishment, and then said, " Why, professor, that was a favourite trick of my fathers. When tricks were performed, he would say, ' Who can do this ? ' and then, without using the right, would bend the joints and twist the fingers of the left hand in a way that I never saw imitated." That to me was a positive proof of my father's identity; it was like him — he liked a joke. He longed to be able to share with his friends the conviction of truth which had come to him. He knew that with Professor Dolbear no proof would be convincing unless of the most unique character. The professor said he was wakened and lay for a time thinking of it ; then fell asleep and dreamed the same thing again. He was much pleased with my corroboration of the circumstance, and said he would willingly travel sixty miles for an experience like that. In 1895 he came to Greenacre a second time, and at dinner with Rev. E. P. Powell, of Clinton, New York, in speaking of my father, used these words, " I talked with him last summer." Knowing that my father had passed out in 1893, Mr. Powell was mystified, and I said, " Professor, Mr. Powell does not understand how that can be, you should explain yourself." He then related his dream. I listened carefully, and noted that the story was just as he had given it the year before.

I omitted one circumstance of 1894. Coming from the tent after the lecture, I met Dr. J. L. M. Willis, my father's physician, and a very intelligent man. I presented him to Professor Dolbear, and then said, " Do you remember, doctor, of any special trick that my father could do with his hands ? " He answered, "No, I do not know of any except this." He then put up his left hand, and trying to cross his fingers, said, " I can't do it ; I never saw anybody else who could." . . . Sarah J. Farmer.

509 A]



Appendices to Chapter V

509 A. The following criticism of the Salpetriere School is taken from an article by Dr. J. Milne Bramwell on "What is Hypnotism?" in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. pp. 205-209.

Charcofs Theory, or that of the SalpHrilre School.

According to this school, hypnosis is an artificially produced morbid condition, characterised by certain chemical changes in the secretions — a neurosis only to be found in the hysterical. Women are more easily hypnotised than men ; children and old people are almost entirely insusceptible.

Hypnosis can be produced by purely physical means, such as pressure on certain regions of the body ; and a person can be hypnotised, as it were, unknown to himself.

The hypnotic phenomena are divided into three different stages, which usually appear in regular sequence. These are induced and terminated by certain definite physical stimuli.

Hypnotism has so far not proved of much therapeutic value.

There is danger of provoking hysteria in trying to induce hypnosis.

There is a difference between suggestion in normal life and in hypnosis. The former is a physiological phenomenon, the latter a pathological one. Suggestibility does not constitute hypnosis, it is only one of its symptoms. There does not exist a single case in which a somnambule has acted criminally under the influence of suggestion.

This theory has been strongly attacked, chiefly by the hypnotic observers who belong to what is termed the Nancy School. To commence with, they point out the insuflSciency of the data upon which the theory has been founded, and cite the confession of its own supporters that only a dozen cases of true hypnosis have occurred in the Salpetri&re in ten years, and that a very large proportion of the experiments were conducted on one subject, who had long been an inmate of that hospital. On the other hand, they call attention to the extended nature of their own observations and to the fact that their conclusions are drawn from the study of many thousand cases.

Is Hypnosis a Morbid Condition which can only be Induced /« the Hysterical?

This question must, I think, be answered in the negative. Moll, in reference to Charcot's argument that hypnotism and hysteria are identical, because the

chemical character of certain secretions is similar in both, pointed out that Charcot's subjects all suffered from hysteria ; and that, as the phenomena which characterise waking life are readily induced in hypnosis, Charcot easily created a complete type of hysteria by suggestion. It would be equally easy to suggest stammering in hypnosis, but one would not be justified, therefore, in characterising hypnosis as a condition of stammering.

Again, as the following statistics show, if the hysterical alone can be hypnotised, over 90 per cent, of mankind apparently suffer from hysteria. Some years ago Bernheim had already attempted to hypnotise 10,000 hospital patients with over 90 per cent, of successes, while Wetterstrand recently reported 6500 cases with 105 failures. Schrenck-Notzing in his First International Statistics, published in 1892, gave 8705 cases by 15 observers in different countries, with 6 per cent, of failures. Mr. Hugh Wingfield, when Demonstrator of Physiology at Cambridge, attempted to hypnotise over 170 men, all of whom, with the exception of 18, were undergraduates. In about 80 per cent, hypnosis was induced at the first attempt ; but as no second trial was ever made with the unsuccessful cases, these results undoubtedly understate the susceptibility. (See Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 198.) Most of the undergraduates would be drawn from our public schools, and, if these do not always turn out good scholars, they cannot at least be accused of producing hysterical invalids. Braid stated that the nervous and hysterical were the most difficult to hypnotise, while Li^beault found soldiers and sailors particularly easy to influence. Grossmann, of Berlin, recently asserted that hard-headed North Germans were very susceptible, and I observed that healthy Yorkshire farm labourers made remarkably good subjects. Professor Forel told me that he had hypnotised nearly all his asylum warders; that he selected these himself, and certainly did not choose them from the ranks of the hysterical. In former times Esdaile's patients were stated to be hysterical. In reply to this, he said, " I cannot possibly see how hysteria has got into my hospitals, where I never saw it before — coolies and felons not being at all nervous subjects. ... As natural hysteria may be supposed to be more powerful than imitation, I shall look with impatience for the announcement in the Mornmg Post that Mrs. Freake has been cured of her nervous headaches by the skilful application of hysteria, and that Lady Tantrum has had her arm cut off while in a fit of hysterics, without knowing it. These should be easy feats for our fashionable physicians and surgeons, as they have the disease and antidote ready made to their hands, whereas it costs me and my assistants great trouble to make the coolies and prisoners of Bengal hysterical to the degree necessary to render them insensible to the loss of their members."

These and similar facts apparently justify the statements of Forel and Moll that it is not the healthy but the hysterical who are the most difficult to hypnotise. According to the former, " every mentally healthy man is naturally hypnotisable ; " while the latter says, "If we take a pathological condition of the organism as necessary for hypnosis, we shall be obliged to conclude that nearly everybody is not quite right in the head. The mentally unsound, particularly idiots, are much more difficult to hypnotise than the healthy. Intelligent people, and those with strong wills, are more easily hypnotisable than the dull, the stupid, or the weak-willed."

Are Women fuore Susceptible than Men?

All observers, with the exception of those of the Salpetriire School, agree in stating that sex has little or no influence upon the susceptibility to hypnosis.

509 A] TO CHAPTER V 439

According to Lidbeault, the difference between the sexes is rather less than i per cent. The majority of Esdaile's subjects were men, and, as we have seen, Mr. Wingfield was able to hypnotise about 80 per cent, of the Cambridge undergraduates at the first attempt.

Are Children and Old People Insusceptible f

Wetterstrand found that all children from three or four to fifteen years of age could be influenced without exception. Dr. Bdrillon, out of 250 cases in children, hypnotised 80 per cent, at the first attempt. Liebeault also found children peculiarly susceptible, and one of his statistical tables records 100 per cent, of successes up to the age of fourteen. In adult life age apparently makes little difference. In the same table we find that from the ages of fourteen to twenty-one the failures were about ro per cent., and from sixty-three years and upwards about 13 per cent.

Can Hypnosis be Induced by Mechanical Means alone ?

This question is answered by the Nancy School in the negative, and my own experience agrees with this. I know of no single instance where hypnosis has followed the employment of mechanical means, when mental influences have been carefully excluded, and the subjects have been absolutely ignorant of what was expected of them. No one was ever hypnotised by looking at a larkmirror until Dr. Luys had borrowed this lure from the bird-catchers and invested it with hypnotic power. On the other hand, any physical method will succeed with a susceptible subject who knows what is expected of him.

Are Hypnotic Phenomena divided into three Distinct Stages?

The stages described by the Salpetriere School, as arising from definite physical stimuli, have never been noticed by other observers. Amongst the many hundred hypnotised subjects I have seen, none have responded to the manipulations which produced such striking phenomena at the Salpetriere. On the other hand, I and many others have found that we could easily evoke these stages by verbal suggestion, and train the patients to manifest them at any given signal. The condition, however, was always an artificial one.

Is Hypnotism of Little Therapeutic Value?

On the one hand, we have the negative evidence of a few cases observed at the Salpetriere, where experiment, not cure, seemed the main end. On the other, the positive evidence, drawn from many thousands of cases, where hypnotism has been successfully employed for the relief or cure of disease.

Is Hypnotism Dangerous ?

The Salpetriere School answer this in the affirmative, asserting that hysterical symptoms have sometimes appeared after the attempted induction of hypnosis. That such phenomena should occur with them is not surprising, when one considers the nature of the subjects and their surroundings, and the violent and startling methods sometimes resorted to. The slight accidents which they record have not occurred in other and more experienced hands. Professor Forel says : — " Liebeault, Bernheim, Wetterstrand, van Eeden, de Jong, Moll, I myself, and the other followers of the Nancy School, declare categorically that, although we have seen many thousands of hypnotised per-

sons we have never observed a single case of mental or bodily harm caused by hypnosis, but, on the contrary, have seen many cases of illness relieved or cured by it." This statement I can fully endorse, as I have never seen an unpleasant symptom, even of the most trivial nature, follow the skilled induction of hypnosis.

See also an important paper by Dr. Bramwell, relating chiefly to the therapeutic value of hypnotism, and entitled " Hypnotism : A Reply to Recent Criticisms," in Brai?i, Part Ixxxv. (Spring, 1899), p. 141.

