12. The experiments thus far described, although presenting some novel \ points, have been such as any observer with good hypnotic subjects at his disposal will probably be able to repeat. Those to which I now come involve j the rarer phenomenon of thought-transference, which cannot be guaranteed in the case of any hypnotic subject, although it would doubtless be oftener found if it were oftener looked for. The evidence for Mr. G. A. Smith's power of transmitting ideas, without the use of ordinary means, to the minds of these and other subjects has been so often discussed in these Proceedings that I need here only remark that in all these experiments a close watch was kept by Dr. Dill or myself, or both of us, to guard against indications (which, of course, may be quite involuntarily given), while at the same time the picture to be discerned in the crystal involved conceptions more complicated than a mere card-name or number. I omit the first of these experiments, which was successful, but during which 1 left the room to speak to Dr. J. Gordon Dill, a physician who had previously assisted in similar experiments, and who kindly consented to help me in these, in which it is naturally desirable to have two observers. In each case Dr. Dill or I wrote down the desired picture carefully on a piece of paper out of sight of the subject and showed it to Mr. G. A. Smith, while the subject was entranced (in the last two experiments after he was awakened). Mr. G. A. Smith then stood at some distance from the percipient, and out of his sight, while the percipient fixed his eyes on the glass of water, and made remarks to which (unless otherwise stated) no one replied. Dr. Dill watched Mr. Smith, and I watched the percipient, or vice vefsd. Such precautions imply no distrust of either agent or percipient, but should be taken as a matter of course in all

624A] TO CHAPTER VI 583

experiments of this kind. Were I myself acting as agent I should prefer to be watched, since no one can be absolutely certain as to what sounds or movements he may unconsciously make. If it is once for all assumed that the human organism, when used in experiments which do not in themselves present any means of eliminating the " personal equation," needs some other eye to guard against possible idiosyncrasies which may confuse the experiments, then such supervision may be submitted to with no more sense of discredit than the astronomer feels when his individual observations are accepted not as absolute truth, but as data to be corrected in a special recognised way. I wrote down " Two cats fighting," and showed the paper carefully to Dr. Dill and Mr. Smith — whom I will call D. and S. T. (in waking state) at once saw "two cats — both with their backs up — fighting, one black and striped, the other with patches of white." "Where are the cats?" "On a wall." S. had mentally reproduced a picture of two cats fighting, done in whitewash on a wall — so that his cats were both white. During this experiment D. left the room for a few minutes : I watched T., whose eyes, as I believe, never left the glass of water.

13. Next time both subjects (hypnotised and awakened as usual) were to see in the same water-glass the same theme, written down by D. and shown to S. and myself : " Boat putting off from beach." P. saw nothing. T. saw " A room cleared for dancing, the gas-branches wreathed with flowers." This appeared to be a deferred picture belonging to a previous series. He had been told, in an experiment which I have omitted, to see four scenes of his past life, at different ages. He had seen three, and this scene was probably enough the fourth, which was to be typical of his adolescence. At any rate he was simply hypnotised again, and again awakened (D. and I watching throughout). On reawaking he said: "There are boats — several steamers and two boats rowing in front, like a picture of a boat-race in the Graphic^ This was an approximation to the desired picture.

14. In the next experiment (same conditions) the theme, written down by me, which S. was mentally to suggest, was "acrobats swinging from trapeze." Neither P. nor T. saw anything at first. They were rehypnotised and reawakened. P. sees a man. T. sees nothing. P. : " He has got something round on his hand like a sailor with a life-buoy, and a rope hanging from his hand." T. : "I imagine that I see the same thing." P. : "I believe he's standing on a vessel— on the deck of a boat — now he's still there, but the vessel's gone — you can only see his feet and nothing beneath him." T. : " He looks to me like a half-photograph." T. then had to leave. We told P. to put himself into the man's attitude. The pose assumed was just that of a man who has lifted himself half over his trapeze, the rope which P. saw being across his body, just about where the trapeze's seat (of rope or wood) would come. Such a picture would also correspond to T.'s "half [length] photograph."

15. Same conditions. I chose the subject, " a house on fire." This time both D. and I watched P. and S., who stood behind P. (of course not in contact), looking at the lamp, and imagining (as he afterwards told us) a great square of flame. P. : "I see something hke a bright light ; there's a ladder up at the window — a house on fire — no doubt about it."

16. Same conditions. Subject written down by D. : " Mr. Gladstone." P. : " I think I see something like a man — a man's head — comes and goes in a flash. I know, it's Gladstone, a photograph — head and shoulders." Here I had to leave, but Dr. Dill continued the experiments. I now quote his

account. Mrs. G. A. Smith was now present, but was not informed of the scene.

17. [Same conditions.] "Jack the Ripper committing a murder." [Subject written down by D.] P. : "I can see something now — it's a man — rather faint. Very awful-looking man. Nothing like Gladstone. Repulsive and dirty-looking. Has something in his hand — it's a knife. Good gracious! what a terrible-looking man — in rags— with his hat coming over his eyes — looks like a murderer." D. : " Is any one with him? " P.: " No, he's alone." Presently : " Yes, he is talking to some one — another man. No, it's a woman." [A few more details are seen and P. recognises the murderer.]

18. Same conditions. "St. George and the Dragon." P. : " Oh, I can see what that is — it's a picture of St. George and the Dragon. The usual picture. Not moving, simply a picture."

19. Here P., as D. tells me in a letter, became anxious to go off to catch a train, a preoccupation which generally interfered with success. On this and the next occasion S. was not shown the theme until after P. had been awakened. [He was hypnotised, as already stated, between each experiment.] Subject: "A pantomime — clown and policeman on stage." P.: "I see something like a lion, I think. Can't tell what it is till it comes closer. Quite gone. Saw something like a man in a white hat — gone — looks like one of the circus clowns — very smudgy, with a mist in front of it." Then about 15 minutes during which he saw nothing. Then " The clown again ! but I lose sight of him when he moves."

20. Subject: "A photograph of Mr. Myers." [This time S. opened and read the paper designating the desired picture downstairs, and did not enter the room. P. saw the beach — boats — nothing.]

625 A. I quote next a record of crystal visions by Mrs. A. W. Verrall, a lecturer at Newnham College, and known to the classical world as the translator of Pausanias. Mrs. Verrall made the experiments simply at my request, without previous knowledge of the subject or interest in it. It will be seen that her crystal-visions do not involve any telepathy or clairvoyance. They present in somewhat developed form what appear to be usual early stages in this form of experiment. The numbers within brackets represent the chronological order of the experiments, all of which have been recorded without delay. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 473-77. See also 610 A and 623 A.)

... I have tried various objects in crystal-gazing, such as a cut crystal, a globular crystal, a glass paper-weight, and a glass full of water, and I find no difference in their efficacy. I have also tried under varying conditions of light, with the conclusion that a dim light is the most likely to result in the seeing of a picture. I have sometimes seen pictures in quite bright light, but never in absolute darkness. Often I see nothing at all but the bright points of light in the crystal, and often I see nothing in the crystal, but get a mental picture suggesting something I have forgotten to do. Indeed, I find crystal-gazing a very convenient way of recalling things forgotten, but in that case I see nothing in the crystal. The difference between a picture in the crystal and a mental picture is quite marked, but difficult to describe ; it will perhaps help to show what I mean if I say that the recalled image of what I have seen in the crystal

625A] TO CHAPTER VI 585

differs as much from the actual image as the mental image of a person differs from the actual person. I believe that with me the crystal picture is built up from the bright points in the crystal, as they sometimes enter into it ; but the picture, when once produced, has a reality which I have never been able to obtain when looking into the fire or trying to call up an imaginary scene with my eyes shut. It has occasionally happened that I have been able to see more on a closer investigation than on the first glance, but if I try to interpose a magnifying-glass between my eye and the crystal the picture instantly goes and only the recollection remains. The following case is almost the only one where I have seen a real person, and here the picture grew distinct as I looked.

I saw (27) a black object which defined itself into the head of a man ; then I saw that it was my husband's head turned nearly in profile towards my left. Behind it was a square-backed chair of brown leather. He was reading, his eyes being on a book, which I could not see. I tried to see the whole figure, in order to know what the book was, and shut my eyes. On opening them I saw the whole figure for a moment, but it was too small for me to distinguish anything. In a moment the head came back, and I had an impression that the book was red, though I could not see it.

As far as I could ascertain, this picture was not telepathic. This is not the only occasion on which I have had a distinct impression of colour coupled with a consciousness that I had not seen the colour. Once I saw a flower (20) which " I knew to be pink, though I saw no colour," and again (12) I once saw a "black cat with ribbon round neck which I knew to be red, though it had no colour." In these last two cases I spent some time trying to see the colour which I knew to be there, but I was not successful. In the greater number of cases the picture has been coloured, but sometimes I am (3, 32) only aware of luminosity and darkness, sometimes (23) of black and white as in a pen-and-ink sketch. I have not been able to find that the colour of the background for the crystal produces any effect on the colour of the picture. I have tried placing the crystal on white linen, dark-blue silk, bright-blue stuff and red leather, but have never been conscious of any suggestion of colour from the background, or able to trace any connection between the background and the vision. . . .

The variety of pictures seen is considerable ; I have classified as follows the thirty-three crystal-visions recorded, covering a period of twenty-one months. {a) Animals, 5 ; {b) Human figures, 7 ; {c) Common objects, 5 (such as clock, ring, melon, &c.) ; {d) Geometrical figure, i ; {e) Written words, 2 ; (/) Scenes, 4 ; {g) Fanciful groups or scenes, 9.

With regard to the written words (^ ), I may say that both instances occurred after a distinct suggestion from myself. On the first occasion I looked in the crystal immediately after writing to ask for an address which I had known, but forgotten. I saw a row of small letters, wondered if they represented the address required, then saw plainly 39 Onslow Square. It was only the number which I wanted, and I found that the number was not correct. On the second occasion (10) I had been trying to obtain automatic writing while looking in the crystal. I was also wondering who had put a pair of lost scissors in a very conspicuous place, where I had just found them. I saw a name written, and found that my right hand had written the same name ; it was a name likely to occur to me. . . .

I have taken considerable pains to endeavour to trace connections between

the pictures in the crystal and ideas or objects lately present to my mind, but there are only nine cases out of the thirty-three where I have perceived any possible connection between my thoughts and my visions. . . .

Two of these (4, 10) have already been mentioned ; they are the cases where written words appeared. In the next case (5) I had been wondering what people we should meet at a luncheon party to which we were going, and I saw in the crystal a human figure, that of " an old lady in black, with a veil or hood on," not a very likely guest, perhaps. In the fourth case (24) after " endless fleeting pictures, single figures, groups, sense of rush, figure with arm out," suddenly the whole became clear " and I saw a man in uniform and cap, with gold or silver braid, holding out his arm to signal, and a train rushing on full speed, and I knew there was an accident, though I saw none." I had been to town and back on that day. The next two (29, 30) were seen in immediate succession ; I saw first the letter A in small bright stars, v/ith a comet overhead, and on looking again, a pyramid dark against a red sky. I find a note in the book that we had been " noticing the red glow of the sky, and a star," just before I looked in the crystal. The last of these cases (32) is one already described ; I need only add the suggested explanation, that I had been in the late afternoon at a lecture illustrated by lantern, and that this vision [a black revolving sphere, with outer fiery ring] occurred about an hour after my return from the lecture. . . .

625 B. The following cases are extracted from Miss A. Goodrich-Freer's paper on "Recent Experiments in Crystal Vision " {^Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v., 1889, pp. 505-519). Miss Goodrich- Freer classifies her visions under three heads, as follows : —

1. After-images or recrudescent memories, often rising thus and thus

only from the sub-conscious strata to which they had sunk.

2. Objectivations of ideas or images ; {a) consciously or {p) unconsciously

in the mind of the percipient.

3. Visions, possibly telepathic or clairvoyant, implying acquirement of

knowledge by supernormal means.

I quote first two examples of recrudescent memories : —

I had been occupied, with accounts; I opened a drawer to take out my banking-book. My hand came in contact with the crystal, and I welcomed the suggestion of a change of occupation. However, figures were still uppermost, and the crystal had nothing more attractive to show me than the combination 7694. Dismissing this as probably the number of the cab I had driven in that day or a chance grouping of the figures with which I had been occupied, I laid aside the crystal and took up my banking-book, which I had certainly not seen for some months, and found, to my surprise, that the number on the cover was 7694. Had I wished to recall the figures I should, without doubt, have failed, and could not even have guessed at the number of digits or the value of the first figure. . . .

To quote again from my note-book. ... I had carelessly destroyed a letter without preserving the address of my correspondent. I knew the county, and searching in a map recognised the name of the town, one unfamiliar to me, but which I was sure I should know when I saw it. But I had no clue to the name of house or street, till at last it struck me to test the value of the crystal as a

625 B] TO CHAPTER VI 587

means of recalling forgotten knowledge. A very short inspection supplied me with " H. House " in grey letters on a white ground, and having nothing better to suggest from any other source, I risked posting my letter to the address so strangely supplied. A day or two brought me an answer, headed H. House in grey letters on a white ground.

The next is a possibly telepathic case : —

On Monday evening, February 11, I took up the crystal, with the deliberate intention of seeing in it a figure, which happened to occupy my thoughts at the moment, but I found the field pre-occupied by a small bunch of daffodils — a prim little posy, not larger than might be formed by two or three fine heads. This presented itself in various positions, in spite of my hurry to be rid of it, for I rashly concluded my vision to be a consequence of my having the day before seen, on a friend's dinner-table, the first daffodils of the season. The resemblance was not complete, for those I had seen were loosely arranged and intermixed with ferns and ivy, whereas my crystal-vision had no foliage, and was a compact little bunch. It was not till Thursday, 14th, that I received, as a wholly unexpected " Valentine," a painting, on a blue satin ground, of a bunch of daffodils, corresponding exactly with my crystal picture, and learnt that the artist had spent some hours on Monday, previous to my vision, in making studies of the flowers in various positions.

The following are other cases in Miss Goodrich-Freer's experience, taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 49.

In some cases ... I have actually tried my best to see or hear something, but failed ; and then the crystal has shown me that something within me has been able to see or hear at longer range than I knew.^

From a letter, written July i, 1891, I take the following account: "I looked across the room this morning to a distant table, where I expected to see a book I wanted. It was not there, but my eye was caught by another book which I saw was strange to me. I tried; but could not read the title at that distance (I have since proved that, even now I know it, this is impossible) ; and turned away to resume my writing. On my blank paper — as in a crystal-scene — I read ' The Valley of Lilies,' which I found to be the title of the

1 The entire word — one I know in no other connection — was supplied.

2 I may here remind the reader of the large group of ill-understood phenomena at present grouped together under the name of Dynamogeny (Fere, Rev. Phil., xx., 364, &c. ). These are cases where either muscular power, as tested by grip of the dynamometer, or the acuteness of some one sense, is increased by a stimulus to some other sense. Thus the Viennese aurist Urbantschisch (James's Psychology, ii., p. 29 ; Pfliiger's Archiv., xlii., p. 154) finds that " a tuning fork sounded close to the ear will sometimes increase acuteness of vision so that letters can be read at a greater distance. Conversely sounds became audible when lights were exhibited to the eye." Similarly Fere finds that in healthy subjects lost after-images can be recalled by the application of a tuning-fork in vibration to the top of the head {Pathologie des Emotions, p. 29). So with hysterical subjects red light quickens perceptions of taste and smell. And in many healthy subjects an increased acuteness of vision and other senses may be produced by hypnotic suggestion. It is the subliminal self, in my terminology, which has to supply this extra acuteness ; and the crystal-vision is merely another way of getting at this reserve of power. — QF. W. H. M.]

book. I have no recollection of ever seeing the book before, certainly not in this house, though it 7nay have caught my eye in a shop." On July 2 I add: " The book was brought into the house in my absence, and placed [by a relative] on her special table, on which jny things are never put, and which, therefore , I should not necessarily glance at on entering the room, as at my own table, for cards or letters. I did not enter the room till after lunch, and, so far as I know, went straight to my own seat, not passing her table, which is in the opposite comer. The book is of rather peculiar appearance — an imitation of wood. If I had consciously seen it in a shop I should probably have bought it, for it purports to be by my favourite a Kempis."

I give another instance in which a similar slight extension of the power of hearing seems to be involved : —

In August 1 891 we went for a few weeks to a small countrv' place, where we had taken a house for the autumn, and which I had never visited before, except once for a single day. One day a kindly neighbour called to offer us the use of his garden during his own absence from home. As he left the house he looked up in passing the window, and said something, of which neither I nor a girl who was staying with me could catch a single word.

The same evening I saw in the crystal a picture of some extraordinarily tall and bushy sweet-peas trained over wire fencing — a picture to which I could assign no meaning. The next day we met our friend's housekeeper, who referred to the in\ntation, and added, " Mr. P. says he hopes you heard his warning not to lose yourselves among the sweet-peas ! " On visiting the garden, I found the fencing covered exactly as the crystal had shown, the sweet-peas, of which Mr. P. was justly so proud, having been arranged to intercept a view of the railway.

625 C. The following case is extracted from Froceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 499-515.

In this case, crystal-vision has formed but a small part of a long and complex group of phenomena centring in a lady who wishes to be known as Miss A. I have been intimately acquainted with Miss A. and her family for some years, and have personally witnessed many of these phenomena. I add to her account, between square brackets, some notes made by the Countess of Radnor, the friend in whose presence many of the phenomena occurred and who has revised the account, and some unsigned notes of my own.

1. Health. — I do not know if my health affects the crystal-seeing ; I am so seldom ill that I have not tried. If I have a headache I never look in the crystal ; but I should imagine I should see equally well anyway.

2. Visualising Power, &^c. — I see in the crystal tmich more distinctly than I could ever imagine things. I am a very bad visualiser; and when I think of people I do so much more by the sound of their voice than by their faces or figures. I don't think I ever imagined a group in motion in my life. I am very short-sighted, and seldom wear glasses ; consequently, I rarely get a clear picture of any room or scene. But when I look in the crystal I see everj^hing as clearly as though I had strong glasses on. I cannot be sure whether either my short sight or my visualising power is better in dreams than in waking hours; but I think both are better. Certainly, however, I never see in dreams any scene at all comparable in clearness to what I see in the crystal.

625 C] T O C H A P T E R V I 589

I have no artistic gift, although I have received a few lessons in drawing and painting. I have automatically drawn flowers, figures, a snake, &c., much better than I can draw by conscious effort. . . .

3. Visions apart from Crystal or OtJier Speculum. — I have sometimes, generally as the result of effort, seen hallucinatory figures — all of them. I believe, in some sense veridical, never mere subjective hallucinations, — standing or sitting in the room. And I have, once at least, seen the room itself alter. I saw a large modern room change into the likeness (as shown afterwards by independent record) of what it was 200 years ago ; and I saw persons in it who apparently belonged to that date.

[The history of the room was known to Lady Radnor, who attests : *• Miss A. has, without looking into anything, described a room, whose historj- was unknown to her, as I have reason to believe that it was 200 j-ears ago. It was the Long Parlour at Longford, which in 1670 was used as the chapel. — H. M. Radnor. " Other \nsions of this kind will be dealt with later.]

4. First Discovery of the Power. — It is now some years since I first began to look in the crj-stal. I had already written automatically, but knew nothing of cn,-stal-vision. I happened one day to be lunching with some friends who talked on the subject, and said that they believed that a glass of clear water acted in the same manner. Two or three of us looked in glasses of water, and after a little while I seemed to see at the bottom of my glass a small gold key. This was so distinct that I looked on the tablecloth, thinking that there must be a real key there. There was none, and nothing to explain what I saw.

5. Speculum and Mode of Casing. — We bought a glass ball, and I gradually began to see a good deal in it. I have since seen in several cr^"stals. in a moonstone in a bracelet, S:c. [I have known her see things in a polished table. — H. M. Radxor.] It does not seem to matter much what the smootli surface is : but I have sometimes fancied that the scenes were brighter if seen in a real cn,-stal. Occasionally I see things in a mirror, or even without any clear surface, as though I were in the midst of them.

I either take the crystal into a dark comer of the room, or wrap it up in black with only a little bit uncovered, or if it is small I hold it inside my hand and look right into it. I can see equally well in the dark. After a minute or two I seem to see a verj- bright light in it, which disappears after a few seconds, and then the surface appears cloudy and thick. This mist clears away, and I see sometimes views, sometimes faces, sometimes letters, and all kinds of things in it. They only last for a few seconds or sometimes minutes, and between each new picture I see the same light and then mist. I cannot look in the crystal for long, as it makes my eyes "water with the brightness of the light and gives me a feeling as if a band were tied round my head : but if I only look a little while it does not hurt me at all. The crvstal seems to become a globe of light. If a sunlit scene appears, the light may continue, or it may disappear before the figure shows itself. [Her eves ofteri stream mth tears from "the brightness of the light."— H. M. Radxor.] I am in a perfectly normal condition when I look : not sleepy, nor in a trance, nor unconscious of my surroundings.

6. MagJiif cation. &^c. — I have tried the magnif^-ing glass. The results are just the same as without it ; only the glass being on the top, I suppose I see in it instead of in the cr}'stal. . . .

7. Verbal Messages in the Cr)/j-/^/.— When I see writing in the cn,-stal I see

it only one letter at a time ; and when the letters are put down they are found to be words spelt backwards.

[Each letter in turn seems to fill the crystal ; and the letters succeed each other so rapidly that it is hard to take them down from Miss A.'s dictation. The words may come to explain a picture, or may form a message by themselves. The backward spelling is probably adopted in order to prevent Miss A.'s supraliminal intelligence from guessing at, and thereby disturbing, the message which is being given.]

Fourteen cases are given in detail, seven of which I quote, as follows : —

B. Second contemporatieous scene.

In one case I saw and described Mr. B. (a well-known writer), whom I knew slightly, as hunting for a paper in the drawers of a writing-table. He used a particular pen, which I described, and with his hands ruffled his hair till it stood up in a kind of halo. A lady came in and pointed to his hair and laughed. Lord Radnor inquired of Mr. B., and all this was found to be correct. He was writing with a pen unusual to him (silver instead of quill, or vice versa), and was looking for a paper which he wanted to send by post. His sister (I did not know that she lived with him, and had never seen her) entered the room, and pointed laughing to his hair, just as I had seen.

[Confirmed. — H. M. Radnor.]

The four next cases are recounted by Sir Joseph Barnby, the wellknown musician, and I give two of them. Case C is probably exactly contemporaneous, and case F seems precognitive.

C. Sir Joseph Barnby writes as follows : —

November 1S92.

I was invited by Lord and Lady Radnor to the wedding of their daughter, Lady Wilma Bouverie, which took place August 15, 1889.

I was met at Salisbury by Lord and Lady Radnor and driven to Longford Castle. In the course of the drive, Lady Radnor said to me : " We have a young lady staying with us in whom, I think, you will be much interested. She possesses the faculty of seeing visions, and is otherwise closely connected with the spiritual world. Only last night she was looking in her crystal and described a room which she saw therein, as a kind of London dining-room. [The room described was not in London but at L., and Miss A. particularly remarked that the floor was in large squares of black and white marble— as it is in the big hall at L., where family prayers are said. — H. M. Radnor.] With a little laugh, she added, ' And the family are evidently at prayers, the servants are kneeling at the chairs round the room, and the prayers are being read by a tall and distinguished-looking gentleman with a very handsome, long grey beard.' With another little laugh, she continued: 'A lady just behind him rises from her knees and speaks to him. He puts her aside with a wave of the hand, and continues his reading.' The young lady here gave a careful description of the lady who had risen from her knees."

Lady Radnor then said : " From the description given I cannot help thinking that the two principal personages described are Lord and Lady L., but I shall ask Lord L. this evening, as they are coming by a later train, and I sliould like you to be present when the answer is given."

That same evening, after dinner, I was talking to Lord L. when Lady

625C] TO CHAPTER VI 591

Radnor came up to him and said : " I want to ask you a question. I am afraid you will think it a very silly one, but in any case I hope you will not ask me why I have put the question?" To this Lord L. courteously assented. She then said: " Were you at home last night? " He replied, "Yes." She said: "Were you having family prayers at such a time last evening?" With a slight look of surprise he replied, "Yes, we were." She then said: "During the course of the prayers did Lady L. rise from her knees and speak to you, and did you put her aside with a wave of the hand?" Much astonished, Lord L. answered: " Yes, that was so, but may I inquire why you have asked this question ? " To which Lady Radnor answered : " You promised you wouldn't ask me that ! "

F. One more incident in connection with the extraordinary powers of this young lady remains to be noted. Whilst looking in her crystal during one of the days I spent at Longford, she described, amongst a number of things unnecessary to mention, a room which appeared to her to be a bedroom. She appeared to be viewing the room from just outs,\di& the open door, for she said: "If there be a bed in the room it must be behind the door on the left;" in any case the room was a long one and the end of it was occupied by a large window which formed the entire end of the room. She added: " There is a lady in the room, drying her hands on a towel." She described the lady as tall, dark, slightly foreign in appearance and with rather "an air" about her. This described with such astonishing accuracy my wife, and the room she was then occupying at a hotel at Eastbourne, that I was impelled to ask for particulars as to dress, &c. She stated that the dress was of serge, with a good deal of braid on the bodice and a strip of braid down one side of the skirt. This threw me off the scent, as before I had started for Longford my wife had expressed regret that she had not a serge dress with her. My astonishment, therefore, was great on returning to Eastbourne to find my wife wearing a serge dress exactly answering to the description given above. The sequel to this incident comes some sixteen months later on, when my wife and I attended a performance given by the Magpie Minstrels (a society of musical amateurs) at Princes' Hall, Piccadilly. We arrived early, and after placing my wife in a seat I moved about the room speaking to friends here and there. In the course of ten minutes or so, Lady Radnor and Miss A. entered the room. During the greetings which ensued, Miss A. called my attention to a standing figure, saying: "You will remember my seeing a lady in her bedroom while looking in my crystal ; that is the lady I saw." That was my wife f I only need add that she had never seen my wife. Joseph Barnby.

Lady Barnby writes as follows in corroboration of the incident relating to her own dress : —

9 St. George's Square, S.W. Saturday, November 12, 1892.

The account about me and my dress is remarkable as being out of the general course of things in this way : I had been remarking to Sir Joseph that it was a mistake to come to the seaside without a serge dress, that being a material particularly suited for wear at the seaside, but I added : " I do not think there is much use in ordering one now, as Madame D. will be gone for her holiday, it being August." Sir Joseph left the next day for Longford, and I wrote to Madame D., telling her to make me this gown. She got the letter Tuesday [August 13, 1889], and in the marvellously short time by

Saturday, I received my gown. Then again, it is not usual in a hotel to have one's bedroom door open when one is occupying the room, but the reason for it on this occasion was the fact that I was to meet Sir Joseph on his return from Longford [Tuesday, August 20] (as a surprise in this new serge gown) and having no clock in our bedroom, which was at the end of the corridor, with my daughter's room at an angle to ours, where she slept with her maid, I — thinking I was somewhat late for meeting the train — opened the door to call to the maid to tell me the time as I washed my hands standing at the washhand-stand in a line with the open door. I do not suppose I have ever done such a thing at a hotel before or since. Edith Mary Barney.

[These dates have been confirmed by Lady Barnby from her diary. Lady Barnby also tells me that her nurse confirms the little incident of the wearing of the serge dress first on August 20. The crystal-scene, therefore, seems to have anticipated a certain definite moment, which happens to have been well remembered.

Case C (Lord L. at prayers). — This incident has been independently recounted to me both by Lady Radnor and by Miss A. herself. Another small point not given by Sir J. Barnby is that Miss A. did not at first understand that family prayers were going on, but exclaimed : " Here are a number of people coming into the room. Why, they're smelling their chairs ! "]

Four cases of apparently historical scenes connected with Salisbury Cathedral are given, of which I quote one, related by Lady Radnor.

H. Retrocognitive Scene (Brian Duppa).

On February 23, 1890, Miss A. and I were in the " Cage" [or Hungerford Chapel] and she told me she saw a grand ceremonial taking place. There appeared to be a tall chair which obstructed the view down the choir, and gradually the place appeared filled with clericals and others dressed in their best attire. Then she saw a tall big man, slowly walking up, dressed in red with white and lace over it, something that hung round his neck and down to his feet of broad gold embroidery, and a broad sort of mitre (but not peaked) more like a biretta, of beautiful embroidery.

Then there were three or four dressed very much like him, gorgeously dressed, and lots of little boys about in red and white and lace — holding candles, books, &c. The whole place was very full of people, and it was evidently a great occasion. After the principal figure had knelt in front of the chair — looking to the west for some little time — he stood up, and ten little boys lifted up the chair, and carried it higher up and placed it in front of the altar, still facing west. Then the principal figure walked up two steps and faced the east. (The whole of the arrangements of the altar, &c., as Miss A. saw them, are quite different from what they are now.) [It is here meant that Miss A.'s description was correct for that past date ; as Lord Radnor explicitly told me was the case.] He had nothing on his head now. He knelt some little time, and then the most gorgeously dressed of the other figures placed something like a mitre on his head and retired, and the principal figure walked up to the chair, and sat down on it facing the congregation. Miss A. said she saw him later dead in a coffin, with the Winchester Cross over him. She says he was tall, big, clean-shaven, a little curling hair, and blue-grey eyes.

Miss A. asked what she was seeing, and the answer came by raps.

A. The induction of Briant Uppa.

625 C] TO CHAPTER VI 593

Then Miss A. said : There can't be such a name ; it must be wrong.

She tried again, and got —

A. You are wrong. It is Duppa, not Uppa. Brian Duppa. Q. Who was Brian Duppa ? A. Chister. Q. What was he ? A. Bishop here. Q. When ? or what was his date ? A. 44-16. His researches would help you. Manuscripts should lay at Winchester.

On returning home, we were talking after tea, and I casually took up Britton's " History of Wiltshire," and said to Miss A., laughing: " Now I will look for your Bishop." . . . The pages where the Bishops' names were were uncut, sides and top. I cut them, and to our delight we found on p. 149: —

"Brian Duppa or De Uphaugh, D.D. . . . tutor to Prince Charles . . . translated to the See of Chichester (Chister?) . . . Bishop of 1641 . . . (deposed soon after by Parliament) . . . preferred soon after the Restoration to the See of Winchester." He was at Carisbrooke with Charles I., and is supposed to have assisted him in the writing of the Eikon Basilike, which book Miss A. had been looking at in my boudoir a few days previously, but which contains no mention of him nor his name.

Miss A. writes : —

K. Retrocognitive Scene (White Webs).

I was looking in the crystal a year or two ago at Longford Castle. Lady Radnor was in the room with me. I saw amongst other things a large carved fireplace with a coat of arms in the middle and curious serpents entwined. There seemed to be a secret passage, which opened on touching one of the serpents' heads. I seemed to follow this path until it led out by a river, and I saw figures pass along it in old-fashioned dress. The name Edwye de Bov^ry was then spelt out in the crystal ; and Lady Radnor said that the vision must be all wrong, as the name had never been spelt like that. The name " White Webs " was also spelt out — a name of which I had never heard. A few days afterwards, when I was looking at some books in the library, I saw a curious old book with crests and coats of arms, drawn by hand, not printed; and in this book I found one of the coats of arms which I had seen in the crystal ; only the one in the book was quartered with another, and the one I saw in the crystal was quite by itself. Lady Radnor found that it was the coat belonging to an heiress, a Miss Smith. A little while afterwards, in an old church register or account-book or something, the name of Sir Edwye de Bovfery was found.

[It was in an extract from a parish register at Britford Church, in which parish Longford is. Sir Edward des Bouverie, Kt., whose name I have since found spelt in old deeds de Bovery, though he signed it himself des Bouverie, lived at the Red House, Cheshunt, Herts, and died there 1694. His son. Sir William, sold the house, and lived partly at the Parsonage of Cheshunt. There is a place called White Webs in that neighbourhood. Sir Edward's grandson, Edward des Bouverie, sold the property and settled at Longford in 171 7. In 1718 he married Mary Smith, daughter and co-heiress of John Smith of London, one of the first Governors of the Bank of England. There were many secret passages leading to and from the Red House at Cheshunt ; but I have not tried to identify the house at White Webs. — H. M. Radnor.]

M. Retrocogjiitive Scene.

Mrs. A. gives the following account : " In October 1886 my daughter saw in the stone in her bracelet a scene which considerably impressed me, as it was VOL. I. 2 P

one which I at once identified, while I was absolutely sure that I had never mentioned it to her or to any of my children. She saw a man in a barge-like boat with a very large gun fixed in it, the object of which she could not understand. The man was alone and lying in the bottom of the boat, and this also puzzled her. Waves seemed to get up, and the man rowed extremely hard, as though trying to get to shore. Then she saw him throw himself down motionless on to the low beach, as if dead. Now this plainly refers to a sad crisis in my father's life. He went out duck-shooting alone on a Norfolk Broad, with an opening to the sea. A storm got up, and he was all but blown out to sea. He was a very strong man, and by great exertion he got to land. Then he threw himself down absolutely spent ; and the exhaustion of that day was the beginning of an illness which ultimately killed him."

[Another case, which in one sense at least is retrocognitive, is supplied by the Hon. Eric Barrington, and confirmed by Mrs. Barrington. I have also received a concordant account of the crystal-message from Lady Radnor, the hostess on the occasion alluded to.]

62 Cadogan Place, O. November 21, 1892.

Two years ago I met Miss A., I think for the first time, at dinner at a friend's house. She told my wife that she had seen standing behind my chair a figure which from her description, though somewhat vague, seemed to be that of a very great friend of mine, an officer who had died about seven years ago on active service. She referred particularly to the attitude assumed by the figure, which was like the one in a photograph I possess of him, but which she had never seen. She knew nothing of this friendship, and the name of the officer was not mentioned to her.

Last summer we met again at the same house, and although in the interval we had become better acquainted with Miss A. and her family, I am not conscious of having ever said anything to her on the subject of my friend. On reaching the drawing-room after dinner I found her looking into a crystal and dictating with extraordinary rapidity a number of letters of the alphabet which were passing before her, and were being taken down by the lady of the house, who had the greatest difficulty in keeping pace with her. When the letters ceased, it was discovered by marking them off from the end that they formed a complete message, of which each word was spelt backwards. Before the letters began to show themselves Miss A. saw in the crystal the same figure that she had seen two years before, dressed in what appeared to be a dark uniform, and in the same peculiar attitude, but I was not in the room when this occurred. As soon, however, as the message was deciphered by our hostess, it became evident that it purported to proceed from the person whose likeness had just been reproduced. It was addressed, not to me, who was absent from the room when the letters first appeared, but to my wife, and was to the following effect : —

"Ask your husband whether he still remembers T. T. Tell him that I am constantly with him, and that death makes no difference in friendship."

The full surname was given, preceded by a nickname which had been dropped when he grew up, and was only known to those who, like myself, had been intimate with him from childhood.

It cannot be suggested that Miss A. had been in any way impressed by my thoughts, for it was not until I sat by my hostess and helped her to spell out

625D] TO CHAPTER VI 595

the words of the message that I realised from whom it came, when I was able to explain the meaning of the nickname that had completely puzzled her, though she had been well acquainted with the bearer after he entered the army, Eric Barrington.

This entirely agrees with my recollection of the circumstances. The moment Miss A. described the figure on our first meeting, I felt a very peculiar sensation, accompanied by a certainty as to the identity of the person she saw.

Christina Barrington,

[There is a privately printed life of the officer in question, in which an early nickname of his is given. But I find that this nickname is not the same as that shown in the crystal, which was appropriate for recognition by friends of boyhood only.]

625 D. The following accounts are extracts from Mr. Andrew Lang's Maki7ig of Religion (1898). Mr. Lang tells us that he made the acquaintance of the lady whom he calls " Miss Angus " early in 1897 ; he obtained a glass ball for the purpose of asking her to experiment with it, and was present when she first did so. The first case given here occurred on the day after she began her experiments, and is described in her own words {op. cit., p. 96).

A lady one day asked me to scry out a friend of whom she would think. Almost immediately I exclaimed, " Here is an old, old lady looking at me with a triumphant smile on her face. She has a prominent nose and nut-cracker chin. Her face is very much wrinkled, especially at the sides of her eyes, as if she were always smiling. She is wearing a little white shawl with a black edge, Bzit . . . she can^t be old, as her hair is quite brown, although her face looks so very, very old." The picture then vanished, and the lady said that I had accurately described her friend's mother instead of himself ; that it was a family joke that the mother must dye her hair, it was so brown, and she was eighty-two years old. The lady asked me if the vision were distinct enough for me to recognise a likeness in the son's photograph ; next day she laid several photographs before me, and in a moment, without the slightest hesitation, I picked him out from his wonderful likeness to my vision.

Mr. Lang adds : —

The inquirer verbally corroborated all the facts to me, within a week, but leaned to a theory of " electricity," She has read and confirms this account.

The next case which I quote is given, says Mr. Lang (p. loi), first in the version of the lady who was unconsciously scried for, and next in that of Miss Angus. The other lady writes : —

November 2yd, 1S97. I met Miss A, for the first time in a friend's house in the south of England, and one evening mention was made of a crystal ball, and our hostess asked Miss A. to look in it, and if possible, tell her what was happening to a friend of hers. Miss A. took the crystal, and our hostess put her hand on Miss A.'s forehead to "will her." I, not believing in this, took up a book and went to the other side of the room. I was suddenly very much startled to hear Miss

A., in quite an agitated way, describe a scene that had most certainly been very often in my thoughts, but of which I had never mentioned a word. She accurately described a race-course in Scotland, and an accident which happened to a friend of mine only a week or two before, and she was evidently going through the same doubt and anxiety that I did at the time as to whether he was actually killed or only very much hurt. It really was a most wonderful revelation to me, as it was the very first time I had seen a crystal. Our hostess, of course, was very much annoyed that she had not been able to influence Miss A., while I, who had appeared so very indifferent, should have affected her.

Miss Angus herself writes : —

Another case was a rather interesting one, as I somehow got inside the thoughts of one lady while another was doing her best to influence me !

Miss , a friend in Brighton, has strange " magnetic " powers, and felt

quite sure of success with me and the ball.

Another lady, Miss H., who was present, laughed at the whole thing,

especially when Miss insisted on holding my hand, and putting her other

hand on my forehead. Miss H. in a scornful manner took up a book, and crossing to the other side of the room, left us to our folly.

In a very short time I felt myself getting excited, which had never happened before, when I looked in the crystal. I saw a crowd of people, and in some strange way I felt I was in it, and we all seemed to be waiting for something. Soon a rider came past, young, dressed for racing. His horse ambled past, and he smiled and nodded to those he knew in the crowd, and then was lost to sight.

In a moment we all seemed to feel as if something had happened, and I went through great agony of suspense, trying to see what seemed just beyond my view. Soon, however, two or three men approached, and carried him past before my eyes, and again my anxiety was intense to discover if he were only very badly hurt or if life were really extinct. All this happened in a few moments, but long enough to have left me so agitated that I could not realise it had only been a vision in a glass ball.

By this time Miss H. had laid aside her book and came forward quite startled, and told me that I had accurately described a scene on a race-course in Scotland which she had witnessed just a week or two before — a scene that had very often been in her thoughts, but, as we were strangers to each other, she had never mentioned. She also said I had exactly described her own feelings at the time, and had brought it all back in a most vivid manner.

The other lady was rather disappointed that, after she had concentrated her thoughts so hard, I should have been influenced instead by one who had jeered at the whole affair.

[This anecdote was also told to me, within a few days of the occurrence, by Miss Angus. Her version was that she first saw a gentleman rider going to the post and nodding to his friends. Then she saw him carried on a stretcher through the crowd. She seemed, she said, to be actually present, and felt somewhat agitated. The fact of the accident was, later, mentioned to me in Scotland by another lady, a stranger to all the persons. A. L.]

The next case is thus described by Mr. Lang (p. io6) : —

The following examples have some curious and unusual features. On

625 D] TO CHAPTER VI 597

Wednesday, February 2, 1897, Miss Angus was looking in the crystal, to amuse six or seven people whose acquaintance she had that day made. A gentleman, Mr. Bissett, asked her " What letter was in his pocket ? " She then saw, under a bright sky, and, as it were, a long way off, a large building, in and out of which many men were coming and going. Her impression was that the scene must be abroad. In the little company present, it should be added, was a lady, Mrs. Cockburn, who had considerable reason to think of her young married daughter, then at a place about fifty miles away. After Miss Angus had described the large building and crowds of men, some one asked, " Is it an Exchange ? " " It might be," she said. " Now comes a man in a great hurry. He has a broad brow, and short, curly hair ; 1 hat pressed low down on his eyes. The face is very serious, but he has a delightful smile." Mr. and Mrs. Bissett now both recognised their friend and stockbroker, whose letter was in Mr. Bissett's pocket.

The vision, which interested Miss Angus, passed away, and was interrupted by that of a hospital nurse, and of a lady in z. peis^noir, lying on a sofa, with bare feet. Miss Angus mentioned this vision as a bore, she being more interested in the stockbroker, who seems to have inherited what was once in the possession of another stockbroker — " the smile of Charles Lamb." Mrs. Cockburn, for whom no pictures appeared, was rather vexed, and privately expressed with freedom a very sceptical opinion about the whole affair. But, on Saturday, February 5, 1897, Miss Angus was again with Mr. and Mrs. Bissett. When Mrs. Bissett announced that she had " thought of something," Miss Angus saw a walk in a wood or garden, beside a river, under a brilliant blue sky. Here was a lady, very well dressed, twirling a white parasol on her shoulder as she walked, in a curious "stumpy" way, beside a gentleman in light clothes, such as are worn in India. He was broad-shouldered, had a short neck and a straight nose, and seemed to listen, laughing, but indifferent, to his obviously vivacious companion. The lady had a " drawn " face, indicative of ill health. Then followed a scene in which the man, without the lady, was looking on at a number of Orientals busy in the felling of trees. Mrs. Bissett recognised in the lady her sister, Mrs. Clifton, in India — above all, when Miss Angus gave a realistic imitation of Mrs. Clifton's walk, the peculiarity of which was caused by an illness some years ago. Mr. and Mrs. Bissett also recognised their brother-in-law in the gentleman seen in both pictures. On being shown a portrait of Mrs. Clifton as a girl. Miss Angus said it was " like, but too pretty." A photograph done recently, however, showed her "the drawn face" of the crystal picture.^

Next day, Sunday, February 6, Mrs. Bissett received — what was not usual — a letter from her sister in India, Mrs. Clifton, dated January 20. Mrs. Clifton described a place in a native State, where she had been at a great "function " in certain gardens beside a river. She added that they were going to another place for a certain purpose, " and then we go into camp till the end of February." One of Mr. Clifton's duties is to direct the clearing of wood preparatory to the formation of the camp, as in Miss Angus's crystal picture.'* The sceptical

1 Miss Angus could not be sure of the colour of the hair.

2 The position was such that Miss Angus could not see the face of the lady.

3 I saw the photographs.

* I have been shown the letter of January 20, which confirmed the evidence of the crystal pictures. The camp was formed for ofificial purposes in which Mr. Clifton was concerned. A letter of February 9 unconsciously corroborates.

Mrs. Cockburn heard of these coincidences, and an idea occurred to her. She wrote to her daughter, who has been mentioned, and asked whether, on Wednesday, February 2, she had been lying on a sofa in her bedroom with bare feet. The young lady confessed that it was indeed so,^ and, when she heard how the fact came to be known, expressed herself with some warmth on the abuse of glass balls, which tend to rob life of its privacy.

630 A. Note on " Number-Habits:'

Some critics of the experimental evidence for thought-transference have attempted to show that a large proportion of the successes obtained may be due, not to telepathy, but to the mental idiosyncrasies of the experimenters. This is a possible source of error which should always be kept in mind, but its actual bearing on the evidence has been widely misunderstood. A brief general review of the subject of " mental habits " is therefore given here.

It has long been recognised by psychologists that most — if not all — persons have unconscious preferences for certain objects or ideas over others of the same class ; so that, if one is asked to guess or to think of, say, a colour, a plavingcard, or a number, — certain colours, cards, or numbers occur to the mind more frequently than others, and are therefore guessed more often. These idiosyncrasies are called "mental habits," or — if we are referring to numbers only — " number-habits," and they may vary in the same person at different times. But different persons may exhibit the same preferences, and when this is so in the case of two experimenters, a certain proportion of the diagrams drawn by the percipient may resemble those drawn by the agent, and thus simulate the phenomenon of thought-transference. Similarly, if the cards or numbers to be guessed are chosen by the agent, his mental habits may lead him to choose a large proportion of those that happen also to be favourites with the percipient, who will therefore have a better chance of guessing right. This is, of course, one reason why it is always best for the agent in experiments with cards or numbers to draw them at random from a batch and not to choose them.

It is sometimes found, in fact, that in experiments with diagrams of which only a small proportion have succeeded, the successes relate to the most familiar forms, such as circles and triangles. To explain, however, by " mental habits " the large proportion of success in the series cited below, it would be necessary to prove that almost all the diagrams used were general favourites.^

In order tO" test empirically how far mental habits might have simulated thought-transference in the experiments with diagrams. Colonel G. L. Le M.

1 The incident of the feet occurred at 4.30 to 7.30 p.m. The crystal picture was about 10 P.M.

'^ [Mr. Lang gives further footnotes referring to these cases as follows :] " Miss Angus had only within the week made the acquaintance of Mrs. Cockburn and the Bissetts. Of these relations of theirs at a distance she had no knowledge. This account I wrote from the verbal statement of Mrs. Hissett. It was then read and corroborated by herself, Mr. Bissett, Mr. Cockburn, Mrs. Cockburn, and Miss Angus, who added dates and signatures. The letters attesting each of these experiments are in my possession. The real names are in no case given in this account, by my own desire, but (with permission of the persons concerned) can be communicated privately."

An attempt was made by Professor C. S. Minot (see his paper " Upon the Diagram Tests " in the Proceedings of Ihe Aiiierican S.P.R.^ vol. i. p. 302) to find statistically what forms occur most often when people are asked to draw or to think of diagrams.

630A] TO CHAPTER VI 599

Taylor carried out a series of dummy experiments, made in the same manner as the experiments in thought-transference, but with the element of thoughttransference eliminated (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 398). He got eighty persons to draw twenty-five diagrams each, and so obtained 1000 pairs of diagrams, which could be compared according to a prearranged plan. The comparison showed how many resemblances were actually produced by chance, combined with similarity in the mental habits of the persons who drew the diagrams ; and the number of resemblances were found to be proportionately far less than those found in the experiments in thought-transference.

To this it might be objected that the persons who drew the diagrams being taken at random, there was no reason to expect similarity in their mental habits ; whereas — since some experiments in thought-transference fail, while others succeed— it might be argued that only those succeed where the mental habits of agent and percipient happen to be similar. Similarity of mental habits could not, of course, in any case ens7ire success, because it would be very unlikely that the percipient would think of his favourite forms in the same order as the agent ; but it might increase the chance of success. In many of the experiments in thought-transference, however, the diagrams were drawn or selected by some person other than the agent, and not always the same person, so that 2. general similarity in mental habits — as well as a general tendency to think of the favourites in the same order — would have to be assumed, and this seems to be negatived by Colonel Taylor's experiments.

In the case of experiments with such objects as numbers,^ the effect of " mental habits " can be more precisely tested. Supposing first that the same numbers happen to be the favourites of both agent and percipient. If, then, the agent selects numbers to think of, some successful guesses may be made which are due — not to thought-transference, but to similarity in the number-habits of the two experimenters.

This source of error, however, may be absolutely excluded if the numbers to be guessed are not selected voluntarily hy the agent, but drawn at random from a batch of numbers. As early as 1886, therefore (see Phafitasms of the Living, vol. i. pp. 31-35, and vol. ii. p. 653), experimenters who worked in connection with the Society for Psychical Research were accustomed to use the method of drawing numbers at random.

On the other hand, supposing again that the agent selects the numbers and that his number-habits are markedly dissimilar from those of the percipient, then the successes would probably be decidedly fewer than they would be if due to chance alone.

Now, confining ourselves to cases where the numbers to be guessed are drawn at random, it is clear that the existence of any decided number-habit does not affect in any way the probability of guessing right by chance, since the number drawn at any moment is neither more nor less likely to be one of the percipient's favourites than to be any other number. On the average, therefore, the number of accidental successes would be the same, whether a numberhabit existed or not.

1 For examples of the experimental study of number-habits, see Professor and Mrs. Sidgwick's articles on their experiments in thought-transference in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 170, and vol. viii. p. 548 ; also a further discussion by Professor Sidgwick in vol. xii. pp. 303-4 ; and a brief account in a review of Dr. Dessoir's Das Doppel-Ich in vol. vi. p. 209.

6oo APPENDICES [630 B

A decided number-habit may, however, affect prejudicially the number of successes prodticed by telepathy (assuming, for the sake of the argument, that successes may sometimes be due to telepathy), because the idea of the favourite number, constantly obtruding itself into the mind, would tend to obscure or replace the impressions derived telepathically ; just as, when a material object is perceived in the ordinary way through the senses, a preconceived idea as to what the object is may often make us perceive it wrongly.

Thus, in experiments of the kind under consideration, there is only one case in which the existence of number-habits can increase the successes and so make the evidence for telepathy in that case appear stronger than it really is ; namely, the case in which (i) the agent selects the numbers to be guessed and at the same time (2) his number-habits are similar to those of the percipient. In all other cases, number-habits would decrease those successes which are due to any other agency than chance.

630 B. The first experimental study of thought-transference was connected with the discovery that the somnambulistic state could be artificially induced, and the greater number of observations made during this early stage were carried out in this country during the second quarter of the nineteenth century. Thought-transference in these cases took the form oi community of setisation between operator and subject, depending, as was supposed, on a specific rapport between them (see 571). The phenomenon was not studied by itself, but regarded as belonging essentially to mesmerism ; consequently it shared in the discredit into which the latter fell, being only one of the numerous reported mesmeric marvels, which — speaking generally — were rejected wholesale and without inquiry.

The first impetus to the more recent scientific study of telepathy was given by Professor W. F. Barrett, F.R.S., who brought forward some results of his own with a hypnotised girl, in a paper read before the British Association in 1876. In the course of the correspondence arising out of his paper, Professor Barrett learnt of other instances, which he carefully investigated, in which telepathy had been observed in the normal waking state. Later, in the years 1881-2, a long series of experiments in which Professor Sidgwick, Professor Balfour Stewart, Edmund Gurney, myself, and others joined with Professor Barrett, seemed to establish the possibility of a new mode of communication from mind to mind. And these early results have been confirmed by further experiments continued down to the present time by observers both in this country and abroad.

At about the time of the early S.P.R. experiments in thought-transference, popular interest had been roused in the subject by the invention of the "willing game," and the discussions and experiments — especially of Professor Barrett and other members of the S.P.R. — which showed that success in the game depended on " muscle-reading," — that the subject was led to perform actions by unconscious guidance from the person touching him, in the same way that table-tilting, or even such com-

630 B] TO CHAPTER VI 6or

plicated processes as writing, may be carried out by many persons in complete ignorance that their wills, or even their muscles, are concerned. Even if the subject is not in contact with any one, he may be guided through unconscious variations in tone of voice, gesture, or expression, by the persons watching his progress. On the other hand, if contact ceases before he begins to perform the required movement ; or if, while in contact, he has only to say what mental impression he has received — as in experiments in guessing playing-cards, numbers, and the like — the possibility of unconscious guidance by contact is much reduced. Since, however, it is impossible to make sure that guidance has not been operative under such circumstances, we cannot claim as evidence of thought-transference experiments in which contact has been allowed at any stage. The experiments cited here have been selected with a special view to the exclusion of these possible sources of error, and therefore no cases in which any contact had been allowed are given.

With regard to the possibility of deliberate collusion or fraud, no general statement can be made as to conditions that would absolutely exclude this. In the last resort, all scientific experiments rest on the bona fides of the experimenter. There are many psychological observations which cannot be controlled by others, or repeated at will, since they relate to subjective sensations, or depend on unknown conditions; but they are generally accepted as correct, because it is believed that the observers are genuinely interested in the truth of the facts. Similar presurnption of the genuineness of experiments in thought-transference is afforded by the intelligence of the experimenters, the scientific standing of some of them, and the general spirit in which their work has been done, as may be seen from the detailed accounts, a few of which I now proceed to give.^

Mr. Guthrie's Experiments. — Full records of these experiments were published in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. i. pp. 263—283 ; vol. ii. pp. 1-5, 24-42, 189-200; vol. iii. pp. 424-452. The account here quoted is a briefer one, which was given by Gurney in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. pp. 36-58.

In [this] series of experiments . . . there were two percipients, and a considerable group of agents, each of whom, when alone with one or other of the percipients, was successful in transferring his impression. . . .

We owe these remarkable experiments to the sagacity and energy of Mr. Malcolm Guthrie, J. P., of Liverpool. At the beginning of 1883, Mr. Guthrie

1 Besides the experiments here given, see those of Herr Max Dessoir {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iv. p. Ill, and vol. v. p. 355); Herr Anton Schmoll and M. Etienne Mabire {ibid. vol. iv. p. 324, and vol. v. p. 169) ; Mr. J. W. Smith [ibid. vol. ii. p. 207) ; Professor Oliver Lodge (ibid. vol. vii. p. 374) ; Dr. A. Blair Thaw {ibid. vol. viii. p. 422); Dr. von Schrenck-Notzing {ibid. vol. vii. p. 3); Professor Richet {ibid. vol. v. p. 18). See also Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. pp. 32-34, and vol. ii. pp. 653-

6o2 APPENDICES [630 B

happened to read an article on thought-transference in a magazine, and though completely sceptical, he determined to make some trials on his own account. He was then at the head of an establishment which gives employment to many hundreds of persons ; and he was informed by a relative who occupied a position of responsibihty in this establishment that she had witnessed remarkable results in some casual trials made by a group of his employees after business hours. He at once took the matter into his own hands, and went steadily, but cautiously, to work. He restricted the practice of the novel accomplishment to weekly meetings ; and he arranged with his friend, Mr. James Birchall, the hon. secretary of the Liverpool Literary and Philosophical Society, that the latter should make a full and complete record of every experiment made. Mr. Guthrie thus describes the proceedings : —

" I have had the advantage of studying a series of experiments ab ovo. I have witnessed the genuine surprise which the operators and the ' subjects ' have alike exhibited at their increasing successes, and at the results of our excursions into novel lines of experiment. The affair has not been the discovery of the possession of special powers, first made and then worked up by the parties themselves for gain or glory. The experimenters in this case were disposed to pass the matter over altogether as one of no moment, and only put themselves at my disposal in regard to experiments in order to obhge me. The experiments have all been devised and conducted by myself and Mr. Birchall, without any previous intimation of their nature, and could not possibly have been foreseen. In fact they have been to the young ladies a succession of surprises. No set of experiments of a similar nature has ever been more completely known from its origin, or more completely under the control of the scientific observer." [In] the earlier experiments, the ideas transferred were of colours, geometrical figures, cards, and visible objects of all sorts, which the percipient was to name. . . ?■ The reproduction of diagrams was introduced in October 1883, and in that and the following month about 150 trials were made. The whole series has been carefully mounted and preserved by Mr. Guthrie. No one could look throuo-h them without perceiving that the hypothesis of chance or guesswork is out of the question; that in most instances some idea, and in many a complete idea, of the original must, by whatever means, have been present in the mind of the person who made the reproduction. In Mr. Guthrie's words :— "It is difficult to classify them. A great number of them are decided successes; another large number give part of the drawing; others exhibit the general idea, and others again manifest a kind of composition of form. Others, such as the drawings of flowers, have been described and named, but have been too difficult to draw. A good many are perfect failures. The drawings generally run in lots. A number of successful copies will be produced very

1 There is one point of novelty which is thus described by Mr. Guthrie : " We tried also the perception of motion, and found that the movements of objects exhibited could be discerned. The idea was suggested by an experiment tried with a card, which in order that all present should see, I moved about, and was informed by the percipient that it was a card, but she could not tell which one because it seemed to be moving about. On a subsequent occasion, in order to test this perception of motion, I bought a toy monkey, which worked up and down on a stick by means of a string drawing the arms and legs together. The answer was : ' I see red and yellow, and it is darker at one end than the other. It is like a flag moving about— it is moving. . . . Now it is opening and shutting like a pair of scissors.' "

630 B] TO CHAPTER VI 603

quickly, and again a number of failures — indicating, I think, faultiness on the part of the agent, or growing fatigue on the part of the ' subject.' Every experiment, whether successful or a failure, is given in the order of trial, with the conditions, name of ' subject ' and agent, and any remarks made by the ' subject' specified at the bottom. Some of the reproductions exhibit the curious phenomenon of inversion. These drawings must speak for themselves. The principal facts to be borne in mind regarding them are that they have been executed through the instrumentality, as agents, of persons of unquestioned probity, and that the responsibihty for them is spread over a considerable group of such persons ; while the conditions to be observed were so simple— for they amounted really to nothing more than taking care that the original should not be seen by the ' subject ' — that it is extremely difficult to suppose them to have been eluded."

I give a few specimens — not unduly favourable ones, but illustrating the "spreading of responsibility" to which Mr. Guthrie refers. The agents concerned were Mr. Guthrie ; Mr. Steel, the President of the Liverpool Literary and Philosophical Society; Mr. I^irchall, mentioned above; Mr. Hughes, B.A., of St. John's College, Cambridge ; and myself. The names of the percipients were Miss Relph and Miss Edwards. The conditions which I shall describe were those of the experiments in which I myself took part ; and I have Mr. Guthrie's authority for stating that they were uniformly observed in the other cases. The originals were for the most part drawn in another room from that in which the percipient was placed. The few executed in the same room were drawn while the percipient was blindfolded, at a distance from her, and in such a way that the process would have been wholly invisible to her or any one else, even had an attempt been made to observe it. During the process of transference, the agent looked steadily and in perfect silence at the original drawing, which was placed upon an intervening wooden stand; the percipient sitting opposite to him, and behind the stand, blindfolded and quite still. The agent ceased looking at the drawing, and the blindfolding was removed, only when the percipient professed herself ready to make the reproduction, which happened usually in times varying from half a minute to two or three minutes. Her position rendered it absolutely impossible that she should obtain a glimpse of the original. Apart from the blindfolding, she could not have done so without rising from her seat and advancing her head several feet ; and as she was very nearly in the same line of sight as the drawing, and so very nearly in the centre of the agent's field of vision, the slightest approach to such a movement must have been instantly detected. The reproductions were made in perfect silence, the agent forbearing to follow the actual process of the drawing with his eyes, though he was, of course, able to keep the percipient under the closest observation.

In the case of all the diagrams, except those numbered 7 and 8, the agent and the percipient were the only two persons in the room during the experiment. In the case of numbers 7 and 8, the agent and Miss Relph were sitting quite apart in a corner of the room, while Mr. Guthrie and Miss Edwards were talking in another part of it. Numbers 1-6 are specially interesting as being the complete and consecutive series of a single sitting.

[There was no contact between the agent and percipient in the case of any of the diagrams here reproduced.]

6o4

[630 B

No. I. Original Drawing.

No. I. Reproduction.

Mr. Guthrie and Miss Edwards. No contact.

No. 2. Original Drawing.

No. 2. Reproduction.

Mr. Guthrie and Miss Edwards. No contact.

630 B]

TO CHAPTER VI

No. 3. Original Drawing.

No. 3. Reproduction.

Mr. Guthrie and Miss Edwards. No contact.

No. 4. Original Drawing.

No. 4. Reproduction.

Mr. Guthrie and Miss Edwards. No contact.

6o6

[630 B

No. 5. Original Drawing.

No. 5. Reproduction.

Mr. Guthrie and Miss Edwards. No contact.

No. 6. Original Drawing.

Mr. Guthrie and Miss Edwards. No contact.

No. 6. Reproduction.

Miss Edwards almost directly said, " Are you thinking of the bottom of the sea, with shells and fishes ? " and then, " Is it a sna'il or a fish ? " — then drew as above.

630 B]

TO CHAPTER VI

No. 8. Original Drawing,

No. 8. Reproduction.

Mr. Gurney and Miss Relph. No contact.

No, 9. Original Drawing.

Mr, Birchall and Miss Relph. No contact.

No. 9, Reproduction.

Miss Relph said she seemed to see a lot of rings, as if they were moving, and she could not get ihem steadily before her eyes.

6o8

[630 B

No. 10. Original Drawing.

No. lo. Reproduction.

Mr, Birchall and Miss Relph. No contact.

No. II. Original Drawing.

Mr. Birchall and Miss Edwards. No contact.

TO CHAPTER VI

No. 12. Original Drawing.

Mr, Steel and Miss Relph. No contact.

No. 12. Reproduction.

VOL. I.

2Q

6io

[630 B

No. 15. Original Drawing.

Mr. Huffhes and Miss Edwards. No contact.

No. 15. Reproduction.

Miss Edwards said, " It is like a mask at a pantomime," and immediately drew as above.

630 B]

TO CHAPTER VI

6ii

No. t6. Original Drawing.

Mr. Hughes and Miss Edwards. No contact.

No. i6. Reproduction.

6l2

[630 B

Soon after the publication of these results, Mr. Guthrie was fortunate enough to obtain the active co-operation of Dr. Oliver J. Lodge, Professor of Physics in University College, Liverpool, who carried out a long and independent series of experiments with the same two percipients, and completely convinced himself of the genuineness of the phenomena. In his report,^ he says : "... We have many times succeeded with agents quite disconnected from the percipient in ordinary Hfe, and sometimes complete strangers to them. Mr. Birchall, the headmaster of the Birkdale Industrial School, frequently acted ; and the house physician at the Eye and Ear Hospital, Dr. Shears, had a successful experiment, acting alone, on his first and only visit. All suspicion of a pre-arranged code is thus rendered impossible even to outsiders who are unable to witness the obvious fairness of all the experiments."

The objects of which the idea was transferred were sometimes things with names (cards, key, teapot, flag, locket, picture of donkey, and so on), sometimes irregular drawings with no name. Professor Lodge satisfied himself that auditory as well as visual impressions played a part — that in some cases the idea transferred was that of the object itself, and, in others, that of its name. . . . Of the two percipients one seemed more susceptible to the visual, and the other to the auditory impressions. A case where the auditory element seems clearly to have come in is the following. The object was a tetrahedron rudely drawn in projection, thus —

A

The percipient said : " Is it another triangle ? " No answer was given, but Professor Lodge silently passed round to the agents a scribbled message, "Think of a pyramid." The percipient then said, " I only see a triangle " — then hastily, " Pyramids of Egypt. No, I shan't do this." Asked to draw, she only drew a triangle.

I will give only one other case from this series, which is important as showing that the percipient may be simultaneously influenced by two minds, which are concentrated on two different things. The two agents being seated opposite to one another. Professor Lodge placed between them a piece of paper, on one side of which was drawn a square, and on the other a cross. They thus had

n X

KEPRODUCTION'.

ORICrNALS.

different objects to contemplate, and neither knew what the other was looking at; nor did the percipient know that anything unusual was being tried. There was no contact. Very soon the percipient said, " I see things moving about ... I seem to see two things ... I see first one up there, and then one down there ... I don't know which to draw ... I can't see either distinctly." Professor Lodge said: " Well, anyhow, draw what you have seen." She took off the bandage and drew first a square, and then said, " Then there was the other thing as well . . . afterwards they seemed to go into one," — and she' drew a cross inside the square from corner to corner, adding afterwards, " I don't know

1 Proceedings of the S.P.R., vol. ii. p. 189, &c.

630B] TO CHAPTER VI 613

what made me put it inside." The significance of this experimental proof of jomt agency will be more fully realised in connection with some of the spontaneous cases.

Further experiments of Mr. Guthrie's related to the transference of tastes, which he was the first to observe in the case of non-hypnotised persons (and of which some account has been given in 571 C), and of smells. In these, it is difficult to make the conditions such as to ensure that no indications reach the percipient through any of the ordinary channels of sense. With regard to the transference of pains in the normal state (akin to the community of sensation occasionally observed between hypnotists and their subjects, see 571) there is not the same difficulty of experimenting under satisfactory conditions, since a pain cannot travel like a smell. The following are some of Mr. Guthrie's experiments carried out without contact between agent and percipient. I quote them from Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 57 : —

At seven of the Liverpool meetings, which took place at intervals from November 1884 to July 18S5, the experiment was arranged in the following way. The percipient being seated blindfolded, and with her back to the rest of the party, all the other persons present inflicted on themselves the same pain on the same part of the body. Those who took part in this collective agency were three or more of the following : Mr. Guthrie, Professor Herdman, Dr. Hicks, Dr. Hyla Greves, Mr. R. C. Johnson, F.R.A.S., Mr. Birchall, Miss Redmond, and on one occasion another lady. The percipient throughout was Miss Relph. In all, 20 trials were made. The parts pained were — I. — Back of left hand pricked. Rightly localised. 2. — Lobe of left ear pricked. Rightly localised. 3.— Left wrist pricked. " Is it in the left hand ? " — pointing to the back near

the little finger. 4. — Third finger of left hand tightly bound round with wire. A lower joint

of that finger was guessed. 5. — Left wrist scratched with pins. " It is in the left wrist, like being

scratched." 6. — Left ankle pricked. Rightly localised. 7. — Spot behind left ear pricked. No result. 8. — Right knee pricked. Rightly localised. 9. — Right shoulder pricked. Rightly localised. 10. — Hands burned over gas. " Like a pulling pain . . . then tingling, like

cold and hot alternately " — localised by gesture only. II. — End of tongue bitten. " It is in the lip or the tongue." 12. — Palm of left hand pricked. " Is it a tingling pain in the hand, here ? " —

placing her finger on the palm of the left hand. 13. — Back of neck pricked. " Is it a pricking of the neck ? " 14. — Front of left arm above elbow pricked. Rightly localised. 15. — 3pot just above left ankle pricked. Rightly localised. 16. — Spot just above right wrist pricked. " I am not quite sure, but I feel

a pain in the right arm, from the thumb upwards, to above the wrist." 17. — Inside of left ankle pricked. Outside of left ankle guessed.

6i4 APPENDICES [630 C

* i8. — Spot beneath right collar-bone pricked. The exactly corresponding spot on the left side was guessed.

19. — Back hair pulled. No result.

20. — Inside of right wrist pricked. Right foot guessed.

Thus in 10 out of the 20 cases, the percipient localised the pain with great precision ; in 6 the localisation was nearly exact, and with these we may include No. 10, where the pain was probably not confined to a single well-defined area in the hands of all the agents ; in 2 no local impression was produced ; and in I, the last, the answer was wholly wrong.

Some other experiments with diagrams in which the amount of success obtained was very striking (and which I omit here for want of space) were carried out by the " Committee on Thought-transference" of the S.P.R. in 1883, and are recorded in the Proceedings, vo\. i. pp. 161-167 and 174-

630 C. Mr. Henry G. Rawson's Experiments} — Mr. Rawson had previously been successful as percipient in several short sets of experiments in card-guessing with different agents. In the paper referred to here, he describes experiments of various kinds carried out with a party of his friends : three sisters, Mrs. L., Mrs. B. and Miss B., and Mr. L., the husband of Mrs. L. Mr. Z., an uncle of Mr. Rawson, was also present on one occasion, and confirms what was reported then. The full names of all these persons were given us in confidence, and the originals of most of the notes of the experiments and of all the diagrams were sent to us. The following is Mr. Rawson's account of experiments on two evenings in the transference of diagrams : —

November 24/A, 1894. — The first evening was occupied with experiments in the transference of diagrams, Mrs. L. and Mrs. B. (who are sisters), being the operators, and myself the only other person present.

The positions on that occasion were throughout as follows : Mrs. L. sat on a low chair by the fire, drawing in her lap ; Mrs. B. sat some distance off at a table in the middle of the room, with her back to Mrs. L. ; and I stood almost between them with my back to the fire, looking occasionally over Mrs. B.'s shoulder. To the best of my recollection, I never saw Mrs. L.'s drawings until they were complete and handed up for comparison.

From the sitters' positions, it was impossible that they could look over one another, and as one was sitting throughout with her back to the other, some eight feet distant, no collusion was possible. In one case only, that of the fernpalms (No. 6, see below), was anything said except, " Oh ! I know what she is thinking of," or words to that effect, which the percipient exclaimed on two or three occasions almost immediately the agent began drawing, and at once commenced her own sketch. All the diagrams drawn by both agent and percipient are reproduced below, those of the agent being marked O., and those of the percipient R. In the first three, Mrs B. was agent, and in the last three Mrs. L. No. 2 (the triangle) was the only one suggested by me, and also the only instance in which there was a failure. In this case alone some additions were made subsequently to the percipient's drawing by myself, showing how a

1 See Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp 2-17.

630 C]

TO CHAPTER VI

kind of triangle was to be seen in the figure of the cat. At that time I had not thought of reproducing the record. The agent then made some additions to her sketch, but in the reproductions which accompany this paper, both diagrams are given as originally drawn. The other diagrams were chosen by the agent in every case without communication with any one, and were drawn in the positions I have indicated.

I O.

I R.

6i6

[630 C

4R.

December \ith, 1894.— Present : Mrs. L., Mrs. B., and myself.

We tried first experiments with drawings, all of which are reproduced below. The annexed plan [omitted here] shows the relative positions of the sitters. Mrs. L. on chair facing [Mrs. B.], writing on lap. Mrs. B. sitting at table, back to Mrs. L., 11 feet distant. H. G. R. facing Mrs. L.

630 C]

TO CHAPTER VI

0. 1 I R. 1

O. 3

O. 5

6i8

[630 C

R. 6

The originals of Nos. i, 2, and 3 were drawn by Mrs. L. ; in some cases Mrs. B. had finished her thought copy almost as soon as Mrs. L.

The originals of Nos. 4, 5, and 6 were drawn by Mrs. B., in each case at my suggestion.

I have recorded all that was said.

(No. i) Shortly after Mrs. L. began drawing this (a nose) Mrs. B. said, "I can think of nothing; I can only hold my nose." At that time I did not know what Mrs. L. was drawing. In some 10 seconds Mrs. B. began drawing, and was finished within 15 seconds of Mrs. L.

(No. 2) This was more like a foot at first, but while waiting for Mrs. L. to begin a fresh subject Mrs. B. began shading the boot — without thinking — and this accentuates the dissimilarity. This and the case mentioned on November 24th, are the only instances in which the drawing was touched after the original had been seen.

(No. 4) Mrs. L. said almost at once — after, say, 10 seconds: " Now I know what it is ; I am sure ; I can see it."

(No. 5) Mrs. L. began drawing within 10 to 15 seconds, and presently said, " I am drawing something I can see." The clock was in front of her on the mantelpiece.

(No. 6) Mrs. L. said, " I know what it is."

Afterwards Mrs. B. told me that she thought of putting a label on the champagne bottle she drew (No. 4).

A few experiments in "willing" the subject to perform various actions were tried at different times. No contact was used, but the subject was generally in sight of the agents, so that there might have been unconscious guidance through looks, &c.

Some short series of card-guesses were also carried out, the percipients on different occasions being Mr. Rawson, Mr. and Mrs. L. and Mrs. B., and the agents, Mrs. L., Mrs. B., and Miss B. The following is a summary of the results obtained : —

Total number of trials Complete successes Number of pips only right Suit only right

630 D] TO CHAPTER VI 619

Sometimes second guesses were allowed, but first guesses only are included in the above summary. In fourteen cases the card to be guessed was selected by the agent ; in the other cases it was drawn from the pack at random.

630 D. Comparatively few cases have been recorded on good evidence of the experimental transference of impressions when the agent and percipient were in different places, and their value, of course, depends primarily on the total number of experiments tried in any one case, and the proportion of success obtained. Considering how seldom experiments seem to have been made under this condition, the amount of success is perhaps greater than might have been expected.^

Mr. Joseph Kirk's Experiffienfs. — The account is taken from Mr. F. Podmore's Apparitions and Thought-transference, pp. 131— 136. (See also experiment by Mr. Kirk, in 668 B.)

During the year 1890 and onwards, Mr. Joseph Kirk, of 2 Ripon Villas, Plumstead, has carried on with a friend, Miss G., a series of experiments in thoughttransference at a distance varying from 400 yards to about 200 miles. Some account of these experiments will be found in the Joiirnal of the S.P.R. for February and July 1891 and January 1892. There are 22 (excluding two in which the distance was only a few yards) trials in the transference of diagrams, &c., there recorded. The object looked at by Mr. Kirk was generally a square or oblong card, or a white disc with or without a picture, diagram, or letter on it. The object was always illuminated by a strong light. Notes of the experiments were in every case made independently in writing by agent and percipient. In each case, with the exception of two occasions (on which Mr. Kirk's notes record his anticipation of failure), the percipient saw luminous appearances, often taking the form of round or square patches of light, in correspondence with the shape of the surface looked at by the agent. When Miss G. was at Pembroke or Ilfracombe (Mr. Kirk remaining at Plumstead) the correspondence did not go beyond this ; but in two or three cases, when Miss G. was also at Plumstead, at a distance of only 400 yards, the percipient appears to have seen some details of the diagram on the card, and in one instance a fairly accurate reproduction of the diagram was given. Mr. Kirk, on this occasion, 4th June 1891, was trying to impress three percipients — of whom Miss G. was one — and used three diagrams, viz., a Maltese cross, a white oval plate with the figure 3 on it, and a full-sized drawing of a man's hand in black on white. Miss G.'s report is as follows : —

"5/6/91- Sat last night from 11. 15 to ri.45. After a few minutes wavy clouds appeared, [these are drawn as a group of roundish objects,] followed by a pale bluish light very bright in centre. [This is drawn of an indefinite oval shape with roundish white spot in centre.] Near the end of experiment saw a larger luminous form, lasting only a moment, but reappearing three or four times ; it had lines or spikes about half an inch wide darting from it in varied positions."

See Mr. F. Podmore's Apparitions and Thought-transference, chapter v., for other cases of the experimental production of telepathic effects at a distance, besides those given here.

[630 D

Appended are reproductions of Miss G.'s original drawings of her impression, which bear, it will be seen, a marked likeness to a man's hand.

It should be added that Miss G. has not had any hallucinations of the kind except at times when Mr. Kirk was experimenting; and the amount of correspondence between her visions and the images which Mr. Kirk endeavoured to transfer would certainly seem beyond what chance could produce.

A further series of seven trials with the same percipient in April-June 1892 produced some interesting results. Full notes of the experiments were, as in the previous cases, made by Mr. Kirk and Miss G. independently. Mr. Kirk wrote his notes immediately after the conclusion of the experiments, vv^hich were made late in the evening, at a time previously agreed upon. Miss G., who was in the dark, and as a rule in bed, wrote her notes on the following morning before hearing from Mr. Kirk. No diagrams were used in this series, "the object being," in Mr. Kirk's words, " to test the possibility of influencing the imagination, and inducing the percipient to visualise hallucinatory figures of persons or animals thought of by the agent." Miss G. knew only that diagrams would not be used. The distance between agent and percipient was about 400 yards.

In the first three trials (April loth, 17th, and 24th, 1892), Mr. Kirk pictured to himself some ducks in a room, a witch, and other figures. On the 17th, Miss G. saw at one time a sunlike light, but with this exception she had no impression at all on any of the three occasions.

At the fourth trial (ist May), Miss G. records the same night that she saw "a broken circle O, then only patches of faint light, not cloudlike, but flat, which alternated with vertical streaks of pale light." Afterwards, however, she had another vision, which she thus records on the following morning before meeting Mr. Kirk : —

