718. I place next by themselves a small group of cases which have the interest of uniting the group just recounted, where the spirit anticipates the friend's departure, with the group next to be considered, where the spirit welcomes the friend already departed from earth. This class forms at the same time a natural extension of the clairvoyance of the dying exemplified in some " reciprocal " cases (e.g. in the case of Miss W., where a dying aunt has a vision of her little niece who sees an apparition of her at the same time ; see Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 253). Just as the approaching severance of spirit from body there aided the spirit to project its observation among incarnate spirits at a distance upon this earth, so here does that same approaching severance enable the dying person to see spirits who are already in the next world. It is not very uncommon for dying persons to say, or to indicate when beyond speech, that they see spirit friends apparently near them. But, of course, such vision becomes evidential only when the dying person is unaware that the friend whose spirit he sees has actually departed, or is just about to depart, from earth. Such a conjuncture must plainly be rare ; it is even rather surprising that these " Peak in Darien " cases, as Miss Cobbe has termed them in a small collection which she made some years ago, should be found at all. We can add to Miss Cobbe's cases two of fair attestation, which I give in 718 A and B.

719. From this last group, then, there is scarcely a noticeable transition to the group where departed spirits manifest their knowledge that some friend who survived them has now passed on into their world. That such recognition and welcome does in fact take place, later evidence, drawn especially from trance-utterances, will give good ground to believe. Only rarely, however, will such welcome — taking place as it does in the spiritual world — be reflected by apparitions in this. When so reflected, it may take different forms, from an actual utterance of sympathy, as from a known departed friend, down to a mere silent presence, perhaps inex-

1 For some curious parallels to these modern cases from savage beliefs, see Mr. Andrew Lang's Myth, Ritual, and Religion, vol. i. pp. 105-6.

plicable except to those who happen to have known some long predeceased friend of the decedent's.

I quote in full one of the most complete cases of this type, which was brought to us by the Census of Hallucinations {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. pp. 380-82).

From Miss L. Dodson : —

September \\th, 1891.

On June 5th, 1887, a Sunday evening,1 between eleven and twelve at night, being awake, my name was called three times. I answered twice, thinking it was my uncle, " Come in, Uncle George, I am awake," but the third time I recognised the voice as that of my mother, who had been dead sixteen years. I said, " Mamma ! " She then came round a screen near my bedside with two children in her arms, and placed them in my arms and put the bedclothes over them and said, " Lucy, promise me to take care of them, for their mother is just dead." I said, "Yes, mamma." She repeated, "Promise me to take care of them." I replied, "Yes, I promise you ; " and I added, " Oh, mamma, stay and speak to me, I am so wretched." She replied, " Not yet, my child," then she seemed to go round the screen again, and I remained, feeling the children to be still in my arms, and fell asleep. When I awoke there was nothing. Tuesday morning, June 7th, I received the news of my sister-in-law's death. She had given birth to a child three weeks before, which I did not know till after her death.

I was in bed, but not asleep, and the room was lighted by a gaslight in the street outside. I was out of health, and in anxiety about family troubles. My age was forty-two. I was quite alone. I mentioned the circumstance to my uncle the next morning. He thought I was sickening for brain fever. [I have had other experiences, but] only to the extent of having felt a hand laid on my head, and sometimes oh my hands, at times of great trouble.

LUCY DODSON.

The collector, Mr. C. H. Cope, writes in answer to our questions : —

BRUSSELS, October ifth, 1891.

I have received replies from Miss Dodson to your inquiries.

(1) "Yes [I was] perfectly awake [at the time]."

(2) "Was she in anxiety about her sister-in-law?" "None whatever; I did not know a second baby had been born ; in fact, had not the remotest idea of my sister-in-law's illness.'*

(3) "Did she think at the time that the words about the children's mother having just died referred to her sister-in-law? Had she two children?" " No, I was at a total loss to imagine whose children they were."

(4) " I was living in Albany Street, Regent's Park, at the time. My sisterin-law, as I heard afterwards, was confined at St. Andre* (near Bruges), and removed to Bruges three days prior to her death. (N.B. — She had two children including the new-born baby.) "

(5) " My late uncle only saw business connections, and having no relations or personal friends in London, save myself, would not have been likely to mention the occurrence to any one."

1 We have ascertained that this date was a Sunday.

719] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 33

Mr. Cope also sent us a copy of the printed announcement of the death, which Miss Dodson had received. It was dated, " Bruges, June 7th, 1887," and gave the date of death as June 5th. He quotes from Miss Dodson's letter to him, enclosing it, as follows : — " [My friend], Mrs. Grange, tells me she saw [my sister-in-law] a couple of hours prior to her death, which took place about nine o'clock on the evening of June 5th, and it was between eleven and twelve o'clock the same night my mother brought me the two little children."

Professor Sidgwick writes : —

November 23rd, 1892.

I have just had an interesting conversation with Miss Dodson and her friend, Mrs. Grange.

Miss Dodson told me that she was not thinking of her brother or his wife at this time, as her mind was absorbed by certain other matters. But the brother was an object of special concern to her, as her mother on her deathbed, in 1871, had specially charged her — and she had promised — to take care of the other children, especially this brother, who was then five years old. He had married in April 1885, and she had not seen him since, though she had heard of the birth of his first child, a little girl, in January 1886; and she had never seen his wife nor heard of the birth of the second child.

She is as sure as she can be that she was awake at the time of the experience. She knew the time by a clock in the room and also a clock outside. She heard this latter strike twelve afterwards, and the apparition must have occurred after eleven, because lights were out in front of the public-house. The children seemed to be with her a long time ; indeed, they seemed to be still with her when the clock struck twelve. The room was usually light enough to see things in — e.g. to get a glass of water, &c. — owing to the lamp in the street, but the distinctness with which the vision was seen is not explicable by the real light. The children were of ages corresponding to those of her sisterin-law's children, i.e. they seemed to be a little girl and a baby newly born ; the sex was not distinguished. She was not at all alarmed.

She heard from Mrs. Grange by letter, and afterwards orally from her brother, that her sister-in-law died between eight and nine the same night.

She never had any experience of the kind, or any hallucination at all before : but since she has occasionally felt a hand on her head in trouble.

Mrs. Grange told me that she was with the sister-in-law about an hour and a half before her death. She left her about seven o'clock, without any particular alarm about her; though she was suffering from inflammation after childbirth, and Mrs. Grange did not quite like her look ; still her state was not considered alarming by those who were attending on her. Then about 8.30 news came to Mrs. Grange in her own house that something had happened at the sisterin-law's. As it was only in the next street, Mrs. Grange put on her bonnet and went round to the house, and found she was dead. She then wrote and told Miss Dodson.

I quote further cases more or less analogous to this in the Appendices to this section. In the first (719 A) the apparition of a dying mother brings the news of her own death and that her baby is living. In the second (719 B) a mother sees a vision of her son being drowned and also an apparition of her own dead mother, who tells her of the drowning.

VOL. II. C

In this case, the question may be raised as to whether the second figure seen may not have been, so to say, substitutive — a symbol in which the percipient's own mind clothed a telepathic impression of the actual decedent's passage from earth. Such a view might perhaps be supported by some anomalous cases where news of the death is brought by the apparition of a person still living, who, nevertheless, is not by any normal means aware of the death. (See the case of Mrs. T., already given in Chapter IV., 428; and that of Miss Hawkins-Dempster in 719 C.)

720. I will quote here one case, at any rate, where such an explanation would be impossible, since both the deceased person and the phantasmal figure were previously unknown to the percipient. This case — the last which Edmund Gurney published — comes from an excellent witness. The psychical incident which it seems to imply, while very remote from popular notions, would be quite in accordance with the rest of our present series. A lady dies; her husband in the spirit-world is moved by her arrival ; and the direction thus given to his thought projects a picture of him, clothed as in the days when he lived with*her, into visibility in the house where her body is lying. We have thus a dream-like recurrence to earthly memories, prompted by a revival of those memories which had taken place in the spiritual world. The case is midway between a case of welcome and a case of haunting.

From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 422-26. The account is given by Mrs. Bacchus, of Sherbourne Villa, Leamington.

August 1886.

On Saturday, October i8th [really 24th], 1868, we left some friends (the Marquis and Madame de Lys) with whom we had been staying at Malvern Wells, and went to Cheltenham. The reason for going to Cheltenham was that a brother-in-law of my husband, Mr. George Copeland, was living there. He was a great invalid, suffering from paralysis and quite unable to move, but in full mental vigour, so his friends were anxious to see him as often as possible to relieve the dreariness of his long illness, and we did not like to be so near without paying him a visit. We knew that he had friends staying in the house at the time, so determined to go to Cheltenham without letting him know, to take lodgings near, and then tell him we had done so, that he might not feel he ought to invite us to his house. We soon found some rooms in York Terrace, close to Bay's Hill, Mr. Copeland's house. After we had taken the rooms — the usual lodging-house kind — drawing-room and bedroom at the back, and were going out, we noticed some medicine bottles on the hall table, asked if any one were ill in the house, and were told that an old lady, a Mrs. R., and her daughter were in the dining-room, that Mrs. R. had been ill for some time, that her illness was not serious and that there was no immediate danger of her dying ; in fact, it was made quite light of, and we thought no more about it. We just mentioned in the course of the evening the name of the people lodging in the same house, and Mr. Copeland said he knew who Mrs. R. was ; she was the widow of a physician who formerly practised in Cheltenham, that one of her daughters was married to a master of the College, a Mr. N. Then I remembered having seen Mrs. N. at a garden-party at Dr. Barry's the year before, and had noticed her talking to Mrs. Barry, and thought her very pretty. This was all I knew or ever heard of the people. On Sunday morning, when

720] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD '35

I came into the drawing-room for breakfast, I thought my husband looked a little uncomfortable ; however, he said nothing till I had finished breakfast, then asked, "Did you hear a noise of a chair in the hall a little while ago? The old lady downstairs died in her chair last night, and they were wheeling her into the bedroom at the back." I was very uncomfortable and frightened ; I had never been in a house with any one dead before, and wanted to go, and several friends who heard of it asked me to stay with them, but my husband did not wish to move. He said it was a great deal of trouble, was really foolish of me to wish it, that he did not like moving on Sunday, also that he did not think it right or kind to go away because some one had died, that we should think it unkind if the case had been our own, and other people had rushed off in a hurry ; so we decided to stay. I spent the day with my brother-in-law and nieces, and only returned to the lodgings in time to go to bed. I went to sleep quickly as usual, but woke, I suppose, in the middle of the night, not frightened by any noise, and for no reason, and saw distinctly at the foot of the bed an old gentleman with a round rosy face, smiling, his hat in his hand, dressed in an old-fashioned coat (blue) with brass buttons, light waistcoat, and trousers. The longer I looked at him the more distinctly I saw every feature and particular of his dress, &c. I did not feel much frightened, and after a time shut my eyes for a minute or two, and when I looked again the old gentleman was gone. After a time I went to sleep, and in the morning, while dressing, made up my mind that I would say nothing of what I had seen till I saw one of my nieces, and would then describe the old gentleman, and ask if Dr. R. could be like him, although the idea seemed absurd. I met my niece, Mary Copeland (now Mrs. Brandling), coming out of church, and said, "Was Dr. R. like an old gentleman with a round rosy face," &c., &c., describing what I had seen. She stopped at once on the pavement, looking astonished. " Who could have told you, aunt? We always said he looked more like a country farmer than a doctor, and how odd it was that such a common-looking man should have had such pretty daughters."

This is an exact account of what I saw. I am quite sure I should know the old gentleman again, his face is clearly before me when I think of it now, as at the time Miss de Lys had a letter from me with the story, and sent it to a relation in France; she heard me tell it again some years after, and said there was no variation whatever in it. My two nieces are still living, and can remember exactly everything that happened as I told it to them. Of course I cannot explain it in any way ; the old lady who was dead was in the room directly under the one I was sleeping in. The part of the whole thing that surprised me the most was, that I was so very little frightened as to be able to sleep afterwards, and did not wish to disturb any one else.

Mr. Bacchus writes : —

LEAMINGTON, September 2"jth, 1886.

I have read my wife's account of what happened at Cheltenham when we were staying there in October 1868; it is exactly what she told me at the time, and I remember it all perfectly, also her telling my niece about it in the morning. HENRY BACCHUS.

In answer to further questions, Mrs. Bacchus replied as follows : —

September qth, 1886.

(1) I have never seen anything of the kind before or since.

(2) I gave the date from memory. The day was Saturday, and it was Sunday night, or early on Monday morning, that I saw Dr. R.

(3) I do not remember the number in York Terrace; probably the Times of October 1868 would give Mrs. R.'s death and where it took place. [The Times gives the death at 7 York Terrace, Sunday, October 25th, 1868.]

(4) The letter to Miss de Lys cannot be found ; all my letters to her were burnt after she died in 1883.

(5) Mr. Bacchus and Mrs. Henry Berkeley have given their account. Mrs. Brandling has not yet written.

(6) I am quite sure I never saw any picture of any kind of Dr. R.

(7) I do not know when he died ; probably three or four years before I saw him. His death was spoken of in that way. I can find out if necessary from an old servant of Mr. Copeland's who lives at Cheltenham, and who would remember him, and be able to inquire.

(8) I do not remember anything about the light, if there was a night-light in the room or not; I think not. When I say, "do not remember," I mean that being asked puzzles me; my impression of the whole thing is that it was like a magic lantern, all dark round, and the figure, colour, and clothes quite light and bright. I always see the whole thing when I speak of it.

ISABELLE BACCHUS.

Statements were also obtained from Mrs. Berkeley and Mrs. Brandling, nieces of Mrs. Bacchus, confirming her recollection that she had described the details of the apparition to them the next morning, and that it closely resembled Dr. R., as they remembered him. These statements are printed in full in the Proceedings.

Mr. R. died (as Mrs. Bacchus ascertained for us), August 3Oth, 1865.

721. I now come to a considerable group of cases where the departed spirit shows a definite knowledge of some fact connected with his own earth-life, his death, or subsequent events connected with that death. The knowledge of subsequent events, as of the spread of the news of his death, or as to the place of his burial, is, of course, a greater achievement (so to term it) than a mere recollection of facts known to him in life, and ought strictly, on the plan of this series, to be first illustrated. But it will be seen that all these stages of knowledge cohere together ; and their connection can better be shown if I begin at the lower stage, — of mere earth- memory. Now here again, as so often already, we shall have to wait for automatic script and the like to illustrate the full extent of the deceased person's possible memory. Readers of the utterances, for instance, of " George Pelham" (see Chapter IX.), will know how full and accurate may be these recollections from beyond the grave. Mere apparitions, such as those with which we are now dealing, can rarely give more than one brief message, probably felt by the deceased to be of urgent importance.

I will quote at length a well-attested case where the information communicated in a vision proved to be definite, accurate, and important to the survivors. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 200-205.) l

1 Some of the correspondence about the case given in the Proceedings is omitted here for want of space.

721] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 37

The first report of the case appeared in The Herald (Dubuque, Iowa), Febiuary nth, 1891, as follows: —

It will be remembered that on February 2nd, Michael Conley, a farmer living near Ionia, Chickasaw County, was found dead in an outhouse at the Jefferson house. He was carried to Coroner Hoffmann's morgue, where, after the inquest, his body was prepared for shipment to his late home. The old clothes which he wore were covered with filth from the place where he was found, and they were thrown outside the morgue on the ground.

His son came from Ionia, and took the corpse home. When he reached there, and one of the daughters was told that her father was dead, she fell into a swoon, in which she remained for several hours. When at last she was brought from the swoon, she said, " Where are father's old clothes ? He has just appeared to me dressed in a white shirt, black clothes, and felt [mis-reported for satin] slippers, and told me that after leaving home he sewed a large roll of bills inside his grey shirt with a piece of my red dress, and the money is still there." In a short time she fell into another swoon, and when out of it demanded that somebody go to Dubuque and get the clothes. She was deathly sick, and is so yet.

The entire family considered it only a hallucination, but the physician advised them to get the clothes, as it might set her mind at rest. The son telephoned Coroner Hoffmann, asking if the clothes were still in his possession. He looked and found them in the backyard, although he had supposed they were thrown in the vault, as he had intended. He answered that he still had them, and on being told that the son would come to get them, they were wrapped in a bundle.

The young man arrived last Monday afternoon, and told Coroner Hoffmann what his sister had said. Mr. Hoffmann admitted that the lady had described the identical burial garb in which her father was clad, even to the slippers, although she never saw him after death, and none of the family had seen more than his face through the coffin lid. Curiosity being fully aroused, they took the grey shirt from the bundle, and within the bosom found a large roll of bills sewed with a piece of red cloth. The young man said his sister had a red dress exactly like it. The stitches were large and irregular, and looked to be those of a man. The son wrapped up the garments and took them home with him yesterday morning, filled with wonder at the supernatural revelation made to his sister, who is at present lingering between life and death.

Dr. Hodgson communicated with the proprietors of The Herald, and both they and their reporter who had written the account stated that it was strictly accurate. The coroner, Mr. Hoffmann, wrote to Dr. Hodgson on March iSth, 1891, as follows: —

In regard to the statement in the Dubuque Herald, about February iQth, about the Conley matter is more than true by my investigation. I laughed and did not believe in the matter when I first heard of it, until I satisfied myself by investigating and seeing what I did.

M. M. HOFFMANN, County Coroner.

Further evidence was obtained through Mr. Amos Cnim, pastor of a church at Dubuque. The following statement was made by Mr. Brown,

whom Mr. Crum described as " an intelligent and reliable farmer, residing about one mile from the Conleys."

IONIA, July 20th, 1891.

Elizabeth Conley, the subject of so much comment in the various papers, was born in Chickasaw township, Chickasaw County, Iowa, in March 1863. Her mother died the same year. Is of Irish parentage ; brought up, and is, a Roman Catholic; has been keeping house for her father for ten years.

On the 1st day of February 1891 her father went to Dubuque, Iowa, for medical treatment, and died on the 3rd of the same month very suddenly. His son was notified by telegraph the same day, and he and I started the next morning after the remains, which we found in charge of Coroner Hoffmann.

He had 9 dollars 75 cents, which he had taken from his pocket-book. I think it was about two days after our return she had the dream or vision. She claimed her father had appeared to her, and told her there was a sum of money in an inside pocket of his undershirt. Her brother started for Dubuque a few days afterwards, and found the clothes as we had left them, and in the pocket referred to found 30 dollars in currency. These are the facts of the matter as near as I can give them. GEORGE BROWN.

Mr. Crum wrote later : —

DUBUQUE, IOWA, August i$th, 1891.

DEAR MR. HODGSON, — I send you in another cover a detailed account of interview with the Conleys. I could not get the doctor.

I have had a long talk with Mr. Hoffmann about the Conley incident, and think you have all the facts — and they are facts.

The girl Lizzie Conley swooned. She saw her dead father ; she heard from him of the money left in his old shirt ; she returned to bodily consciousness ; she described her father's burial dress, robe, shirt, and slippers exactly, though she had never seen them. She described the pocket in the shirt that had been left for days in the shed at the undertaker's. It was a ragged-edged piece of red cloth clumsily sewn, and in this pocket was found a roll of bills — 35 dollars in amount — as taken out by Mr. Hoffmann in presence of Pat Conley, son of the deceased, and brother of the Lizzie Conley whose remarkable dream or vision is the subject of inquiry. AMOS CRUM, Past. Univ. Ch.

... I herewith transcribe my questions addressed to Miss Elizabeth Conley and her replies to the same concerning her alleged dream or vision ....

On July 1 7th, about noon, I called at the Conley home near Ionia, Chickasaw County, Iowa, and inquired for Elizabeth Conley. She was present and engaged in her domestic labours. When I- stated the object of my call, she seemed quite reluctant for a moment to engage in conversation. Then she directed a lad who was present to leave the room. She said she would converse with me upon the matter pertaining to her father.

Q. What is your age ? A. Twenty-eight.

Q. What is the state of your health ? A. Not good since my father's death.

Q. What was the state of your health previous to his death ? A. It was good. I was a healthy girl.

Q. Did you have dreams, visions, or swoons previous to your father's death ? A. Why, I had dreams. Everybody has dreams.

721] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 39

Q. Have you ever made discoveries or received other information during your dreams or visions previous to your father's death ? A. No.

Q. Had there been anything unusual in your dreams or visions previous to your father's death ? A. No, not that I know of.

Q. Was your father in the habit of carrying considerable sums of money about his person? A. Not that I knew of.

Q. Did you know before his death of the pocket in the breast of the shirt worn by him to Dubuque ? A. No.

Q. Did you wash or prepare that shirt for him to wear on his trip to Dubuque ? A. No. It was a heavy woollen undershirt, and the pocket was stitched inside of the breast of it.

Q. Will you recite the circumstances connected with the recovery of money from clothing worn by your father at the time of his death? A. (after some hesitation) When they told me that father was dead I felt very sick and bad; I did not know anything. Then father came to me. He had on a white shirt and black clothes and slippers. When I came to, I told Pat [her brother] I had seen father. I asked him (Pat) if he had brought back father's old clothes. He said, " No," and asked me why I wanted them. I told him father said to me he had sewed a roll of bills inside of his grey shirt, in a pocket made of a piece of my old red dress. I went to sleep, and father came to me again. When I awoke I told Pat he must go and get the clothes.

Q. While in these swoons did you hear the ordinary conversations or noises in the house about you ? A. No.

Q. Did you see your father's body after it was placed in its coffin ? A. No ; I did not see him after he left the house to go to Dubuque.

Q. Have you an education ? A. No.

Q. Can you read and write? A. Oh yes, I can read and write; but I've not been to school much.

Q. Are you willing to write out what you have told me of this strange affair? A. Why, I've told you all I know about it.

She was averse to writing or to signing a written statement. During the conversation she was quite emotional, and manifested much effort to suppress her feelings. She is a little more than medium size, of Irish parentage, of Catholic faith, and shows by her conversation that her education is limited.

Her brother, Pat Conley, corroborates all that she has recited. He is a sincere and substantial man, and has no theory upon which to account for the strange facts that have come to his knowledge. In his presence Coroner Hoffmann, in Dubuque, found the shirt with its pocket of red cloth stitched on the inside with long, straggling, and awkward stitches, just as a dim-sighted old mr.n or an awkward boy might sew it there. The pocket was about 7 [seven] inches deep, and in the pocket of that dirty old shirt that had lain in Hoffmann's back room was a roll of bills amounting to 35 dollars. When the shirt was found with the pocket, as described by his sister after her swoon, and the money as told her by the old man after his death, Pat Conley seemed dazed and overcome by the mystery. Hoffmann says the girl, after her swoon, described exactly the burial suit, shirt, coat or robe, and satin slippers in which the body was prepared for burial. She even described minutely the slippers, which were of a new pattern that had not been in the market here, and which the girl could never have seen a sample of ; and she had not seen, and never

saw, the body of her father after it was placed in the coffin, and if she had seen it she could not have seen his feet " in the nice black satin slippers " which she described. . . . AMOS CRUM, Pastor Univ. Church.

If we may accept the details of this narrative, which seems to have been carefully and promptly investigated, we find that the phantasm communicates two sets of facts : one of them known only to strangers (the dress in which he was buried), and one of them known only to himself (the existence of the inside pocket and the money therein). In discussing from what mind these images orignate it is, of course, important to note whether any living minds, known or unknown to the percipient, were aware of the facts thus conveyed.

There are few cases where the communication between the percipient and the deceased seems to have been more direct than here. The hard, prosaic reality of the details of the message need not, of course, surprise us. On the contrary, the father's sudden death in the midst of earthly business would at once retain his attention on money matters and facilitate his impressing them on the daughter's mind. One wishes that more could be learned of the daughter's condition when receiving the message. It seems to have resembled trance rather than dream.

722. A dream in which a message of somewhat the same kind is given is here added in 722 A, after which will also be found (in 722 B) one of the few old cases whose lineage is sufficiently respectable to allow its entrance here. The preoccupation in each case turns on the fulfilment of a small duty. One other case in this group I must quote at length. It illustrates the fact that the cases of deepest interest are often the hardest for the inquirer to get hold of.

From the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. pp. 385-86.

The account of the percipient, Baron B. von Driesen, was written in November 1890, and has been translated from the Russian by Mr. M. Petrovo-Solovovo, who sent us the case.

[Baron von Driesen begins by saying that he has never believed and does not believe in the supernatural, and that he is more inclined to attribute the apparition he saw to his " excited fancy " than to anything else. After these preliminary remarks he proceeds as follows :— ]

I must tell you that my father-in-law, M. N. J. Ponomareff, died in the country. This did not happen at once, but after a long and painful illness, whose sharp phases had obliged my wife and myself to join him long before his death. I had not been on good terms with M. Ponomareff. Different circumstances, which are out of place in this narrative, had estranged us from each other, and these relations did not change until his death. He died very quietly, after having given his blessing to all his family, including myself. A liturgy for the rest of his soul was to be celebrated on the ninth day. I remember very well how I went to bed between one and two o'clock on the eve of that day, and how I read the Gospel before falling asleep. My wife was sleeping in the same room. It was perfectly quiet. I had just put out the candle when footsteps were heard in the adjacent room— a sound of slippers

722] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 41

shuffling, I might say — which ceased before the door of our bedroom. I called out, " Who is there ? " No answer. I struck one match, then another, and when after the stifling smell of the sulphur the fire had lighted up the room, I saw M. Ponomareff standing before the closed door. Yes, it was he, in his blue dressing-gown, lined with squirrel furs and only half-buttoned, so that I could see his white waistcoat and his black trousers. It was he undoubtedly. I was not frightened. They say that, as a rule, one is not frightened when seeing a ghost, as ghosts possess the quality of paralysing fear.

"What do you want?" I asked my father-in-law. M. Ponomareff made two steps forward, stopped before my bed, and said, " Basil Feodorovitch, I have acted wrongly towards you. Forgive me ! Without this I do not feel at rest there." He was pointing to the ceiling with his left hand whilst holding out his right to me. I seized this hand, which was long and cold, shook it, and answered, " Nicholas Ivanovitch, God is my witness that I have never had anything against you."

[The ghost of] my father-in-law bowed [or bent down], moved away, and went through the opposite door into the billiard-room, where he disappeared. I looked after him for a moment, crossed myself, put out the candle, and fell asleep with the sense of joy which a man who has done his duty must feel. The morning came. My wife's brothers, as well as our neighbours and the peasants, assembled, and the liturgy was celebrated by our confessor, the Rev. Father Basil. But when all was over, the same Father Basil led me aside, and said to me mysteriously, " Basil Feodorovitch, I have got something to say to you in private." My wife having come near us at this moment, the clergyman repeated his wish. I answered, " Father Basil, I have no secrets from my wife ; please tell us what you wished to tell me alone."

Then Father Basil, who is living till now in the Koi parish of the district of Kashin [Gov. of Tver], said to me in a rather solemn voice, " This night at three o'clock Nicholas Ivanovitch [Ponomareff] appeared to me and begged of me to reconcile him to you." (Signed) BARON BASIL DRIESEN.

Mr. Solovovo adds : —

The Baroness von Driesen is now dead, so that her evidence cannot be obtained . . .

I also saw Baron Basil von Driesen himself, and spoke with him about M. Ponomareff's ghost. He stated to me that if he were going to die to-morrow, he should still be ready to swear to the fact of his having seen the apparition, or something to this effect. I asked him to obtain for me the clergyman's account, to whom I had already written before seeing Baron von Driesen (though not knowing him), but without receiving an answer — which is but natural, after all. Baron von Driesen kindly promised to procure for me the account in question, as it was then his intention to visit different estates in Central Russia, including the one that had belonged to M. Ponomareff.

Baron Nicholas von Driesen — Baron Basil's son — called on me a few days ago. He stated, with regard to the case in question, that it was necessary to see the clergyman in order to induce him to write an account of what had happened to him.

Baron N. von Driesen afterwards sent a note to Mr. Solovovo, stating that his grandfather (M. Ponomareff) died on November 2ist, 1860; and

the testimony of the priest was obtained later. Mr. Solovovo, who had already ascertained independently that the Rev. Basil Bajenoff had been a priest at Koi in the year 1861, and was there still, writes : —

The following is the translation of the Rev. Basil Bajenoff' s statement : —

"Koi, July zyd [Attgust qth], 1891.

" To the account I heard from Baron B. F. Driesen in the presence of his wife's brothers, MM. N. N., A. N., and I. N. Ponomareff, as to how M. Nicholas I. Ponomareff appeared to him in the night of November 29-30^1, 1860, having died nine days before, and begged of the Baron to be reconciled to him, I may add that to me also did he appear at the same time and with the same request, which fact, before hearing the Baron's narrative, I communicated to all those present at the liturgy for the rest of the soul of the late M. N. I. Ponomareff.

"(Signed) BASIL BAJENOFF,

" Priest of Trinity Church, at Koi, District of Kashin, Government of Tver."

723. In this connection I may refer again to Mrs. Storie's dream of the death of her brother in a railway accident, given in Chapter IV. (427). While I think that Gurney was right — in the state of the evidence at the time Phantasms of the Living was written — in doing his best to bring this incident under the head of telepathic clairvoyance, I yet feel that the knowledge since gained makes it impossible for me to adhere to that view. I cannot regard the visionary scene as wholly reflected from the mind of the dying man. I cannot think, in the first place, that the vision of Mr. Johnstone, — interpolated with seeming irrelevance among the details of the disaster, — did only by accident coincide with the fact that that gentleman really was in the train, and with the further fact that it was he who communicated the fact of Mr. Hunter's death to Mr. and Mrs. Storie. I must suppose that the communicating intelligence was aware of Mr. Johnstone's presence, and at least guessed that upon him (as a clergyman) that task would naturally fall. Nor can I pass over as purely symbolic so important a part of the vision as the second figure, and the scrap of conversation, which seemed to be half heard. I therefore consider that the case falls among those where a friend recently departed appears in company of some other friend, dead some time before.

724. We have thus seen the spirit occupied shortly after death with various duties or engagements, small or great, which it has incurred during life on earth. Such ties seem to prompt or aid its action upon its old surroundings. And here an important reflection occurs. Can we prepare such a tie for the departing spirit ? Can we create for it some welcome and helpful train of association which may facilitate the self-manifestation which many souls appear to desire ? I believe that we can to some extent do this. At an early stage of our collection, Edmund Gurney was struck by the unexpectedly large proportion of cases where the percipient informed us that there had been a compact between himself and the deceased person that whichever passed away first should try to appear to the other.

725] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 43

"Considering," he adds, "what an extremely small number of persons make such a compact, compared with those who do not, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that its existence has a certain efficacy."

The cases recorded in Phantasms of the Living are such as fell, or may have fallen, within twelve hours of the death ; otherwise they would not have been introduced into that work. It will, of course, occur to the reader that since the especial object of that compact is to assure the surviving friend that the deceased person has safely traversed the gate of death, its fulfilment affords some presumption that he is not merely approaching that gate, but feels that he has passed it. On the other hand, Gurney remarks, that " considering how often spontaneous telepathy acts without any conscious set of the distant mind towards the person impressed, it is safer to refer the phenomenon to the same sort of blind movements as seem sometimes at supreme crises to evoke a response out of memories and affinities that have long lapsed from consciousness ; on which view the efficacy of the compact may quite as readily be conceived to depend on its latent place in the percipient's mind as in the agent's."

Since these words were written the general trend of the evidence has somewhat changed ; and it may be well briefly to refer to the compactcases in Phantasms of the Living, considering how far they seem to indicate ante-mortem or post-mortem communication.

725. Taking the cases as they follow each other in that work, the first (vol. i. p. 395) is the well-known incident recorded by Lord Brougham — his vision, while taking a warm bath in Sweden, of a school friend from whom he had parted many years before, but with whom he had long ago " committed the folly of drawing up an agreement written with our blood, to the effect that whichever of us died first should appear to the other, and thus solve any doubts we had entertained of the life after death." This incident happened about 2 A.M. apparently on December ipth (possibly on December 2Oth), 1799. G. died in India on December 1 9th, 1799 — place and hour not stated. The time in any part of India is, of course, several hours ahead of the time in Sweden. In this case the time-coincidence cannot be clearly determined.

The second compact-case in Phantasms of the Living (vol. i. p. 419) tells definitely against the assumption that the apparent fulfilment of a compact must needs indicate actual death. Captain P. was washed overboard at sea ; but though in extreme danger, did not lose consciousness, caught hold of a rope, and was saved. On the same night, perhaps at the same moment, a lady with whom Captain P. had made a death-compact, saw his phantasm in her room. This seems precisely the kind of incident which Gurney's last-quoted sentences have in view.

The third case (vol. i. p. 427) is remarkable inasmuch as the phantasmal figure appeared not only to the partner in the compact, but also to a child unacquainted with the decedent, but who chanced to be sleeping in a room near to that occupied by the said partner. It is not known which

of the two appearances came first ; but to the child the figure appeared as though groping its way. The death occurred on the same night, but the time-coincidence is not more precisely known.

In the fourth case1 (vol. i. p. 506) the coincidence is said to have been very close : the mother dying at five minutes to three, and the son seeing the figure just before the clock struck three. It is, of course, impossible to say whether the phantasm precaeded or followed actual death.

Iks fifth case, again, given in Chapter VI. (667 A), shows us the phantasm, which had been promised at death, appearing when the agent was still alive, but had been stunned by a fall from a coach, which left for some time much mental confusion. The case is interesting as showing what may be called a ready dissociability of spirit and organism, coincident with complete obscuration of the supraliminal consciousness.

The sixth case is that of Captain Colt of Gartsherrie. I quote this at length in 725 A, since it is probable — though not certain — that the agent had been dead for some hours at the time of the apparition. Allowing for difference of time, he had probably been shot in the temple some fourteen hours before. He had apparently not moved after he was shot. He had been previously wounded in several places, and no surgical aid was attainable. There is here a curious analogy with the narrative of the red scratch already given. Captain Colt says, " I saw ... a wound on the right temple with a red stream from it. His face was of a waxy pale tint," &c. The " red stream " — the aspect of the body just after death — seems to have been made prominent for an evidential purpose. On the dead man's body was found a letter from his brother, the percipient, which begged him, if killed in battle, to manifest himself in the very room in which his phantasm did actually appear.

The seventh case (vol. i. p. 531) is that of a half-caste Indian, called "Mountain Jim," over whom the well-known traveller, Mrs. Bishop (then Miss Bird), had established a great influence. At their last parting he vowed that he would see her again when he died ; and, in fact, some hours either before or after his death in Colorado she, being in Switzerland, saw his phantasm, and heard the words, " I have corce, as I promised."

In the eighth case — Chevalier Fenzi's (vol. ii. p. 63) — the percipient had a sudden fit of deep depression, and went out to walk on the sea-shore in the midst of a violent thunderstorm. There he thought he saw his brother — who was really at Florence, seventy miles off — walking a little way off over some rocks, behind one of which the figure disappeared. The brother died at the time. He had not only promised to try to appear after death, but had at the same time predicted to Chevalier Fenzi that

1 Gurney did not give this case an " evidential number," regarding it as " ambiguous " on account of the anxiety subsisting in the percipient's mind. For the present purpose, however, it plainly ought to be taken into consideration.

726] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 45

he would die within three months. The prediction was fulfilled. It may, of course, have had some influence in producing Chevalier Fenzi's experience.

In the ninth case (vol. ii. p. 253), already referred to above (in 718), the decedent was still living, but her strong desire had been for a sight of the percipient before her own death ; and this she appears to have attained.

In the tenth case (which is given at second-hand in vol. ii. p. 477) two girl friends exchanged rings, with the promise that the friend who died first would restore the ring to the survivor. At about the time when the first friend died the surviving friend saw her standing by her bedside, and holding out the ring.

In the eleventh case (in vol. ii. p. 489, which is again at second-hand, and very remote) there were three parties to the compact, and two of these successively are said to have appeared at about the time of death to the last survivor.

The twelfth case (vol. ii. p. 496) although second-hand and remote, was written down apparently within a year of its occurrence. The timecoincidence cannot be exactly known, as the decedent was shipwrecked. His appearance was that of a drowned man.

726. In three of these twelve cases of fulfilment of compact, then, the agent whose phantasm appeared was certainly still alive. In most of the other cases the exact time-relation is obscure ; in a few of them there is strong probability that the agent was already dead. The inference will be that the existence of a promise or compact may act effectively both on the subliminal self before death and also probably on the spirit after death.

This conclusion is confirmed by the following cases, of which two must be quoted at length in the text, as specially instructive. I first give one in which the deceased person's impulse has been the fulfilment of an immediate engagement.

From Proceedings S. P.R., vol. viii. p. 214. The following letter was addressed to the late Professor Adams, Cambridge : —

ST. LUKE'S CHURCH, CER VAN NESS AVENUE, AND CLAY STREET, SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA, September \\th, 1890.

. . . [A few weeks ago] my choir-trainer, a man in robust health and with a predisposition against anything " Spiritualistic," saw plainly the apparition of one of his choir, a man of fifty years old. It happened thus :—

Mr. R[ussell], the bass-singer of the choir, fell in an apoplectic fit upon the street at 10 o'clock on a certain Friday; he died at n o'clock at his house. My wife, learning of his death, sent my brother-in-law down to the house of the choirmaster [Mr. Reeves] to ask him about music for the funeral. The messenger reached the house of the choirmaster about 1.30 P.M. He was told that the choirmaster was upstairs, busy looking over some music. He

accordingly sat down in the drawing-room, and, while waiting, began to tell the ladies (sister and niece of the choirmaster) about Mr. R.'s death. While they were talking they heard an exclamation in the hall-way. Some one said, "My God!" They rushed out, and half-way down, sitting on the stairs, saw the choirmaster in his shirt-sleeves, showing signs of great fright and confusion. As soon as he saw them he exclaimed, "i have just seen R. !" The niece at once said, " Why, R. is dead ! " At this the choirmaster without a word turned back upstairs and went to his room. ^My brother-in-law followed him and found him in complete prostration, his face white, &c. He then told my brother-in-law what he had experienced.

He had been looking over some music ; had just selected a " Te Deum " for the morning service. This " Te Deum " closed with a quartette setting for two bass and two tenor voices. He was wondering where he could get a second tenor. Finally, he went to the door on his way downstairs to look up another " Te Deum." At the door he saw Mr. R., who stood with one hand on his brow, and one hand extended, holding a sheet of music. The choirmaster advanced, extended his hand, and was going to speak, when the figure vanished. Then it was that he gave the exclamation mentioned above.

You must remember that he knew nothing of R.'s death until he heard his niece spe"ak of it as detailed above.

This is the best authenticated ghost story I ever heard. I know all the parties well, and can vouch for their truthfulness. I have no doubt that the choirmaster saw something, either subjectively or objectively. Whatever it was, the experience was so vivid that it made him sick for days, though he is a man of exceptional physique.

At finst I tried to explain this on natural grounds. I thought possibly he had been in the room overhead, and had overheard, unconsciously, the story of R.'s death, and by a process of unconscious cerebration summoned up the image, of the dead man. But this is impossible, because the house is very large, the rooms widely apart, &c.

My present conviction is this : Mr. R. was a man of the utmost regularity and faithfulness in fulfilling his duties. He has sung for us without pay for many years. His first thought (or one of the first), after his stroke of apoplexy,, must have been : " How shall I get word to the choirmaster that I cannot go to rehearsal to-morrow night?" In an hour he died, without ever having recovered consciousness. My notion is that in some way he was enabled to make himself appear to the choirmaster. If you refer to the attitude in which he appeared, you will see that it answers to my supposition. It indicates his illness (a pain in the head), and his desire to give up, so to speak, his duty as singer. . . . WM. W. DAVIS, Rector.

Mr. Reeves' own account is reported in the San Francisco Chronicle (quoted in Light, September 27th, 1890), as follows : —

Early on Friday morning Edwin Russell, an Englishman, well known as a real estate agent, was walking near the corner of Sutter and Mason Streets when he sustained an apoplectic stroke, from the effects of which he died shortly before noon. He had resided in the city ten years, and was well and favourably known in the commercial world here.

726] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 47

Mr. Russell was a member of the Protestant Episcopal Church, and also the possessor of a rich bass voice. This made him a welcome addition to the choir of St. Luke's Church, and brought him in immediate contact with the Rev. W. W. Davis, vicar of the church, and with Harry E. Reeves, the recently appointed choir leader. Mr. Reeves is a nephew of the distinguished English tenor of the name, and conducted the musical services at the funeral of President Chester A. Arthur.

It was to Mr. Reeves that the very sensational and startling revelation now to be recorded was vouchsafed. Mr. Reeves was found at the residence of his sister, Mrs. Cavanagh, 2121 California Street, by a Chronicle reporter. He became evidently agitated when asked if it were true that he had seen the apparition of Russell before hearing of the latter's death. [Mr. Reeves stated that he was not a Spiritualist, and proceeded] : —

" I last saw Russell alive on the Saturday night previous to his death. Russell came to the choir rehearsal. I said to him : ' Do you know where I can get a good cigar ? ' and he recommended a place. I went there with him, and then took such a fancy to him that I invited him to come to my house, or rather my sister's house. We agreed to postpone his visit till the following Saturday, and he said: 'Well, I'll call on you next week anyhow.' The matter passed from my mind until Friday afternoon, about three o'clock. I always make it a point to look over my music for Sunday a day or two before, and on this occasion I was sitting in the parlour and took up two Te Deums to make a choice. One was Starkweather's in G, the other a composition of KroelPs. Just as I had taken one in my hand and was going upstairs to my room to look over it I heard the front door bell ring, and recognised that some visitor whom I did not then know had called. I afterwards learned that it was young Mr. Sprague, who can tell you his story when you ask him.

" I went into my room. I lay down on the lounge for a moment, then by an impulse I cannot account for, I walked to the door. The head of the stairway was somewhat dimly lighted, as you see it now, but not so dimly but what I could at once see what appeared to be the figure of Russell. It was so real, so lifelike, that I at once stepped forward and stretched out my hand, and was about to speak some words of welcome.

" The figure seemed to have a roll of music in one hand and the other over its face, but it was Russell's image. I am quite sure of that. As I advanced to the head of the stairway the figure seemed to turn, as if about to descend, and faded into the air.

" I remember trying to speak to the figure, but the tongue clung to the roof of my mouth. Then I fell against the wall and gasped out. * Ah ! My God!' just like that. My sister and niece, with the other folks, came up. My niece said, 'Uncle Harry, what's the matter?' I went on to explain what it was, but was so scared I could hardly speak. My niece said, « Don't you know Russell is dead?' Well, that flabbergasted me; it only made matters worse, and I nearly fainted. Then they told me that the Rev. Mr. Davis had sent Mr. Sprague to tell me of the sad news. I was terribly startled by the affair, and feel shaky even now, but I am not given to superstitious fears, and I suppose it can be explained. Mr. Sprague had been waiting nearly half-an-hour before I saw him and obtained corroboration of the news of Russell's death. It is very strange; very strange, indeed. I saw that man Russell after he must have been dead three hours at least, as plainly as I see you in that chair."

Mr. Reeves confirms this account in a letter to Dr. Hodgson as follows : —

SAN FRANCISCO, September i$th, 1890.

DEAR SIR, — With reference to your favour of the 5th inst, just received, the full particulars were given in city papers; some things not just exactly as stated, especially the word "flabbergasted," which is foreign to me. Apart from what you read, there is nothing more to be given.

H. E. REEVES.

Dr. Hodgson received the following independent and corroborative account from Mr. Sprague : —

GRAND FORKS, DAK., November 2gth, 1890.

. . . You probably know all about Mr. Russell's death and connection with St. Luke's Church, so I shall only give you the facts as they came to my knowledge.

On Friday noon, August 22nd, a young lady friend of the Russells came to my brother-in-law's (Mr. Davis') house and asked to see Mr. Davis. As Mr. Davis was out, his wife (my sister) saw this young lady. I was not present at the interview, but my sister told me shortly afterwards the facts of Mr. Russell's death, &c., and said that this young lady had come to ask Mr. Davis if the church choir would be willing to sing at Mr. Russell's funeral, as Mr. R.'s family were of limited means and could not afford to pay the choir.

As I was going to Mr. Reeves' house that afternoon my sister asked me to tell Mr. Reeves about Russell's death and ask him about the singing. I called at 1 221 California Street about three o'clock that afternoon, and had been in the parlour some twenty minutes talking with Miss Kavanagh (Mr. Reeves' niece), when we heard Mr. Reeves' exclamation on the stairs, and I followed Miss Kavanagh to see what the trouble was. We found Mr. R. sitting on the stairs in his shirt sleeves and evidently very much frightened. Miss K. brought him a glass of wine, also a glass of water, but I think he did not touch either. After a couple of minutes Mr. R. went up to his room, and Miss Kavanagh asked me to go up and see if he was all right, as she was afraid to go. I went up and found Mr. Reeves sitting down on a chair near the window with his legs crossed. He had no coat or vest, collar or necktie on, and the perspiration seemed to roll off him. He seemed greatly agitated, but in a few minutes he told me his story, and I left him. In about five minutes he came downstairs and began to talk about it, and continually said, " It is the strangest thing ; I can't understand it." GOLDWIN S. SPRAGUE.

727. The next case is even more remarkable. It is a deflected fulfilment, occurring two days before death, and probably during sleep ; the agent has made a promise to one friend, but is only perceptible to another person who happens to be in that friend's company. We may compare a case quoted in our last chapter, where a brother, presumably wishing to appear to his sister, is perceived only by the sister's black nurse (see section 651). The following is quoted from the "Report on the Census of Hallucinations " in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 284.

727] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 49

From COUNTESS EUGENIE KAPNIST.

June 2^tht 1891.

A Talta, en FeVrier, 1889, nous fimes la connaissance de M. P. et de sa femme, passant la soiree chez des amis communs qui avaient tenu a nous reunir. A cette dpoque, M. P. souffrait deja d'une phthisic assez avancee ; il venait de perdre, a Pe'tersbourg, son frere, atteint de la meme maladie. On pria ma sceur de faire un peu de musique, et elle choisit au hasard le Prelude de Mendelssohn. A mon dtontiement je vis M. P., que nous ne connaissions, que de ce soir, aller, tres e'motionne', prendre place aupres du piano, et suivre avec une espece d'anxiete' le jeu de ma soeur. Lorsqu'elle eut fini, il dit quo pour quelques instants elle venait de faire ressusciter son frere, executant absolument de la meme maniere ce morceau, qu'il jouait frdquemment. Depuis, en voyant ma soeur, il aimait particulierement a causer avec elle. Je puis certifier ainsi qu'elle une conversation que nous eumes a une soire'e, au mois de Mars. Nous parlions de la mort, chose frdquente a Talta, toujours peuplee de malades : — " Savez-vous," disait-il a ma soeur, "il me semble toujours que mon esprit est tres proche du v6tre ; j'ai la certitude de vous avoir deja connue ; nous avons dans la rdalitd une preuve que ce n'est pas en ce monde — ce sera que je vous aurais vue durant quelqu'autre vie prece'dente " (il dtait un peu spirite). " Ainsi done, si je meurs avant vous, ce qui est bien probable, vu ma maladie, je reviendrai vers vous, si cela m'est possible, et je vous apparaitrai de fa^on a ne pas vous effrayer ddsagreablement." Ma sceur lui rdpondit, prenant la chose tres au s£neux, qu'elle lui rendrait la pareille si elle mourait la premiere, et j'etais tdmoin de cette promesse mutuelle.

Ne'anmoins nous fimes a peine connaissance de maison; nous nous rencontrions parfois chez des amis communs, et nous le voyions souvent se promener sur le quai dans un paletot couleur noisette qui excitait notre hilarite et qui nous resta dans la me'moire je ne sais plus pourquoi. Au mois de Mai, nous partions de Talta, et depuis nous eumes tant d'impressions diverses, nous vimes tant de monde, que jusqu'a 1'hiver suivant nous oubliames comple'tement M. P. et sa femme, qui reprdsentaient pour nous des connaissances comme on en a par centaines dans la vie.

Nous e'tions a Pe'tersbourg. Le n Mars, c'dtait un lundi de Careme en 1890, nous allames au theatre voir une representation de la troupe des Meiningner. Je crois qu'on donnait Le Marchand de Venise. Mile. B. dtait avec nous, venue de Tsarskoe' a cette occasion. La piece termine'e, nous n'eumes que le temps de rentrer a la maison changer de toilette, apres quoi nous accompagnames Mile. B. a la gare. Elle partait avec le dernier train, qui quitte pour Tsarskoe Selo a I heure de la nuit. Nous Pinstallames en wagon, et ne Fy laissames qu'apres la seconde cloche de depart.

Notre domestique allait bien en avant de nous, afin de retrouver notre voiture, de maniere que, gagnant le perron, nous la trouvames avanc£e qui nous attendait. Ma soeur s'assit la premiere ; moi je la fis attendre, descendant plus doucement les marches de Fescalier; le domestique tenait la portiere du landau ouverte. Je montai a demi, sur le marchepied, et soudain je m'arretai dans cette pose, tenement surprise que je ne compris plus ce qui m'arrivait. II faisait sombre dans la voiture, et pourtant en face de ma sceur, la regardant, je vis dans un petit jour gris qu'on eut dit factice, s'e'claircissant vers le point qui attachait le plus mes yeux, une figure a la silhouette e'mousse'e diaphane, plutot qu'inde'cise. Cette vision dura un instant, pendant lequel,

VOL. II. D

pourtant, mes yeux prirent connaissance des moindres details de ce visage, qui me sembla connu : des traits assez pointus, une raie un peu de c6td, un nez prononce', un menton tres maigre a barbe rare et d'un blond foncd. Ce qui me frappe, lorsque j'y pense a present, c'est d'avoir vu les diffe'rentes couleurs, maigre' que la lueur grisatre, qui eclairait a peine 1'inconnu, cut e^e insuffisante pour les distinguer dans un cas normal. II e'tait sans chapeau, et en meme temps dans un paletot comme on en porte au sud — de couleur plutot claire — noisette. Toute sa personne avait un cachet de grande fatigue et de maigreur. Le domestique, tres etonne' de ne pas me voir monter, arrete'e ainsi sur le marchepied, crut que j'avais marche dans ma robe et m'aida a m'asseoir, pendant que je demandais a ma sosur, en prenant place a cotd d'elle, si c'dtait bien notre voiture ? A tel point j'avais perdu la tete, ayant senti un vrai engourdissement de cerveau en voyant cet Stranger install^ en face d'elle, je ne m'e'tais pas rendu compte que, dans le cas d'une presence re'elle d'un semblable vis-a-vis, ni ma sceur, ni le valet de pied ne resteraient si calmement a 1'envisager. Lorsque je fus assise, je ne vis plus rien, et je demandais a ma soeur :— " N'as-tu rien vu en face de toi?" "Rien du tout, et quelle idee as-tu cue de demander, en entrant dans la voiture, si c'dtait bien la n6tre ? " rdpondit-elle en riant. Alors, je lui racontais tout ce qui precede, ddcrivant minutieusement ma vision. " Quelle figure connue," disait-elle, " et a paletot noisette, cette raie de cSte*, ou done 1'avons nous vue ? Pourtant nul ne ressemble ici a ta description ; " et nous nous creusions la tete sans rien trouver. Rentre'es a la maison, nous racontames ce fait a notre mere ; ma description la fit aussi souvenir vaguement d'un visage analogue. Le lendemain soir (12 Mars) un jeune homme de notre connaissance, M. M. S., vint nous voir. Je lui re'pe'tais aussi 1'incident qui nous e'tait arrive'. Nous en parlames beaucoup, mais inutilement; je ne pouvais toujours pas appliquer le nom voulu a la personnalite' de ma vision, tout en me souvenant fort bien avoir vu un visage tout pareil parmi mes nombreuses connaissances ; mais ou et a quelle dpoque ? Je ne me souvenais de rien, avec ma mauvaise me'moire qui me fait souvent ddfaut, a ce sujet. Quelques jours plus tard, nous dtions chez la grandmere de M. M. S. :— " Savez vous," nous dit-elle, " quelle triste nouvelle je viens de recevoir de Talta? M. P. vient de mourir, mais on ne me donne pas de details." Ma soeur et moi, nous nous regardames. A ce nom, la figure pointue et le paletot noisette retrouverent leur possesseur. Ma soeur reconnut en meme temps que moi, grace a ma description precise. Lorsque M. M. S. entra, je le priai de chercher dans les vieux journaux la date exacte de cette mort. Le ddces e'tait marque' au 14 du mois de Mars, done, deux jours apres la vision que j'avais cue. J'e'crivis a Talta pour avoir des renseignements. On me rdpondit qu'il gardait le lit depuis le 24 Novembre et qu'il avait &6 depuis dans un £tat de faiblesse extreme, mais le sommeil ne 1'avait point quitt^; il dormait si longtemps et si profonde'ment, meme durant les dernieres nuits de son existence, que cela faisait espdrer une amelioration. Nous nous etonnions de ce que j'aie vu M. P., maigre' sa promesse de se montrer a ma sceur. Mais je dois ajouter ici qu'avant le fait de'crit ci-dessus, j'avais £te voyante un certain nombre de fois, mais cette vision est bien celle que j'ai distingude le plus nettement, avec des details minutieux, et avec les teintes diverses du visage humain, et meme du vetement.

COMTESSE EUGENIE KAPNIST.

COMTESSE INA KAPNIST.

729] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 51

The second signature is that of the sister who was present at the time. Mr. Michael Petrovo-Solovovo, who sent us the case, writes : —

I have much pleasure in certifying that the fact of Countess Kapnist's vision was mentioned, among others, to myself before the news of Mr. P.'s death came to Petersburg. I well remember seeing an announcement of his demise in the papers.

This case suggests an important practical reflection. When a compact to appear, if possible, after death is made, it should be understood that the appearance need not be to the special partner in the compact, but to any one whom the agent can succeed in impressing. It is likely enough that many such attempts, which have failed on account of the surviving friend's lack of appropriate sensitivity, might have succeeded if the agent had tried to influence some one already known to be capable of receiving these impressions. I add in 727 A and B two other cases which may be regarded as deflected fulfilments. See also a case given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 440, in which a lady, having made a compact with her husband and also with a friend, her phantom is seen after her death by her husband and daughter and the latter's nurse, collectively ; but not by the friend, who was living elsewhere.

728. Again, we cannot tell- how long the spirit may continue the effort, or, so to say, renew the experiment. In a case recorded in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 378, the compact is fulfilled after a space of five years. In another case (given in 728 A), there had been no formal compact ; yet the narrative may find place here. There is an attempt to express gratitude on an anniversary of death ; and this implies the same kind of mindful effort as the fulfilment of a definite promise.

I conclude this group by quoting in 728 B another compact case where the apparition coincides with a funeral, and itself indicates that a funeral is preparing. This forms a transition to the next group.

729. I have now traced certain post-mortem manifestations which reveal a recollection of events known at death, and also a persistence of purpose in carrying out intentions formed before death. In this next group I shall trace the knowledge of the departed a little further, and shall discuss some cases where they appear cognisant of the aspect of their bodies after death, or of the scenes in which those bodies are temporarily deposited or finally laid. Such knowledge may appear trivial, — unworthy the attention of spirits transported into a higher world. But it is in accordance with the view of a gradual transference of interests and perceptions,— a period of intermediate confusion, such as may follow especially upon a death of a sudden or violent kind, or perhaps upon a death which interrupts very strong affections.

Thus we have already (in 717) encountered one striking case of this type, — the scratch on the cheek, perceived by the departed daughter, as we may conjecture, by reason of the close sympathy which united her to the mother who was caring for her remains.

There are also two cases closely resembling each other, though from percipients in widely different parts of the world, where a clairvoyant vision seems to be presented of a tranquil death-chamber. One of these has been quoted in Chapter VI., section 664. In the other (that of Mr. Hector of Valencia, South Australia, see Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 353) the percipient sees in a dream his father dying in the room he usually occupied, with a candle burning on a chair by his bed ; and the father is found dead in the morning, with a candle by his bedside in the position seen in the dream. Perhaps in neither of these cases is there any sure indication that the dead or dying person was cognisant of his own body's aspect or surroundings. There may have been a clairvoyant excursion on the percipient's part, evoked by some impulse from the agent which did not itself develop into distinctness.

730. But in certain cases of violent death there seems to have been an intention on the deceased person's part to show the condition in which his body is left. Such was Mrs. Storie's dream, or rather series of visions, referred to earlier in this chapter. Such, too, was Mrs. Menneer's dream (429 A), where the additional evidence obtained since our first publication of the case brings out a special meaning in the severed head, beyond the mere fact of decapitation. Such was an equally striking dream, which I have left for quotation in this place, because it forms a link between this group — where post-mortem knowledge of the body's aspect is in question— and the next following group, which will deal with the still stranger phenomenon of post-mortem knowledge of dissemination of the news of death. The case is taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. (1885 ) p. 95.

Mr. D., the narrator, did not wish his name to be published, but Gurney saw him, and talked over the subject with him. Mr. D. narrates as follows : —

I am the owner of a very old mechanical business in Glasgow, with for twenty years past a branch in London, where I have resided for that period, and in both of which places my professional reputation is of the highest order.

Some thirty-five years ago I took into my employment a tender, delicatelooking boy, Robert Mackenzie, who, after some three or four years' service, suddenly left, as I found out afterwards, through the selfish advice of older hands, who practised this frightening away systematically to keep wages from being lowered, — a common device, I believe, among workmen in limited trades. Passing the gate of the great workhouse (Scottice poorhouse) in the Parliamentary Road, a few years afterwards, my eye was caught by a youth of some eighteen years of age ravenously devouring a piece of dry bread on the public street, and bearing all the appearance of being in a chronic state of starvation. Fancying I knew his features, I asked if his name were not Mackenzie. He at once became much excited, addressed me by name, and informed me that he had no employment ; that his father and mother, who formerly supported him, were now both inmates of the " poorhouse," to which he himself had no claim for admission, being young and without any bodily disqualification for work, and that he was literally homeless and starving. The matron, he informed me,

730] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 53

gave him daily a piece of dry bread, but durst not, under the rules, give him regular maintenance. In an agony of grief he deplored his ever leaving me under evil advice, and on my unexpectedly offering to take him back he burst into a transport of thanks, such as I cannot describe. Suffice it to say that he resumed his work, and that, under the circumstances, I did everything in my power to facilitate his progress. All this was mere matter of course; but the distinction between it and the common relations of master and servant was this, that on every occasion of my entering the workshop he never, so far as possible, took off his eyes from following my movements. Let me look towards him at any moment, there was the pale, sympathetic face with the large and wistful eyes, literally yearning towards me, as Smike's did towards Nicholas Nickleby. I seemed to be "the polar star of his existence," and this intensity of gratitude never appeared to lessen in degree through lapse of time. Beyond this he never ventured to express his feelings. His manhood, as it were, his individuality and self-assertion, seemed to have been crushed out of him by privations. I was apparently his sole thought and consideration, saving the more common concerns of daily life.

In 1862 I settled in London, and have never been in Glasgow since. Robert Mackenzie, and my workmen generally, gradually lost their individuality in my recollection. About ten to twelve years ago my employees had their annual soire'e and ball. This was always held, year after year, on a Friday evening. Mackenzie, ever shy and distant as usual, refused to mingle in the festivities, and begged of my foreman to be permitted to serve at the buffet. All went off well, and the Saturday was held (more workmen) as a succeeding day of festival. All this, however, I only learned after what I am now about to relate. On the Tuesday morning following, immediately before 8 A.M., in my house on Campden Hill, I had the following manifestation — I cannot call it a dream ; but let me use the common phraseology. I dreamt, but with no vagueness as in common dreams, no blurring of outline or rapid passages from one thing disconnectedly to another, that I was seated at a desk, engaged in a business conversation with an unknown gentleman, who stood on my right hand. Towards me, in front, advanced Robert Mackenzie, and feeling annoyed, I addressed him with some asperity, asking him if he did not see that I was engaged. He retired a short distance with exceeding reluctance, turned again to approach me, as if most desirous for an immediate colloquy, when I spoke to him still more sharply as to his want of manners. On this, the person with whom I was conversing took his leave, and Mackenzie once more came forward. " What is all this, Robert ? " I asked somewhat angrily. " Did you not see I was engaged ? " " Yes, sir," he replied ; " but I must speak with you at once." " What about ? " I said ; " what is it that can be so important ? " "I wish to tell you, sir," he answered, "that I am accused of doing a thing I did not do, and that I want you to know it, and to tell you so, and that you are to forgive me for what I am blamed for, because I am innocent." Then, " I did not do the thing they say I did." I said, "What?" getting same answer. I then naturally asked, " But how can I forgive you if you do not tell me what you are accused of ? " I can never forget the emphatic manner of his answer in the Scottish dialect, " Ye'll sune ken " (you'll soon know). This question and the answer were repeated at least twice — I am certain the answer was repeated thrice, in the most fervid tone. On that I awoke, and was in that state of surprise and bewilderment which such a remarkable dream, quA mere dream, might induce, and was wondering what it all meant, when my wife burst into

my bedroom, much excited, and holding an open letter in her hand, exclaimed, " Oh, James, here's a terrible end to the workmen's ball— Robert Mackenzie has committed suicide ! " With now a full conviction of the meaning of the vision, I at once quietly and firmly said, " No, he has not committed suicide." "How can you possibly know that?" "Because he has just been here to tell me."

I have purposely not mentioned in its proper place, so as not to break the narrative, that on looking at Mackenzie I was struck by the peculiar appearance of his countenance. It was of an indescribable bluish-pale colour, and on his forehead appeared spots which seemed like blots of sweat. For this I could not account, but by the following post my manager informed me that he was wrong in writing me of suicide. That on Saturday night, Mackenzie, on going home, had lifted a small black bottle containing aqua fortis (which he used for staining the wood of birdcages, made for amusement), believing this to be whisky, and pouring out a wine-glassful, had drunk it off at a gulp, dying on the Sunday in great agony. Here then, was the solution of his being innocent of what he was accused of — suicide, seeing that he had inadvertently drunk aqua fortis, a deadly poison. Still pondering upon the peculiar colour of his countenance, it struck me to consult some authorities on the symptoms of poisoning by aqua fortis, and in Mr. J. H. Walsh's " Domestic Medicine and Surgery," p. 172, I found these words under symptoms of poisoning by sulphuric acid. ..." The skin covered with a cold sweat ; countenance livid and expressive of dreadful suffering." . . . " Aquafortis produces the same effect as sulphuric, the only difference being that the external stains, if any, are yellow instead of brown." This refers to indication of sulphuric acid, "generally outside of the mouth, in the shape of brown spots." Having no desire to accommodate my facts to this scientific description, I give the quotations freely, only at the same time stating that previously to reading the passage in Mr. Walsh's book, I had not the slightest knowledge of these symptoms, and I consider that they agree fairly and sufficiently with what I saw, viz., a livid face covered with a remarkable sweat, and having spots (particularly on the forehead), which, in my dream, I thought great blots of perspiration. It seems not a little striking that I had no previous knowledge of these symptoms, and yet should take note of them.

I have little remark to make beyond this, that in speaking of this matter, to me very affecting and solemn, I have been quite disgusted by sceptics treating it as a hallucination, in so far as that my dream must have been on the Wednesday morning, being that after the receipt of my manager's letter informing me of the supposed suicide. This explanation is too absurd to require a serious answer. My manager first heard of the death on the Monday — wrote me on that day as above — and on the Tuesday wrote again explaining the true facts. The dream was on the Tuesday morning, immediately before the 8 A.M. post delivery, hence the thrice emphatic " Ye'll sune ken." I attribute the whole to Mackenzie's yearning gratitude for being rescued from a deplorable state of starvation, and his earnest desire to stand well in my opinion. I have coloured nothing, and leave my readers to draw their own conclusions.

D.

The following is Mrs. D.'s corroboration : —

In regard to the remarkable dream my husband had when Robert Mackenzie's death took place through inadvertently drinking some aqua fortis, I beg to inform you of what took place as far as I am concerned.

733] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 55

On the Tuesday morning after the occurrence I was downstairs early, and at 8 o'clock was handed a letter, just received from the postman, and addressed to Mr. D. Seeing it was from our manager in Glasgow, I opened it, and was much grieved to find that it was to tell us that Robert Mackenzie had committed suicide. I ran upstairs to Mr. D.'s bedroom with the letter in my hand, and in much excitement. I found him apparently just coming out of sleep, and hastily cried out to him, exactly as he has described to you. I need not go over the words, which have often been repeated amongst us since, and I can confirm his narrative regarding them, as given to you, in every particular. The whole affair gave us a great shock, and put an end to the workmen's balls for some four or five years. Mr. D.^s dream was a frequent subject of conversation at the time. I knew Mackenzie well. He was a pale, large-eyed, and earnestlooking young man, with a great regard for Mr. D., through circumstances. The next day's post brought us the actual facts.

J. D.

731. Here, too, may be placed two cases — those of Dr. Bruce (in Chapter IV., 426 A) and Miss Hall (see 731 A) — where there are successive pictures of a death and the subsequent arrangement of the body. The milieux of the percipients, the nature of the deaths, are here again totally disparate ; yet we seem to see the same unknown laws producing effects closely similar.

In Dr. Bruce's case one might interpret the visions as coming to the percipient through the mind of his wife, who was present at the scene of the murder. But this explanation would be impossible in Miss Hall's case. Rather it seems as though some telepathic link, set up between the dying brother and the sister, had been maintained after death until all duties had been fulfilled to the departed. The case reminds one of the old Homeric notions of the restless appeal of unburied comrades.

732. In the case of Mrs. Green, already quoted in Chapter IV., 429 D, we come across an interesting problem. Two women are drowned under very peculiar circumstances. A friend has apparently a clairvoyant vision of the scene, yet not at the moment when it occurred, but many hours afterwards, and about the time when another person, deeply interested, heard of the death. It is therefore possible to suppose that the apparently clairvoyant scene was in reality impressed telepathically on the percipient by another living mind. I think, however, that both the nature of the vision and certain analogies, which will appear later in our argument, point to a different view, involving an agency both of the dead and of the living. I conjecture that a current of influence may be started by a deceased person, which, however, only becomes strong enough to be perceptible to its object when reinforced by some vivid current of emotion arising in living minds. I do not say that this is yet provable ; yet the hint may be of value when the far-reaching interdependencies of telepathy between the two worlds come to be better understood.

733. Two singular cases in this group remain, where the departed

spirit, long after death, seems pre-occupied with the spot where his bones are laid. The first of these cases (see 733 A) approaches farce ; the second (in which the skeleton of a man who had probably been murdered about forty years before was discovered by means of a dream ; see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 35) stands alone among our narratives in the tragedy which follows on the communication. Mr. Podmore in an article in the same volume (p. 303) suggests other theories to account for this case without invoking the agency of the dead : but to me the least impossible explanation is still the notion that the murdered man's dreams harked back after all those years to his remote unconsecrated grave. I may refer further to another case (in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 155, footnote) where feelings of horror and depression were constantly experienced in a room over which a baby's body was afterwards found. This case makes, perhaps, for another explanation — depending not so much on any continued influence of the departed spirit as on some persistent influence inhering in the bones themselves — deposited under circumstances of terror or anguish, and possibly in some way still radiating a malignant memory. Bizarre as this interpretation looks, we shall find some confirmation of such a possibility in our chapter on Possession. Yet another case belonging to the same group, and given in 733 B, supplies a variant on this view; suggesting, as Edward Gurney has remarked, the local imprintation of a tragic picture, by whom and upon what we cannot tell.

I think it well to suggest even these wild conjectures ; so long as they are understood to be conjectures and nothing more. I hold it probable that those communications, of which telepathy from one spirit to another forms the most easily traceable variety, are in reality infinitely varied and complex, and show themselves from time to time in forms which must for long remain quite beyond our comprehension.

734. The next class of cases in this series well illustrates this unexpectedness. It has only been as the result of a gradual accumulation of concordant cases that I have come to believe there is some reality in the bizarre supposition that the departed spirit is sometimes specially aware of the time at which news of his death is about to reach some given friend. Proof of such knowledge on his part is rendered harder by the alternative possibility that the friend may by clairvoyance become aware of a letter in his own proximity. As was shown in Phantasms of the Living, there is some evidence for such clairvoyance even in cases where the letter seen is quite unimportant (see also 421 H and J and 656 B). May there be here also some conjuncture of the spheres of knowledge of the departed and the incarnate spirits, so that a glimpse obtained by the one in some way reinforces a glimpse obtained by the other?

I quote a typically difficult instance of this coincidence of an apparition with the arrival of the news of a death.

From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 409. The case was sent to us by the Bishop of Carlisle, the percipient being the Rev. G. M. Tandy, vicar

735] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 57

of West Ward, near Wigton, Cumberland, formerly of Loweswater, who writes : — l

When at Loweswater, I one day called upon a friend, who said, "You do not see many newspapers; take one of those lying there." I accordingly took up a newspaper bound with a wrapper, put it into my pocket, and walked home. In the evening I was writing, and wanting to refer to a book, went into another room where my books were. I placed the candle on a ledge of the bookcase, took down a book and found the passage I wanted, when, happening to look towards the window, which was opposite to the bookcase, I saw the face of an old friend whom I had known well at Cambridge, but had not seen for ten years or more, Canon Robinson (of the Charity and School Commission). I was so sure I saw him that I went out to look for him, but could find no trace of him. I went back into the house, and thought I would take a look at my newspaper. I tore off the wrapper, unfolded the paper, and the first piece of news that I saw was the death of Canon Robinson ! 2

Mr. Tandy further writes : —

In reply to your note, October 6th, I may state, with regard to the narrative I detailed to the Bishop of Carlisle, that I saw the face looking through the window, by the light of a single Ozokerit candle, placed on a ledge of the bookcase, which stood opposite the window ; that I was standing, with the candle by my side, reading from a book to which I had occasion to refer, and raising my eyes as I read, I saw the face clearly and distinctly, ghastly pale, but with the features so marked and so distinct that I recognised it at once as the face of my most dear and intimate friend, the late Canon Robinson, who was with me at school and college, and whom I had not seen for many years past (ten or eleven at the very least). Almost immediately after, fully persuaded that my old friend had come to pay me a surprise visit, I rushed to the door, but seeing nothing I called aloud, searched the premises most carefully, and made inquiry as to whether any stranger had been seen near my house, but no one had been heard of or seen. When last I saw Canon Robinson he was apparently in perfect health, much more likely to outlive me than I him, and before I opened the newspaper announcing his death (which I did about an hour or so after seeing the face) I had not heard or read of his illness or death, and there was nothing in the passage of the book I was reading to lead me to think of him.

The time at which I saw the face was between ten and eleven P.M., the night dark, and I was reading in a room where no shutter was closed or blind drawn.

I may answer in reply to your question — " whether I have ever had any other vision or hallucination of any kind?" — that, though I never saw any apparition, I have heard mysterious noises which neither my friends nor I were able satisfactorily to account for.

735. This incident, taken alone and without any apparent connection with other forms of action of the departed, seems almost too quaint to be included in a more or less coherent series like the present. But a hint

1 The narrative is undated, but the first part of it was printed in the Journal S.P.R. for January 1885.

2 As we do not know what newspaper this was, it is not possible to ascertain the precise interval which had elapsed since the death.

towards its comprehension is given by certain other cases where the percipient states that a cloud of unreasonable depression fell upon him about the time of his friend's death at a distance, and continued until the actual news arrived ; when, instead of becoming intensified, it lifted suddenly. In one or two such cases there was an actual presence or apparition, which seemed to hang about until the news arrived, and then disappeared. Or, on the other hand, there is sometimes a happy vision of the departed preluding the news, as though to prepare the percipient's mind for the shock (735 A). The suggested inference is that in such cases the spirit's attention is more or less continuously directed to the survivor until the news reaches him. This does not, of course, explain how the spirit learns as to the arrival of the news ; yet it makes that piece of knowledge seem a less isolated thing.

736. And here I will quote a case so divergent from accepted types that the ordinary retailer of ghost stories might well be tempted to pass it over in silence as incomprehensibly absurd. As will presently be seen, however, it fits with singular appropriateness into just this place in my series.

The case was sent to Professor James, and I quote it from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 220.

, Wis., September 22nd, 1890.

A very unusual thing occurred to the writer and one other person — my

sister, Miss Mary Q. — at the city of , Wisconsin, on the 5th day of

November 1885, at 10 o'clock P.M.

Our mother, Mrs. Mary Margaret Q. R., died at our home, in said city of

, Wisconsin, on the above date, at 8.40 P.M., very suddenly, of pneumonia.

Our youngest half-brother, Robert B. R., was working at S , N. Dakota, at

that time, about 700 miles distant from , Wisconsin. At 9.45 we retired to

the guests' chamber, a room over the south parlour, and about the same dimensions as said parlour, having two windows to the south and one to the east. There were two beds in this large room, and I lay on one and my sister on the other, trying to compose our broken hearts, for we loved our mother very dearly. The night was cold and the windows were all closed, except the east was down at the top a few inches, when, lo ! we both distinctly heard at the same instant my brother, Robert B. R., singing, " We had better bide a wee," in a clear, deep tenor, accompanied by a high-pitched soprano and an oldfashioned small melodeon accompaniment, and it sounded as though they were upon a level with our windows, about 15 feet from the ground; and I arose and threw up the south-west window, from whence the sounds seemed to proceed, and then they — the singing — moved to the next, or south-east, window, and sang another verse. And I threw that up and saw nothing, but still distinctly heard the words as well as the music, and so round to the east window, where they sang the last verse, and then the music seemed to float away to the north. But the queer part of this occurrence is the fact that at the very time

that we heard my brother singing in , Wisconsin, he 'was singing the same

song before an audience, with the identical accompaniment, an old, tiny melodeon, and a high-pitched soprano young lady — a Miss E., of North Dakota — as we learned two days afterwards, when he came home in response to our telegram announcing the death of our mother.

Any verification of the above facts will be cheerfully made.

(Signed) [Miss Q.]

736] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 59

, WlS., October \\th, 1890.

DEAR STR,— Yours of the 6th inst was duly received, and in reply to your request for corroborative testimony relative to the "phenomenal occurrence" on the night of November 5th, 1885, at Janesville, Rock Co., Wisconsin— that is, the hearing music and two human voices, and the words distinctly audibleone voice perfectly familiar to us as that of our half-brother, Robert B. R., then of N. Dakota, and the other voice that of a strange lady — soprano, and they, my said brother R. B. R., and Miss Sarah E., of N. Dak., 'were singing the same song, "We had better bide a wee," at an entertainment given by a

church society of S , a printed programme of which my brother afterwards

sent to us.

I am an exceedingly busy person, but a lover of the truth, and interested in the progress of the race; but my sister, Miss Mary Q., of this city, is very conservative and proud, and when I asked her for an affidavit of her experience on that eventful 5th of November 1885, she replied, " I do not wish the world to think me or you a ' crank' or Spiritualist, and do not wish our names published." I will add that my sister, who is blind, is very intuitive and clairvoyant, and there is much in her experience to deeply interest the psychical student. It seems to me that the loss of her sight has been compensated by another sense — a super-intuition.

I have written to my brother, R. B. R.,to reply to your request, and also to

obtain a programme of the church entertainments at S , N. Dak., on

November 5th, 1885, at which he and Miss Sarah E. sang, "We had better bide a wee/' and also to state the exact hour when they were called in the programme, for as Robert stated to us when he arrived on that sad occasion —the death of our good mother— he informed us that the telegram was brought to him, and was held by the operator so as not to spoil the entertainment by telling him before he sang, and we — my sister Mary Q. and I — both heard every note and word of that song sung about seven hundred miles away, while our mother's remains were in the parlour under our bedroom. — Cordially yours, (Signed) [Miss Q.]

Miss Mary Q. writes to Dr. Hodgson as follows : —

, Wis., November i$th, 1890.

DEAR SIR, — [In reply to] your kind note of inquiry, relative to my experiences on the night of November 5th, 1885, they were such as have been described by my sister [Miss Q.], who is a lover of scientific research, and is not so timid as I and my brother; the latter is very much opposed to either of us making known our experience on that night, and has urged me not to tell any one of the occurrences of that eventful time, and he refuses to furnish the printed programme of the entertainment, at which he and Miss E. were singing, "We had better bide a wee," insisting that people will believe us all " luny " if we make known all the facts ; and so in deference to his prejudices I must respectfully decline to make any further disclosures at present. — Respectfully yours, [Miss MARY Q.]

Dr. Hodgson adds : —

