The hypothesis of accidental coincidence would be tenable, though not probable, did the events of April 20th to 24th constitute the whole of the observed series. But the number of coincidences noticed by Dr. Gibert, Professor Janet, and others has been so large that the action of mere chance seems to be quite excluded. It is to be observed that, as Professor Janet tells us, the subject has, during an observation of several weeks (maintained by Mile. Gibert when Professor Janet is not present), only twice fallen sponta^ieously into this somnambulic sleep, when no one willed her to do so; once before our arrival, on looking at a picture of Dr. Gibert, and once on April 21st, as narrated below. On the other hand, the observed cases of sleep deliberately induced from a distance amount, I believe, to at least a dozen. I exclude, of course, the very numerous occasions when sleep has been induced by an operator present with the patient, by holding her thumbs, looking at her, &c. This, however, brings us to the third source of doubt, whether the sleep may not on all occasions have been induced by some suggestion^ given perhaps unconsciously, by word or gesture. It was thus that I was at first inclined to explain Cases I. and II. among those that follow, but the other cases here given seem to negative the supposition. . . .

I. I pass on to describe the first case of sommeil a distance, April 21st. At 5.50 P.M. (an hour which was selected by drawing lots among various suggested hours) Dr. Gibert retired to his study and endeavoured to send Madame B. to sleep in the Pavilion, at a distance of about two-thirds of a mile. She was to fall asleep in the salon ; whereas she habitually sits in the kitchen of the Pavilion (a house occupied by Dr. Gibert's sister).

It was supposed that the command would take about ten minutes to operate, and at about six Professor Janet, Dr. Ochorowicz, M. Marillier, my brother, and

This number, as will be hereafter seen, has since been increased.

myself entered the Pavilion, but found that Madame B. was not in the salon, but in the kitchen. We immediately went out again, supposing that the experiment had failed, A few minutes later Professor Janet re-entered with M. Ochorowicz, and found her asleep in the salon. In the somnambulic state she told us that she had been in the salon, and nearly asleep when our arrival startled her, and had then rushed down to the kitchen to avoid us ; had returned to the salon and fallen asleep as soon as we left the house. These movements were attested by the bonne, but it of course seemed probable that it was merely our arrival which had suggested to her that she was expected to fall asleep.

On this day she was ill and exhausted from too prolonged experiments on the previous days. In the afternoon she fell asleep of her own accord, and in the late evening (11.35 p-m.), when she had long been in bed, M. Gibert willed that her natural sleep should be transferred into somnambulic, and that she should dress and go into the garden of the Pavilion. Nothing followed on this attempt, unless an unusually prolonged sleep and complaints of unwonted headache next day were to be in any way connected herewith. On the whole, had I left after these experiments only, I should have referred the phenomena to suggestion of the ordinary hypnotic kind.

II. On the morning of the 22nd, however, we again selected by lot an hour (11 A.M.) at which M. Gibert should will, from his dispensary, which is close to his house, that Madame B. should go to sleep in the Pavilion. It was agreed that a rather longer time should be allowed for the process to take effect, as it had been observed (see M. Janet's previous communication) that she sometimes struggled against the influence, and averted the effect for a time by putting her hands in cold water, &c. At 11.25 we entered the Pavilion quietly, and almost at once she descended from her room to the salon, profoundly asleep. Here, however, suggestion might again have been at work. We did not, of course, mention M. Gibert's attempt of the previous night. But she told us in her sleep that she had been very ill in the night, and repeatedl}^ exclaimed, " Pourquoi M. Gibert m'a-t-il fait souffrir ? Mais j'ai lavd les mains continuellement." This is what she does when she wishes to avoid being influenced.

III. In the evening (22nd) we all dined at M. Gibert's, and in the evening M. Gibert made another attempt to put her to sleep at a distance from his house in the Rue Sery — she being at the Pavilion, Rue de la Ferme — and to bring her to his house by an effort of will.^ At 8.55 he retired to his study, and MM. Ochorowicz, Marillier, Janet, and A. T. Myers went to the Pavilion, and waited outside in the street, out of sight of the house. At 9.22 Dr. Myers observed Madame B. coming half-way out of the garden-gate, and again retreating. Those who saw her more closely observed that she was plainly in the somnambulic state, and was wandering about and muttering. At 9.25 she came out (with eyes persistently closed, so far as could be seen), walked quickly past MM. Janet and Marillier, without noticing them, and made for M. Gibert's house, though not by the usual or shortest route. (It appeared afterwards that the bonne had seen her go into the salon at 8.45, and issue thence asleep at 9.15 ; had not looked in between those times. 2) She avoided lamp-posts,

1 It will be seen from the synopsis of experiments given below that the afternoon, and not the evening, was the time of day usually chosen.

2 It was not unusual for her to sit in the salon in the evening, after the day's occupations were over.

568 A] TO CHAPTER V 527

vehicles, &c., but crossed and recrossed the street repeatedly. No one went in front of her or spoke to her. After eight or ten minutes she grew much more uncertain in gait, and paused as though she would fall. Dr. Myers noted the moment in the Rue Faure ; it was 9.35. At about 9.40 she grew bolder, and at 9.55 reached the street in front of M. Gibert's house. There she met him, but did not notice him, and walked into his house, where she rushed hurriedly from room to room on the ground-floor. M. Gibert had to take her hand before she recognised him. She then grew calm.

M. Gibert said that from 8.55 to 9.20 he thought intently about her, from 9.20 to 9.35 he thought more feebly ; at 9.35 he gave the experiment up, and began to play billiards; but in a few minutes began to will her again. It appeared that his visit to the billiard-room had coincided with her hesitation and stumbling in the street. But this coincidence may of course have been accidental. . . .

IV. [Account of a deferred mental suggestion, omitted here.]

V. On [April 23rd] M. Janet lunched in our company, and retired to his own house at 4.30 (a time chosen by lot) to try to put her to sleep from thence. At 5.5 we all entered the salon of the Pavilion, and found her asleep with shut eyes, but sewing vigorously, being in that stage in which movements once suggested are automatically continued. Passing into the talkative state, she said to M. Janet, " C'est vous qui m'avez fait dormir k quatre heures et demi." The impression as to the hour may have been a suggestion received from M. Janet's mind. We tried to make her believe that it was M. Gibert who had sent her to sleep, but she maintained that she had felt that it was M. Janet.

VI. On April 24th the whole party chanced to meet at M. Janet's house at 3 P.M., and he then, at my suggestion, entered his study to will that Madame B. should sleep. We waited in his garden, and at 3.20 proceeded together to the Pavilion, which I entered first at 3.30, and found Madame B. profoundly sleeping over her sewing, having ceased to sew. Becoming talkative, she said to M. Janet, " C'est vous qui m'avez commandde." She said that she fell asleep at 3.5 P.M. 2

Professor Janet's paper in the Revue Philosophique ior August 1886 enables me to give a conspectus of the experiments on som7fieil a distance made with Madame B. up to the end of May (see next page). The distance was in each case between \ mile and i mile.

We have thus nineteen coincidences and six failures 3 — the failures all more or less explicable by special circumstances. During Madame B.'s visits to Havre, about two months in all, she once fell into ordinary sleep during the day, and twice, as already mentioned, became spontaneously entranced, one of these times being on April 21st, a day of illness and failure. She never left the house in the evening except on the three occasions on which she was willed to do so (experiments 14, 17, 21). Trials of this kind had to be made after dark, for fear her aspect should attract notice. The hours of the other experiments were generally chosen at the moment, to suit the operators' convenience ; sometimes, as I have said above, they were chosen by lot.

1 M. Gibert was not with us ; but M. Janet often came to see her after M. Gibert had hypnotised her.

2 On these two occasions (V. and VI.) no one actually saw her asleep before we entered the Pavilion, since we desired Mile. Gibert not to watch her, for fear that she might guess that an experiment was going on.

Cases I and 4 were practically successes, but I have counted them as one success and one failure.

[568 A

<~ a

Date

Operator.

Hour when Given

Remarks.

1/1 k

15 S.

I

Oct.

Gibert

11.30 A.M.

She washes hands and wards off trance ....

do.

11.40 A.M.

Found entranced 11.45 •

I

do.

4.15 P.M.

Found entranced 4.30: had been asleep about 1 5 minutes

I

Feb.

Janet

She washes hands and wards off trance ....

[i]

do.

Asleep at once

I

do.

Mere discomfort observed

March

I

do.

do. do.

do.

Found asleep at 4 : has slept about an hour

I

j»

do.

Will interrupted : trance coincident, but incomplete

I

>j

do.

5-5.10 P.M.

Found asleep a few minutes afterwards ....

I

II

j^

Gibert

Found asleep 8.3 .

I

9f

do.

Success — no details

I

Janet

Success — no details

I

Gibert

Brings her to his house: she leaves her house a few

IS

Janet

minutes after 9 . Found asleep in 10 minutes .

I I

April

Gibert

Found asleep 4.15 .

I

fj

do.

Made to come to his house .

I

do.

5.50 P.M.

My case I. : trance too tardy .

y>

do.

11.35 P.M.

Attempt at trance during sleep: see my case I. .

do.

II A.M.

Asleep 11.25: trance too tardy: my case II. : count as failure.

do.

Comes to his house: leaves her house 915: my case III. .

I

Janet

4.30 P.M.

Found asleep 5.5, says she has slept since 4.30 : my case V.

I

jy

do.

Found asleep 3.30, says she has slept since 3.5: my case VI.

I

May

do.

Success — no details

I

do.

Success — no details

I

Further experiments with the same subject were made b)' Professor Janet in the autumn of 1886. The results, communicated to Professor Richet, were published by him in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 43-45 (also in the Revue de r Hypnotisme for February 1888, which also contains an account of some less successful experiments by Professor Richet himself). Thirty-five experiments were made, of which sixteen were successful, Madame B. being found asleep at intervals varying from five

568 B] TO CHAPTER V 529

minutes to an hour after the attempt was made ; in two cases the result was doubtful, and the other seventeen attempts failed altogether.

568 B. With regard to the cases next to be quoted, it must be observed that when the operator is within sight or hearing of the subject, either the production of hypnosis by mental suggestion alone, or its prevention by " silent wiUing " while ostensibly trying to produce it, is inconclusive as evidence of telepathy. The subject, having been previously hypnotised by the operator, must be assumed to be familiar — subliminally at least — with his particular habits of unconscious physical expression in connection with hypnotisation, so that the slight unconscious indications of his intentions that would perhaps escape the notice of the ordinary bystanders might very likely be perceived by the subject.

The same objection cannot, of course, apply to the instances of hypnotisation at a distance by the same experimenters, which, if not produced telepathically or occurring accidentally, can only be attributed to self-suggestion.

The following account is from Dr. J. Hericourt, who was one of Professor Richet's ablest assistants in the editing of the Revue Scientifiqiie. The observations were made and recorded in 1878, and contributed to the Societe de Psychologie Physiologique, November 30th, 1885 {^Bulletins, Tome I. p. 35). Dr. Hericourt's account, as well as Dr. Gley's, to be next quoted, were published in Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. pp. dZj^, 685. In both cases I give a slightly abbreviated English translation, taken from Edmund Gurney's paper on " Hypnotism and Telepathy" in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 222, 223.

The "subject" — Madame D. — was a young widow, in whom no trace of hysteria could be discovered. M. Hericourt found her exceedingly easy to hypnotise, and after about a fortnight could entrance her by his will alone, exercised without any word or gesture, and sometimes while Madame D. was in the midst of an animated conversation with other persons. On the other hand, he found that all the ordinary physical processes remained completely ineffectual if his will was not that the trance should ensue. He soon began to extend the distance between himself and his " subject," and instead of producing the effect from one corner of a room to another, he could produce it from one house or one street to another. The first trial from a distant street was specially interesting. While concentrating his thoughts on the desired effect, at 3 p.m., Dr. Hericourt was summoned to see some patients, and for a time forgot all about Madame D. He then remembered that he was engaged to meet her on the promenade at 4.30, but not finding her, he bethought him that possibly his experiment had succeeded, and towards five o'clock he vigorously willed that she should wake. In the evening Madame D., spontaneously, and without his having made the slightest allusion to her absence from the promenade, informed him that about three o'clock she had been suddenly seized by an irresistible inclination to go to sleep, though she never slept in the daytime. It was all she could do to walk into another room, where she fell on a sofa, and was afterwards found by a servant cold and motionless, comme morte. The servant shook Madame D. vigorously, but could not make VOL. I. 2 L

her do more than open her eyes. All that Madame D. remembered experiencing at this time was a violent headache, which disappeared towards five o'clock, the hour when M. Hdricourt willed the undoing of his work.

This experiment was the first of a series, during which a number of persons had the opportunity of arranging the conditions and testing the results. The hypothesis of expectant attention was doubly excluded; for if M. H^ricourt gave Madame D. notice of his intention to entrance her, but actually willed that she should remain awake, she retained her normal condition, and imagined that he had failed.

568 C. The next case, contributed by Dr. E. Gley, of 37 Rue Claude Bernard, Paris, is a record of some observations of his friend, Dr. Dusart, published in the Tribune Medicale, in May 1875.

The " subject " was a hysterical girl of fourteen, whom Dr. Dusart found very susceptible to hypnotism. He early remarked that his passes were ineffective if his attention was not strongly directed to the desired result; and this suggested to him to try the effect of purely mental suggestion. One day, before the usual hour for waking the patient had arrived, he gave her the mental command to awake. The effect was instantaneous : the patient woke, and again, in accordance with his will, began her hysterical screaming. He took a seat with his back to her, and conversed with other persons, without appearing to pay any attention to her; but on his silently giving her the mental suggestion to fall again into the trance, his will was again obeyed. More than one hundred experiments of the sort were made under various conditions, and with uniform success. On one occasion Dr. Dusart left without giving his usual order to the patient to sleep till a particular hour next morning. Remembering the omission, he gave the order mentally, when at a distance of 700 metres from the house. On arriving next morning at 7.30 he found the patient asleep, and asked her the reason. She replied that she was obeying his order. He said: "You are wrong; I left without giving you any order." "True," she said, "but five minutes afterwards I clearly heard you tell me to sleep till eight o'clock." Dr. Dusart then told the patient to sleep till she received the command to wake, and directed her parents to mark the exact hour of her waking. At 2 P.M. he gave the order mentally, at a distance of seven kilometres, and found that it had been punctually obeyed. This experiment was successfully repeated several times, at different hours.

After a time Dr. Dusart discontinued his visits, and the girl's father used to hypnotise her instead. Nearly a fortnight after this change it occurred to Dr. Dusart, when at a distance of ten kilometres, to try whether he still retained his power, and he willed that the patient should not allow herself to be entranced; then after half-an-hour, thinking that the effect might be bad for her, he removed the prohibition. Early next morning he was surprised to receive a letter from the father, stating that on the previous day he had only succeeded in hypnotising his daughter after a prolonged and painful struggle ; and that, when entranced, she had declared that her resistance had been due to Dr. Dusart's command, and that she had only succumbed when he permitted her.

568 D. The next case is quoted from Dr. Dufay's paper already referred to {^Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 411). The author's caution in

568D] TO CHAPTER V 531

interpreting the phenomena adds to the value of his observations. The account is dated Blois, May 18S8. It will be remembered that in the case quoted in 552 A, Dr. Dufay hypnotised an actress from a distant part of the theatre, but in that case it did not seem absolutely certain that she could not have suspected his presence in the theatre and his intention.

. . . Madame C. was thirty-five years of age, of a nervous temperament, and slightly rheumatic. For some time she had been subject to periodical attacks of headache and sickness, which the usual remedies had failed to relieve. Under these circumstances, I did not hesitate to try the effect of magnetism on my first visit to her. At the end of five minutes the pain passed off and the sickness ceased, and on every subsequent occasion the same thing took place. If my arrival was delayed the troubles continued ; but hardly had I pulled the bell, and before the door was opened, Madame C. fell into a calm sleep. It was quite a different thing if any one else rang the bell, for then the invalid complained bitterly of the noise that was splitting her head.

Later on she even felt my approach from the further end of the street : "Ah! what happiness!" she would say, "here is the doctor coming, I feel myself cured ! " and Monsieur C. would open the window to make certain of it, and would see me in the distance. And his wife never made a mistake. Sometimes he would try to encourage her by telhng her that he saw me coming, but she knew that this was not true, and the sickness continued.

In a case of this sort, how could I hesitate to make an attempt at influencing her from a distance ? Moreover, I was driven to it by circumstances. At the height of an attack Monsieur C, who had already been twice to fetch me, discovered where I was to be found. Being with a patient whom I could not leave for several hours, I assured Monsieur C., without being at all certain of it myself, that his wife would be asleep and cured when he got home again. I had the satisfaction of verifying this three hours later, when I ordered a profound sleep to last till the following day, which repaired the fatigues of the morning. " Thus the possibility of magnetising at a distance is not to be doubted," say my notes. But nowadays the objection of self-suggestion presents itself: I was expected; Monsieur Chad promised to bring me with him.

Am I going to find a more convincing example ? Yes, certainly. It was, however, an act of simple curiosity without any therapeutic aim. Madame C. was in perfect health, but her name happening to be mentioned in my hearing, the idea struck me that I would mentally order her to sleep, without her wishing it this time, and also without her suspecting it. Then, an hour later I went to her house and asked the servant who opened the door whether an instrument, which I had mislaid out of my case, had been found in Madame C.'s room.

" Is not that the doctor's voice that I hear ? " asked Monsieur C. from the top of the staircase ; " beg him to come up. Just imagine," he says to me, " I was going to send for you. Nearly an hour ago my wife lost consciousness, and her mother and I have not been able to bring her to her senses. Her mother, who wished to take her into the country, is distracted. . . ."

I did not dare to confess myself guilty of this catastrophe, but was betrayed by Madame C, who gave me her hand, saying, " You did well to put me to sleep. Doctor, because I was going to allow myself to be taken away, and then I should not have been able to finish my embroidery."

"You have another piece of embroidery in hand ? "

" Yes ; a mantle-border ... for your birthday. You must not look as though you knew about it, when I am awake, because I want to give you a surprise."

" Make yourself easy as to that, you will see me just as surprised as grateful the day when you make me this valuable present. But why do you mention it to me now ? "

" Because you ought to know why I am pleased at not being able to go away."

I then explained to the husband and the mother that I had allowed myself to make an experiment, and it was settled amongst us that Madame C. should not be told of it. I then woke her as usual by means of passes from within outwards in front of her eyes, and she was told that she had fallen asleep after lunch, while reading the newspaper, which did not astonish her at all. . . .

I repeated the experiment many times with [Madame C], and always with success, which was a great help to me when unable to go to her at once when sent for. I even completed the experiment by also waking her from a distance, solely by an act of volition, which formerly I should not have believed possible. The agreement in time was so perfect that no doubt could be entertained.

To conclude, I was about to take a holiday of six weeks, and should thus be absent when one of the attacks was due. So it was settled between M. C. and myself that, as soon as the headache began, he should let me know by telegraph ; that I should then do from afar off what succeeded so well near at hand ; that after five or six hours I should endeavour to awaken the patient, and that M. C. should let me know by means of a second telegram whether the result had been satisfactory. He had no doubt about it ; I was less certain. Madame C. did not know that I was going away.

The sound of moanings one morning announced to M. C. that the moment had come ; without entering his wife's room he ran to the telegraph office, and I received his message at ten o'clock. He returned home again at that same hour, and found his wife asleep and not suffering any more. At four o'clock I willed that she should wake, and at eight o'clock in the evening I received a second telegram: " Satisfactory result, woke at four o'clock. Thanks."

And I was then in the neighbourhood of Sully-sur- Loire, 28 leagues— 112 kilometres— from Blois. . . .

I had no doubt as to the reality of action at a (perhaps unlimited) distance, when I observed this case, about twenty-five years ago. But now, so much am I struck by the improbability of the story, that I am more ready to admit that Madame C., at the moment when the pain and sickness commenced, thought that her husband had heard her moans and had hurried to secure my assistance, since she was unaware of my absence; that her conviction that I should give her relief as usual had sufficed to produce sleep by self-suggestion, and that the waking had taken place under the same influence, after a lapse of time sensibly equivalent to that during which I usually caused her to sleep. . . .

568 E. In the Zoist for April 1849 Mr. Adams, a surgeon of Lymington, writing four months after the event, describes how a guest of his own twice succeeded in mesmerising the man-servant of a common friend at a distance of nearly fifty miles, the time when the attempt was

569 A] TO CHAPTER V 533

to be made having in each case been privately arranged with the man's master. On the first occasion the unwitting " subject " fell at the time named, 7.30 p.m., into a state of profound coma not at all resembling natural sleep, from which he was with difficulty aroused. He said that "before he fell asleep he had lost the use of his legs ; he had endeavoured to kick the cat away, and could not do so." On the second occasion a similar fit was induced at 9.30 a.m., when the man was in the act of walking across a meadow to feed the pigs.

For other cases of hypnotisation at a distance, see Professor Richet in the Revue Philosophique, February 1886, p. 199 (quoted in Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 332), and Dr. Dariex in the Annates des Sciences Psychiques, vol. iii., 1893, pp. 257-67. Dr. Wetterstrand of Stockholm also states in a letter published in Dr. Schmidkunz's Psychologie der Suggestion (Stuttgart, Enke, 1892), and translated in Proceedings, vol. ix. p. 216, that he has a patient whom he can send to sleep and wake up again from his house, and that he has also made her get up m a state of sleep from her own room and come to his.

Another case, involving an experiment not to be recommended, was recorded by Dr. Tolosa-Latour in the Annates des Sciences Psychiques, vol. iii., 1893, pp. 268-73. The subject of the experiment was a Mile. R., whom Dr. Latour had treated hypnotically for hysterical paralysis since September 1886. Prior to his treatment, in 1885, she had had daily hysterical attacks, but both these and the paralysis had almost entirely disappeared at the time of his experiment, October 1890. She was then living at Madrid, and he was travelling in France. During a journey from Poitiers to Migne he attempted for an hour or two to send her to sleep and pour fixer bien la suggestion to produce a violent hysteric attack after the sleep. Some time after his return to Madrid he learnt of the complete success of his experiment. A letter from Mile. R., written in March 189 1, describing her experience, states that she had been perfectly well just before the attack, and had had no attacks of the kind since.

569 A. The production of local anaesthesia and rigidity is a common phenomenon, familiar to all hypnotic operators as the result of a definite verbal suggestion, and one that can also be produced in some subjects by self-suggestion (see 518 D). The special feature of the experiments recorded in this Appendix and 569 B is that they were carried out under conditions which, as the experimenters believed, precluded any knowledge on the part of the subject as to which of his fingers was to be operated on. Experiments of this type were first tried by Gurney from 1883 onwards, partly with a view to testing the reahty of the "mesmeric effluence." I quote extracts from his latest account of them in his paper on " Recent Experiments in Hypnotism " in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. (1888), pp. 14-17. For the details, I must refer the reader to the paper itself.

Experiments of this most important class have been already described in these Proceedings } In outline the modus opera7idi has been as follows : The "subject" is made to put his arm through a thick screen, extending high above his head, and to spread his ten fingers on a table in front of him. The fingers are thus completely concealed from his view, and the operator's hand is held, without contact, at a distance varying from about a third to three-quarters of an inch, over one or another of them, according to my selection, with the result that in a very large majority of cases the finger so treated, and that finger alone, becomes rigid and insensible to extremely severe treatment in the way of stabs, burns, and electric shocks. From my knowledge of the "subjects," and of the circumstances, I regard simulation as practically out of the question. But this is not really important, for the hypothesis of simulation has no application to the frequent cases where the rigidity was tested before the anzesthesia. The "subject" is told to double his fist, and no desire to deceive could have taught him which particular one of his ten digits was to remain recalcitrant.

In the recent series there have been i6o experiments of the described type with five "subjects." In all these cases I held my hand, in the same position as S.'s[" S." is Mr. G. A. Smith, the hypnotist who constantly assisted in Gurney's experiments], over one of the remaining nine fingers. In 124 cases S. alone produced the effect intended. In 16 cases S. and I both succeeded; and in 13 cases I succeeded, and S. failed. In the remaining 7 cases no eflfect at all was produced. . . .

The finger operated upon was generally restored to its normal condition by reverse passes, made with contact — about twenty being the average number required. Most of the attempts to annul the effect withotit contact were inconclusive. Sometimes the effort was successful, and in a few instances very distinctly so, but in other cases the process took so much time that contact was eventually resorted to. I frequently tried, by stroking the finger, to undo the efiect which S. had produced; but I succeeded on only one occasion. . . .

The "subject" is occasionally, but not usually, conscious of some change in the finger as the experiment progresses. Asked to say whether he felt anything unusual, he would sometimes say that he felt " cold," " pins and needles," " numbness," or " creepiness," in a certain finger — which finger was in nearly every case the one under experiment. In connection with this point the following experiment with Wells is of great interest. Without telling him specially to observe any change in his fingers, one was made insensitive and rigid in the usual way. It was then "undone" by reverse strokings over the back of his hand, and he appeared to be in complete ignorance as to which particular finger had been the subject of experiment, and could not say which one had been afiected. But entranced immediately afterwards, and told to write which finger had been stiffened, and then woke and set to the planchette, he wrote the right one. The experiment was repeated several times, with the same result. The planchette gave the information which the "subject" could not consciously supply.

Besides the above, forty-one experiments were made in which S., while holding his hand as usual, willed that no effect should be produced. Of these, thirtysix were successful (in the sense that no effect was produced), and five failed.

1 See vol. i. pp. 257-60; vol. ii. pp. 201-205; vol. iii. pp. 453-59. For a discussion of the subject see the concluding portion of my paper in this number on " Hypnotism and Telegraphy." — E. G.

569 B] TO CHAPTER V 535

[Several experiments were made in which the selected fingers were covered with small screens, but these were generally unsuccessful. In other successful cases, selected spots on the bare arms of the subjects were operated upon, instead of fingers.]

569 B. Further experiments of the kind just described were carried out by Mrs. H. Sidgwick in 1890 and 1892 with the help of the same hypnotist, Mr. G. A. Smith, in the course of her experiments on thoughttransference (see 573 A). I quote a few extracts from the account given (pp. 577-93) in the paper by Mrs. Sidgwick and Miss Alice Johnson on " Experiments in Thought-Transference " in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 536-96, beginning with their summary of Gurney's theoretical discussion of his results.

Mr. Gurney discusses the possible explanation of his results in the . . . Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 254-59. He assumes that the conditions adopted secure — as they are designed to secure — that no indications as to which finger is to be operated on should unintentionally reach the subject through the eye, or the ear, or by touch. There remain then three hypotheses : {a) that this knowledge may reach his brain by means of a delicate perception, conscious or unconscious, of temperature or air-currents, caused by the proximity of Mr. Smith's fingers ; {b) that it may be conveyed from Mr. Smith's mind to that of the subject by thought-transference ; and {c) that some direct physical influence in which the ordinary channels of sense are not concerned is exercised through Mr. Smith's hand on that of the subject.^

Mr. Gurney considered that the ineffectiveness of Mr. Smith's hand unless his will was engaged at the same time seemed alone fatal to hypothesis {a), which was also rendered almost untenable by the difficulty of supposing that the delicate perception assumed could have been delicate enough to make it possible to distinguish Mr. Smith's hand from Mr. Gurney's held similarly over another finger at the same time. Hypothesis {b), Mr. Gurney says, " seems excluded by the fact that the physical proximity of Mr. Smith's hand (no less than his concentration of will on the desired result) proves to be a necessary condition," and he concludes that the balance of probability is greatly in favour of hypothesis {c) — a direct physical influence, exercised through Mr. Smith's hand, in which the ordinary channels of sense are not concerned.

This brief introduction seemed necessary in order to explain the state of the question and the bearing of our own experiments on it. These, as will be seen, still further confirm Mr. Gurney's view as to the untenablenessof his hypothesis (a), because we have succeeded in obtaining the result with a thick sheet of glass

1 Mr. Gurney explains this hypothesis at greater length on pp. 257-59, vol. v. He thinks that if this specific influence exists, as a property of Jiving tissue, there can be no doubt that it depends on the brain of the operator ; since his attention and will to produce the effect are indispensable, and the same proximity of his hand which produces the effect also removes it — the only change of condition being in his intention. It is clear, however, that the nervous condition of the operator is not simply reproduced in the subject— the hand operated on assuming quite a different condition from that of the hand that operates. Therefore, " though finding its nearest analogue in induced electric currents, and though best, perhaps, described as nervous induction, [the influence] is essentially vital and sui generis"

between Mr. Smith's fingers and the subject's. They also exclude hypothesis (c) and remove Mr. Gurney's main objection to hypothesis (3) (thoughttransference), because we have succeeded when Mr. Smith did not hold his hand over the subject's at all, but merely stood with folded arms looking at the finger to be affected. We therefore believe that the true explanation of the results is thought-transference or fnental suggestion, received in some unconscious or " subliminal " manner by the subject's mind, and acting on his organism in the same way that an ordinary verbal suggestion may act. The process would thus be analogous to that supposed by Mr. Gurney to occur in hypnotisation at a distance.

Before proceeding to a detailed description of our own experiments, we may remark that even taking Mr. Gurney's alone, the balance of probability seems to us to be rather on the side of thought-transference than of a direct physical influence. His contrary opinion appears to us to rely too much on negative evidence, the force of which it is easy to over-estimate. In his unsuccessful experiments where willing without approaching the hand was used, the only observed dX^Htroxiz^ in conditions was the intentional withholding of Mr. Smith's hand ; but this difference may easily not have been the whole change actually produced in the conditions, and therefore may not have been the cause of the «^«-occurrence of the phenomena under observation. Our experiments show, in fact, that it was not the cause.

But we also think some of Mr. Gurney's positive results hard to interpret on any hypothesis of a physical influence acting immediately on the subject's nerves, and not through his brain by means of suggestion. We refer especially to the fact that occasionally the wrong finger was affected instead of, or as well as, the right one. For instance, in Mr. Gurney's experiments with little paper screens already mentioned, two fingers, the selected one and another, were protected by them, and in the first experiment both these fingers became stiff and insensitive. Now it is easy to see how this might happen if the result were due to " suggestion " — that is, to an impulse communicated to the percipient's brain which set the machinery to work to produce the nervous effect — for the suggestion can easily be conceived to go wrong. If it was self-suggestion, due to the perception of the little screens through the senses, it might naturally affect both fingers alike ; and if it was mental suggestion through the action of the operator's mind on that of the subject, it is easy to suppose that Mr. Smith's attention was equally directed to both the marked fingers, though his hand only pointed to one. But it is hard to see how any specific influence from Mr. Smith's hand could affect the finger he was and the finger he was not pointing at, without affecting also the intervening ones.

Details of the Experiments.

For our own experiments we adopted the same arrangements as Mr. Gurney. The subject, who was always in a normal condition at the time of the experiments, sat with his hands passed through holes in a screen which extended sufficiently above and on each side of him to prevent his seeing the operator or his own hands. The hands were spread out on a table, and the finger to be operated on was silently indicated to Mr. Smith behind the screen by one of ourselves either by signs or in writing. Mr. Smith generally said nothing while an experiment was going on, and he remained behind the screen until the testing was finished. The subject was frequently engaged by one of us in conversa-

569 B]

TO CHAPTER V

tion on topics outside the matter in hand during the process of making the finger insensitive, but sometimes we encouraged him to attend to his own sensations, with results which will be described below. When we believed the insensitiveness to have been produced, we ascertained, without moving the screen, which finger it was in by touching the fingers with the point of a pencil or some other convenient instrument, taking care to attack them in varying orders, sometimes beginning with the selected finger and sometimes taking it later in the series, so that no indication as to which finger we expected to find affected might be given by the order of testing. Occasionally the testing was done by one of us who was ignorant of which finger had been selected. Rigidity was ascertained by telling the subject to close his hands, when the affected finger i-emained extended. We often tried this before testing for insensitiveness, because it was free from the objection that in testing we might possibly ourselves indicate the finger. In some experiments we attempted to ascertain roughly the degree of insensitiveness by means of a small induction coil. To this we shall recur later when we discuss the nature of the effect produced.

Our experiments may be divided into six heads, according to the position and procedure of Mr. Smith.

[I omit the details, and give only the summary of the experiments made, with the subject P. as follows : — ]

Number of

CO

CU 3 t/3

J

{a) With Mr. Smith pointing at the selected ) finger . . . . . . .

(d) A glass screen placed over P.'s hands, Mr. f Smith pointing at the finger . . .

(c) Mr. Smith not pointing at the finger, in ) the same room with P., from 2^ to > about 12 feet off )

(<a?) Mr. Smith in another room across a pas- ) sage, both intervening doors open, look- > ing through an opera-glass at the finger)

{e) Mr. Smith in a different room from P., an > intervening door closed . . . . )

(/■) Mr. Smith pointing, but willing that no \ e£Eect should be produced . . . >

Totals ....

[The writers describe fully the means they used to test the anaesthesia, the degree of ansesthesia attained, and the means used for restoring sensibility. The next point described is one which, as they say, affords further strong evidence of the genuineness of the experiments, since the subjects were quite

The writers explain this expression to mean that Mr. Smith's hand was held above the selected finger, his fingers pointing downwards towards it, at a distance varying up to about four inches from it.

unaware that the observations were being made, "such points never being discussed in their presence, even when they were hypnotised."]

Seqjietice of Effects.

An interesting point observed was that the loss of sensibility seemed to spread from the lower part of the finger upwards, and when the effect was slight the tip of the finger only was affected. We have recorded fourteen cases in which either the lower part only — or the lower part first — became insensitive, or more insensitive than the upper. The only case observed in which this rule did not appear to hold good was one (No. 55) in which — after an attempt longer than usual, viz., from five to ten minutes — the only part of the selected finger (the right thumb) that became insensitive was the inner side of the proximal joint. Another possible exception to the rule was an experiment with Miss B., in which the part selected to be made anesthetic was a spot in the middle of the back of the left hand. Here the anaesthesia extended both above and below the spot, over the metacarpal and proximal joints of the middle finger.

Recovery seemed to proceed in the opposite direction, the sensibility spreading downwards towards the tip of the finger. It was only possible to observe this in a few cases, as recovery of the whole finger, when upward passes were used for the purpose, was generally very rapid. One case is recorded when the sensibility was completely restored by two such passes. In seven cases, however, we detected the gradual recovery referred to, which always followed the rule given.

The recovery of motor power and of sensibility was not always simultaneous. We have noted five cases in which the sensibility was recovered first and none in which the motor power first reappeared. Also, in making the experiments, the motor power was sometimes lost while the sensibility was wholly or partially retained (this was noted in five cases) ; but we never detected any case in which the loss of sensibihty extended further than the loss of the motor power. In other words, it seemed that the motor effect could be produced both more easily and more completely than the sensory.

These latter observations, though only made casually in the course of our experiments, are in accordance with the general experience of other investigators. In the paper already referred to [618 D] on the influence of selfsuggestion, it is said that " muscular rigidity [was the] most general form of phenomenon produced by self-suggestion," whereas local anaesthesia appeared more rarely. It is well known also that muscular rigidity is one of the easiest effects to produce by verbal suggestion.

Sensations Described by the Subjects in the Coiirse of the Experiments.

When their attention was directed to their hands, the subjects were sometimes aware of peculiar sensations in one or more of their fingers during the operation. Mr. Gurney found this with two of his subjects, after he had experimented with them for some time and got them to attend to their sensations during the process, and the finger in which they occurred was nearly always the one under experiment. The prevailing sensation was cold, sometimes also "pins and needles," "numbness," and the like {Proceedings, vol. v. p. 15).

Both P. and Miss B., when asked to attend to their hands, often mentioned a sensation of cold in the selected finger, and if we tested at once we generally found its sensibility reduced below the normal. The difference of temperature,

569 C] TO CHAPTER V 539

if it existed at all, was not such as to be perceptible to ordinary touch. The sensation of cold soon went off, and the finger then became completely anaesthetic. It would, of course, be very easy — especially under the circumstances of the experiments — to imagine such a feeling as this, but its association with the right finger was certainly significant. The sensation, however, sometimes occurred in the wrong finger, but then ansesthesia never followed with P., though it occasionally did so with Miss B. . . .

Care was, of course, always taken, when the subject first spoke of the sensation, to avoid giving him hints as to whether the finger he mentioned was the one we had selected for experiment. After a time we left off encouraging him to pay attention to his sensations, for fear of rendering the fingers too susceptible to any chance suggestions. [Some experiments illustrating this are next described.]

569 C. Several sets of experiments are recorded in the S.P.R. Proceedings in which the subject's power of response to a question was shown to be under the control of the unspoken will of the hypnotist, that will being directed during a long series of trials in accordance with an arbitrary list oi yeses and noes drawn up by the committee who were conducting the experiments. One series of trials conducted by Professor Barrett (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 417, and, for a more detailed account, Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. pp. 59-61) gave forty-three successes without a single failure. In the last six of these trials the hypnotist, who was a complete stranger to the subject, was at a distance of 1 7 feet from him, outside a door, through a narrow chink in which he received from Professor Barrett one or other of two cards, containing respectively the words yes and no. The question, "Do you hear me?" was every time addressed to the subject by Professor Barrett. To ensure a neutral tone, he took care (after the first twelve trials) not to know himself which of the two cards he gave the hypnotist until after the result, which, according to the will that had been exerted, was either the answer "yes," or silence.

Many cases are recorded in the Zoist of the induction or inhibition of particular actions through the " silent willing " of the mesmerist,^ the subject being generally hypnotised at the time. These experiments were mostly of the type of the " willing game," but without contact between the agent and the subject.^ Unconscious muscular guidance was thus

1 See Proceedings S.P.R., vol. i. p. 256; vol. ii. pp. 13-17; also Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 59.

"^ See, eg., Zoist, vol. iii. pp. 321, 323-24; vol. v. pp. 253, 260, 323; vol. vi. p. 289; vol. viii. pp. 126, 142, &c. See also Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. pp. 89-91. Petetin {Electricite Animate, p. 103) records that he could produce any movement in his cataleptic patients by his will alone. Puysegur also gives instances of " silent willing."

3 Speaking of the relation of the will to telepathic experiments in general, Gurney remarks (Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 92) that the will of the agent or operator seems at first sight to come more into play when the subject is desired to perform some action than when the image of some object is attempted to be conveyed to his mind. But even in the former case "there is little foundation for the idea that the operator's

excluded, but the records are seldom sufficiently detailed to show that the possibility of all other physical indications was excluded, and though some of the observers (H. S. Thompson, at least, see Zoisi, vol. v. p. 256) were well aware that hypnosis is often accompanied by hyperaesthesia, especially in reference to the hypnotist, they had not the knowledge that we now have of the possibilities of subconscious perception and interpretation. Still, it is difficult thus to explain away all the cases of " silent willing," for instance, those in which the subject was in a different place from the operator (see, e.g., Zoist, vol. viii. pp. 131—33, and 143-44), and we can hardly doubt that H. S. Thompson had real telepathic power as well as unusual facility as a hypnotist.

571 A. Different observers take different views of rapport. Bernheim and Liebeault believe that a real rapport exists between the subject and the operator, and that this follows as a natural consequence from the methods employed in inducing hypnosis. On the other hand, according to Braid, it was possible to create by suggestion an artificial state in which the subjects appeared to be en rapport only with the operator, but this condition was only apparent, not real. The subjects really heard the suggestions of others, though special artifices might be required to make them respond to them. Dr. Bramwell says (see "What is Hypnotism?" Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. p. 229) : —

My own observations in reference to rapport have led me to conclusions similar to those of Braid, viz. : i. That rapport does not appear unless it has been directly or indirectly suggested. 2. That the condition is alwa3's an apparent, and never a real one. It could always be experimentally proved that the subjects actually had been cognisant of what had been said and done by others who had not been placed eii rapport with them. In those who did not know what was expected of them, and to whom neither direct nor indirect suggestions of rapport were made, this condition did not appear. On the contrary, they heard and obeyed any one who might address them.

Moll, in Der Rapport in der Hypnose, published in 1892, comes practically to the same conclusion as Braid in regard to rapport, viz. : that it is caused by direct or indirect suggestions of the operator, or by self-suggestions which result from the subject's conception of the nature of the hypnotic state.

571 B. Experiments in " community of sensation " were made by the "Committee on Mesmerism" of the S.P.R. first in 1883. The first series (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. i. pp. 224-27) were carried out with a boy named Wells, who was blindfolded and hypnotised by Mr. G. A. Smith. Out of twenty-four experiments in the transference of pains, the exact spot was correctly indicated by the subject twenty times.

will in any way dominates the other will, or that he succeeds by superior 'strength of will ' in any ordinary sense. It is still primarily an image, not any form of force, that is conveyed — but an image of movement, i.e. an image whose nervous correlate in the brain is in intimate connection with motor-centres ; and the muscular effect is thus evoked while the subject remains a sort of spectator of his own conduct."

571 B] TO CHAPTER V 541

On September loth, 1883, Gurney made further experiments in the transference of pains and tastes with another subject, Conway. His account of them is as follows (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. p. 17).

Conway sat with his eyes closed, in a tolerably deep trance. Mr. Smith and I stood behind him, without contact, and Mr. Smith preserved absolute silence. I from time to time asked Conway whether he felt anythmg, but of course gave no guiding hint or indication of whether he was right or wrong.

I pinched Mr. Smith's right upper arm. Conway at once showed signs of pain, rubbed his right hand, then passed his left hand up to his right shoulder, and finally localised the exact spot.

I silently changed to Mr. Smith's left arm. In a very few seconds Conway's right hand flew to the corresponding place on his own left arm, and he rubbed it, uttering strong complaints.

I nipped the lobe of Mr. Smith's right ear. Conway first rubbed the right side of his neck close to his ear ; he then complained of his right leg, and used threats. I then gave a severe nip to his own right ear, and he made no sign of any sort. He then rubbed close to the left ear, and finally locaHsed the spot on that ear exactly corresponding to the place touched on Mr. Smith's right ear.

I now pinched the right side of Mr. Smith's right thigh. Conway, without receiving any hint that he was expected to feel anything, immediately began to rub the corresponding part of his left leg.

Mr. Smith now put a succession of substances into his mouth, according to my indications, still keeping behind Conway, and preserving total silence. I kept Conway's attention alive by asking him from time to time what the taste was like, but gave not the faintest guidance, except in the single case of cloves, when — to see if Conway would take a hint — I asked if it tasted like spice, and he said it did not.

Mustard. — " Something bitter." " It's rather warm."

Cloves. — " Some sort of fruit." " Mixed with spirits of wine." " Not like spice." "Tastes warm."

Bitter Aloes.— "■ Not nice." " Bitter and hot." " Sort of harshness." " Not sweet." (I had suggested that it was sweet.) "Not nice." " Frightful stuff." " Hurt your throat when you swallow it." " Bitterness and saltness about it."

Stigar. — "It's getting better." "Sweetish taste." "Sweet." "Something approaching sugar."

Powdered Alum. — "Fills your mouth with water." "Precious hot." "Some stuff from a chemist's shop, that they put in medicine." " Leaves a brackish taste." " Makes your mouth water." " Something after the style of alum."

Cayenne Pepper. — Conway showed strong signs of distress. " Oh ! you call it good, do you ? " " Oh ! give us something to rinse that down." " Draws your mouth all manner of shapes." " Bitter and acid, frightful." " You've got some Cayenne down my throat, I know." Renewed signs of pain and entreaties for water.

The subject was now waked. He immediately said, " What's this I've got in my mouth?" "Something precious hot." "Something much hotter than ginger." "Pepper and ginger."

Further experiments of the same kind with the same subject, made by Gurney and Dr. A. T. Myers, are recorded in Proceedings, vol. ii. pp. 205-

571 C. Mr. M. Guthrie, whose experiments in thought-transference with persons in a normal waking condition are given in 630 B, found that " community of sensation " sometimes existed between persons in a normal state, he being the first to observe this in the case of taste. In some of his experiments the tasters were himself, Gurney, and the present writer, and the percipients were his two principal subjects, Miss Relph and Miss Edwards. I quote part of the report made at the time from Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. pp. 52-54.

The taste to be discerned was known only to one or more of the three actual experimenters, and the sensations experienced were verbally described by the subjects (not written down), so that all danger of involuntary muscular guidance was elimina'ced.

A selection of about twenty strongly-tasting substances was made. These substances were enclosed in small bottles and small parcels, precisel}' similar to one another, and kept carefully out of the range of vision of the subjects, who were, moreover, blindfolded, so that no grimaces made by the tasters could be seen. The subjects, in fact, had no means whatever of knowing, through the sense of sight, what was the substance tasted.

Smell had to be guarded against with still greater care. When the substance was odoriferous the packet or bottle was opened outside the room, or at such a distance and so cautiously as to prevent any sensible smell from escaping. The experiments, moreover, were conducted in the close vicinity of a very large kitchen, from whence a strong odour of beefsteak and onions proceeded during almost all the time occupied. The tasters took pains to keep their heads high above the subjects, and to avoid breathing with open mouth. One substance (coffee) tried was found to give off a slight smell, in spite of all precautions, and an experiment made with this has been omitted.

The tasters were Mr. Guthrie (M. G.), Mr. Gurney (E. G.), and Mr. Myers (M.). The percipients may be called R. and E. The tasters lightly placed a hand on one of the shoulders or hands of the percipients — there not being the same objection to contact in trials of this type as where hues and figures are concerned, and the subjects themselves seeming to have some faith in it. During the first experiments (September 3rd and 4th) [18S3] there were one or two other persons in the room, who, however, were kept entirely ignorant of the substance tasted. During the experiments silence was preserved. The last fifteen of them (September 5th) were made when only M. G., E. G., and M., with the two percipients, were present. On this evening E. was, unfortunately, suffering from sore throat, which seemed to blunt her susceptibility. On this occasion none of the substances were allowed even to enter the room where the percipients were. They were kept in a dark lobby outside, and taken by the investigators at random, so that often one investigator did not even know what the other took. Still less could any spy have discerned what was chosen, had such spy been there, which he certainly was not.

Under these conditions thirty-two experiments were made, which are described in detail. In nine cases the percipients named the actual substance used, and in five other cases described the taste with fair accuracy i^e.g. "a sharp and nasty taste " for vinegar, "horrible and bitter" for bitter aloes, " something sweet and hot" for candied ginger). Other

572A] TO CHAPTER V 543

experiments of the same kind were tried later (^op. cit. pp. 55-58). See also Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. pp. 424-52, for experiments by Mr. Guthrie in the transference of sensations of many dififerent kinds ; some of those relating to pains are quoted in 630 B.

For other experiments with hypnotised subjects in the transference of sensations by many different observers, see Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. pp. 324-29, 338-45, 666-68. Some of these are quoted from the early mesmerists — Dr. Esdaile, the Rev. C. H. Townshend, Professor Gregory, and Dr. Elhotson.

572 A. The following case is quoted from Mrs. Sidgwick's paper " On the Evidence for Clairvoyance " in Proceedifigs S.P.R., vol. vii. pp. 30-99. It is one of a group of four cases given by Mrs. Sidgwick, which were observed by Mr. A. W. Dobbie, of Gawler Place, Adelaide, South Australia, with various hypnotic subjects of his own. Mr. Dobbie had at that time practised hypnotism for ten or twelve years, chiefly with a view to alleviating suffering, and out of some five hundred subjects, had come across a few who seemed capable of clairvoyance. Mrs. Sidgwick made his acquaintance and talked over his cases with him during a visit of his to England in 1889. The account quoted here is a copy, Mr. Dobbie informed us, of the notes he " wrote down the moment the words were uttered."

July i,th, 1886.

Striking case of clairvoyance, which occurred May 28th, 1886, in the presence of the Hon. Dr. Campbell, M.L.C., Hon. David Murray, M.L.C., and Chief Secretary of South Australia, Mr. Lyall, and Mr. Fleming, solicitor : —

The circumstances are briefly as follows, viz. : Dr. Campbell, being present at one of my usual clairvoyant evenings, handed me a gold sleeve-link, at the same time telling me that he had lost the fellow one to it, but had no idea as to what had become of it; he asked me to give the remaining one to one of my clairvoyants, and see if they could find the missing one. I should state that neither of the clairvoyants had ever seen either of the rooms they referred to, nor did they know the names of the children, or anything in connection with this case, so that it is either a case of genuine clairvoyance or else a most remarkable case of thougiit-reading.

I first handed the sleeve-link to the younger of the two sisters [Misses Eliza and Martha Dixon], who is not so lucid as her sister (I was giving the elder one a rest, as she had been hard at work, clairvoyantly, for the past hour).

Miss Martha began by first accurately describing Dr. Campbell's features, then spoke of a little fair-haired boy who had a stud, or sleeve-link, in his hand, also of a lady calling him " Neil " ; then said that this Httle boy had taken the link into a place like a nursery where there were some toys, especially a large toy elephant, and that he had dropped the link into this elephant through a hole which had been torn or knocked in the breast ; also that he had taken it out again, and gave two or three other interesting particulars. We were reluctantly compelled to postpone further investigation until two or three evenings afterwards.

On the next occasion (in the interval, however, the missing sleeve-link had been found, but left untouched), I again placed the link in her hand, and the

previous particulars were at once reproduced ; but as she seemed to be getting on very slowly, it occurred to Dr. Campbell to suggest placing his hand on that of the clairvoyant, so I placed him en rapport and allowed him to do so, he simply touching the back of her hand with the points of his fingers. As she still seemed to have great difficulty (she is always much slower than her sister) in proceeding, it suddenly occurred to me that it would be an interesting experiment to place Miss Eliza Dixon en rapport with Miss Martha, so I simply joined their disengaged hands, and Miss Eliza immediately commenced as follows, viz. : —

" I'm in a house, upstairs, I was in a bathroom, then I went into another room nearly opposite, there is a large mirror just inside the door on the left hand, there is a double-sized dressing-table with drawers down each side of it, the sleeve-link is in the corner of the drawer nearest the door. When they found it they left it there. I know why they left it there, it was because they wanted to see if we would find it. I can see a nice easy chair there, it is an old one, I would like it when I am put to sleep, because it is nice and low. The bed has curtains, they are a sort of brownish net and have a fringe of darker brown. The wall paper is of a light blue colour. There is a cane lounge there and a pretty Japanese screen behind it, the screen folds up. There is a portrait of an old gentleman over the mantelpiece, he is dead, I knew him when he was alive, his name is the same as the gentleman who acts as Governor when the Governor is absent from the colony, I will tell you his name directly — it is the Rev. Mr. Way. It was a little boy who put the sleeve-link in that drawer, he is very fair, his hair is almost white, he is a pretty little boy, he has blue eyes, and about three years old. The link had been left on that table, the little boy was in the nursery, and he went into the bedroom after the gentleman had left. I can see who the gentleman is, it is Dr. Campbell. Doesn't that little boy look a young Turk, the link is quite a handful for his little hand, he is running about with it very pleased ; but he doesn't seem to know what to do with it." (A) [Dr. Campbell was not present from this point.]

" Now I can hear some one calling up the stairs, a lady is calling two names, Colin is one and Neil is the other, the other boy is about five years old and is darker than the other. The eldest, Colin, is going downstairs now, he is gone into what looks like a dining-room, the lady says, ' Where is Neil ? ' ' Upstairs, ma.' ' Go and tell him to come down at once.' The little fair-haired boy had put the link down ; but when he heard his brother coming up he picked it up again. Colin says, ' Neil, you are to come down at once.' 'I won't,' says Neil. ' You're a goose,' replies Colin, and he turned and went down without Neil. What a young monkey ! now he has gone into the nursery and put the link into a large toy elephant, he put it through a hole in front, which is broken. He has gone downstairs now, I suppose he thinks it is safe there.

" Now that gentleman has come into the room again and he wants that link ; he is looking all about for it, he thinks it might be knocked down ; the lady is there now too, and they are both looking for it. The lady says, ' Are you sure you put it there ? ' The gentleman says, ' Yes.'

" Now it seems like next day, the servant is turning the carpet up and looking all about for it; but can't find it.

" The gentleman is asking that young Turk if he has seen it, he knows that

1 Chief Justice Way is the gentleman who acts as Deputy for his Excellency when absent from the colony. — A. W. D.

572A] TO CHAPTER V 545

he is fond of pretty things. The little boy says ' No.' He seems to think it is fine fun to serve his father like that.

" Now it seems to be another day, and the little boy is in the nursery again, he has taken the link out of the elephant, now he has dropped it into that drawer, that is all I have to tell you about it, I told you the rest before."

July \tfh, 1886. Since writing the above pages I have handed them to Dr. Campbell for perusal, so that he might check the account and ratify it or otherwise, and after going carefully through it he has returned it to me, accompanied by a complete , ratification in writing, which I herewith enclose. A. W. Dobbie.

Memo, by Dr. Campbell.

At>^i.mt>y., July gih, 1886.

At the point (A) the stance was discontinued till the next sitting, when I was absent. The conversation reported as passing between the children is correct. The description of the room is accurate in every point. The portrait is that of the late Rev. James Way. The description of the children and their names are true. The fact that the link was discovered in the drawer, in the interval between one sitting and the final one, and that the link was left there, pending the discovery of it by the clairvoyant, is also correct, as this was my suggestion to Mrs. Campbell when she showed it to me in the corner of the drawer. In fact, every circumstance reported is absolutely correct. I know, further, that neither of the clairvoyants has ever been inside of my door. My children are utterly unknown to them, either in appearance or by name. I may say also that they had no knowledge of my intention to place the link in their possession, or even of my presence at the stance, as they were both on each occasion in the mesmeric sleep when I arrived. Allan Campbell.

[In a later letter, dated December i6th, 1887, Dr. Campbell writes : — ]

Dear Mr. Dobbie, — Your London correspondent asks if I had any knowledge of the conversation that the clairvoyant stated had passed between the children. I had no knowledge whatever of this conversation, nor the circumstances attending it, until she repeated it. It was subsequently confirmed to me in part by Mrs. Campbell, such part as she herself is reported to have taken in the tableau.

With respect to the large toy elephant, I certainly knew of its existence, but was not thinking of it at the time the clairvoyant was speaking. I did not know even by suspicion that the elephant was so mutilated as to have a large opening in its chest, and on coming home had to examine the toy to see whether the statement was correct. I need hardly say that it was absolutely correct. — I am, yours sincerely, Allan Campbell.

[Mr. Dobbie tells us that "neither he nor his clairvoyants had any opportunity, directly or indirectly, of knowing any of the particulars brought out by the clairvoyant." He afterwards saw the room described, and says "the description is simply perfect in every particular."

On this narrative Mrs. Sidgwick comments as follows: — ]

There are several noteworthy points about this rather complicated case. In the first place, it will be noticed that the greater part of the information given by the clairvoyants might have been obtained by thought-transference from the VOL. I. 2 M

mind of Dr. Campbell, who was present most of the time. It would then, at any rate, be a very remarkable and interesting case of thought-transference, but so far it would not be clairvoyance as we have defined it. Further, a large proportion of the statements made — all about the little boy taking, hiding, and restoring the sleeve-link — are unverifiable. But there is one important point unknown to Dr. Campbell (so far as his conscious memory, at least, was concerned) and afterwards proved true, and that is the existence of the hole in the front of the toy elephant. The introduction of this peculiar fact — which, if learnt by mind-reading, must, it would seem, have been learnt from the child or some other person quite unknown to the percipient — is so remarkable that it makes it seem more probable than not that the hiding of the sleeve-link there was also a fact. If so, it is greatly to be regretted in the interests of science that the child ever took it out again ! I attach less importance, as evidence of clairvoyance, to the knowledge of the conversation of the children than to that of the hole in the toy elephant, because it is more the kind of thing that might be guessed.

Another noticeable point in this case is that so far as the clairvoyants' remarks relate to the actions of those concerned — the children, Dr. and Mrs. Campbell, the servant — the descriptions are not of the present, but of the past.

Another case of Mr. Dobbie's relates to the tracing of a lost gold pencil-case through the same clairvoyant {op. cit., pp. 68—70).

572 B. The Zoisf, vol. vii. pp. 95-101, contains a similar case, communicated by Mr. E. H. Earth, of the finding of a lost brooch by means of the noted clairvoyant Ellen Dawson. The account is given by a Mrs. M., the owner of the brooch. Ellen Dawson described a former servant of Mrs. M.'s, who she said had stolen the brooch, and said that she had kept the case, with some diamonds in it, in her trunk, and sold the brooch for a very small sum ; that it was then in a place like a cellar, with *' lots of other property," silver spoons, &c., and that the servant had moved from the place she had lived at when she first left Mrs. M. This latter point was found to be correct, and Mrs. M. (who had suspected another of her servants), on the advice of the clairvoyant, sent for the girl to come to her house, and taxed her with the theft. Finally she confessed that she had stolen the brooch and pawned it, keeping the case and two diamond chains which were worn with the brooch. All the property was finally recovered. Mrs. M. had never seen Ellen Dawson before.

Ellen Dawson had been subject to epileptic fits as a child, for which she had been treated mesmerically, first by the Baron Dupotet, and afterwards by Mr. W. Hands, who, observing that she appeared to be able to see objects without the use of her eyes when in the sleep-waking state, endeavoured to cultivate the clairvoyant faculty in her. Some remarkable cases of her "travelling clairvoyance " are recounted by him in the Zoist, vol. iii. pp. 226—36, and the same number, pp. 236—41, contains a further account by Miss Boyle of her description of Rouen Cathedral, and incidents that had happened to Miss Boyle there, &c.

573 A. The longest and most important series of experiments in

I

573A] TO CHAPTER V 547

thought-transference with hypnotised subjects carried out by members of the S.P.R, are those of Professor and Mrs. Sidgwick, described in the paper by them and Mr. G. A. Smith in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 128-70, and in the paper by Mrs. Sidgwick and Miss Alice Johnson in vol. viii. pp. 536-96. I give brief extracts from both these papers.

The following is a general description of the first series of experiments, which took place in 1889 : —

The experiments in thought-transference about to be described have been carried out with four different percipients while in the hypnotic trance, Mr. [G. A.] Smith, who hypnotised them, being the agent. The experiments were usually directed and arranged by Mrs. Sidgwick, who also took the notes which form the basis of the present paper. On two or three occasions, however, she was absent, and her place was taken by Professor Sidgwick, who was also present on most other occasions in July and August.

Most of the experiments were in the transference of numbers of two digits, Mr. Smith looking at the numbers and the percipient guessing them. The number of experiments of this nature tried with Mr. Smith in the same room as the percipient was 664, of which 131 were successes; and the number tried with Mr. Smith in another room was 228, of which only 9 were successes. In these numbers an experiment in which two percipients were at work at the same time is counted as two. By a success we mean that both digits are correctly given, but not necessarily placed in the right order. Of the 131 successes with Mr. Smith in the same room the digits were reversed in 14 ; and of the 9 successes with Mr. Smith in a different room the digits were reversed in i. We had no numbers above 90 among those we used. If the percipients had been aware of this, the probability of their guessing the right digits in the right order in one trial by pure chance would have been i to 81, and the probability of their guessing the right digits in any order half that. But, as at different times they guessed all the numbers between 90 and 100, we believe that they were not aware that our series stopped at 90, in which case their chance of being right in a single guess was i to 90. No one will suppose, therefore, that 117 complete successes in 664 guesses was the result of chance. Good days and bad days alike are included in the numbers given, though, as will be seen in the sequel, on some days no success at all was obtained. It was clear that the power of divining the numbers was exceedingly variable, but whether the difference was in the agent or the percipient, or on what circumstances it depended, we have so far been unable to discover.

Eight persons, at least, besides Mr, Smith, tried to act as agents, but either failed to hypnotise the percipients or to transfer any impression. Nor did others succeed in transferring impressions when the hypnotic state had been induced by Mr. Smith. Mr. Smith himself did not succeed except when the percipients were hypnotised.

[The account, written at the time, of the first day's experiments with each of the four percipients — Mr. W,, Mr. T., Mr. P., and Miss B. — is next given. The numbers used were all those from 10 to 90 inclusive ; each number was drawn at random from a bag, and placed in a little box which Mr. Smith held in his hand with its back towards the subject, who sat facing him with closed eyes. It was ascertained by experiment that the subject would have had

[573 A

to move his head several feet to see the number. He was only told that he was to see numbers of two figures.

All the experiments are given in order in a tabulated form, including in each case the number drawn, the number guessed, and the conditions. The following is a summary of the trials with P. and T. : —

Percipient.

Guess

completely

Right.

Digits Right,

but in

Reverse Order.

One Digit

Right in

Right Place.

Wrong.

Total number of Trials.

With Mr. S. in same j P. . room . . j T. .

Total ' . . .

ID

Most probable number of J successes by chance . J

With Mr. S. in another ( p room . . j ■ ■

I

Most probable number of 1 successes by chance . j

Of the 139 trials " with Mr. Smith in another room," there were 52 in which the two rooms were only separated by a curtain ; 3 of the complete successes were obtained under these conditions. In the other 87 trials Mr. Smith (accompanied by one of the other experimenters) was in the passage outside, with the door closed, or in a room below. With T. 79 trials were made with Mr. Smith in another room, but the success obtained was not beyond what might be expected by chance.

The nature of the percipients' impressions and other cognate points are fully discussed in the paper. A detailed discussion is also given as to how far the conditions were adequate to prevent the impressions reaching the percipients through any of the ordinary channels of sense. The question of the possibility of unconscious whispering or counting by the agent is fully dealt with, and an analysis is given of all the wrong guesses, in order to test whether the mistakes are such as could have been produced by this means. The conclusion is reached that the mistakes could not be thus accounted for.^^

The question of the bearing of " number-habits " on these experiments is also discussed. On this subject, see the " Note on Number-habits," in 630 A.

1 Messrs. Hansen and Lehmann, in a pamphlet entitled Ueher unwillkiirliche Flilsicrn . . . (in Wundt's Philosophische Studien, vol. xi. part 4) endeavoured to show that the success of these experiments was due to unconscious whispering, on the ground that the mistakes made in them were similar to the mistakes that occurred in their own experiments in unconscious whispering. Professor Sidgwick, however, showed (Proceedmgs S.P.R., vol. xii. pp. 298-315), by analysing all the experiments, that the number of correspondences in mistakes in the two sets were not more than might have been produced by chance, and that, therefore, no argument could be founded on them.

573 A] TO CHAPTER V 549

The experiments were continued at intervals during 1890 and 1891 by Mrs. Sidgwick, assisted by Miss Alice Johnson, Mr. G. A. Smith being the hypnotiser, and the principal subjects being P., T., and Miss B. The experiments were all made at Brighton, some in Mr. Smith's rooms, and some in Mrs. Sidgwick's lodgings.

Three different kinds of experiments were made: (i) in transferring numbers of two digits ; (2) in transferring ideas other than numbers ; (3) in producing local anaesthesia and rigidity by mental suggestion.^

The first kind of experiments afforded important confirmation of the earlier series, in that success was obtained with agent and percipient i^i different rooms, no one in the same room with the percipient knowing what the numbers to be guessed were. A full description, with a plan, is given of Mr. Smith's rooms (one of the " arches " on the beach at Brighton), in which most of the experiments were made. The arch contained two floors, the upper entirely occupied by a sitting-room, and the lower consisting of a little lobby and two small rooms. The first conditions of the evening's experiments with Miss B. are described as follows : —

The persons present were Miss B., Professor Barrett, Mr. Smith, Mrs. Sidgwick, Miss Johnson, and T.; but T., with whom we have been experimenting, was hypnotised, and not attending to what was going on. Mr. Smith hypnotised Miss B, and tried three numbers while in the room with her and speaking to her. There was some success with these, and then Mr. Smith and Miss Johnson went downstairs to the lobby. Miss Johnson drew a number at random out of a bag containing all the numbers from 10 to 90, and handed it to Mr. Smith, who then tried to communicate it mentally to Miss B. A little bell or gong was rung upstairs by Mrs. Sidgwick as soon as a guess had been made, and again when the party upstairs were ready to begin another. As the bell was rung Mrs. Sidgwick, who had previously been put en rapport with Miss B., said, " There's another, Miss B.," or words to that effect ; and Miss B. began to look out for an impression, whicli usually came to her in a visual form. Mrs. Sidgwick noted down her guesses and remarks, while Miss Johnson noted the numbers that she drew from the bag, and at intervals we compared notes. . . . It is hardly necessary to say that, as Mrs. Sidgwick was herself wholly ignorant of the number, it was impossible for her remarks to give any indications to Miss B.

[The nature and development of the percipients' impressions are fully discussed. Miss B.'s impressions were mostly visual, and generally seemed to develop gradually. Sometimes her eyes were opened, and she was made to see the number as a hallucination on a piece of paper. The number then sometimes appeared in a fragmentary way, and was liable to appear and disappear. On one occasion it was suggested successfully that the percipients should hear the numbers repeated instead of seeing them.

In forty-five out of the seventy-one experiments made in Mrs. Sidgwick's lodgings (the third section of the table given on p. 550), the numbers were guessed by means of table-tilting, MissB. in forty-one cases being in a normal condition at the time, and tilting out the numbers apparently quite automatically. In four

1 These experiments are described in 569 B.

[573 A

cases, being hypnotised, she tilted out the numbers with the table, and at the same time made verbal guesses, which were differentirom those made through the table. The same method was used occasionally with P. and T., and on one evening the percipients were made to guess the numbers both verbally and by planchettewriting. A detailed comparison of the verbal guesses with those made unconsciously at the same time is given on pp. 550-52 of the paper. The two guesses were in most cases different No more success was obtained with these automatic methods than by guessing in the ordinary way.

A table is given of the experiments of each day, with Miss B. as percipient, in guessing numbers of two digits, the agent, Mr. Smith, being in a different room. I summarise this table as follows : —

ID

Pi

'Sii

OS

•OP5

(1) Place — the Arch. Percipient up- )

stairs ; agent downstairs . . J

(2) Place — the Arch. Percipient down- j

stairs ; agent upstairs . . . f

(3) Place — Mrs. Sidgwick's lodgings.

Percipient in room ; agent in > passage, with door closed . . )

Totals ....

II

Most probable number of successes by ) chance . . . . .)

Results obtained during the same period ) by Mr. Smith as agent in the > room with Miss B. . . . ;

Experiments in Tra7isferring Ideas other than Ntcmbers.

The most successful experiments under this head were those in which Mr. Smith was merely concentrating his mind on a "mental picture " of some sort, without looking at any real representation. The person who carried on the conversation with the percipient during the course of each experiment, and took notes of his remarks, was generally ignorant of the subject of the picture.

The percipient was sometimes made to receive the impression as a fully externalised visual hallucination seen with open eyes ; usually as a picture on a blank white card on which he had been told that a picture would appear, and occasionally in a ciystal used in the same way.^ Latterly, the percipients

Compare the similar experiments with P. and T. described in 624 A.

573 A]

TO CHAPTER V

were generally induced to see the pictures when h3rpnotised with closed eyes. Full details are given of the experiments which the writers regarded as successful, with accounts of some failures, also a tabulated list of all the experiments tried. Those with agent and percipients in the same room are summarised by the authors as follows : —

Percipient.

Impression.

Number of Trials.

Correct or

partially

Wrong.

None.

correct.

Miss B. .

I

P

T

Whybrew

ID

Major

Totals .

I quote the first seven experiments with Miss B., of which four are counted as successful, viz. Nos. i, 2, 5, and 7.

The first experiments with Miss B. took place on July 9th, 1890. The percipient, being in a hypnotic trance, had her eyes opened, and was given a card and told to look out for a picture which would come on it.

No. I. The subject, chosen by Mrs. Sidgwick, was a little boy with a ball. Mr. Smith sat close to Miss B., but neither spoke to her nor touched her. Miss B. presently said, " A figure is coming — a little boy." Mrs. Sidgwick asked what he had in his hand, and Miss B. replied, " A round thing, a ball, I suppose."

No. 2. For the next experiment Mr. Smith sat behind a screen. The subject, a kitten in ajar, was again set by Mrs. Sidgwick. Miss B. said, " Something like an old cat — a cat — I think it's a cat." Mrs. Sidgwick. — "What is the cat doing?" Miss B. (doubtfully). — "Sitting down." Mrs. Sidgwick. — "Is there anything else but a cat?" Miss B. — "No, only scratches about."

No. 3. (Failure.) . . .

No. 4. Subject : a Christy Minstrel with a bajijo (chosen by Mrs. Sidgwick, who took the notes). Miss B. said, " There's something long, something round in that one — a little cage of some sort — something that looks like a cage ; yet there's something like a handle. A can ! oh, it's a can ! It's quite clear now." We then gave her a fresh card, and Mr. Smith moved round from behind the screen and sat close to her, still without speaking.

No. 5. The same subject (continued). Miss B. said, " Something here dark — a hand." Mrs. Sidgwick. — " Is it a woman's hand or a man's ?" Miss B. — " A black hand." This seemed to be a partial success.

Mr. Smith then woke Miss B. up to ask her when she had to go, but finding that there was still a little time to spare, re-hypnotised her, and tried another subject.

No. 6. A saili7ig-boat on the sea. Mr. Smith sat behind the screen. Presently Miss B. said, "A man — black. He's got something in his hand — an instrument — sort of guitar thing." As we had not spoken about the Christy

Minstrel and banjo, this tardy emergence of the idea when Mr. Smith was thinking of something else, and after awaking and re-hypnotisation, was interesting.

We then changed Miss B.'s card, and Mr. Smith continued to think of the sailing-boat, but Miss B. only saw something like a bear, and we changed her card again. Of course during these changes we told her nothing about the subject, nor whether it was changed, nor whether she was right or wrong. Miss B. then said, "Very funny thing" (shaking her head); "can't see it coming to any figure. There's a mess — it doesn't come to any shape."

No. 7. At this point Mrs. Sidgwick asked Mr. Smith to come from behind the screen and sit near Miss B. Miss Johnson, who did not know what the subject of the picture was, asked Miss B. whether it was anything like an animal. Miss B. said, " No — got some prong sort of things — something at the bottom like a little boat. What can that be up in the air ? Cliffs, I suppose — cliffs in the air high up — it's joining the boat — oh, sails — a saihng-boat — not cliffs — sails." This was not all uttered consecutively, but partly in answer to questions put by Miss Johnson ; but as Miss Johnson was ignorant of the subject of the supposed picture, her questions could, of course, give no guidance.

[The following are five experiments made with P. : — ]

As a preliminary to each experiment, P. was hypnotised and told by Mr. Smith that he would see a picture, then had his eyes opened, and was given a blank card to look at. The subjects of the pictures were chosen by Mrs. Sidgwick and written down by her. In the case of the first two, the subject for the picture was shown in writing to Mr. Smith before his final remarks to P. about looking for the picture to come on the card. In the case of the last three, it was only shown to him after he had explained to P. what he was to do, and he did not speak at all after he knew what the subject was. He sat near P., but behind him in all cases. Miss Johnson, who was ignorant of the subjects, took notes of P.'s conversation and other remarks that were made during the course of each experiment. P. occasionally addressed Mrs. Sidgwick, and she answered him, being of course very careful to avoid giving any indications by her remarks.

No. 15. (Failure.) ...

No. 16. Subject: A black kitten playing with a cork. P. — "Something like a cat; it's a cat." Mrs. Sidgwick. — "What is it doing?" P. — "Something it's been feeding out of — some milk, is it a saucer? Can't see where its other paw is — only see three paws."

No. 17. Subject: A sandwich mati with advertiscmeiit of a play. P. said, " Something like letter A — stroke there, then there." Mrs. Sidgwick. — "Well, perhaps it will become clearer." P. — "Something like a head on the top of it ; a V upside down — two legs and then a head. — A man with two boards — looks like a man that goes about the streets with two boards. I can see a head at the top, and the body and legs between the boards. I couldn't see what was written on the boards, because the edges were turned towards me." Mr. Smith told us afterwards that he had pictured to himself the man and one board facing him, thus not corresponding to the impression which P. had.

No. 18. Subject: A choir boy. P. said, "Edge of card's going a dark colour. Somebody dressed up in white, eh? Can see something all white; edge all black, and like a figure in the middle. There's his hands up" (making a gesture to show the attitude) "like a ghost or something — you couldn't mistake it for anything but a ghost. It's not getting any better, it's fading — no, it's still there. It might frighten any one." . . .

573 B] TO CHAPTER V 553

No. 19. Subject: A vase with flowers. (Mr. Smith, still behind P., was looking at a blue flower-pot in the window, containing an india-rubber plant). P. said, " I see something round, like a round ring. I can see some straight things from the round thing. I think it's a glass — it goes up. I'll tell you what it is ; it must be a pot, a flower-pot, you know, with things growing in it. I only guessed that, because you don't see things growing out of a glass. It's not clear at the top yet. You see something going up, and you can't see the top because of the edge of the paper, it's cut off. I don't wonder, because it's no good wondering what Mr. Smith does, he does such funny things. I should fancy it might be a geranium, but there's only sticks, so you can't tell." Mrs. Sidgwick. — " What colour is the pot ? " P. — " Dark colour, between terra-cotta and red— dark red, you'd call it."

573 B. In Mrs. Sidgwick's paper " On the Evidence for Clairvoyance " in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vii. pp. 30-99, an account is given of several striking cases of " travelling clairvoyance " on the part of a woman there called Jane, the wife of a Durham pitman {op. cit., pp. 53-62 and 82—94). She was hypnotised at intervals for many years from 1845 onwards, for the sake of her health, and used then to ask to "travel" — that is, to be guided by suggestion to places which she should clairvoyantly visit. The main evidence about her is contained in the contemporaneous notes of a Dr. F., which, however, do not appear to have been made before the truth of her statements was verified. I quote an extract from these notes.

Before commencing the sitting I fixed to take her to a house, without communicating'my intentions to any of the parties present. In the morning of the day I stated to a patient of my own, Mr. Eghnton, at present residing in the village of Tynemouth, that I intended to visit him. He stated that he would be present between 8 and 10 p.m. in a particular room, so that there might be no difficulty in finding him. He was just recovering from a very severe illness, and was so weak that he could scarcely walk. He was exceedingly thin from the effects of his complaint.

After the usual state had been obtained, I said, " We are standing beside a railway station, now we pass along a road, and in front of us see a house with a laburnum tree in front of it." She directly replied, "Is it the red house with a brass knocker ? " I said, " No, it has an iron knocker." I have since looked, however, and find that the door has an old-fashioned brass handle in the shape of a knocker. She then asked, " Shall we go up the steps ? Shall we go along this passage and up these stairs ? Is this a window on the stair head ? " I said, " You are quite right, and now I want you to look into the room upon the lefthand side." She replied, " Oh yes, in the bedroom. There is no one in this room; there is a bed in it, but there is no person in it." I was not aware that a bedroom was in the place I mentioned, but upon inquiry next day I found she was correct. I told her she must look into the next room and she would see a sofa. She answered, " But there is here a little gallery. Now I am in the room, and see a lady with black hair lying upon the sofa." I attempted to puzzle her about the colour of her hair, and feeling sure it was Mr. Eglinton who was lying there, I sharply cross-questioned her, but still she persisted in her story. The questioning, however, seemed to distract her mind, and she

commenced talking about a lady at Whickham, until I at last recalled her to the room at Tynemouth by asking her whether there was not a gentleman in the room. " No," she said; " we can sec no gentleman there."

After a little she described the door opening, and asked with a tone of great surprise, "Is that a gentleman ? " I replied, "Yes; is he thin or fat?" "Very fat," she answered; "but has he a cork leg ? " I assured her that he had no cork leg, and tried to puzzle her again about him. She, however, assured me that he was very fat and had a great corporation, and asked me whether I did not think such a fat man must eat and drink a great deal to get such a corporation as that. She also described him as sitting by the table with papers beside him, and a glass of brandy and water. " Is it not wine?" I asked. " No," she said, " it's brandy." " Is it not whisky or rum ? " " No, it is brandy," was the answer ; " and now," she continued, " the lady is going to get her supper, but the fat gentleman does not take any." I requested her to tell me the colour of his hair, but she only answered that the lady's hair was dark. I then inquired if he had any brains in his head, but she seemed altogether puzzled about him, and said she could not see any. I then asked her if she could see his name upon any of the letters lying about. She replied, "Yes;" and upon my saying that the name began with E, she spelt each letter of the name " Eglinton."

