However phrased, it is the fact (as amply established by M. Fe"r6 and others1) that excitations of almost any kind — whether sudden and startling or agreeable and prolonged — do tend to increase the subject's dynamometrical power. In the first place, and this is in itself an important fact, the average of squeezing-power is found to be greater among educated students than among robust labouring men, thus showing that it is not so much developed muscle as active brain which renders possible a sudden concentration of muscular force. But more than this ; M. F£r£ finds that with himself and his friends the mere listening to an interesting lecture, or the mere stress of thought in solitude, or still more the act of writing or of speech, produces a decided increase of strength in the grip, especially of the right hand. The same effect of dynamogeny is produced with hypnotic subjects, by musical sounds, by coloured light, especially red light, and even by a hallucinatory suggestion of red light. " All our sensations," says M. Fer£ in conclusion, "are accompanied by a development of potential energy, which passes into a kinetic state, and externalises

1 Sensation et Mouvement, par Ch. Fere. Paris : Alcan, 1887.

809] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 91

itself in motor manifestations which even so rough a method as dynamometry is able to observe and record."

I would beg the reader to keep these words in mind. We shall presently find that a method apparently even rougher than dynamographic tracings may be able to interpret, with far greater delicacy, the automatic tremors which are coursing to and fro within us. If once we can get a spy into the citadel of our own being, his rudest signalling will tell us more than our subtlest inferences from outside of what is being planned and done within.

809. Further illustrations might easily be here given. But for brevity's sake I pass on to the automatic messages which form our special subject, trusting that the specimens above given of motor externalisations of unexpected kinds may have led the reader to feel that experiment alone can tell us how far such delicate motor indications may in fact be traceable ; how much of information may pass from one stratum of our consciousness to another, and in a form how strangely transmuted. And having now to deal with what I define as messages conveyed by one stratum in man to another stratum, I must first consider in what general ways human messages can be conveyed. Writing and speech have become predominant in the intercourse of civilised men, and it is to writing and speech that we look with most interest among the communications of the subliminal self. But it does not follow that the subliminal self will always have such complex methods at its command. We have seen already that it often finds it hard to manage the delicate co-ordinations of muscular movement required for writing, — that the attempt at automatic script ends in a thump and a scrawl. Does the history of animal communication suggest to us to try any easier, more rudimentary plan ?

The first communications of animals are by gesture ; and even when sound is added this is at first only a specialised kind of gesture. The higher animals discriminate their calls ; man develops speech ; and the message-giving impulse parts into the main channels of movement — movement of the throat and movement of the hand. The hand-gestures — " high as heaven," " horned like a stag," and so forth — develop in their turn into the rude drawing of objects; and this graphic impulse again divides along two channels. On the one hand it develops into the pictorial and plastic arts, conveying its messages through what may be termed a direct, as opposed to an arbitrary symbolism. On the other hand it assimilates itself to the laws of speech, it becomes ideographic ; and gradually merging direct into arbitrary symbolism it becomes alphabetical script, arithmetic, algebra, telegraphy.

But the word telegraphy suggests to us that in recent times a fresh beginning has had to be made in human communication; modes have had to be invented by which a civilised man, disposing only of a few simple movements, — the deflections of the indicating needle, — might attain to the precision of grammatical speech. This, as we know, has been easily

effected; and the mere repetition of one or two simple movements at varied intervals suffices, to eye or ear, for all the purposes of an alphabet.

Now we shall find, perhaps, among the communications of the subliminal self parallels to all these varying modes of communication. But since the subliminal self, like the telegraphist, begins its effort with full knowledge, indeed, of the alphabet, but with only weak and rude command over our muscular adjustments, it is a priori likely that its easiest mode of communication will be through a repetition of simple movements, so arranged as to correspond to letters of the alphabet.

And here, I think, we have attained to a conception of the mysterious and much-derided phenomenon of " table-tilting " which enables us to correlate it with known phenomena, and to start at least from an intelligible basis, and on a definite line of inquiry.

A few words are needed to explain what are the verifiable phenomena, and the less verifiable hypotheses, connoted by such words as " tableturning," "spirit-rapping," and the like.

If one or more persons of a special type, — at present definable only by the question-begging and barbarous term " mediumistic," — remain quietly for some time with hands in contact with some easily movable object, and desiring its movement, that object will sometimes begin to move. If, further, they desire it to indicate letters of the alphabet by its movements, — as by tilting once for #, twice for, &c., it will often do so, and answers unexpected by any one present will be obtained.

Thus far, whatever our interpretation, we are in the region of easily reproducible facts, which many of my readers may confirm for themselves if they please.

But beyond the simple movements — or table-turning — and the intelligible responses — or table-tilting — both of which are at least primd fade physically explicable by the sitters' unconscious pressure, without postulating any unknown physical force at all, — it is alleged by many persons that further physical phenomena occur ; namely, that the table moves in a direction, or with a violence, which no unconscious pressure can explain ; and also that percussive sounds or " raps " occur, which no unconscious action, or indeed no agency known to us, could produce. These raps communicate messages like the tilts, and it is to them that the name of " spirit-rapping " is properly given. But spiritualists generally draw little distinction between these four phenomena — mere table-turning, responsive table-tilting, movements of inexplicable vehemence, and responsive raps — attributing all alike to the agency of departed spirits of men and women, or at any rate to disembodied intelligences of some kind or other.

I am not at present discussing the physical phenomena of Spiritualism, and I shall therefore leave on one side all the alleged movements and noises of this kind for which unconscious pressure will not account. I do not prejudge the question as to their real occurrence ; but assuming that such disturbances of the physical order do occur, there is at least no primd,

810] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 93

facie need to refer them to disembodied spirits. If a table moves when no one is touching it, this is not obviously more likely to have been effected by my deceased grandfather than by myself. We cannot tell how / could move it ; but then we cannot tell how he could move it either. The question must be argued on its merits in each case ; and our present argument is not therefore vitiated by our postponement of this further problem.

810. Before M. Richet 1 1 believe that no writer, outside the Spiritualistic group, so much as showed any practical knowledge of this phenomenon, — still less endeavoured to explain it. Faraday's well-known explanation of table-turning as the result of the summation of many unconscious movements— obviously true as it is for some of the simplest cases of tablemovement — does not touch this far more difficult question of the origination of these intelligent messages, conveyed by distinct and repeated movements of some object admitting of ready displacement. The ordinary explanation — I am speaking, of course, of cases where fraud is not in question — is that the sitter unconsciously sets going and stops the movements so as to shape the word in accordance with his expectation. Now that he unconsciously sets going and stops the movements is part of my own present contention, but that the word is thereby shaped in accordance with his expectation is often far indeed from being the case. Several of the examples in the Appendices to this chapter illustrate the bizarre capriciousness of these replies — their want of relation to anything anticipated or desired by the persons in contact with the table. Similar instances might be indefinitely multiplied ; but any one who is really willing to take the requisite trouble can satisfy himself on this point by experiment with a sufficiently varied list of trustworthy friends. To those indeed who are familiar with automatic written messages, this question as to the unexpectedness of the tilted messages will present itself in a new light. If the written messages originate in a source beyond the automatist's supraliminal self, so too may the tilted messages ; — even though we admit that the tilts are caused by his hand's pressure of the table just as directly as the script by his hand's manipulation of the pen.

One piece of evidence which I have cited (in 830 A) in order to show that written messages were not always the mere echo of expectation, was a case where anagrams were automatically written, which their writer was not at once able to decipher. Following this hint, I have occasionally succeeded in getting anagrams tilted out for myself by movements of a small table which I alone touched. I should add that although, as I have elsewhere mentioned, I have never succeeded in writing automatically, I have nevertheless, after some hundreds of trials, continued over many years, attained the power of eliciting by unconscious pressure tilted responses which do not emanate from my own conscious self. That they do,

1 La Suggestion Mentale (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. pp. 239 sqq.).

however, emanate from some stratum of my being — from that fragmentary and incoherent workshop where dreams are strung together — seems to me, as already indicated, the most probable hypothesis.

The anagrams — or rather jumbles of letters forming a short word — which I have myself obtained, have been of the simplest kind. But occasionally I have not at once recognised the word thus given, but have been aware of a distinct interval before the word which my own unconscious muscular action had thus confusedly "tilted out" was grasped by my conscious intelligence. This is a kind of experiment which might with advantage be oftener repeated ; for the extreme incoherence and silliness of the responses thus obtained does not prevent the process itself from being in a high degree instructive. Here, again (as in the automatic writing of the "CleKa" case, 830 A), a man may hold colloquy with his own dream — may note in actual juxtaposition two separate strata of his own intelligence.

I shall not at present pursue the discussion of these tilted responses beyond this their very lowest and most rudimentary stage. They almost immediately suggest another problem, for which our discussion is hardly ripe, the participation, namely, of several minds in the production of the same automatic message. There is something of this difficulty, even in the explanation of messages given when the hands of two persons are touching a planchette ; but when the instrument of response is large, and the method of response simple, as with table-tilting, we find this question of the influence of more minds than one imperatively recurring.

811. Our immediate object, however, is rather to correlate the different attainable modes of automatic response in some intelligible scheme than to pursue any one of them through all its phases. We regarded the table-tilting process as in one sense the simplest, the least-differentiated form of motor response. It is a kind of gesture merely, though a gesture implying knowledge of the alphabet. Let us see in what directions the movement of response becomes more specialised, — as gesture parts into pictorial art and articulate speech. We find, in fact, that a just similar divergence of impulses takes place in automatic response. On the one hand the motor impulse specialises itself into drawing; on the other hand it specialises itself into speech. Of automatic drawing I have already said something (Chapter III. 324). Automatic speech will receive detailed treatment in Chapter IX. At present I shall only briefly indicate the position of each form of movement among cognate automatisms.

Some of my readers may have seen these so-called " spirit-drawings," — designs, sometimes in colour, whose author asserts that he drew them without any plan, or even knowledge of what his hand was going to do. This assertion may be quite true, and the person making it may be perfectly sane.1 The drawings so made will be found curiously accordant

1 See the quotations from Mr. Wilkinson's book in 811 A. But, of course, like other automatic impulses, this impulse to decorative or symbolical drawing is sometimes

812] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 95

with what the view which I am explaining would lead us to expect. For they exhibit a fusion of arabesque with ideography ; that is to say, they partly resemble the forms of ornamentation into which the artistic hand strays when, as it were, dreaming on the paper without definite plan ; and partly they afford a parallel to the early attempts at symbolic self-expression of savages who have not yet learnt an alphabet. Like savage writing, they pass by insensible transitions from direct pictorial symbolism to an abbreviated ideography, mingled in its turn with writing of a fantastic or of an ordinary kind.

812. And here, before we enter on the study of automatic writing, I shall somewhat break the thread of discussion in order to refer at length to two great historic cases of automatism, which may, perhaps, be most fitly introduced here as a kind of prologue to what is to follow. One case, that of Socrates, is a case of monitory inhibition ; the other, that of Jeanne d'Arc, of monitory impulse. Each case, moreover, is instructive as regards the substance of the messages, and also as regards the character and capacity of the percipient. I begin with that great historical instance, — an instance well observed and well attested, although remote in date, which will at once have occurred to every reader.

The Founder of Science himself, — the permanent type of sanity, shrewdness, physical robustness, and moral balance, — was guided in all the affairs of life by a monitory Voice, — by " the Daemon of Socrates." This is a case which can never lose its interest, a case which has been vouched for by the most practical, and discussed by the loftiest intellect of Greece, — both of them intimate friends of the illustrious subject ; — a case, therefore, which one who endeavours to throw new light on hallucination and automatism is bound, even at this distance of time, to endeavour to explain. And this is the more needful, since a treatise was actually written, a generation ago, as "a specimen of the application of the science of psychology to the science of history," arguing from the records of the 8at/x,oVtoi/ in Xenophon and Plato that Socrates was in fact insane.1

I believe that it is now possible to give a truer explanation ; to place these old records in juxtaposition with more instructive parallels; and to show that the messages which Socrates received were only advanced examples of a process which, if supernormal, is not abnormal, and which characterises that form of intelligence which we describe as genius. For genius (as we have seen), is best defined — not as "an unlimited capacity

seen at its maximum in insane patients. Some drawings of an insane patient, reproduced in the American Journal of Psychology, June 1888, show a noticeable analogy (in my view.predictable analogy) with some of the " spirit-drawings " above discussed. See also the Martian landscapes of Helene Smith, in Professor Flournoy's Des Indes cl la plantte Mars, referred to below, sections 834 et seq.

1 Du Demon de Socrate, &c., by L. F. Lelut, Membre de 1'Institut. Nouvelle edition, 1856.

of taking pains" — but rather as a mental constitution which allows a man to draw readily into supraliminal life the products of subliminal thought.

813. I have already urged that beneath the superficially conscious stratum of our being there is not only a stratum of dream and confusion, but a still subjacent stratum of coherent mentation as well. This thesis, I think, is strongly supported by the records which have come down to us as to the Daemon of Socrates. We shall see that the monitions which Socrates thus received were for the most part such as his own wiser self might well have given, and that where the limits of knowledge attainable by his own inmost reflection may possibly have been transcended, they seem to have been transcended in such direction as a clairvoyant development of his own faculties might allow, rather than in such a way as to suggest the intervention of any external power. Let us try to analyse the nature of the "divine interventions" actually recorded by Socrates' contemporaries. The voice, it should be remarked, was always a voice of restraint; its silence implied approval. In the first place Xenophon's testimony completely establishes the fact. He desires, in defending his friend and master from the charge of impiety, to make as little as may be of the matter ; but what he says is quite enough to prove — if such proof were needed — that the Saiftoviov (monitory voice) is no metaphor, but is to be taken literally as a notorious and repeated incident in Socrates' life.

" First then," he says,1 " as to his not worshipping the gods whom the city worships, what evidence was there of this ? He sacrificed constantly, and obviously used the art of divination; for it was matter of .notoriety that Socrates said that TO Sai/xwioi/ — the divine Providence — gave him indications ; and this indeed was the principal reason for accusing him of introducing new gods."

The instances where such indication was given may be divided into three heads.

First come the cases where the warning voice — or its equally significant absence — gives proof of a sagacity at least equal to that of the waking Socrates, and decides him to action, or to abstention from action, which he professes always to have recognised as right and wise.

Next come the cases where the monition implies some sort of knowledge not dependent on any external source, yet not attainable by ordinary means ; — as a knowledge of potential rapport (to use the term of the elder mesmerists), or special relation between two organisms.

And, lastly, come one or two doubtful cases where, if they be correctly reported, there was something like clairvoyance, or extension of the ordinary purview of sense.

The first of these classes contains the great majority of the recorded cases, whether small or great matters are concerned. And it is noticeable 1 Xen. Memorabilia, i. I.

813] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 97

that the monition frequently occurred in reference to mere trifles, and had been a habitual phenomenon for Socrates from childhood upwards, both of which points are eminently in analogy with what we know of other automatisms. Let us take first some trivial cases.

1. In the Euthydemus of Plato, Socrates is about to quit the palaestra ; the sign detains him; young men enter, and profitable conversation ensues.

2. In the Phadrus, Socrates, when leaving his resting-place, is detained by the sign, which thus leads him to a discourse which he had not intended to utter — 'Ei//.i Sr) /xai/rts //,ev — " I am, it seems, a prophet," he then remarks, " but only just enough for my private use and benefit."

3. In the First Alcibiades the sign restrains him from speaking to Alcibiades until the latter is old enough to understand him aright.

There are also various cases where Socrates dissuades his friends from expeditions which ultimately turn to their harm. None of these are in our sense evidential ; and in some of them (as in the case of the Athenian expedition against Syracuse) ordinary sagacity might have given the same warning. The case of Timarchus (Plato, Theages) is the most dramatic of these warnings.

Timarchus was sitting at supper with Socrates, and rose to go out to a plot of assassination, to which plot only one other man was privy. " ' What say you, Socrates ? ' said Timarchus, ' do you continue drinking ? I must go out somewhither ; but will return in a little, if so I may.' And the voice came to me ; and I said to him, < By no means rise from table ; for the accustomed divine sign has come to me.' And he stayed. And after a time again he got up to go, and said, ' I must be gone, Socrates.' And the sign came to me again ; and again I made him stay. And the third time, determining that I should not see, he rose and said naught to me, when my mind was turned elsewhere ; and thus he went forth, and was gone, and did that which was to be his doom."

We cannot now tell what the evidential value of this case may have been. There may have been that in the countenance of one of them who sat at meat, which may have shown to Socrates that the hand of an assassin was with him on the table.

But, among these monitions of Socrates, a certain silence of the warning voice on one last occasion was held by Socrates himself, and has since been reputed, as the most noteworthy of all. This was when Socrates, accused on a capital charge of impiety, from which he might have freed himself by far less of retractation than has been consented to by many a martyr, refused altogether to retract, to excuse himself, to explain away ; claiming rather, in one of the first and noblest of all assertions of the law • of conscience as supreme, that he deserved to be supported at the public cost in the Prytaneum, as a man devoted to the mission of a moral teacher of men. The divine sign, as has been said, came only to warn or to restrain ; when it was absent, all was well. And throughout the whole series VOL. n. G

of events which led to Socrates' death, the voice intervened once only, — to check him from preparing any speech in his own defence. Thereafter, by an emphatic silence, it approved the various steps by which the philosopher brought on his own head that extreme penalty which, save for his own inflexible utterances, the Dikastery would not have ventured to inflict.

"There has happened to me, O my judges," he said in his last speech after sentence passed, " a wonderful thing. For that accustomed divine intimation in time past came to me very many times, and met me on slight occasion, if I were about to act in some way not aright ; but now this fate which ye behold has come upon me, — this which a man might deem, and which is considered, the very worst of ills. Yet neither when I left my home this morning was I checked by that accustomed sign ; nor when I came up hither to the judgment-hall, nor at any point in my speech as I spoke. And yet in other speeches of mine the sign has often stopped me in the midst. But now it has not hindered me in any deed or word of mine connected with this present business. What then do I suppose to be the reason thereof ? I will tell you. I think it is that what has happened to me has been a good thing ; and we must have been mistaken when we supposed that death was an evil. Herein is a strong proof to me of this ; for that accustomed sign would assuredly have checked me, had I been about to do aught that was evil."

I dwell upon this incident ; for in the history of inward messages no such scene is likely to recur. We shall never again see such a man at such a moment drawing strength from the silence of the monitory utterance which came to him as from without himself, though it were from the depths of his own soul.

814. The next class of the Socratic monitions can only be briefly dealt with here. They touch on that singular phenomenon of so-called rapport which is to us at present and has long been in the eyes of Science an unexplained and a very disputable thing ; but on which recent hypnotic experiments are slowly bringing us to look as in some sense a reality. In modern terms we should say that the disciples of Socrates were influenced not so much by his instruction as by his suggestion ; and that some inward and perhaps telepathic instinct — expressed by the monitory voice whose utterances we are analysing — informed him without conscious consideration whether his intending disciples were receptive to his suggestion or no. It is in the Platonic dialogue Theages that this aspect of the divine monition is most insisted on.

" I never learnt from you," says a certain Aristeides to Socrates, " anything at all. You yourself well know this. But I always made progress whenever I was along with you, even if I were in the same house but not in the same room ; yet most when I was in the same room ; and even in the same room I got on better if I looked at you when you were speaking than if I looked anywhere else. But I got on far the best of all when I

814] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 99

was sitting near you and holding or touching you. But now, said he, all my then character has dribbled out of me." Nw Se, rj 8'6's, Trao-a eKavrj rj e£ts egeppvrjKtv.

I would not insist too strongly on an interpretation which may seem merely fanciful. But nevertheless we should be puzzled to find Greek words more expressive of the gradual dissipation and disappearance of a post-hypnotic suggestion, — the melting away of some imparted energy in well-doing as the subject is removed from the operator's influence. And that the possibility of some rapport of this kind should be indicated, not by conscious thought but by a message emanating from some sub-conscious phase of a man's being ; — this, too, is a phenomenon to which modern experience furnishes not unfrequent analogies.

The third class of Socratic monitions which I have mentioned rests on very slender evidence. We cannot be sure that the monitory sign ever warned him of anything which no possible sagacity of the ordinary kind could have led him to discover. As is natural in the beginning of such inquiries, the cases cited to illustrate this supposed supernormal knowledge are mainly interesting and important incidents ; and it is precisely in relation to such incidents that some unconscious guess is likely to have been made. What we should like would be just what Plato had omitted ; — specimens, namely, of the trivial cases where the divine warning saved the philosopher from some momentary mishap. Of this sort I can find one only ; and that is merely a tradition, given in Plutarch's essay De Genio Socratis. Socrates, according to this story (which Plutarch puts into the mouth of a supposed eye-witness), is walking and talking with Euthyphron, but stops suddenly, and calls his friends to turn back by another street. Most of them follow him, but others keep on their way, and presently meet a great herd of swine who knock down some of them and befoul the rest. "Charillus" (who had thus braved Socrates' warning) "returned home with legs and clothes all full of mire, — so that we all remembered Socrates' familiar spirit, with roars of laughter, marvelling how the Divinity had care of him continually."

One more remark. Among the most singular incidents in Socrates' life were those pauses of immobility, frequently lasting for hours, and once, as reported, for a consecutive day and night, when he was inaccessible to any outward stimulus, and remained fixed as in a deep contemplation. Medical readers have seen that there must have been more than mere contemplation here ; and Le"lut has treated these accesses as a kind of stupor attonitus — of bewildered paralysis of all intellectual operation, such as is seen in minds overbalanced by some terrible shock. I cannot accept the parallel, nor believe that symptoms so grave can supervene in robust health and disappear without leaving a trace behind. Nor, again, is there anything which suggests epilepsy. I believe the accesses to have been accesses of ecstasy, reached, as in some rare cases, without any previous hysterical disturbance ; and indicating (as I hold) a subliminal self, so powerful and

ioo CHAPTER VIII [815

so near the surface that some slight accident sufficed to determine its temporary predominance over the whole man.

But I must now leave the story of Socrates, rich in unworked psychological suggestion, but cited here only as an example of wise automatism ; of the possibility that the messages which are conveyed to the supraliminal mind from subliminal strata of the personality, — whether as sounds, as sights, or as movements, — may sometimes come from far beneath the realm of dream and confusion, — from some self whose monitions convey to us a wisdom profounder than we know.

815. The case, assuredly, is a marked one ; but it may be thought to be too exceptional for the purpose of my argument. Socrates, it may be said, was too strangely above ordinary men to allow us to draw wider inferences from this unique example. It might be well if we could add a case not complicated by such towering genius ; — a case where some one with no previously manifested gifts of nature, with no incomprehensible workings of the soul, had, nevertheless, by monitory voices been taught wisdom and raised to honour, — and who, if so it might be, had testified to the reality of the inward message by some witness which the world could not gainsay. And such a case there is ; there is a figure in history unique and marvellous, but marvellous in this point alone. One there has been who was born with no opportunities of education, and in no high or powerful place, but to whom voices came from childhood onwards, and brought at length a strange command ; — one who by mere obedience to that monitory call rose to be the saviour of a great nation ; — one to whose lot it fell to push that obedience to its limit, and to pledge life for truth ; to perish at the stake rather than disown those voices or disobey that inward law.

I speak, of course, of Joan of Arc, the Maid of Orleans, the national heroine of France ; whose name crowns the poet's list of those famous women of old time who have vanished like " the snows of yester-year."

" La royne blanche comme ung lys Qui chantoit a voix de sereine, Berthe au grant pied, Bietris, Allys, Haremboures qui tint le Mayne, Et Jehanne la bonne Lorraine Qu' Anglois bruslerent a Rouen, Oil sont-ilz, Vierge souveraine ? Mais ou sont les neiges d'antan ? "

I must be excused for dwelling on this signal example ; for I believe that only now, with the comprehension which we are gradually gaining of the possibility of an impulse from the mind's deeper strata which is so far from madness that it is wiser than our sanity itself, — only now, I repeat, can we understand aright that familiar story. I shall not repeat its incidents in detail ; but shall draw my citations from the most trustworthy source, namely, Joan's evidence, given in 1431, before Cauchon,

815] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 101

Bishop of Beauvais, and the other ecclesiastics who ultimately condemned her to be burnt alive.1 The condemnation was based on her own admissions ; and the Latin proces-verbal still exists, and was published from the MS. by M. Quicherat, 1841-9, for the French Historical Society. Joan, like Socrates, was condemned mainly on the ground, or at least on the pretext, of her monitory voices : and her Apology remarkably resembles his, in its resolute insistence on the truth of the very phenomena which were being used to destroy her. Her answers are clear and self-consistent, and seem to have been little, if at all, distorted by the recorder. Few pieces of history so remote as this can be so accurately known.

On the other hand, the Proces de Rehabilitation, held some twenty years after Joan's death, when memories had weakened and legend had begun to grow, is of little value as evidence. Joan's credit must rest entirely on that testimony on the strength of which she was condemned to death.

Fortunately for our purpose, her inquisitors asked her many questions as to her voices and visions ; and her answers enable us to give a pretty full analysis of the phenomena which concern us.

I. The voices do not begin with the summons to fight for France. Joan heard them first at thirteen years of age, — as with Socrates also the voice began in childhood. The first command consisted of nothing more surprising than that "she was to be a good girl, and go often to church." After this the voice — as in the case of Socrates — intervened frequently, and on trivial occasions.

II. The voice was accompanied at first by a light, and sometimes afterwards by figures of saints, who appeared to speak, and whom Joan appears to have both seen and felt as clearly as though they had been living persons. But here there is some obscurity ; and Michelet thinks that on one occasion the Maid was tricked by the courtiers for political ends. For she asserted (apparently without contradiction) that several persons, including the Archbishop of Rheims, as well as herself, had seen an angel bringing to the King a material crown.2

III. The voices came mainly when she was awake, but also sometimes roused her from sleep ; a phenomenon often observed in our cases of " veridical hallucination." " Ipsa dormiebat, et vox excitabat earn." (Quicherat, i., p. 62.)

IV. The voice was not always fully intelligible (especially if she was half awake) ; — in this respect again resembling some of our recorded cases, both visual and auditory, where, on the view taken in Phantasms of the Living, the externalisation has been incomplete. " Vox dixit aliqua, sed non omnia intellexit." (Quicherat, i., p. 62.)

V. The predictions of the voice, so far as stated, were mainly fulfilled ;

1 For other authorities see Mr. Andrew Lang's paper in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 198-212, from which I quote in 815 A.

2 On this point, see Mr. Lang in 815 A.

viz., that the siege of Orleans would be raised ; that Charles VII. would be crowned at Rheims ; that she herself would be wounded ; but the prediction that there would be a great victory over*the English within seven years was not fulfilled in any exact way, although the English continued to lose ground. In short, about so much was fulfilled as an ardent selfdevoted mind might have anticipated; much indeed that might have seemed irrational to ordinary observers, but nothing which actually needed a definite prophetic power. Here, again, we are reminded of the general character of the monitions of Socrates. And yet in Joan's case, more probably than in the case of Socrates, there may have been one singular exception to this general rule. She knew by monition that there was a sword "retro altare " — somewhere behind the altar — in the Church of St. Catherine of Fierbois. " Scivit ipsum ibi esse per voces " : — she sent for it, nothing doubting, and it was found and given to her. This was an unique incident in her career. Her judges asked whether she had not once found a cup, and a missing priest, by help of similar monitions, but this she denied ; and it is remarkable that no serious attempt was made either to show that she had claimed this clairvoyant power habitually, or, on the other hand, to invalidate the one instance of it which she did in effect claim. It would be absurd to cite the alleged discovery of the sword as in itself affording a proof of clairvoyance, any more than Socrates' alleged intimation of the approaching herd of swine. But when we are considering monitions given in more recent times it will be well to remember that it is in this direction that some supernormal extension of knowledge seems [possibly traceable.

And, lastly, it must be observed that among all the messages thus given to Joan of Arc, there does not seem to have been one which fell short of the purest heroism. They were such commands as were best suited to draw forth from her who heard them the extreme of force, intelligence, virtue, of which she had the potency at her birth. What better can we desire as the guide of life ?

We need not assume that the voices which she heard were the offspring of any mind but her own, any more than we need assume that the figures in which her brave and pious impulses sometimes took external form were veritable saints, — the crowned St. Margaret and the crowned St. Catherine and Michael in the armoury of Heaven.

Yet, on the other hand, we have no right to class Joan's monitions, any more than those of Socrates, as an incipient madness. To be sane, after all, is to be adjusted to our environment, to be capable of coping with the facts around us. Tried by this test, it is Socrates and Joan who should be our types of sanity ; their difference from ourselves lying rather in the fact that they were better able to employ their own whole being, and received a clearer inspiration from the monitory soul within.

I have dwelt at some length on these two cases, far more remote in date than those to which it is our custom to appeal. But this has been

817] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 103

because I held it essential to make my reader understand that the grotesque and trivial messages or monitions, with which in this inquiry we habitually deal, are not to be taken as covering the whole field of automatic action. Before we proceed to consider the question as to the action of minds external to the automatist's own, we ought at any rate to recognise that words given in these strange ways may in themselves be worth hearing, — that not the mechanism only but the content of automatic messages may sometimes deserve our close and serious attention.

816. The cases of Socrates and of Joan of Arc, on which I have just dwelt, might (as I have said) with almost equal fitness have been introduced at certain other points of my discussion. At first sight, at any rate, they appear rather like sensory than like motor automatisms, — like hallucinations of hearing rather than like the motor impulses which we are now about to study. Each case, however, approaches motor automatism in a special way.

In the case of Socrates the " sign " seems to have been not so much a definite voice as a sense of inhibition. In the case of Joan of Arc the voices were definite enough, but they were accompanied — as such voices sometimes are, but sometimes are not — with an overmastering impulse to act in obedience to them. These are, I may say, palmary cases of inhibition and of impulse : and inhibition and impulse are at the very root of motor phenomena.

If to this quality we add their historical priority and their intrinsic dignity, ennobling in advance the series of petty incidents of similar type with which we must soon deal, I think that sufficient reason may have been given for the position assigned to them. Furthermore, and partly by reason of that very dignity, they show at once the furthest extent of the claim that can be made for the agency of the subliminal self, apart from any external influence, — apart from telepathy from the living, or possession by the departed.

Each of those other hypotheses will claim its own group of cases ; but we must not invoke them until the resources of subliminal wisdom are manifestly overtaxed.

817. These two famous cases, then, have launched us on our subject in the stress of a twofold difficulty in logical arrangement. We cannot always answer these primary questions, Is the subliminal impulse sensory or motor? is it originated in the automatist's own mind, or in some mind external to him?

In the first place, we must reflect that, if the subliminal self really possesses that profound power over the organism with which I have credited it, we may expect that its "messages" will sometimes express themselves in the form of deep organic modifications — of changes in the vaso-motor, the circulatory, the respiratory systems. Such phenomena are likely to be less noted or remembered as coincidental, from their very indefiniteness, as compared, for instance, with a phantasmal appearance ; but we have

' records of various telepathic cases of deep ccenesthetic disturbance, of a profound malaise which must, one would think, have involved some unusual t condition of the viscera. In Gurney's collection of " emotional and motor effects " (Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. chap, vii.), we find such phrases as "a cloud of calamity which was almost a physical feeling," "deep depression," "a dreadful feeling of illness and faintness, and I felt that I was dying," " dreadful trembling'with prostration," " trembling, with no apparent cause whatever," "conviction that I should die that night," and so forth. And we have, moreover, the definite vaso-motor phenomenon of sudden weeping, which in one case (op. cit., p. 275) is described as "hysterics " by a lady who " never experienced a similar feeling." This attack corresponded exactly with the sudden death of a father at a distance. We must hardly press her phrase as implying more than a sudden, uncontrollable unmotived fit of weeping, though it would, of course, be specially interesting if we could find definite hysterical symptoms originated by a telepathic shock. Another informant (p. 277) speaks of an " extraordinary state of depression and restlessness ; . . . a violent fit of weeping, a thing absolutely alien to my character," as coinciding with the sudden illness and delirium of a distant husband.

In other cases, too, where the telepathic impression has ultimately assumed a definite sensory form, as in the narratives included in Chapters VI. and VII., some organic or emotional phenomena have been noted, being perhaps the first effects of the telepathic impact, whether from the living or from the dead. In the case of Dr. N., for instance, which I give in 817 A, we have first an emotion, then a sense of locality, and lastly, an identification with a particular person.

I follow this case with Appendices 817 B and C containing two cases (Mrs. Hadselle's) where the motor effect produced was the important part of the experience, but which show in intimate connection general malaise, motor impulse, and auditory hallucination. And I add, in 817 D, an experience of Lady de Vesci's, who described to me in conversation a similar malaise, defining itself into the urgent need of definite action — namely, the despatch of a telegram to a friend who was in fact then dying at the other side of the world. Such an impulse had one only parallel in her experience, which also was telepathic in a similar way.

Similar sensory disturbances are sometimes reported in connection with an important form of motor automatism, — that of "dowsing" or discovering water by means of the movement of a rod held in the hands of the automatist, — already treated of in vol. i., 541 A and B.

818. A small group of cases may naturally be mentioned here.

From two different points of view they stand for the most part at the

entrance of our subject. I speak of motor inhibitions, prompted at first

* by subliminal memory, or by subliminal hypersesthesia, but merging into

telaesthesia or telepathy. Inhibitions — sudden arrests or incapacities of

action — (more or less of the Socratic type) — form a simple, almost rudi-

819] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 105

mentary, type of motor automatisms. And an inhibition — a sudden check on action of this kind — will be a natural way in which a strong but obscure impression will work itself out. Such an impression, for instance, is that of alarm, suggested by some vague sound or odour which is only subliminally perceived. And thus in this series of motor automatisms, just as in our series of dreams, or in our series of sensory automatisms, we shall find ourselves beginning with cases where the subliminal self merely shows some slight extension of memory or of sensory perception, — and shall thence pass insensibly to cases where no " cryptomnesia " will explain the facts known in the past, and no hyperaesthesia will explain the facts discerned in the present.

I will begin with a form of inhibition parallel in its triviality to the pinfinding or muscle-reading experiments already mentioned. We may most of us have observed that if we perform any small action to which there are objections, which we have once known but which have altogether passed from our minds, we are apt to perform it in a hesitating, inefficient way. The observer whose account I subjoin in 818 A — a lady specially susceptible to subliminal impressions, and specially prompt in selfanalysis (Mrs. Verrall) — has observed that the existence of a forgotten memory (so to term it) may actually neutralise purposive muscular adjustments.

Parallel to this trivial case of inability to grasp an unneeded envelope is a case of sudden check from throwing into the fire a bundle of banknotes mistaken for useless papers (818 B).

819. Trivial, again, yet so promptly observed that its very triviality has significance, is the following experience of sudden inhibition mixed with corresponding impulse — the walk unconsciously arrested, the eyes bent on the ground for a reason not at first comprehended by the supraliminal self. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 415.)

LECKHAMPTON HOUSE, CAMBRIDGE, September 14^, 1895.

Yesterday morning (September I3th, 1895), just after breakfast, I was strolling alone along one of the garden paths of Leckhampton House, repeating aloud to myself the verses of a poem. I became temporarily oblivious to my garden surroundings, and regained my consciousness of them suddenly to find myself brought to a stand, in a stooping position, gazing intently at a fiveleaved clover. On careful examination I found about a dozen specimens of five-leaved clover as well as several specimens of four-leaved clover, all of which probably came from the same root. Several years ago I was interested in getting extra-leaved clovers, but I have not for years made any active search for them, though occasionally my conscious attention, as I walked along, has been given to appearances of four-leaved clover which proved on examination to be deceptive. The peculiarity of yesterday's " find " was that I discovered myself, with a sort of shock, standing still and stooping down, and afterwards realised that a five-leaved clover was directly under my eyes. I plucked some of the specimens, and showed them at once to Mr. and Mrs. Myers, and

io6 CHAPTER VIII [820

explained how I had happened to find them. Clover plants were thickly clustered in the neighbourhood, but I failed on looking to find any other specimens. The incident naturally suggests the arresting of my subliminal attention.

R. HODGSON.

Compare with this Dr. Guebhard's case (see 819 A) of sudden perception of a bifid fern, where the careless sweep of the eye seems to have been arrested by a similar subliminal call.

820. Similarly there are cases where some sudden muscular impulse or inhibition has probably depended on a subliminal perception or interpretation of a sound which had not reached the supraliminal attention. For instance, two friends walking together along a street in a storm just evade by sudden movements a falling mass of masonry. Each thinks that he has received some monition of the fall ; each asserting that he heard no noise whatever to warn him. Here is an instance where subliminal perception may have been slightly quicker and more delicate than supraliminal ; and may have warned them just in time.

In the next case1 (quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 416) there may have been some subliminal hyperaesthesia of hearing which dimly warned Mr. Wyman of the approach of the extra train.

Mr. Wm. H. Wyman writes to the Editor of the Arena as follows : —

DUNKIRK, N.Y., June 26th, 1891.

Some years ago my brother was employed and had charge as conductor and engineer of a working train on the Lake Shore and Michigan Southern Railway, running between Buffalo and Erie, which passes through this city (Dunkirk, N.Y.). I often went with him to the Grave Bank, where he had his headquarters, and returned on his train with him. On one occasion I was with him, and after the train of cars was loaded, we went together to the telegraph office to see if there were any orders, and to find out if the trains were on time, as he had to keep out of the way of all regular trains. After looking over the train reports and finding them all on time, we started for Buffalo. As we approached near Westfield Station, running about 12 miles per hour, and when within about one mile of a long curve in the line, my brother all of a sudden shut off the steam, and quickly stepping over to the fireman's side of the engine, he looked out of the cab window, and then to the rear of his train to see if there was anything the matter with either. Not discovering anything wrong, he stopped and put on steam, but almost immediately again shut it off and gave the signal for breaks and stopped. After inspecting the engine and train and finding nothing wrong, he seemed very much excited, and for a short time he acted as if he did not know where he was or what to do. I asked what was the matter. He replied that he did not know, when, after looking at his watch and orders, he said that he felt that there was some trouble on the line of the road. I suggested that he had better run his train to the station and find out. He then ordered his flagman with his flag to go ahead around the curve, which was just ahead of us, and he would follow with the train. The

1 For a somewhat similar case, possibly due to hyperaesthesia of hearing, see American Journal of Psychology, vol. iii. p. 435 (September 1890).

821] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 107

flagman started and had just time to flag an extra express train, with the General Superintendent and others on board, coming full forty miles per hour. The Superintendent inquired what he was doing there, and if he did not receive orders to keep out of the way of the extra. My brother told him that he had not received orders and did not know of any extra train coming ; that we had both examined the train reports before leaving the station. The train then backed to the station, where it was found that no orders had been given. The train despatcher was at once discharged from the road, and from that time to this both my brother and myself are unable to account for his stopping the train as he did. I consider it quite a mystery, and cannot give or find any intelligent reason for it. Can you suggest any ? The above is true and correct in every particular.

In subsequent letters to Dr. Hodgson Mr. Wyman writes : —

My brother died some three years ago.

The incident occurred about the year 1873.

I was not connected with the road or train at the time ; I was employed on the New York, Lake Erie, and Western R. R., at Dunkirk. The flagman is now, or was a short time ago, living in Denver, Colorado; his statement can be obtained if desirable.

The Superintendent died in Germany about two years ago.

In a subsequent letter Mr. Wyman adds : " I traced Mr. James Conway [the flagman] to Colorado, and learned from his son that he died March 16, 1888. [Letter sent herewith.]"

Mrs. Wyman, widow of the percipient, writes : —

JERSEY CITY, September 16, 1893.

MR. HODGSON, — SIR, — I -received your letter asking me for statements in regard to Mr. Wyman's experience. I don't think I could tell any of the circumstances. I only recollect hearing him say he was singularly and deeply impressed that something was wrong, and he obeyed the impulse and stopped the train just in season of time to prevent an accident, and it left a deep impression on his mind ever after, as he often spoke of it and wondered why and what it was. — Yours respectfully, L. A. WYMAN.

821. Here, again, is an averted railway accident, where smell may possibly have played some part.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 419.) The following letter was received by Dr. Hodgson in confirmation of an account in a newspaper, concordant with Mr. Stewart's account given later.

BALTIMORE AND OHIO RAILROAD COMPANY,

August 14, 1893, GARRETT, IND.

Yours of August loth received. Must say, the story as printed in many of the newspapers of our country, regarding the train being saved by a premonition, or warning, given me, was true as printed. The fireman I then had, since became an engineer, and was killed in an accident on a railroad in Iowa two years since. The conductor who was with me at the time you refer to is running passenger train on the Mackinaw road. I do not know his address,

io8 CHAPTER VIII [822

but his father, a minister of the gospel, and his brother, Dr. Charles Stewart, are residents of this city. A letter addressed to Mr. Joseph Stewart, care of Dr. Charles Stewart, Garrett, Ind., would reach my conductor.

Yes, sir, I have had an experience of similar nature since the occurrence you refer to. Had a warning from the same source, and by obeying it I saved what otherwise, without obeying the warning, must have been a most dreadful accident, and must have resulted in the entire destruction of my train, with the lives of many, if not all the persons on board. I am not a Spiritualist, do not believe in so-called Spiritualism, but do believe that the living are often visited, often warned of danger, and often comforted in times of affliction, by the spirits of departed loved ones. ... C. W. MOSES.

BATTLE CREEK, MICH., August 28, 1893.

RICHARD HODGSON, ESQ.,— DEAR SIR,— Your request received, and will, as far as memory serves, give a correct statement as to the incident referred to.

Train No. 2, of the B. and O. R. R., due in Chicago at 6.20 A.M., Sunday, in the month of August 1883 (have forgotten exact date), was on time, running at about thirty-five miles an hour. On approaching Salt Creek Trestle Work, about forty miles east of Chicago, the engineer, Mr. C. W. Moses, felt that something that he could not define compelled him to stop before attempting to cross over. He applied the air and came to a full stop at the approach. I occupied front seat in smoker, it being the second car from engine. The time was about 4.30 A.M. I immediately went forward and joined the engineer where we found thirty feet of the woodwork burned, the rails being held to place by charred stringers. We went across, by climbing down and up the bank on the other side, and woke up the watchman who was employed to look after the bridge, who, on seeing us and the condition of things in general, took to his heels and is running still, as far as I know. I would say that in more than a score of years engaged in railroad work, that was the most narrow escape I ever experienced ; for undoubtedly, with a fall of thirty feet and the length of over a hundred, we would not only have been disabled, but burned.

Now you especially ask as to what impelled Mr. Moses in his action. He only stated to me at the time that something especially pressing on him told him he should stop, and he acted on the impulse. There had been fires all along the side of track at other points, but he paid no attention to them.

In conclusion, I see some newspaper man got hold of the incident as late as last June, and attempted to make Mr. Moses say that the spirit of a sainted mother took hold of him. Well, Mr. Moses is an upright and truthful, old, reliable engineer, and owing to his great advance in years at this late date may have intimated as much, but nothing was said about the old lady at the time ; that I vouch for. . . .

I. J. STEWART, Conductor C. J. and M. R. R. [Formerly of the B. and O. R. R.]

In another case again (given in 821 A) some subliminal sense of smell may be conjectured.

822. In the next case (it comes from a good observer) some warning may have been received from the closer smell of slimy water ; — or perhaps

822] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 109

from a vague difference in the look of the darkness, or even in the resistance of the air. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 422.)

October 30^, 1892.

DR. HODGSON, — DEAR SIR, — I send you an account of an incident in which, I think, my life was saved by my obedience to an impulse arising from nothing within my conscious knowledge or perception.

Some years ago, I landed in Stillwater, Minn., from a steamboat on which I had come down the St. Croix River. The boat was a small, local affair, and no conveyances came to meet it. I was, I believe, the only passenger on board when we reached Stillwater, and there I was left to make my way alone to the hotel. We landed at about 9 P.M. of a starless night, and in the shadow of a warehouse which cut off the lights of the town ; the hour, the clouded sky, and the shadow of the warehouse, uniting to make the dock extremely dark.

I had been in Stillwater once before, and had a general idea of the topography of the town, although some years had passed since my previous visit, and I am quite certain that I had never passed over this particular locality.

As I left the boat I saw the lights of the bridge at some distance on my left, and knowing the bridge to be at the foot of the principal street, on which stood the hotel where I intended to put up, I naturally commenced to walk along the dock in that direction. I had gone but a very short distance, when I suddenly felt so strong an impulse to turn and go the other way that I instantly obeyed. I saw nothing, heard nothing; I did not even have an impression of danger, though I did have a feeling that it must be in someway better to turn.

I distinctly remember that my reason protested, and berated me for a fool in taking a roundabout way to my destination when the straight way lay before me, with the added prospect of losing myself in the railway yards, with perhaps a ten-feet fence to climb. I laughed aloud, and articulated, or at least, mentally formed the words, " You fool ! What are you doing this for?" However, my impulse proved stronger than my reason. I persisted in " going round Robin Hood's barn," reached my hotel, and there the matter passed from my mind.

The next day I casually came to the same place, and discovered that I had turned within a few feet of a spot where the dock was cut away into an incline for hauling freight up into the warehouse. This incline was so steep that a person could have kept his footing on it only by great care. If I had unexpectedly stepped down on to it in the darkness, I should certainly have lost my footing, and should have slipped into the river ; and as I am but a feeble swimmer under the most favourable circumstances, and was encumbered with a fall overcoat and a rather heavy satchel, I should just as certainly have been drowned.

The value of the incident lies in the fact, for which you must take my word, that I am not an impulsive and changeable person, but rather logical and persistent. My action was entirely contrary to my nature, and the unavailing protest of my reason against what appeared to me an inconsequent and absurd proceeding convinces me either that I was influenced by some intelligence entirely without, or that my " Subliminal Self " perceived and acted upon what my " Supraliminal Self" could not see.

I have never had any other supernormal experiences.

MARSHALL WAIT.

no CHAPTER VIII [823

823. Tactile sensibility, again, must be carefully allowed for. The sense of varying resistance in the air, to which I just now alluded, may reach in some seeing persons, as well as in the blind, a high degree of acuteness. It is perhaps possible that even the interposition of a chair in a narrow passage might thus make itself felt. But Mr. W. (a good witness and well known to Dr. Hodgson) has had (as we shall see later on in 873) other experiences where supernormal influences seemed plainly indicated. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 423.)

STATE OF NEW YORK, December 2&th, 1893.

DR. HODGSON, — DEAR SIR, — In compliance with your request to write out an account of my chair experience, which I described to you when here, I submit the following : —

My office consists of three rooms, and the library in the back one is reached by passing through the full length of the other two. The middle room is rather narrow, and well filled on both sides with furniture, leaving a rather narrow passage through the room lengthwise, particularly at a point about the middle of the room, where the passage is only three feet wide. This passage was very naturally kept free from obstructions, but on the occasion of which I am about to speak, some one, probably the janitor when he came in to see to the fires soon after the office was closed for the day, had placed a chair in this narrow passage, so that any one who should attempt to pass through the room would be certain to fall over it, if dark. I think it was about the last days of December 1892. I recollect the days were very short. I had left the office for the day with the passage free. I visit the office occasionally evenings, but not often. On this occasion during the evening, when it was very dark, I visited the office alone. I unlocked the outside door, walked through the first room, stopping at the door that leads to the second or middle room, to get a match from the safe hanging on the door casing with which to light a lamp in the library, where I wished to get something. I was in a very great hurry, and walked very rapidly; after taking the match from the safe, I started at a very rapid pace to go through this narrow passage and into the library. It was very dark, none of the objects in the room were visible, but as I was very familiar with the place, I did not hesitate. I had proceeded six or eight feet in this rapid manner, when suddenly I saw a bright, yellow light lighting up very plainly the back of the chair which was in the passage. The light was confined to the chair, and at the same time I stopped short. The stopping was quite involuntary on my part. The light lasted for but a second, but it had showed me the chair distinctly, especially the carving on the back of the chair.

Immediately it occurred to me to discover the origin of the light, if possible, so, before proceeding to get a light or to leave the room, I approached the chair again in a similar manner, but no light appeared, and I experienced no check. I also looked very carefully for the origin of the light, but could discover none. There was no light anywhere near, and even had there been, I am at a loss to see how it could have shone into the centre of this room, and the difficulty is still further increased by the fact that it shone only in one place, and even there the light was of a somewhat different colour and appearance from ordinary artificial light.

After satisfying myself that there was no light anywhere that could have produced it, I went into the library and got a lamp and made an examination..

824] MOTOR AUTOMATISM in

The chair was in the passage in the most dangerous part ; otherwise the room was in its usual condition. I should also state that at one end of this room there was a. coal stove, with a fire in it of hard coal. It was burning very low, and was ashed over. I examined it before I got a lamp, and I am confident that no light of any kind proceeded from it.

As to my sudden stop. The stop and the light were simultaneous. I hardly think the light unaided caused me to stop; it undoubtedly prevented me from starting after I had stopped. I fully believe I should have sustained a heavy fall, but for the light and the stop. W.

p,S. — When I mention that the colour of the light appeared different, I mean that it did not look as a light reflected from or shining from a distance on to a spot would — // was more like looking directly at a light.

See also a case given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 345, where a lady hurrying up to the door of a lift, is stopped by seeing the figure of a man standing in front of it, and then finds that the door is open, leaving the well exposed, so that she would probably have fallen down it, if she had not been checked by the apparition.

824. And now I give a case of sudden motor inhibition where no warning can well have been received from hyperaesthetic sensation. We have come, it seems, to telaesthesia or to spirit guardianship.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 459.)

Four years ago, I made arrangements with my nephew, John W. Parsons, to go to my office after supper to investigate a case. We walked along together, both fully determined to go up into the office, but just as I stepped upon the door sill of the drug store, in which my office was situated, some invisible influence stopped me instantly. I was much surprised, felt like I was almost dazed, the influence was so strong, almost like a blow, I felt like I could not make another step. I said to my nephew, " John, I do not feel like going into the office now; you go and read Flint and Aitken on the subject." He went, lighted the lamp, took off his hat, and just as he was reaching for a book the report of a large pistol was heard. The ball entered the window near where he was standing, passed near to and over his head, struck the wall and fell to the floor. Had I been standing where he was, I would have been killed, as I am much taller than he. The pistol was fired by a man who had an old grudge against me, and had secreted himself in a vacant house near by to assassinate me.

This impression was unlike any that I ever had before. All my former impressions were slow in their development, grew stronger and stronger, until the maximum was reached. I did not feel that I was in any danger, and could not understand what the strong impression meant. The fellow was drunk, had been drinking for two weeks. If my system had been in a different condition — I had just eaten supper — I think I would have received along with the impression some knowledge of the character of the danger, and would have prevented my nephew from going into the office.

I am fully satisfied that the invisible and unknown intelligence did the best that could have been done, under the circumstances, to save us from harm.

D. J. PARSONS, M.D., Sweet Springs, Mo.

(The above account was received in a letter from Dr. D. J. Parsons, dated December \$th, \ 891 . )

Statement of Dr. J. W. PARSONS.

About four years ago my uncle, Dr. D. J. Parsons, and I were going to supper, when a man halted us and expressed a desire for medical advice. My uncle requested him to call the next morning, and as we walked along he said the case was a bad one and that we would come back after supper and go to the office and examine the authorities on the subject. After supper we returned, walked along together on our way to the office, but just as we reached the door of the drug store he very unexpectedly, to me, stopped suddenly, which caused me to stop too ; we stood there together a few seconds, and he remarked to me that he did not feel like going into the office then, or words to that effect, and told me to go and examine Flint and Aitken. I went, lit the lamp, and just as I was getting a book, a pistol was fired into the office, the ball passing close to my head, struck the east wall, then the north, and fell to the floor.

This 5th day of July, 1891.

JOHN W. PARSONS [Ladonia, Texas].

825. In the next group of cases which I shall cite, we reach a class of massive motor impulses which are almost entirely free from any sensory admixture.

In the first of these, Mr. Garrison left a religious meeting in the evening, and walked eighteen miles under the strong impulse to see his mother, and found her dead. The account is taken from the Journal S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 125.

Mr. Garrison writes : —

GARDNER & GARRISON, Dealers in Fancy and Family Groceries.

OZARK, Mo.,/w/y 2gtky 1896.

MR. RICHARD HODGSON, — DEAR SIR, — Answering your letter of July 1 5th in regard to my experience connected with the death of my mother, I will make the following statement. My mother, Nancy J. Garrison, died on Friday night, October 4th, 1888, at her home three miles north-east of Ozark, Christian County, Missouri. She was fifty-eight years old. I was then living at Fordland, in Webster County, Missouri, about eighteen miles north-east of my mother's home. I had not seen my mother for two months at the time of her death, but had heard from [her] by letter from week to week.

On the night of my mother's death there was a meeting in Fordland, and myself and wife attended the preaching. We had then one child, a baby a year old. The meetings had been going on a week or more. About ten o'clock, just before the meeting closed, while the congregation was singing, I felt the first desire to see my mother. The thought of my mother was suggested by the sight of some of the penitents at the altar, who were very warm and sweating. My mother was subject to smothering spells, and while suffering from these attacks she would perspire freely and we had to fan her. In the faces of the mourners I seemed to see my mother's suffering. And then the impulse to go to her became so strong that I gave the baby to a neighbourwoman and left the church without telling my wife. She was in another part of the house.

The train going west which would have taken me [to] Rogersville, seven miles of the distance to my mother's place, was due at 10.30 P.M., but before

825] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 113

I got home and changed my clothes and returned to the depot, the cars had left the station. I still felt that I must see my mother, and started down the railroad track alone, and walked to Rogersville. Here I left the railroad and walked down the waggon way leading from Marshfield to Ozark, Mo. It was about three o'clock A.M. when I reached my mother's house. I knocked at the door two or three times and got no response. Then I kicked the door, but still made no one hear me. At last I opened the door with my knife and walked in and lighted a lamp. Then my sister, Mrs. Billie Gilley, the only person who had been living with my mother, awoke, and I asked her where mother was. She replied that she was in bed, and I said, " She is dead," for by that time I felt that she could not be alive. She had never failed to wake before when I had entered the room at night.

I went to my mother's bed and put my hand on her forehead. It was cold. She had been dead about three hours, the neighbours thought, from the condition of her body. She had gone to bed about ten o'clock at night, feeling better than usual. She and my sister had talked awhile after going to bed. They were aiming to come to Ozark the next morning, and intended to get up early.

The above facts cover my experience as fully as I can tell the story. I have no explanation for the matter. It is as much a mystery to me now as ever. I could not believe such a strange affair if told by any one else, and yet I could swear to every fact stated. . . . THOMAS B. GARRISON.

OZARK, Mo., August i^tk, 1896.

MR. RICHARD HODGSON, — DEAR SIR, — I send you a statement made by my wife about the death of my mother. . . .

I have not yet been able to get my sister's statement. She lives a few miles out of town. I will get her to tell about the death of mother and my coming home that night when I see her.

After finding that mother was dead I went to three neighbour families right away and had the women come and stay with us till morning. Mrs. Green, Mrs. Walker, and Mrs. Gardner were the women who first heard of mother's death from me. They still live in that neighbourhood, and would confirm my story so far as it relates to my coming to my mother's that night and finding her dead.

Would you like a statement from these women ? I shall be glad to give you all the facts connected with the strange occurrence, for it has been to me a mystery of the greatest perplexity. ... T. B. GARRISON.

Corroborative statements are as follows : —

OZARK, Mo., Aiigust \zth, 1896.

RICHARD HODGSON,— DEAR SIR,— We received your letter asking for a statement from me in regard to the death of my husband's mother.

I remember the occurrence just as my husband has written it. I was very much surprised to find him gone from the church, and more so when I got home to hear he had started seventeen miles after night without saying a word to me, as he never left home even for a few hours without telling me where he was going. My mother (Mrs. Butcher) was at the house. When he started he left word with her telling me he had gone to see his mother, but I could hardly believe it, it being such a strange time to start such a distance. He did not say anything about going to any one except my mother. He has always said he felt as if he must go. ... MINNIE GARRISON.

VOL. II. TT

n4 CHAPTER VIII [825

OZARK, Mo., September itfh, 1896.

MR. R. HODGSON, — Hearing that you were trying to find out the particulars about the remarkable circumstance of Mr. Garrison's experience about the time of his mother's death, I decided to write to you. I was living about 150 yards from Mrs. Garrison at the time, and Mr. Garrison came to our house between three and four that morning to tell us of his mother's death, and we learned the matter then just as it was printed in the newspaper. . . .

MRS. C. C. GREEN.

OZARK, Mo., September i6th, 1896.

... I was living with my son-in-law, Thomas B. Garrison, at the time of his mother's death on October 3rd, 1888.

Garrison and his wife went to church in Fordland, Mo., and I remained at home. About ten o'clock that night T. B. Garrison returned home and said " Ma, I have took a notion to go home, in Christian Co., and see mother." I was surprised at his starting at that hour of the night. I asked him where Minnie was. He said she was at church, and he told me to tell his wife where he was gone when she returned. The above is true. . . .

ELVIRA BUTCHER.

In another case, that of Major Kobbe" (given in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 288), the percipient was prompted to visit a distant cemetery, without any conscious reason, and there found his father, who had, in fact, for certain unexpected reasons, sent to his son, Major Kobbe", a request (accidentally not received) to meet him at that place and hour.

In a third case, Mr. Skirving (see 825 A) was irresistibly compelled to leave his work and go home — why, he knew not — at the moment when his wife was in fact calling for him in the distress of a serious accident. See also a case given in Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 377, where a bricklayer has a sudden impulse to run home, and arrives just in time to save the life of his little boy, who had set himself on fire.

This special sensibility to the motor element in an impulse recalls to us the special susceptibilities to different forms of hallucination or suggestion shown by different hypnotic subjects. Some can be made to see, some to hear, some to act out the conception proposed to them. Dr. B£rillon J has even shown that certain subjects who seem at first quite refractory to hypnotisation are nevertheless at once obedient, even in the waking state, to a motor suggestion. This was the case both with a very strong man, with weak men and women, and with at least one subject actually suffering from locomotor ataxy. Thus the loss of supraliminal motor control over certain muscular combinations may actually lead to motor suggestibility as regards those combinations j just as the loss of supraliminal sensation in some anaesthetic patch may lead to a special subliminal sensitiveness in the very directions where the superficial sensibility has sunk away. On the other hand, a specially well-developed motor control may predispose in a similar way ;— as for instance, the subject who can sing already is

1 Revue de r Hypnotisms, March 1893, p. 268.

825] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 115

more easily made to sing by suggestion. We must, then, await further observations before we can pretend to say beforehand with which automatist the messages will take a sensory, and with which a motor form.

Still less can we explain the special predisposition of each experimenter to one or more of the common kinds of motor automatism — as automatic speech, automatic writing, table movements, raps, and so forth. These forms of messages may themselves be variously combined j and the contents of a message of any one of these kinds may be purely dream-like an(J fantastic, or may be veridical in various ways.

Let us enumerate the modes of subliminal motor message as nearly as we can in order of their increasing specialisation.

1 . We may place first the massive motor impulses (like Mr. Garrison's) which mark a kind of transition between coenesthetic affections and motor impulses proper. There was here no impulse to special movement of any limb ; but an impulse to reach a certain place by ordinary methods.

2. Next, perhaps, in order of specialisation come the simple subliminal muscular impulses which give rise to table-tilting and similar phenomena.

3. Musical execution, subliminally initiated, might theoretically be placed next ; although definite evidence of this is hard to obtain, since the threshold of consciousness with musical performers is notoriously apt to be shifting and indefinite. (" When in doubt, play with your fingers, and not with your head.")

4. Next we may place automatic drawing and painting. This curious group of messages has but seldom a telepathic content, and, as was suggested in Chapter III. (324), is more akin to genius and similar nontelepathic forms of subliminal faculty.1

5. Next comes automatic writing, on which much remains to be said in this chapter.

6. Automatic speech, which would not seem to be per se a more developed form of motor message than automatic script, is often accompanied by profound changes of memory or of personality which raise the question of "inspiration" or "possession "; — for the two words, however different their theological import, mean much the same thing from the standpoint of experimental psychology.

7. I must conclude my list with a class of motor phenomena which I shall here merely record in passing, without attempting any explanation. I allude to raps, and to those telekinetic movements of objects whose real existence is still matter of controversy.

Comparing this list of motor automatisms with the sensory automatisms enumerated in Chapter VI., we shall find a certain general tendency running

1 When the automatic drawings have any telepathic or other supernormal content, they are usually associated with automatic writing. Compare the case of Mr. Cameron Grant, 736 B, and two cases in the experience of Mr. Stainton Moses, that connected with " Blanche Abercromby " (see 949), and the case of the man crushed by a steamroller (see 948 A).

ii6 CHAPTER VIII [826

through each alike. The sensory automatisms began with vague unspecialised sensations. They then passed through a phase of definition, of specialisation on the lines of the known senses. And finally they reached a stage beyond these habitual forms of specialisation : beyond them, as of wider reach, and including in an apparently unanalysable act of perception a completer truth than any of our specialised forms of perception could by itself convey. With motor messages, too, we begin with something of similar vagueness. They, too, develop from modifications of «the percipient's general organic condition, or ccenesthesia ; and the first dim telepathic impulse apparently hesitates between several channels of expression. They then pass through various definitely specialised forms ; and finally, as we shall see when automatic script is considered, they, too, merge into an unanalysable act of cognition in which the motor element of the message has disappeared.

But these motor messages point also in two other even more perplexing directions. They lead, as I have said above, towards the old idea of possession ; — using the word no longer in an unfavourable sense, but simply as an expression for some form of temporary manifestation of some veritably distinct and alien personality through the physical organism of some living man or woman. And they appear to lead also to another class of phenomena in which (just as in "possession") the influence at work, instead of becoming more and more identified with the automatist's conscious thought, appears to become more and more markedly distinguished from it. 1 allude to telekinesis, or hyperboulia, or whatever name we may decide to give to effects apparently exercised in the automatist's presence, but not through his normal agency, upon the physical world.

These two last-named topics, so-called " possession," and so-called " telekinetic phenomena," although unavoidably mentioned here, must be reserved for fuller description in my next chapter. It will be enough for the present to consider motor messages as running parallel to sensory messages; — as covering much the same ground, and presenting the old problems as to their source and initiation in an instructively different light.

826. The subject of automatic writing, to which our argument next leads us, is a creation of the last few decades, and is at present in so rapidly developing a condition that it is not easy to know at what stage of proof or explanation it is here 'best to begin. In calling the subject novel I do not indeed mean to deny that this and similar practices are traceable in many lands and in remote antiquity. But among civilised men, in Europe and America, the phenomenon came first into notice as an element in so-called " modern spiritualism," about the middle of the nineteenth century. It then remained for another generation a kind of plaything or drawing-room amusement ; — planchette being called upon for answers to such questions as "What young lady am I thinking of?" "What horse is going to win the Derby?"

It was in the United States that these sporadic messages were first

826] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 117

developed and systematised. Through the unlettered mind of Andrew Jackson Davis a kind of system of philosophy was given. Through Judge Edmonds many messages of serious import were given, although, as recorded, they contain little evidence to the agency of an external intelligence. The Healing of the Nations was another work of the same general type. But the automatic writings of W. Stainton Moses — about 1870-80 — were perhaps the first continuous series of messages given in England which lifted the subject into a higher plane.1

These writings marked a new departure of most serious moment. Mr. Moses — a man whose statements could not be lightly set aside — claimed for them that they were the direct utterances of departed persons, some of them lately dead, some dead long ago. Such a claim seemed at first too prodigious for belief; and — as will be seen later — it is in fact still under discussion. But Mr. Moses' writings — however to be explained — strongly impressed Edmund Gurney and myself, and added to our desire to work at the subject in as many ways as we could.

It was plain that these writings — which might be of almost immeasurable importance — could not be judged aright without a wide analysis of similar scripts, — without an experimental inquiry into what the human mind, in states of somnambulism or the like, could furnish of written messages, apart from the main stream of consciousness. By his experiments, mentioned in a former chapter, on writing obtained in different stages of hypnotic trance, Gurney acted as the pioneer of a long series of researches which, independently set on foot by Professor Pierre Janet in France, have become of high psychological, and even medical, importance. What is here of prime interest is the indubitable fact that fresh personalities can be artificially and temporarily created, which will write down matter quite alien from the first personality's character, and even matter which the first personality never knew. That matter may consist merely of reminiscences of previous periods when the second personality has been in control. But, nevertheless, if these writings are shown to the primary personality, he will absolutely repudiate their authorship — alleging not only that he has no recollection of writing them, but also that they contain allusions to facts which he never knew. Some of these messages, indeed, although their source is so perfectly well defined — although we know the very moment when the secondary personality which wrote them was called into existence — do certainly look more alien from the automatist in his normal state than many of the messages which claim to come from spirits of lofty type. It is noticeable, moreover, that these manufactured personalities sometimes cling obstinately to their fictitious 'names, and refuse to admit that they are in reality only aspects or portions

1 The automatic messages collected by " Allan Kardec " in the Livre des Esprits and the Livre des Mediums, although in themselves interesting, were not evidential. They seem to have been arbitrarily selected from writings which supplied no proof of supernormal origin.

u8 CHAPTER VIII [827

of the automatist himself. This must be remembered when the persistent claim to some spiritual identity — say Napoleon — is urged as an argument for attributing a series of messages to that special source. There is much else which may be learnt from these self-suggested automatisms ; and the discussions in my earlier chapters refer to several points which should be familiar to all who would seriously analyse the more advanced, more difficult, motor phenomena.

827. And here it must be strongly asserted that, however important it may be to work to the full that preliminary inquiry, it is still more important to collect the richest possible harvest of those more advanced cases. To such collection Mr. Moses' writings acted as a powerful stimulant ; and ever since my first sight of his MSS. I have made it a principal object to get hold of automatic script from trustworthy sources.

During those twenty-seven years I have personally observed at least fifty cases where there was every reason to suppose that the writing was genuinely automatic ; albeit in most of the cases it was uninteresting and non-evidential.

This number is, at any rate, sufficient to enable me to generalise as to the effects of this practice on healthy persons rather less inadequately than writers who generalise from mere hearsay, or from observation of hospital patients.

In two cases I think that the habit of automatic writing (carried on in spite of my warning, by persons over whom I had no influence), may have done some little harm, owing to the obstinate belief of the writers that the obvious trash which they wrote was necessarily true and authoritative. In the remaining cases no apparent harm was done ; nor, so far as I know, was there any ill-health or disturbance in connection with the practice. Several of the writers were persons both physically and mentally above the average level.

My own conclusion is that when the writing is presumptuous or nonsensical, or evades test questions, it should be stopped ; since in that case it is presumably the mere externalisation of a kind of dream-state of the automatist's ; but that when the writing is coherent and straightforward, and especially when some facts unknown to the writer are given as tests of good faith, the practice of automatic writing is harmless, and may lead at any moment to important truth. The persons, in short, who should avoid this experiment are the self-centred and conceited. It is dangerous only to those who are secretly ready — and many are secretly ready — to regard themselves as superior to the rest of mankind.

828. What has now been said may suffice as regards the varieties of mechanism — the different forms of motor automatism — which the messages employ. I shall pass on to consider the contents of the messages, and shall endeavour to classify them according to their apparent sources.

A. In the first place, the message may come from the percipient's own mind; its contents being supplied from the resources of his ordinary

828] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 119

memory, or of his more extensive subliminal memory ; while the dramatisation of the message — its assumption of some other mind as its source — will resemble the dramatisations of dream or of hypnotic trance.

Of course the absence of facts unknown to the writer is not in itself a proof that the message does not come from some other mind. We cannot be sure that other minds, if they can communicate, will always be at the pains to fill their messages with evidential facts. But, equally of course, a message devoid of such facts must not, on the strength of its mere assertions, be claimed as the product of any but the writer's own mind.

B. Next above the motor messages whose content the automatist's own mental resources might supply, we may place the messages whose content seems to be derived telepathically from the mind of some other person still living on earth ; that person being either conscious or unconscious of transmitting the suggestion.

C. Next comes the possibility that the message may emanate from some unembodied intelligence of unknown type — other, at any rate, than the intelligence of the alleged agent. Under this heading come the views which ascribe the messages on the one hand to " elementaries," or even devils, and on the other hand to " guides " or " guardians " of superhuman goodness and wisdom.

I). Finally we have the possibility that the message may be derived, in a more or less direct manner, from the mind of the agent — the departed friend — from whom the communication does actually claim to come.

My main effort has naturally been thus far directed to the proof that there are messages which do not fall into the lowest class, A — in which class most psychologists would still place them all. And I myself — while reserving a certain small portion of the messages for my other classes — do not only admit but assert that the great majority of such communications represent the subliminal workings of the automatist's mind alone. It does not, however, follow that such messages have for us no interest or novelty. On the contrary, they form an instructive, an indispensable transition from psychological introspection of the oldfashioned kind to the bolder methods on whose validity I am anxious to insist. The mind's subliminal action, as thus revealed, differs from the supraliminal in ways which no one anticipated, and which no one can explain. There seem to be subliminal tendencies setting steadily in certain obscure directions, and bearing as little relation to the individual characteristics of the person to the deeps of whose being we have somehow penetrated as profound ocean-currents bear to waves and winds on the surface of the sea.1

1 See Professor James's Psychology, vol. i. p. 394 : " One curious thing about trance utterances is their generic similarity in different individuals. ... It seems exactly as if one author composed more than half of the trance messages, no matter by whom they are

Is this indeed the drift of the Zeitgeist — as Professor James suggests — steady beneath the tossings and tumblings of individual man ? Or is it something independent of age or season? Is there some pattern in the very fabric of our nature which begins to show whenever we scratch the glaze off the stuff?

All this may be better considered hereafter, apart from the evidential discussions with which this chapter must be mainly concerned.

Another point also, of fundamental importance, connected with the powers of the subliminal self, will be better deferred until a later chapter. I have said that a message containing only facts normally known to the automatist must not, on the strength of its mere assertions, be regarded as proceeding from any mind but his own. This seems evident ; but the converse proposition is not equally indisputable. We must not take for granted that a message which does contain facts not normally known to the automatist must therefore come from some mind other than his own. If the subliminal self can acquire supernormal knowledge at all, it may obtain such knowledge by means other than telepathic impressions from other minds. It may assimilate its supernormal nutriment also by a directer process — it may devour it not only cooked but raw. Parallel with the possibilities of reception of such knowledge from the influence of other embodied or disembodied minds lies the possibility of its own clairvoyant perception, or active absorption of some kind, of facts lying indefinitely beyond its supraliminal purview.

829. Now, as I have said, the great majority of the nunciative or message-bearing motor automatisms originate in the automatist's own mind, and do not involve the exercise of telepathy or telsesthesia, or any other supernormal faculty; but they illustrate in various ways the coexistence of the subliminal with the supraliminal self, its wider memory, and its independent intelligence.

I need not here multiply instances of the simpler and commoner forms of this type, and I will merely quote in illustration two short cases recounted by Mr. H. Arthur Smith (author of The Principles of Equity, and a member of the Council of the Society for Psychical Research) who has had the patience to analyse many communications through " Planchette."

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. p. 233.) Mr. Smith and his nephew placed their hands on the Planchette, and a purely fantastic name was given as that of the communicating agency.

