I was so convinced that I had at last detected her in a complete mistake that I arose, and declined proceeding further in the matter, stating that, although her description of the house and the name of the person were correct, in everything connected with the gentleman she had guessed the opposite from the truth.

On the following morning Mr. E. asked me the result of the experiment, and after having related it to him, he gave me the following account : He had found himself unable to sit up to so late an hour, but wishful fairly to test the powers of the clairvoyante, he had ordered his clothes to be stuffed into the form of a figure, and to make the contrast more striking to his natural appearance, had an extra pillow pushed into the clothes so as to form a "corporation." This figure had been placed near the table, in a sitting position, and a glass of brandy and water and the newspapers placed beside it. The name, he further added, was spelt correctly, though up to that time I had been in the habit of writing it " Eglington," instead of as spelt by the clairvoyante, "Eglinton."

573 C. Dr. Alfred Backman, of Kalmar, Sweden, published a paper on " Experiments in Clairvoyance " in Proceedmgs S.P.R., vol, vii. pp. 199-220. His subjects were patients of his own, hypnotised by him for medical treatment, and among them he found a certain number who seemed to possess the clairvoyant faculty. One of the best was Alma Radberg, a maid-servant, aged about twenty-six (the subject of the experiment described in 543 E), and I quote a case that occurred with her. Dr. Backman writes : —

On April 8th, 1890, I received a letter from Dr. F. Kjellman,! of Stockholm,

1 Dr. Backman say.s that all the notes made of the experiments with Dr. Kjellman were sent to the latter before he (Dr. Backman) knew anything about whether they had been successful or not. It is these notes which are reproduced in his paper, without any additions.

573D] TO CHAPTER V 555

in which he asked me to arrange a time at which I should hypnotise Alma, of whom he had heard, and "ask her to find a certain Dr. von B., who was known to her, and describe the room in which he was, the other persons present, the arrangements of the room, &c. Dr. K. had purposely hung something on the chandelier that is not generally there, in order to make the experiment more crucial." In answer to this, I merely sent this telegram, " From one to two to-morrow, in your apartment." No further arrangement was made, and Dr. Kjellman's appearance, as well as his apartment, was quite unknown both to me and the clairvoyant, and also to all the persons present with us. Alma was hypnotised in my house at Kaimar, and the record made of the sitting is as follows : —

April 9th, 1890, at 1.40 p.m. Alma is hypnotised and ordered to go to Stockholm to the apartments of Dr. Kjellman. i. "Is Alma there ? " " No." 2. Question repeated. "Yes." 9. "Is there a chandelier hanging from the ceiling?" "No, no chandelier, something more like a lamp." 10. "Do you see anything particular there?" " Something long and narrow is hanging in the chandelier." 11. "What is it made of, stuff or metal?" "It must be metal, I think, and stuff also." 12. "Have you ever seen such a thing?" " No, I never saw anything like it." 13. "Try to see what it is, or what it is called." (No answer.) 14. " What is it used for ? " " I do not know what it is used for." " Is it anything used by physicians, or an ornament ? " " More like an ornament, larger than a ribbon." 15. "What is it like, what colour is it?" "It is white." 16. "Are there several colours?" " It is also red." 17. "What is the metal like?" "It is white, probably silver." 18. "Are there mountings fixed to the stuff, or stuff on a piece of metal ? " "I think the stuff is wound round a piece of metal." 19. " How long and how broad is it ? " "A quarter of a yard broad, and three-quarters of a yard long." 20. " What kind of stuff is it?" "Probably silk." 21. "Does the stuff belong to the piece of metal? " " No, it is wound round it for the occasion." 22. " What is it generally used for ? " "It ought to stand on a writing-table." 23. " What is the use of it ? " (She does not know.) 24. " Is it fixed to the lamp, or could it be easily taken off ? " " It is not fixed firmly." She cannot possibly tell what is hanging in the chandelier. When awake, she states that she believes it was a pair of scissors for cutting paper, or a paper-knife, that was hanging in the chandelier; and it was probably fixed with a handkerchief. . . .

After having communicated to Dr. Kjellman what Alma had said, I received from him two letters, containing the following information : —

" There was really hanging in the chandelier a large pair of paper-scissors fixed by an india-rubber otoscope, and with a tea-rose and some forget-me-nots in one of the handles of the scissors . . ."

" Her statement that the object was hanging in a lamp, not in a chandelier, was right. It is both a lamp and a chandelier, and the lamp was drawn down a long way under the chandelier. . . ."

573 D. Some good cases of telepathy and telepathic clairvoyance occurring with hypnotised percipients are given in Dr. Fahnestock's Statuvolism (see especially pp. 127-35'^^ PP- 221-32). I quote one of these (from pp. 229-32).

1 I quote only the part of the record relating to the object hung on the chandelier.— F. W. H. M.

[A Mr. had requested some friends of his at Baltimore to place something in a particular place in a certain house, after he had left the city, to test if it could be seen by any of Dr. Fahnestock's clairvoyants at Lancaster.]

Subject : Mrs. E. She had never been in Baltimore in her life, and after she had entered the state, it was necessary, as I was not acquainted with the location of the house, for him to convey her in thought to the appointed place. Having done so, I requested her to describe the room, which she did to his satisfaction ; and as the thing to be looked at was to be at or about the timepiece, I directed her attention to it, and desired her to look whether there was anything about the clock which did not belong to it. She said she saw something dark there, which looked like a bottle, but that she felt as if she were going backwards, and could not keep herself there long enough to see it distinctly. This being the case, and finding that her mind was wandering about the city, I directed her to look about the city, and after I had taken her to the Washington Monument and various other places of interest, I desired her to go back to the clock again, and to go up to it, and to take the article which she before described as being a dark bottle into her hands, and to examine it minutely, so that she could be certain as to what it really was. After having done so, she declared that she now saw it distinctly, and stated that " it was a dark bottle, about the length of her index finger, and was suspended by a white string, tied about its neck, that it was empty, and had no cork.''^

The gentleman left Lancaster for Baltimore the next day, and when he returned he stated that, as he approached the house of his friend in Baltimore, ■where the thing to be looked at was to be placed, he saw his friend at the door, and as he came up to him his friend immediately asked him to tell what he had seen placed near the clock. After he had related the circumstances, and told what the lady said, his friend produced the bottle, which had been suspended at the time agreed upon, and which, to their mutual astonishment, they now saw she had described to the very letter. The gentleman brought the bottle with him to Lancaster, with a piece of the white string still attached, and after it was shown to Mrs. E. she declared that it was the very same which she had seen suspended in Baltimore.

The bottle is of a very dark brown colour, and looks nearly black when not held up between the light and the eye, of a peculiar shape, and not easily mistaken. It is about the length of an index finger, and was empty, and without a cork or stopper.

A purer case of actual clairvoyance could not be desired, because there was no person in the room that knew or had any suspicion of what might be placed there.

Some good instances of apparent clairvoyance or telepathic clairvoyance on the part of a hypnotised subject are also to be found in Somnolism and Psycheisjti, by Joseph W. Haddock, M.D. (London, 185 1).

573 E. From " Facts in Clairvoyance," by Dr. Ashburner {Zoist, vol. vi. pp. 96-110). In the following case the information given by the clairvoyants related to facts which were apparently not known by normal means to any person.

Major Buckley, a well-known mesmerist, brought to Dr. Ashburner's house in London on February 12th, 1848, two young women, A. B. and E. L., whom he had brought from Cheltenham that day. They had often

573E] TO CHAPTER V 557

been mesmerised by him, and Dr. Ashburner wished to investigate their alleged clairvoyant powers. On this first evening only the two subjects, Major Buckley, and Dr. Ashburner were present. The latter writes : —

We assembled in my little library. I had provided myself with a dozen walnut-shells, bought at Grange's in Piccadilly, containing carraway comfits and, as I thought, a motto each, and two ounces of hazel-nut shells containing comfits and printed mottoes. These were in two packets of an ounce each, and had been purchased by me about two hours before at Lawrence's in Oxford Street, at the corner of Marylebone Lane. One of the young women was seated at either side of the fireplace; Major Buckley placed himself at the apex of a triangle, of which they formed the basal angles. He made a few slow passes from his forehead to the pit of his stomach on his own person. The girls said, after he had made eight or ten of these passes, " that they were sufficient." They saw a blue hght upon him, and A. B. having taken up one of the nut-shells provided by me, placed it upon the chimney-piece above her head. E. L. then did the same thing with one of the nut-shells allotted to her. I was fully aware of the objections of sceptics, that a possibility existed of changing these shells by sleight-of-hand. I watched the proceedings anxiously and accurately, to avoid the possibility of being deceived. The movements of these young women were slow and deliberate, not like the hocus-pocus quick jerk of the conjurer. A. B. first announced her readiness to read the motto in her nut-shell. She said that the words were —

" The little sweetmeat here revealed, Lays, as good deeds should lay, concealed."

I wrote down to her dictation, then I cracked the shell, emptied out the comfits, and found among them a little strip of paper, several times folded, on which were printed the very words she had spoken. Remember, reader, she was not asleep ; both the girls were wide awake, and joined in the conversation with Major Buckley and myself in the intervals of the phenomena which they were exhibiting.

Then E. L. read the motto in her hazel-nut shell. It ran thus —

" An honest man may take a knave's advice, But idiots only will be cheated twice."

After I had written this down, and before I opened the shell by the aid of the nut-crackers, she said, " At the top, above the first hne, is part of another motto ; it runs thus —

' Who smiles to see me in despair.'

The word despair is cut close." When the nut-shell was opened and the motto unfolded, the description given by E. L. was found to be quite correct.

A. B. then took another shell, and in a very short time read these words, which I wrote down —

" She's little in size, Has bright speaking eyes, And if you prove true, Will be happy with you."

The shell was broken open, and the words printed on the little slip of folded

paper found among the sweetmeats within were word for word with those written down by me.

E. L. took her turn at reading. The words she read out were —

" In every beholder a rival I view, I ne'er can be equalled in loving of you."

Having written down these words, the shell was opened, and it was found that E. L. had read the motto quite correctly.

The servant announced that Mr. Arnott wished to see me. He had come on professional business, and with no view of witnessing these phenomena. I asked Major Buckley's permission to introduce him. He came in and sat down. A. B. proposed that he should take up a nut-shell from the table, and she offered to read the motto while he held it in his hand. He seemed hardly to be aware of what wonder he was to witness. He took up a nut, held it in his closed hand, and A. B. read thus —

" The pangs of absence, how severe, Have they ne'er waked thy bitter tear ?"

Mr. Arnott took the nut-crackers, broke his nut-shell, and found that A. B. had read quite correctly. His laugh and look of surprise told enough of the conviction of his mind. The event had become a fact. How to account for it was another matter. He could not deny that he had witnessed the fact.

On the next occasion, February 15th, the twelve walnut-shells were used ; the trials were made under the same conditions as before, the walnutshells being held in the hands of the percipient. All the mottoes were read correctly, with the following exception : —

A. B. then read from the fourth of her walnut-shells, and here she made a mistake, attended by some remarkable circumstances. I wrote down her words thus —

" 'Tis love like the sun that gives light to the year. The sweetest of blessings that life can endear."

She added, underneath the printing of this motto is the top part of a capital T and of two small t's. At the commencing side there appears to be half of an N and a small e belonging to another motto. All this was quite true that she added, but she had mistaken the motto, which ran thus —

" My love's too great, you may perceive. And clearly see I don't deceive."

Five further successful trials were made, in which the nut-shells were held in the hands of Dr. Ashburner, or of a visitor, or on the chimneypiece, and about a dozen others are recorded in the rest of the paper.

Other cases, witnessed by the Earl of Stanhope, of the reading of mottoes in nuts by Major Buckley's subjects are given in the Zoist, vol. viii. pp. 265-67. See also Zoist, vol. ix. p. 234, for references to a large number of cases of clairvoyance published in that journal.

573 F. In the Zoist, vol. xii. pp. 249-52, a case of clairvoyance involving some apparent prevision is recorded by the Rev. J. Peed. A Miss A., whom he was hypnotising in Dublin in September 1853 for medical pur-

575A] TO CHAPTER V 559

poses, described in detail, while hypnotised, the lameness of his sister-inlaw, whom she had never seen or heard of, as far as he knew, and advised him to get her own medical man. Dr. E., to treat it. Mr. Peed told Dr. E., and Miss A. repeated her diagnosis to Dr. E. before he had seen the patient ; after examining her, he pronounced it remarkably correct, and proposed an operation. Miss A., on being questioned in the hypnotic condition about the operation, said that it would be a mere trifle, but that the patient would suffer much pain after it, which could be removed by mesmerism ; that the after treatment, in which some surgical machinery must be used, would be tedious and trying ; that in three weeks she would be able to walk downstairs without assistance, but that it would take three months to complete the cure. Mr. Peed states that all these predictions turned out accurately correct ; also that Miss A. showed knowledge of the progress of the cure as it was going on and of what the doctor was prescribing for it. Unfortunately the doctor's own testimony is lacking, and it seems that the prediction was not recorded till a few months after its fulfilment. The clairvoyant's knowledge of contemporary events in this case seems more clearly beyond guesswork than her knowledge of the future.

575 A. The following account of experiments in the efficacy of charms appeared in iht Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 152 : —

. . . The uncivilised Africans, among whom I have spent many years (sixteen), make large use of charms, worn on the person, in cases of illness. Missionaries and traders are at one that they occasionally derive great benefit from this "superstition." ... I was curious to know whether any evidence could be obtained pointing to a probable cause for their effect.

In order to do this I imitated the African, but did my best to exclude the factor of faith. I prepared a " charm," consisting of a few hieroglyphics written on paper. This was wrapped up and sewn into a piece of tape, and tied firmly on the bare arm of the subject of the experiment. It was to be worn night and day for a few days, no time limit being given. I gave the subjects to understand that I was only asking them to assist in an experiment ; that the charm was only paper with writing on it ; that they were not to expect any improvement, but simply to tell me if such happened. If any faith element remained it was against my wish, and must be a quantity resisting all methods of expulsion, even in people of education. Now for the results in detail: (i) Myself, age forty-six. I have, all my life, been subject to some nervous trick or twitching of a muscle; sometimes of the face, the head, the shoulder, &c. This took the form of a peculiar snort from time to time, and I was aware that it must be unpleasant. I therefore tried earnestly to suppress it, but without effect. I wore a charm, and it immediately disappeared. Some few days after I found myself at it again, and found that the charm had slipped from where I could feel it to the elbow. On replacing it the annoyance ceased. The same lapse occurred two or three times, but I always found the charm had slipped. After a few weeks I discontinued its use, and the bad habit has not recommenced.

Another case lately occurring to myself is the following : I have for the last two months been very weak and ill — slight valvular affection of the heart, on

56o APPENDICES [575 A

the occasion I mention accompanied by severe pain in the back and sides. I was visiting my sister, having a rest, but did not seem to improve. One night she tied me a charm on the left arm, and I passed a good night. The following morning a servant said " Good-morning " to me, but made no further remark. She went into the kitchen and said to the cook, " I can't think what has happened to Mr. Phillips ; he looks quite well this morning. I never saw such a change in anybody ! " And I felt well, though weak. I had no pain whatever, and for the first time in many months was not conscious that I had a heart. This freedom from pain has remained for about three weeks, up to the present time. I am hardly ever conscious of pain, but only of weakness, and I feel considerably better on that score.

The next case is Miss G., cook at the establishment of which my sister is matron — the " Convalescent Home," S. Age, say fifty. The kitchen of the place is very hot — 90 to 100 degrees Fahr. every day. Miss G. is sadly overworked, being constantly on her feet in this temperature from 8 a.m to 8 p.m. What wonder that her health gave way and she became a martyr to sick headache ! Scarcely ever a week passed but she had to remain in bed some portion of or all day. I gave her a charm some nine or ten weeks ago, and am not aware that she has been laid up since. She has told me, when visiting, that she has not been so, and that her headaches have been remarkably lessened, though, as she says, nothing will set her up so long as she has to work all day in that excessive temperature. She has actually given notice to leave, and intended to do so for a long time past.

Next case: Mrs. M., age fifty, complained that on trying to open her eyes in the night, or on awakening in the morning, she was obliged to push the eyelids up with her fingers. She seemed to lack the power of opening them. A charm acted " like a charm," and the annoyance ceased.

Miss B. M., ao-e, say twenty-five, complained of chronic cold in the head, remaining persistently for several months. I gave her a charm, and four days afterwards she told me the cold had quite gone. She said, half ashamed to confess her credulity, that she really thought the charm had cured her.

L. H., seventy-eight, chronic sufferer from rheumatism. I gave him a charm, which he, for convenience, wore loosely buttoned round his neck. No result. I told him that he had disobeyed orders, and must wear it round his arm, tightly enough to feel it.

I did not see him for some time, but he told me that, from whatever cause, he had been very free from pain, and had discontinued the charm. He then had a fatiguing journey in Holland, and on his return told me he was going to look for his charm, as he had had a recurrence of the pain. A week or so after he told me he was wearing it ; had no pain ; nothing but weakness from old age to trouble him.

M. H., age, say forty-two, rheumatic; is reported to me to be much the

M. L., age, say forty, troubled with chronic fits of sneezing, is reported entirely free.

Recent case: M.D., age, say fifty, has chronic bronchitis and difficulty of breathing. I gave her w^ charm to wear three days ago, and she says she is very much better.

J. M., age, say fifty-five, has suffered for fifteen years from locomotor ataxy; has insupportable pains, for which reason he often drinks a pint of whisky per day, without any sign of intoxication (so he says). I gave him a charm, which

578 A] TO CHAPTER V 561

he only wore when the pains became violent — not to prevent their attack. He says the thing is a snare and a delusion; it has done him no good.

P. H., aged twenty-one ; has four times had rheumatic fever ; heart affected ; no constitution. He was recovering from last attack, and I gave him a charm, which he immediately lost. He continues to improve.

These are the details of all the experiments I have made, except one of which I have had no report. ... R. C. Phillips.

The Arts Club, Manchester, September 2^th, 1S93.

For a number of instances of the cure of warts by charms, see Journal S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 7—10, 40, 96, 226, and vol. ix; pp. 100, 121, 225.

578 A. The following account of the Lourdes legend was given by me in an article in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 176-82.

Let us begin by examining the three essential factors of the Lourdes story. In a few words, that story is as follows: The Virgin Mary appeared to Bernadette, and in direct consequence of that apparition miraculous cures are performed in and near the same grotto where the divine figure was seen.

Plainly we have three points to look into : (i) What is the evidence that the apparition was really seen, or, if seen, was more than a purely subjective hallucination.'' (2) What is the evidence which connects the apparition with the cures ? (3) What evidence is there of cures so far surpassing the known effects of suggestion and self-suggestion as to demand a special or a miraculous explanation ? On each of these points there is a good deal to say.

(i) The apparition. "On a great tablet of marble," says Dr. Boissarie [in his book, Lourdes'] "magnificently framed, fastened into the rock near the grotto," the following inscription is to be read : —

Dates of the Eighteen apparitions

and words of the Blessed Virgin

in the year of grace 1858.

In the hollow of the rock where her statue is now seen

the Blessed Virgin appeared to Bernadette Soubirous

Eighteen times.

The nth and the 14th of February;

Each day, with two exceptions, from February i8th till March 4th,

March 25th, April 7th, July i6th.

The Blessed Virgin said to the child on February 18th,

" Will you do me the favour (me faire la grace) of coming here daily

for a fortnight ?

I do not promise to make you happy

In this world, but in the next ;

I want many people to come (qu'il vienne du monde)."

The Virgin said to her during the fortnight :

''You will pray for sinners; you will kiss the earth for sinners.

Penitence ! penitence ! penitence !

Go and tell the priests to cause a chapel to be built ;

I want people to come thither in procession. Go and drink of the fountain and wash yourself in it. Go and eat of that grass which is there (de cette herbe qui est Ik)." On March 25th the Virgin said : " I AM THE Immaculate Conception." VOL. I. 2 N

This, then, is the official account of the vision. We will simplify our discussion by waiving all question as to its good faith or accuracy, and accepting it as an exact account of what Bernadette believed that she heard and saw. How, then, should we classify such a narrative, if sent to us in the ordinary course of our collection of evidence ?

Undoubtedly we should regard it as a purely subjective experience. It does not answer any of the tests which we habitually impose on a hallucination which claims to be veridical. The figure was seen by one person only. The apparition did not coincide with any objective event. It did not even — though to this point we must presently return — contain any prediction whose fulfilment could be a retrospective proof of the reality of the message. And — worst of all from an evidential point of view — the figure seen was one which, by the admission, we believe, of the Catholic clergy themselves, has been often reported as seen, mainly by young girls, under circumstances where no objective value whatever could be attributed to the apparition.

It so happens that on this last and very important point we can adduce a significant series of facts. \xx Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vii. p. loo, maybe found a description, written for the S.P.R. by M. Marillier from observation on the spot, of a series of apparitions of the Virgin near Pontinet in the Dordogne. There the Virgin was seen many times by many persons, generally through a special hole in a wall, but sometimes on the open heath. We entirely concurred, however, with M. Marillier in ranking all these visions as purely subjective. . . . And the Bishop of Perigueuxmust obviously have shared this view, for he discouraged the visions at Pontinet, and nothing has come of them-

It is not easy to explain why this long series of mutually corroborative visions should be thus tacitly dropped, while the similar visions of a single uncorroborated child should receive so much attention. Dr. Boissarie makes two points based on the apparition itself, namely, the beauty of the figure and the loftiness of the message. . . .

How, it may be asked, do we know of the extraordinary beauty of the form which Bernadette perceived ? We know this, it appears, from the statement of the sculptor Fabisch, who made a statue of the Virgin which Bernadette regarded as a faithful copy of what she had seen. Of the pose and expression which he had thus faithfully reproduced, Fabisch informs us that " he has seen nothing to equal them in suavity and rapture in the chefs d^ceavreoi the greatest masters — of Perugino or Raphael." It was fortunate that the task was committed to an artist so fully equal to the occasion ; and the less favourable impression made upon one of ourselves by the sight of the statue in the grotto should not, perhaps, be placed in opposition to this decisive judgment of the sculptor himself.

As regards the loftiness of the message, we have less definite guidance. Dr. Boissarie does not tell us whether it is the divine command to kiss the earth for sinners, or the divine command to eat grass, which is manifestly beyond the intelligence of a simple child. He dwells only upon the phrase, " I am the Immaculate Conception ; " and we may indeed admit that this particular mode of reproducing the probably often-heard statement that the Virgin was conceived without sin does indicate a mind which is either supra or ijifra graiiintaticatn. . . .

If, however, we musrt admit that the story of the apparition is not one which could have found a place as evidential in these Proceedings, the same thing cannot be said of another incident, much less noticed, but in itself far more sur-

578 A] TO CHAPTER V 563

prising, in the recorded life of Bernadette. This incident was observed and described by Dr. Dozous — the physician to whose advocacy the credence bestowed on Bernadette, and the consequent fame of Lourdes, seem to have been in the first instance mainly due. Dr. Boissarie quotes from Dr. Dozous' account, but without giving any reference, nor even the name of the work where the citation occurs. We repeat the story, therefore, as Dr. Boissarie gives it (p. 49) :—

"The girl, upon her knees, held in one hand a lighted taper, which rested upon the ground. During her ecstasy she put her hands together, and her lingers were loosely crossed above the flame, which they enveloped in the cavity between the two hands (dans I'espece de voute qui les s^parait). The taper burnt ; the flame showed its point between the fingers and was blown about at the time by a rather strong current of air. But the flame did not seem to produce any alteration in the skin which it touched."

*' Astonished," says Dr. Dozous, " at this strange fact, I did not allow any one to put a stop to it, and taking out my watch I could observe it perfectly for a quarter of an hour."

[He then describes how he examined her hand immediately afterwards, and found no trace of burning on it.]

If Dr. Dozous' story be true, what are we to hold that it proves ? What parallel cases have we with which to compare it.'' The obvious answer is that we have a series of similar occurrences reported in the case of D. D. Home. Home's phenomena of resistance to fire are, in fact, both in themselves more striking and better attested. . . .

The "miracle of the taper," therefore, if truly reported, may show that Bernadette was a "medium," but cannot fairly be used to prove the action of the Virgin Mary. Still less safe would it be to appeal to the ecstasies themselves as proving the divine character of their inspiring cause. Here, again, Mr. Daniel Home also had his ecstasies, controlled by "guides" who were quite as sensitive to human incredulity as better-authorised saints might have been. " Little faith ! " they would exclaim, " little faith ! Will you not trust in Dan ? "

And this brings us to the second point marked out for our discussion. What connection is to be discerned between the visions of Bernadette and the cures subsequently occurring at Lourdes?

In the first place, it may be observed that the original words of the message make no mention whatever of physical healing. On the contrary, the Virgin expressly states that the happiness which she promises is to be enjoyed in the next world, and not in this. What she apparently aims at in this world is worship for herself: "I want people to come," "I want people to come in procession." There was also, indeed, a direction to wash in the stream, and to drink of it, [and to eat the grass growing on its banks]. Whether Bernadette, or any one else, did eat it is not quite clear. And why they were to eat it, why they were to wash in the stream, is still more mysterious. . , . But we need hardly perhaps further analyse the somewhat incoherent message which has since been made to mean so much more than its actual words will carry.

A quarryman of the name of Bourriette, however (Boissarie, p. 99), conceived the idea that the water of the spring in the grotto might with advantage be applied to his eyes, injured by an explosion. The alleged good effects of the water, in this and other cases among the neighbouring peasantry, started the long series of cures with which we shall presently have to deal.

The connection between these cures and the Virgin Mary lies in almost

all cases in the subjective conviction of the sufferer that he will be cured at Lourdes, and that the Virgin's aid will do it. Sometimes, no doubt, his conviction may be reinforced by a dreatn, as when Mustapha, a Mussulman in Constantinople, dreamt that a lady in white told him that she was the Virgin adored by the Georgian Fathers in that city; in whose chapel, in fact, water from Lourdes is distributed gratis. Mustapha's right eye, which he had cotnpUteinent perdu — "lost altogether," was radicalemejit gueri — "completely cured" (we are told) when he awoke, and Dr. Boissarie concludes (p. 237) that " Our Lady of Lourdes seems to have commenced the religious reformation of the East. ..."

We have not in analogous cases considered that subjective evidence of this kind, even when backed up by definite assertions of identity and continuous action on the part of some unseen agent, did really constitute a proof that that agent was at work. We have regarded it as still possible, and even probable, that the effects were produced by self-suggestion, and that the alleged Spirit or Guardian was no more than a form in which the self-suggestion clothed itself.

An excellent account of the religious history and experiences of Bernadette — written from the point of view of a devout Catholic — is J. B. Estrade's Les Apparitions de Lourdes : Souvenirs intinies d'un Tenioin (Tours, 1899). M. Estrade was a resident of Lourdes; he several times witnessed the ecstasies of Bernadette, and personally investigated the whole case with great care. He does not, however, bring forward any evidence to show that the apparitions were veridical, and the account of the burning taper which he gives as quoted from Dr. Dozous is less remarkable than Dr. Boissarie's narrative of the same incident. Bernadette, he says (p. 151), was holding her rosary in her left hand, and in the right a large lighted taper. " Suddenly the right hand, approaching the left, placed the flame of the large taper under the fingers of the latter, which v^^ere so far apart that the flame could easily pass between them. Blown about at the moment by a rather strong current of air, it did not appear to produce any effect on the skin that it touched." This went on for a quarter of an hour, and on examining the hand before Bernadette left the place. Dr. Dozous found no trace of burning on it. M. Estrade states that on another occasion his own sister saw the fingers of Bernadette resting on the flame of a taper.

603 A]



Appendices to Chapter VI

603 A. Since Mr. Galton's well-known work we have become familiar with " number- forms " and other visual schemata of thought, which tend to shape themselves in many minds. These number-forms involve a complex internal visualisation, the mind's eye following their apparently fixed lines and angles ; but they are also sometimes externalised by the subject. Professor Flournoy thus describes the case of M. Yowanovitch, an intelligent student at Geneva.'

M. Y. is an excellent visual, of the geometrical rather than the picturesque type. He has no trace of coloured audition ; but on the other hand possesses well-defined and localised visual schemata for the numerals, the days of the week, the months, &c. His number-form, composed of parallel lines representing the hundreds, occupies the right half of the space in front of him. In the left half floats his diagram of the week in the form of a horizontal rectangular figure divided into seven bands, something like a leaf of ruled paper, floating in the air about a metre from him, opposite his left thigh. Still more to the left, and at the height of his head, is situated his year-form, an ellipse of small eccentricity presented in a nearly vertical plane. Whenever M. Y. thinks of a date of the year, of a day past or future of the current week, or of a number, he perceives it in its proper place on the corresponding schema. I have often had occasion to make him write down rapidly a series of figures at random ; now these figures do not flow of themselves from his pen ; nor are they preceded in him by their auditory, motor, or graphic image ; but he is obliged, in order to write them, to choose them on his number-form as on a picture placed in front of him. For this purpose, he does not look straight at the page over which his pen is travelling, but looks to the side and above the paper in the direction of the internal diagram, which is the central object of his attention. He follows what he is writing only with an indirect vision, like a hurried copyist who lets his hand work of itself and will not lose sight of the page which he has to copy.

It will be observed that this case presents a curious analogy with the " arithmetical prodigies " on whom I dwelt in Chapter III. With some of them there was a kind of mental blackboard on which the figures which

1 Archives des Sciences 'Physiques et Naturelles, vol. xxviii., No. lo, October iSth, 1892, pp. 326-27. Geneva.

were to be added up remained visible as long as needed. But in their case the subliminal self supplied also the calculating facility ; in M. Y.'s case it seems only to have stereotyped the visual framework for common mental operations.

We take one step further in the direction both of the definite character and of the potential externalisation of these subliminal quasi-percepts when we pass — by gradual transitions — from number-forms to audition coloree. A number-form is an association of an image with an idea — presumably as entirely a result of post-natal experience as is my association of my friend's face with his name. And so also indeed audition coloree, — the perception of a definite " imaginary " or " subjective " colour in association with each definite actual sound, — may in some slighter cases be due to post-natal (mainly infantile) experience working upon an innate predisposition. But when the synaesthesiae of which sound-seeing is only the most conspicuous example are found in fuller development ; — when gradated, peremptory, inexplicable associations connect sensations of light and colour with sensations of temperature, smell, taste, muscular resistance, &c., &c. ; — for M. Gruber finds that these links exist in yet unexplored variety ; — then it becomes probable that we are dealing, not with the casual associations of childish experience, but with some reflection or irradiation of specialised sensations which must depend on the connate structure of the brain itself.^ And the degree of precision shown in these entencephalic reflexes, — if I may so term them, — seems to exceed the precision attainable by the voluntary attention of the supraliminal self.

603 B. A striking case, combining both the subliminal intelligence and the visual externalisation, was described by Professor Gruber, of the University of Jassy, Roumania, at the International Congress of Experimental Psychology in London, August 1892. In one self-observer of exceptional endowment, M. Gruber finds that the " chromatisms," as he calls them, — the patches of colour accompanying the audition of particular words, — follow certain definite rules as to size and shape, depending partly on the phonetic, and partly on the intellectual, significance of the word which the subject heard.^ This curious fact would obviously have remained unprovable had there been no possibility of objective measurement. But this possibiUty fortunately exists.

1 This view is consistent with the results of an Enqiiete sur I'audition calorie conducted by Professor Flournoy, from which it appears that of 213 persons presenting these associations only 48 could assign the date of their origin ; and is supported by a case described in the Revue de f Hypnolisme, December 1892, p. 185, where a man who had long exhibited a limited form of audition colorie developed gustation calorie in addition when in a low state of health.

2 For a full description of this case, see the " Report of the International Congress of Experimental Psychology, Second Session, London, 1892," pp. 10-20 (Williams & Norgate, London, 1892).

607 A] TO CHAPTER VI 567

" My subject," says M. Gruber, "has the power of externalising his chromatisms ; he projects them, for instance, upon the opposite wall, at no matter what distance. I chose a distance of three metres, which is that at which his vision is most distinct. I then made a circle of white paper which I supposed to be of the same size as his chromatism of the number doi (two), and bordered it with bright scarlet. He projected his chromatism into this circle. But the circle was, in fact, smaller than his chromatic circle, and a ring of orange was made by the superposition of the subjective yellow of his chromatism upon the objective scarlet. I enlarged the circle. This time he saw a white ring between the objective frame of scarlet and the subjective yellow. At last we got the edges of the chromatism to touch precisely the edges of the white circle. We had found the exact size of the chromatism and could now measure it to a millimetre."

The foregoing passage will show how clearly defined these entencephalic percepts may be. It is sometimes possible also to show that they represent (as I should expect them to represent) a memory more complete and a perception more exact than the supraliminal self can command. Thus, Mr. Galton had already mentioned a case where a lady used her chromatisms to correct her spelling — the chromatism showing, say, whether or not there were two e's in agreeable, and correcting her supraliminal picture of the word by the symbolic coloured equivalent of each successive letter which thus rose from a memory deeper in her being. In the discussion following Professor Gruber's report at the Congress, Mr. Galton mentioned Lepsius the Orientalist as having been similarly guided in philological investigation. And one of M. Gruber's subjects, a professional singer, when taught to analyse his own chromatisms, found that they corrected his ear in singing ; so that if he sang a false note without detecting it by ear the accompanying patch of colour showed him his mistake.-"^

In the American Journal of Psychology for April 1900 (vol. xi. pp. 377-404), Mr. G. M. Whipple gives a report of detailed observations of his own on two cases of synassthesiae, and remarks that investigators must be prepared not only for a considerable degree of variation between different individuals, but also for variation within the same individual. One of his subjects showed marked taste photisms, together with the still more unusual feature of phonisms to pain, pressure, and temperature.

607 A. The distinction between after-images and memory-images, although sometimes neglected by careless writers, is a marked one ; since after-images, properly so called, are a form of entoptic vision, due to the actual condition of the retina at the moment ; while memory-images are a

1 This curious case may be compared with that of Pedrono, cited by Dr. Krohn in his useful historical sketch of " Pseudo-Chromesthesia," Americmt Journal of Psychology, vol. v., part i., p. 25 : " These colour impressions he describes as sudden and spontaneous. The sounds are translated into colour before he can stop to think whether the voice is high or low." In other experiments it has been found that the colour was seen before the meaning of the word which determined the colour was consciously observed.

form of that "mind's-eye" vision (central, cerebral, internal, subjective) which lacks as yet a recognised scientific name. Nevertheless, a transitional phenomenon is found in illusions hypnagogiques, the vivid pictures which with many persons rise before the " inward eye " at the moment of falhng asleep, or even in waking hours. These may closely resemble postponed after-images ; or again, they may assume the more generalised character of memory-images ; or (and this perhaps is the commonest case) they may show combinations as novel and fantastic as any which deliberate imagination could summon up. A good example of this transition from after-images to memory-images is afforded by the following careful account, which I owe to the kindness of Dr. Th. Flournoy, Professor of Philosophy in the University of Geneva, and now quote from an article of my own in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 453 : —

August 1892.

Although not habitually subject to hypnagogic hallucinations, I have experienced some ten or twelve, of the visual type, and concerned with objects which had engaged my prolonged attention during the day.

In 1875, after my first day of anatomical dissection, I had the hallucination of an aponeurosis, spread out widely. In 1879, after a long afternoon spent at chess, the vision of a chessboard came to me before I went to sleep. Several times in 1878, after a day of microscopical work, the image of a preparation came before me as a hypnagogic hallucination. These three cases struck me forcibly, because at that date I had never heard any mention of such phenomena. Since then I have had a few more experiences, under the following conditions : —

(i) When after a long interval I occupy myself earnestly with some given subject I see that evening a corresponding hypnagogic hallucination ; — as of chessboard, geometrical figures, microscopical preparation ; — which does not repeat itself if I continue to attend to the same matter on subsequent days. (2) But, on the other hand, I sometimes see in the daytime, two or three days later, a very distinct image of the object in question. This image does not amount to a hallucination ; it is not externalised, nor is it as vivid as a perception ; — but, as I am a very bad visualiser, this vivid and precise image is broadly distinguished from my habitual images, which are weak, fragmentary, and indistinct. (3) Neither the hypnagogic image nor the diurnal image are exact reproductions of the given object at a given moment. They are typical images of aponeurosis or chessboard — not reproductions of some specific aspect which has strongly impressed me. Yet they are concrete and precise.

I regard these hypnagogic images, and all memory-images, however recent and intense, as radically different from the " after-images " of the ej'e. These last \\-i.v&7iC^2X\\y sui generis, a "sensational co-efficient" which makes them seem to me to exist outside me, if I see them with open eyes; or to belong to my eye, as though stuck inside my eyelid, if I see them with eyes closed. All other images seem to me to be seen with the mind's eye. I class after-images with external perceptions; all other images, whether as vivid as my hypnagogic hallucinations or as faint as the ordinary visual furniture of my mind, I place in a quite different category.

In this case two points come clearly out — namely, (i) the resurgence

610 A] TO CHAPTER VI 569

of a decadent image with something hke its original brilliancy; (2) the process of generalisation which this image has subliminally undergone. There are other well-known instances of the same kind : Newton and the spectrum ; Baillarger and the gauze which he had been using in anatomical preparations ; Pouchet and the microscopical objects.^ In all these cases the resurgent images appear to have been of a generalised type, — but generalised, so to say, diagrammatically, not blurred or uncertain, but as one would prepare them for a demonstration.'^ For this reason it is certainly better not to class them as "after-images," reserving that term for cases of purely physiological reproductions of external images. And in fact we find that these hallucinations hypnagogiques depart further and further from mere reproductions of objects seen. They assume all kinds of grotesque forms, and show remarkable inventiveness in producing hundreds of faces which the percipient has never seen before. 610 A. The following remarks by Mrs. Verrall (which I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 480) are of interest on the whole question of the externalisation of images, and also as to the transformation into visual terms of a tactile impression subliminally received : —

Since recording my experiments in crystal-vision I have been trying some further experiments of a different kind, with a view to testing my power of visualisation.

I find that I am able to call up a voluntary picture of an object or a scene with extreme distinctness; indeed, in the case of a simple object, the visual image, as far as I can discover, differs from the actual object only in having no solidity — that is, it casts no shadow and appears to be all on the same plane. The form is as well defined and the colour appears as vivid in the visualisation as in the real thing. I have endeavoured to ascertain whether form and colour are equally well reproduced in the visualisation, and as far as my own impression goes there is no difference ; I never think of a coloured object without its colour, but I have not been able to produce complementary after-images from gazing at an imaginary colour. I may say that it is only after a prolonged gazing at a real colour that I can see the complementary after-image, and the colour of the after-image is never anything but very faint.

My visualisations usually, as I have said, have no solidity, but I am able at any time to invest them with solidity by imagining that I see the real thing and not a memory or imagination picture. In that case they cast shadows, and I am able to realise distance. I have much more control over them when once they are there than I have over crystal-visions.

1 See W. James's Principles of Psychology, vol. ii. p. 66, &c. ; Binet's La Psychologic du Raisonnement, p. 48, &c.

2 It is probable that something of the same kind takes place in hypnotic hallucinations, where, say, a dog seen by suggestion is not necessarily any special remembered dog. On the other hand, if the order is to see some special object, it will be seen more accurately than it is remembered ; — as is curiously illustrated by the frequent dissatisfaction of a female subject when told to see her own portrait on a blank card. The idealised memory-picture, which modifies even her perception of her own image in the lookingglass, is ruthlessly displaced by the subliminal fidelity to truth. " J'ai bien des taches de rousseur," said a subject of Binet's, " mais je n'en ai pas tant que 5a."

At one time, some three years ago, I tried a longish series of experiments with cards with a view to seeing whether I could educate my sense of touch sufficiently to distinguish the cards after passing my thumbs once swiftly over the face of each card.^ I had some success, but the reason I record the experiment here is this: At first, while my attention was consciously directed to my fingers, I was aware that I could detect differences in smoothness of surface, which I learnt gradually to interpret; but after a couple of hundred trials, when I grew more expert and more familiar with the experiment, I lost all consciousness of the means which enabled me to guess, and " saw " pictures of the cards which "determined" the particular guess. This experiment seems to show that conclusions arrived at by other means are presented to my mind in the form of visual images, and suggests that sudden visual impressions, spontaneous as well as induced, may in my case be projected visually after they have been produced in some other way.

612 k.— SUMMARY OF THE REPORT ON THE CENSUS OF HALLUCINATIONS

The "Census of Hallucinations" was undertaken in 1889 by a Committee of the S.P.R., under the direction of Professor Sidgwick, and consisting of himself and Mrs. Sidgwick, Dr. A. T. Myers, Mr. F. Podmore, Miss A. Johnson, and the present writer, and the full report of the Committee was published in 1894 {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. pp. 25-422). The object of the inquiry was —

(i) To ascertain approximately what proportion of persons have experienced sensory hallucinations :

(2) To obtain details as to such experiences with a view to examining into their cause and meaning.

It was especially intended to test whether the number of " veridical " hallucinations {i.e. hallucinations representing some external fact) was, or was not, sufficiently numerous in proportion to the whole to preclude us from regarding as merely accidental the coincidence of fact and phantasm.

The inquiry was conducted by the assistance of " collectors " (410 in number). Each of these was instructed to address the following question to twenty-five adults, to be chosen without reference to the probability of an affirmative answer : —

" Have you ever, when believing yourself to be completely awake, had a vivid impression of seeing, or being touched by a living being or inanimate object, or of hearing a voice ; which impression, so far as you could discover, was not due to any external physical cause ? "

The answer "No" and the answer "Yes" were to be recorded with equal scrupulousness ; but in the case of an affirmative answer, a first-hand written account of the details was, if possible, to be obtained. The scope of the inquiry was designed to exclude the hallucinations of sleep, delirium, and insanity.

A similar method of inquiry had been employed by Gurney (v. Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. chap, xiii.), but on a scale perhaps hardly large enough to enable valid inferences as to the proportion of veridical and nonveridical cases to be drawn from the number of persons questioned (5705).

These experiments were afterwards described in full in a paper by Mrs. Verrall in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 174-197.

612 A] TO CHAPTER VI 571

In the present inquiry, conducted during the three years 1889-92, 17,000 persons were questioned. After deducting such affirmative answers as were found to refer to experiences outside the scope of the inquiry {e.g., dreams, impressions of inarticulate sounds, hallucinations occurring during any illness of a kind that is known to produce dehrium) there remained 1684 affirmative answers {Report, p. 39), that is to say, 9.9 per cent, of the whole.

The question arises, How far does this result represent the true state of things? Is it to any considerable extent vitiated by possibilities of error and deception .''

Intentional deception is not Hkely to have had any appreciable influence. The method of inquiry — the questioning by the collector of his acquaintances — and the absence of any motive for deception, practically entitle us to leave it out of account.

A certain number of persons refused to answer the Census question. But the proportion of refusals reported was in general small ; and a consideration of the reasons reported for refusing led to the conclusion that refusals probably only reduced to a small extent the proportion of affirmative answers.

An obvious danger was that of selection by the collectors of persons to be questioned according to what they were likely to say. The instructions to collectors {Report, Appendix A, p. 403), and the number of answers (25) to be obtained by each, were designed to obviate this error. In order, moreover, to check the results on this point, collectors were asked to mark in their lists the names of those persons whose answers were previously known. This check, unfortunately, was not fully operative, through the neglect of some collectors to carry it out. A further more efficient check was a comparison between the whole collection and —

{a) Answers obtained from complete unselected groups of persons, e. g. households or chance gatherings.

{F) Answers collected by the Committee and vouched for by them as unselected.

{c) Answers collected by persons trained in medicine or psychology.

These three sets of answers are given in a table on p. 49 of the Report, and in this table the percentage of affirmative answers is above the average. It may then be inferred that the percentage of affirmative answers in the whole collection has not been increased by selection.

A more important source of error has next to be considered, namely, forgetfulness ; either a temporary and superficial forgetfulness, which may lead people to answer "No" when further care and thought would have produced the answer " Yes " ; or the real oblivion which in course of time may banish many experiences beyond the power of recall. In order to judge of the effect of this, the number of visual hallucinations reported were tabulated according to the time that had elapsed in each case between their occurrence and the date when the percipient answered the Census question. It was found that the number was comparatively large for the most recent year, and decreased rapidly as the years became more remote — at eight, nine, and ten years ago becoming less than half what it was at first {Report, table iv., pp. 43 and 66). The conclusion (based on this table and on other considerations given fully on pp. 63-65 of the Report) was arrived at that, roughly speaking, the number of visual hallucinations reported must be multiplied by four to give the true number experienced over the age of ten. At the same time, the numbers reported are valuable as a record of the number of hallucinations remembered,

and afford means of comparing the number and impressiveness of different kinds of liallucinations.

Chapters IV. to XI. of the Report contain discussions of —

IV. The phenomena of hallucinations in general, different deo'rees of

externalisation of hallucmations, and their relation to sensory impressions which are not fully externalised, and to the power of visualisation.

V. The relation of illusions to hallucinations, and the part played by

points d£ repere in the latter. VI. The form and development of hallucinations.

VII. Their physiology; the physiological action involved in most halluci-

nations is probably exclusively cerebral.

VIII. Age, sex, heredity, nationality, and health considered in relation to

hallucinations. Number of persons who have had more than one hallucination, and cases in which the same form of hallucination is repeated several times.

IX. Mental and nervous conditions ; effects of emotion and anxiety. X. Expectancy and suggestion ; the operation of suggestion in the production and development of hallucinations.

XI. Organic effects sometimes accompanying hallucinations, and the operation of suggestion in producing these.

These chapters are profusely illustrated with examples of all kinds.

For our present purpose the main question relates to the reported proportion of veridical hallucinations, and especially of " death-coincidences," that is to say, cases in which a recognised apparition occurred within twelve hours of the death of the person represented by it, the death being unknown to the percipient at the time {Report, Chapters XII. and XIII.).

Excluding cases occurring to percipients who have had other hallucinations, the exact number of which was not reported, and experiences of children under ten, we find 65 death-coincidences {Report, p. 209) reported at first-hand out of the total of 350 recognised apparitions of living persons {ibid., p. 246). Since deathcoincidences are better remembered and more spoken of than the generahty of hallucinations, a disproportionate number may be expected to have been known by the collectors, and, in fact, 25 per cent, of death-coincidences, as against 8 per cent, of all other recognised apparitions of living persons, are stated to have been so known. Some allowance must therefore be made in this class of cases for the possibility of error arising from selection.

Of the 65 cases, 3 were known to have been selected, and therefore left out of account in the calculation. Of the remaining 62, 16 were known beforehand to the collector ; 26 were not known ; and for the remaining 20 there was no evidence either way. On the supposition that the influence of previous knowledge and selection was the same proportionately in those cases as in the cases where its operation was ascertainable (v. Report, p. 243, footnote 3 for detailed calculation), a deduction of 8 was made to cover the possible disproportion due to selection. A further special allowance was made for the possibility of exaggeration, since in comparing death-coincidences with hallucinations in general, it was found that the remoter cases of death-coincidences were unduly numerous in proportion to the recent ones, which suggested that some of the remote cases reported were not really coincidental. On this ground, 22 cases were deducted, leaving 32 death-coincidences {Report, pp. 242-43).

612 A] TO CHAPTER VI 573

On the other hand, to obtain a fair estimate of the totai number of recognised apparitions of living persons which had actually occurred, in order to compare these with the number of death-coincidences, the number of the former reported was raised, by making the correction for forgetfulness, to 1300 (v. Report, pp. 63-5, and p. 247 for details of the calculations). The final result was thus about 30 death-coincidences out of 1300 cases, or a proportion of about I in 43.

Since the average annual death-rate in England and Wales is 19.15 per 1000, (according to the Registrar-General's Report for 1890), the probability that anyone person taken at random will die on a given day is 19.15 in 365,000, or about i in 19,000. This may be taken as the general probability that he will die on the day on which his apparition is seen and recognised, supposing that there is no causal connection between the apparition and the death. In other words, out of every 19,000 apparitions of living persons there should be by chance one death-coincidence.

But the actual proportion found, viz., i in 43, is equal to about 440 in 19,000, or 440 times the most probable number. Or, looking at the matter another way, we should require 30 X 19,000, or 570,000 apparitions to produce by chance 30 cases of death-coincidences. Of these apparitions, we may assume that about one-quarter, or 142,500, would be remembered. We should therefore expect to have to collect 142,500 cases, instead of 350, in order to obtain by chance 30 death-coincidences.

This is the case if we take, as we have done, death-coincidences to mean an apparition occurring within twelve hours of the death of the person seen. But the great majority of the coincidences are believed by the percipients to be closer than this, and the improbability of the apparition occurring by chance within an hour of the death is of course twelve times as great as that of its occurring within twelve hours of it.

This statistical result is of course worthless, unless the coincidences themselves are well authenticated. It is impossible to summarise the evidence for them, which would no doubt be estimated differently by different persons ; but a large number of the best-evidenced cases are printed in the Report, and supposing that only a few of these are correctly reported, the proportion remains far too large to be attributed to chance.

The explanation of chance coincidence being thus put out of court, the opponent of a telepathic or other supernormal explanation must maintain one of three other hypotheses, (i) He may assert that the coincidences have been exaggerated to a much greater extent than the Committee allowed for ; which argument can only be met by reference to the evidence — given fully in the Report — for the various cases. (2) He may suppose that they were specially sought after by the collectors and illegitimately introduced into the collection to a much larger extent in proportion to non-coincidental cases than was allowed for. Our reply would be that in twenty-six of the total number of death-coincidences, the collectors reported that they did not know of the case beforehand, and therefore could not have selected it to include. Sixteen of these cases are printed in the Report, so that the evidence for them can be studied. (3) Admitting that death-coincidences really exist, and are too frequent to be attributed to chance, it may be argued that the causal connection between hallucination and death is not telepathic, but consists m a condition favourable to hallucination being produced in the percipient in some normal way by the circumstances of the case ; for instance, by anxiety about the dying

person. There is some evidence in the Report that mental tension, anxiety, or other emotional causes are to some extent favourable to hallucinations, and if a hallucination occurs, its form is likely to be determined by whatever subject the percipient is thinking of. But such a cause could only produce a deathcoincidence if the percipient were aware of the dying person's condition, and in many of the cases reported (ten of which are printed in the Report), the percipient had not even heard of the dying person's illness. It was therefore impossible that anxiety should have caused the hallucination in those cases, and even in cases where some degree of anxiety existed, the closeness of the coincidence is inadequately accounted for by it.

The remainder of the Report treats of hallucinations coinciding with other events than deaths, collective hallucinations, premonitions, and what are called "local apparitions" — that is, those seen repeatedly in certain localities — and phantasms of the dead.

I must add that while this argument from statistics and percentages, — capable as it is at once of accurate estimation and of indefinite extension, — constitutes technically the strongest support of the thesis of causal connection between deaths and apparitions, it is yet by no means the only support, nor even the most practically convincing. Those deaths and those apparitions are not mere simple momentary facts, — as though we were dealing with two clocks which struck simultaneously. Each is a complex occurrence, and the correspondence is often much more than a mere coincidence of time alone. Sometimes, indeed, the alleged coincidence is so detailed and intimate that, if the evidence for a single case is fully believed, that case is enough to carry conviction.

The man, therefore, — he is common enough — who believes in one single case where he happens to know the people concerned, and yet discredits all other cases, is not quite so absurd as he seems ; he does but exaggerate a mental attitude in itself easily explicable. One strong disintegrating shock has broken down his lifelong presumptions with more force than pages of unanswerable but dimly realised statistics.

And I admit that for myself the actual colloquy with trusted persons fresh from these experiences has brought home their reality to me with much more vividness than the study of equally good cases collected by my colleagues. I mention this because I think that students of these matters should spare no pains to get at cases first-hand, — should themselves talk with percipients ; and should thus realise how deep and lasting a mark these incidents leave behind them.

620 A. The following historical rdsumd is derived from Mr. Andrew Lang's The Making of Religion (Chapter V., " Crystal Visions, Savage and Civilised," p. 90), and Miss A. Goodrich-Freer's" Recent Experiments in Crystal Vision" {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 486), in both of which numerous references to the history of the subject and the facts here adduced are given. The crystal was only one of many objects used in a similar way as a means of obtaining supernormal knowledge through induced hallucinations; e.g.^ vessels containing liquid — usually water — water in springs, mirrors of polished steel, liquid poured into the palm of the hand, a drop of blood, or ink, and various objects having a reflecting surface, such as the beryl or other gems, the blade of a sword, a ball of polished stone, or the human finger-nail. Crystal-gazing in some such form has been practised for at least 3000 years and is practically of world-wide distribution, having been found among the customs of Assyria, Persia, Egypt — ancient and modern — Greece, Rome, China, Japan and India, North American

623 A] TO CHAPTER VI 575

Indians, Africans of Fez, Zulus, Maoris. It was also practised by the Incas, and is still by Australian savages and Polynesians, the Shamans of Siberia and Eastern Russia, and in Madagascar. Usually a more or less elaborate ritual formed part of the procedure, and in all ages and many places the Seer — variously called Speculator, Scryer, Viewer, or Reader — was usually a child " who had not known sin."

Among the Greeks, several different methods were used, (i) Hydromancy, practised chiefly at the temple of Demeter in Patrje. Before the temple was a fountain, into which a mirror was let down by a small cord, so that its lower edge just touched the water. From the various figures and images seen in it, predictions were made as to the progress of diseases in the patients who came to consult the oracle. (2) Lecanomancy, divination by a bowl containing water, or oil and wine. (3) Catoptromancy, in which mirrors alone were used. (4) Gastromancy, in which glass vessels filled with water and surrounded by torches were used. A demon was invoked and a boy appointed to observe the appearance produced by the demon's action on the water. (5) Onychomancy, in which a boy's nails covered with oil and soot were turned to the sun, the reflection of whose rays produced images supposed to represent certain things. (6) Crystallomancy, where polished and enchanted crystals were used.

In India we find divination by mirrors and also a method in which the ashes of incense moistened with castor-oil are poured into the palm of the child seer. The Arabians also use a mirror in which they see visions after long fasting and prayers.

In Polynesia, Ellis relates that when any one has been robbed, the priest, after praying, has a hole dug in the floor of the house and filled with water. Then he gazes into the water, over which the god is supposed to place the spirit of the thief. The image of the thief is then supposed to be reflected in the water and perceived by the priest.

Among the Apaches also, one of the chief duties of the medicine-men was to find out the whereabouts of lost or stolen property, and for this purpose crystalgazing was employed.

Other Red Indians make their patients gaze into the water, in which they see the pictures of what food or medicine will do them good.

The art, which was attributed in early times to divine power, came to be regarded in the Middle Ages by the Christian Church as the work of evil spirits, and the Specula7-ii — as they were then called — were looked upon as heretics and treated accordingly. They continued, however, to flourish, and the art lingered on till the sixteenth century, when it received a new impetus and reached its highest development in the hands of the famous Dr. John Dee (i 527-1608), whose "Shew-stone " is now to be seen in the British Museum. His seer — a man named Kelly— professed not only to see various spirits in the crystal, but also to hear them speak, and long conversations were carried on with them. Other sounds were also said to be heard in or near the stone, and occasionally apparitions were seen in its neighbourhood. Sometimes writing was seen in it instead of figures. The stone was generally set in a frame of gold on a table, and its use was prefaced with long prayers.

The practice was carried on both in England and on the Continent of Europe through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and has, in fact, never become extinct.

623 A. The following account of optical effects observed in her crystal

visions is given by Miss Goodrich-Freer {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 48s).

These experiments have been for the most part unsatisfactory, as it is almost impossible to say how far the results are due to mere expectation. In no case thus far have I obtained an optical result which surprised me, nor a result capable of such exact measurement as to prove that it was either optically wrong, or more exactly right than my general knowledge could have made it. I mention a few experiments.

1. Distortion. — If I look in a spoon I see the image distorted in the familiar way. But I cannot say whether it is distorted precisely as a real image would be. For in the first place the picture does not always appear to be on the surface of the spoon or other speculum. For instance, in a globular crystal, or semi-globular ring-stone, the picture appears as on a flat surface. In the second place, I could not, at any rate in the short time allowed, draw the distorted picture accurately enough to admit of subsequent comparison with the reflection of the real object itself in the spoon.

2. Refiectio7i. — If I see a picture under circumstances which suggest that it is a reflection, I see it reversed as in a mirror. Thus, in a railway carriage, I experimented with a small crystal and small mirror, both hanging at my chatelaine. I easily reproduced in the crystzl pictures (not real reflections) of the advertisements on the carriage walls, and just as Lane's Egyptian magician told him that the crystal " made left appear right," so were these pictures reversed, and the print appeared as Spiegel-schrift. But I could then reflect the imaginary picture from the crystal into the mirror, and there the letters, " Compton's Hotel," appeared set right again, and legible in the ordinar)^ way.

On the other hand, I once suddenly entered a drawing-room where there was a large mirror, and saw a name for which I had been hunting in vain printed as though on a visiting-card fastened on the wall, and not reversed, in the middle of the mirror, which thus acted as a speculum. But note that when I saw the word I had for the instant forgotten that there was a mirror there, and I took the reflected wall in the mirror for a real wall. So that the picture conformed to my erroneous conception, and not to any true optical law.

3. Magnification. — I have used the magnifying-glass eleven times, and it has always appeared to magnify. In one case already recorded {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. V. p. 513) the apparent enlargement of the picture enabled me to read significant letters, without which the picture would have been meaningless. But this, of course, may be classed as merely one form of the picture's development ; that is to say, the letters might have become visible without the magnif3dng-glass, although they seemed to be vanishing and to be only just caught. I have three times used a bogus glass of similar size and appearance, and that glass did not magnify. However, I have never felt sure that I did not in some way distinguish between the true and the false magnifier even in the act of carrying them to my picture.

4. Double Refraction. — I once tried a flake of Iceland spar, an object which I had never before handled. I knew, however, its property of double refraction, so that the duplication of the picture which followed may have been due to expectation, although it looked to me rather more curious than I consciously anticipated.

5. Colour Contrast. — It is my impression that there is retinal fatigue, and

623A] TO CHAPTER VI 577

consequent sequence of complementary colours, from gazing at crystal pictures as much as from gazing at real objects. I never doubted this until the question was put to me, although I now find it difficult to prove that unconscious expectation may not account for this also.

I will first mention spontaneous and then experimental instances.

I received one day a visit from a friend in a rather striking blue gown, which, some hours later, the crystal reproduced. This picture was followed by another of the lady's little boy, whom I had not seen lately, dressed in a bright orange garment, which I feel sure he does not possess.

Again, one afternoon some one was talking about Palissy ware. I was not specially addressed, and was staring aimlessly at a dark green, almost black glass scent-bottle. I observed in it a picture, all in pale green, of a man hastily tearing up some wooden garden palings ; and before I had time to wonder what this meant, it was followed by another picture, all in red, of the corner of the library where as a child I kept my books, including one distinctly recognisable, which I have not seen these fifteen years, called The Provocations of Mftie. Palissy. Then I remembered that one of this lady's provocations consisted in the fact that her husband fed his furnace with the household furniture, or even the fixtures of the house itself.

These are the only spontaneous colour-sequences which I can recall, as the pictures do not usually show any one predominating colour. By experiment I find that if I tire the retina by staring at a red flower, I see a green one in the crystal ; and conversely that if I summon up (as I sometimes can do) a red flower in the crystal, I then see a green patch on the wall. If I use two crystals there is a similar change of colour between the first picture and the second. Or if I merely desire a change of colour in a crystal-picture I find that blue is followed by orange, yellow by purple, green by red. But this may, of course, be due to unconscious self-suggestion, although I am not so familiar with the sequence of colours that I could without hesitation name the complement of any given colour.

The same result would occur if my blue picture were merely conjured up with closed eyes. On being transferred to the crystal — I, as it were, remaining entirely passive — it would appear as orange. When I first discerned this fact it was distinctly to my own surprise, and it required a moment's thought to assure myself that this was in the natural course of events. It may be worth noting that a distinct effort is required to convert a scene — lighted, for example, with red — to its natural colouring or even to a neutral tint. It is necessary to close the eyes or to look away for a moment; so that what follows is a second edition rather than a prolongation of the first picture. On the other hand, the mere desire for change will produce a green light rapidly alternating with the original hue.

It is significant that these optical effects seem to have been dependent on Miss Freer's knowledge of how real objects would have appeared under the same conditions.

In order to test further whether the results were due to suggestion, Mr. W. A. Dixey,^ the well-known optician of New Bond Street, carried out a series of experiments with Miss Freer on the effect of different kinds of lenses on her

1 See " Report on the Census of Hallucinations," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 108.

crystal visions, the conditions being arranged so that she did not know the normal effects of the lenses on real objects (see Borderland for January 1894). The lenses were fitted into four pairs of eye-glasses, and, with normal binocular sight, their respective effects on real objects at the given distance would have been: (A) to duplicate the object vertically; (B) to blur it ; (C) no effect ; (D) to duplicate the object horizontally. Mr. Dixey handed the lenses to Miss Freer, and the eight experiments were as follows: (i) A gave distance; (2) B, the picture disappeared, but after about a minute the colours became intenser, and the shadows more defined ; (3) C, no difference ; (4) D duplicated the picture horizontally; (5) A duplicated it vertically; (6) A lowered part of the picture; (7) D moved it to the right; (8) B, the picture disappeared. In experiments (3) (4) and (5) the effects were what they would have been on real objects, while in (6) and (7) they were what they would have been if the right eye only had been looking at a real object. In (i) (2) and (8) the effects were not similar to what would have been produced on real objects. Thus the general result was that in five out of eight experiments the cr3'stal pictures changed in appearance in the same way that real objects would have done on applying the lenses, but in the other three the changes that followed in the pictures on applying the lenses were not those that would have been produced in real objects.

Mr. Dixey has since repeated these experiments, under as nearly as possible the same conditions, with Mrs. Verrall, who found, on applying the lenses, that her crystal pictures either disappeared or remained unaffected, except in one case, where a temporary enlargement of the picture — which was not the normal effect of the lens — took place. These negative results are of special interest, because Mrs. Verrall, unlike most crystal-seers, is conscious of Vi?AVig points de repere in her visions, and informs us that on this occasion they were more conspicuous to her than usual v/henthe pictures began to develop, though, as usual, she lost sight of them when the pictures became fully formed.

It seems probable, therefore, that Miss Freer in her experiments may have unconsciously made use of pomts de repere, and that the effects actually produced by the lenses on them were transferred by self-suggestion to the visions. It would obviously be difificult to exclude this explanation in any such experiments.

Some experiments made by Mrs. Sidgwick on the function of pomts de repere in the case of hallucinations that seem to move are described in the " Report on the Census of Hallucinations " {^Proceedvigs S.P.R., vol. x. p. 108).

Cases of hallucinations apparently following optical laws are important in view of their possible bearing on physiological theories of the origin of hallucinations, having often been cited as evidence that the retina — as well as the brain — must be affected by the hallucination. For a discussion of this view — with illustrative cases — see the " Report on the Census of Hallucinations " (^Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. pp. 144-48).

624 A. The following is an account (taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 459) of experiments in crystal vision made by myself with two of the hypnotic subjects of Gurney and Mrs. Sidgwick, referred to in 669 A and B and 573 A. Mr. G. A. Smith was the hypnotist.

624 A] TO CHAPTER VI 579

Experiments made at Brighton, March 9, 26, 27, 28, 189:. Extract from account written out after the experiments from notes made at the time, with some comments added later.

March 9. — Present, G. A. Smith and the two subjects, P. and T.

1. I began with repeating the experiment already frequently made with these and other subjects, viz., suggesting to the hypnotised P. that he would see a given picture on a card when awakened. [G. A. S. hypnotised and awoke the subjects throughout.] I told P. that on awaking he would be shown a card with a picture of a baby on it. I said the one word " baby " without detail in order to see how his mind developed the idea. He was shown a blank card and saw, not a veritable baby, but a child of six.

2. Next time I suggested a hippopotamus — an animal which P. had never seen in the flesh. On being awakened he saw on the card what he called a rhinoceros. He complained that it was rather indistinct ; he was not sure whether it had horns or tusks. There is a certain interest in this as indicating that the hallucination was founded upon a mental picture suggested by my words, rather than on the words themselves. One might have supposed that, since my whole suggestion consisted of the word hippopotamus, the awakened subject, however vaguely he saw the beast, would have known that it was meant for a hippopotamus. But the picture, vague as it was, seemed to be more communicable from the hypnotic to the suprahminal self than the word which had originally generated it. K picture was what had been ordered, and a picture came.

3. I repeated this form of experiment once more, telling P. that he would see a picture of T. ; which he saw clearly.

4. I next determined to try the effect of a glass of water, arranged as a speculum, in giving additional vividness to these post-hypnotic pictures. I suggested to each young man separately a different scene, and then set them to gaze into the same glass of water, behind which I placed a dark background. T. had once looked into ink : but beyond this neither of them knew anything of crystal-gazing, and they were told that they were to see an optical illusion of my invention. They naturally assumed that they would both equally see whatever there was to be seen.

I told P. (hypnotised) that the electric light on the Eastbourne Parade had gone out on the previous evening, but had been relighted in a few minutes.

I told T. (hypnotised) that at Barnum's Circus there was a race of ponies with monkeys on their backs.

P., though generally the better seer of hallucinatory pictures, began (when awakened and set before the glass of water) by saying that all was quite black.

T. said : " Look, there's something going round and round in the water ! "

P. : It's your fancy ; it's all dark."

T. : " No, it's horses — they're horses going round and round — they've got something small on their backs, not so big as those girls who jump through hoops. It's like a circus."

Suddenly P. looked sharply up at me as though to see what I was doing. " What have you done with the light ? " he said ; " you've made a great ball of light in the glass, like a round thing with a light in the middle of it." He did not see the meaning of this ; but it appeared that he had begun with simply a vision of darkness, and then had seen the electric light rekindled. This was not the way in which I had conceived my picture — I had thought of the look

58o APPENDICES [624 A

of the long Parade and a line of lamps going out) — but it gave the essential point.

It will be observed that in this experiment, as in that of the hippopotamus, and in most of those that follow, neither percipient recognised the full meaning of the picture seen. The undistinguished " small things " in T.'s picture were, of course, the monkeys of my story. I shall recount later on some attempts to make similar obscure details clear by magnification. Both a true and a pretended or suggested magnifying-glass should be tried with many subjects under such conditions as these.

5. I next told P. (hypnotised) the story of Robinson Crusoe finding the footprint and fearing savages.

I told T. that Moses Primrose took a cow to the fair and returned with a gross of green spectacles, to the derision of his family.

Awakened and set before the glass of water, P. at once exclaimed : " Why, there's Buffalo Bill ! He's dressed in feathers, and skins round him ; almost like a savage. He's walking about in a waste place." T. : " Is he leading a cow along ? " P. : " No, no, he's all alone." T. : " That's a cow, not Buffalo Bill." P. : " I can see something else coming from another part, — it's a blackie." T. : " No, it's a sack, a sack on his back." P. : " Look at them now, how they're arguing ! Buffalo Bill and his black man." T. : " / can see them arguing now — he's got into a house — there's four of them." P. : " No, no, only two." T. : " No, four, — look at them roaring ! " (z'.^., with laughter). P. : " No, they're behind some trees." T. : " They're crying now."

Observe that in P.'s case the footmark, which was the point on which I had chiefly dwelt, was not observed ; although I suspect from P.'s insistence on \!a.^\<:)V\^g pacing about oi his Buffalo Bill, that the footmark was in some sense intended to form part of the picture, although too small to be noticed by an observer not aware of its importance. P. had read " Robinson Crusoe ; " but Buffalo Bill was plainly fresher in his memory.

T. saw no meaning in his story whatever. He did not know what was in the sack — (a detail of his own adding, as I had not clearly conceived how the spectacles were brought home) — and he saw no reason for the laughter or weeping. The crying was added from his hypnotic self's own conception of the probable effect of such a bargain upon the family, after their first amusement. T. had never read the "Vicar of Wakefield."

6. Observing the attempts made by the two seers to harmonise these divergent stories, I chose two scenes which had a certain similarity, to see whether either seer would be able to persuade the other to accept his version of what was going on.

I told P. briefly that Banquo's ghost had appeared to Macbeth, his murderer, as he sat with warriors and nobles round him at a feast.

I told T. (what he already knew to have happened) that at the North Kilkenny election Mr. Parnell, while addressing the crowd, received a bag of lime in his face from a political opponent. Thus each scene had its central and commanding figure; I wished to see if the two could be combined.

P. : "I see two or three men standing — some sitting — one in a chair on a raised place, like where the head man sits. That's the Mayor, I suppose." [P. is more familiar with municipal government than with military or imperial rule.]

T. : " Why, there are a whole lot of men — a town — a lot of cars — not like our carriages."

624 A] TO CHAPTER VI 581

P. (with a loud whistle) : " Oh, here he comes, the bogey-man ! " (apparently quoting a song).

T. : "There he is standing up in the middle of them ; — I've seen the man at Brighton."

P.: "Look at that chap in the corner! isn't he frightened of him? The Mayor's quite upset."

T. : "I know the man well enough ; he has a beard — about my height. I've seen him walk up and down the front (the Parade) with two dogs after him."

P.: "He's ?L ghost!"

T. : "He's no ghost, I say ; he's talking to them; look at that stuff all gone into his face; now three or four men are up talking; they've got some sticks — there's a row."

P. (imitating conventional ghostly action) : " Look at him ! They all stick their swords through him — it doesn't hurt him; he's a ghost ! "

T. : " Nonsense ; how can he be a ghost ? I tell you I've spoken to him in the [telegraph] office ; he's a man any one would remember — a stand-off man. He's all white now; they're all running." "Was his name Parnell?" I asked. "Yes, yes," said T., " Parnell, of course." Here also, it will be observed, as in the case of the hippopotamus, it was the picture framed by the percipient's subliminal self, not the mere name as uttered by me, which was transmitted to his supraliminal consciousness.

These scenes excited the seers ; and there was some absurdity in their endeavours to imitate, and to conciliate, the attitudes of hovering ghost and impassioned orator.

7. March 26, 1891. Magnification. — I told T. (hypnotised) that he would see in the crystal (a real one) a playbill of " Jack Sheppard," which had recently been acted in Brighton, the large print distinct, but not the small print. Awakened, he saw a girl in man's clothes — something like knickerbockers — could make out J C K T H. On looking through a (real) magnifying-glass he easily read JACK SHEPPARD, THEATRE ROYAL, and recognised that the knickerbockers were jack-boots. He said that the letters persisted, but were clearer when the magnifier was applied to the crystal. The picture seen was remembered from an actual poster.

8. Forgotten Memories. — T. was told (same conditions) that he would see scenes of his past life. He was greatly interested by seeing a number of old schoolfellows sitting in his old school ; some whom he could not identify; some of whom he had scarcely thought since he left school. On being re-hypnotised he did not remember seeing these pictures — only remembered my talking to him about his boyhood. We could not therefore get the hypnotic self to identify the unknown boys.

9. March zj. Test of disappearance from waking memory of words spoken to hypnotised subject. — I offered each subject ^10 if he could explain to me the next picture which he saw. It was plainly necessary to choose some scenes whose meaning they could not guess, if my description, given to them when hypnotised, was forgotten on awaking. I told P. of the Finding of Brynhild, and T. of the Niblungs' Need. Each saw his picture well (Greyfell, the flickering flame-wall, the Sleepful Thorn, &c.), but was completely puzzled as to its meaning.

10. March 28. Magnification. — I told T. (hypnotised) that when awakened he would see a telegraph form (he is a telegraphist) in a glass of water ; that

he would not be able to make out the words, but only to count them ; then with a magnifier would make them out. Awakened, he saw a telegraph form so bent that he could only see a fragment of a message, containing seven words which he could not read. Looking in the glass he made out " Met — B'ton (abbreviation used for Brighton) — Hotel — come." We cannot say whether a coherent message in any sense underlay this fragmentary attempt at communication.

11. I now resolved to supply the message myself (same conditions), and told him that he would be able to see the lengths of the words with the naked eye, and to read them with the magnifier. The telegram was to be [To] "Myers, Cambridge — Oxford won by half a length. Harris."' With the naked eye he could see that there were only two words in the address, the second rather long. With the magnifier he gradually picked out letters here and there — saw the capital letters right, partly saw and partly guessed my name — could not make out the message. Experiments such as this show, I think, that there is some appropriateness in speaking of 7nessages or cofm?iufiicationsiroTXv one to another stratum of the Self. Judging from the analogy of many other post-hypnotic suggestions with the same subject, we can hardly doubt that the whole of this simple telegram was remembered by the hypnotic self, and could have been reproduced in obedience to a direct order. But the order was to reproduce it with a certain degree of obscurity; and that obscurity turned out to be slightly greater than the magnifying-glass (however acting) could overcome. The suggestion was thus slightly too complex ; but, although never fully delivered, the " inter-state " or " methectic " message — call it as you will, but let us have some name for it — was ready made up, and waiting to be transmitted from the hypnotic to the supraliminal self.

