Believing, then, that the whole Cosmos is such as to satisfy the claims of human Reason, we are irresistibly led to ask whether it satisfies other claims of our nature which are as imperious as Reason itself. Infinite Intelligence would see the Cosmos as infinitely intelligent ; but would infinite Goodness also see it as infinitely good ?

We know too well the standing difficulties in the way of such an assumption. They are that which we call Evil, and that which we see as Death. Now as to Evil, — which for us here and now seems so ineffaceable a blot on the idea of Omnipotence, — we can perhaps nevertheless just conceive that for the Cosmotheorus all these defects and incompatibilities of human impulse and sensibility may seem as relatively infinitesimal in the unimaginable Sum of Things, as for us are the whirl and clashing of molecules in the dewdrop, which cannot mar for our vision its crystalline calm.

But death, as it presents itself to us, cannot be similarly explained away. If it be really, as it seems, a sheer truncation of moral progress, absolute alike for the individual and for the race, — then any human conception of a moral universe must simply be given up. We are shut in land-locked pools ; why speak to us of an infinite sea ?

What, then, should be the impulse, what the faith of Science, if she finds even the least reason to suspect that this truncation is in fact illusory ; that on the moral side also there is conservation and persistence ; — conservation not only of such ether-vortices as we assume to underlie our visible matter, but of the spiritual systems or syntheses

302 CHAPTERX [App. A

which underlie the personalities of men? — persistence not only of crude transformable energies, but of those specific non-transformable energies which inform a Plato or a Newton, and which seem the only commensurate object towards which the whole process of evolution can tend? Surely in such a case, whatever dreaminess or confusion may mark the opening of intercourse with worlds indefinitely remote, Science should summon all her fundamental trust in the coherence, the intelligibility of things, to assure her that the dreaminess must pass and the, confusion clear, and that the veriest rudiment of communication between world and world bears yet the promise of completing and consummating her own mighty dogmas, — of effecting a unification of the universe such as she has never ventured to hope till now ? What are our petty human preconceptions worth in such a case as this ? If it was absurd to refuse to listen to Kepler, because he bade the planets move in no perfect circles, but in undignified ellipses ; — because he hastened and slackened from hour to hour what ought to be a heavenly body's ideal and unwavering speed ; — is it not absurder still to refuse to listen to these voices from afar, because they come stammering and wandering as in a dream confusedly, instead of with a trumpet's call ? because spirits that bend nigh to earth may undergo, perhaps, an earthly bewilderment, and suffer unknown limitations, and half remember us and half forget ?

Nay ! in the end it is not for us to choose ; — we needs must join in this communion with what grace we may. We cannot, if we would, transform ourselves into the mere cynical spectators of an irrational universe. We are part and parcel of these incredible phenomena ; our own souls shall soon be feeling the same attraction, the same hesitancy, upon the further shore.

" I am the doubter and the doubt, And I the song the Brahman sings."

Let us do what we can, then, to dignify the situation. Let us try, then, whether a more serious response on our part may enable the senders of the messages to speak with clearer voice. To whose care indeed has such response been hitherto for the most part left? May not the instances where adequate precautions have been taken, adequate record made, be counted on the fingers of one hand ? Might not our unseen correspondents turn the tables on us when we complain of their incapacity, and ask whether it was worth while to do better for the " domestic muffs " of Mme. Blavatsky's far-famed c'enacle, or for the sitters at the " materialisation stances " of the " Vampires of Onset "?

Assuredly we modern men have taken, in other quarters, more trouble than here is needed, with far less hope of reward. What has given its worth to the study of comparative religions except our steady effort to comprehend and to co-ordinate such childish and stammering utterances as have marked the rise in one nation after another of those spiritual needs

App. A] APPENDIX A 303

and conceptions which make in the end the truest unity of the race of man ? What should we have learnt from the Vedas, from the Book of the Dead— nay, from the Christian records themselves — had we approached those sacred texts in the spirit alternately of Simple Simon and of Voltaire ?

The time, I think, is ripe for a generalisation wider than any which those ancient books contain. For just as a kind of spiritual fusion of Europe under Roman sway prepared the way for Christianity to become the European religion, so now also it seems to me that a growing conception of the unity, the solidarity, of the human race is preparing the way for a world- religion which expresses and rests upon that solidarity; — which conceives it in a fuller, more vital fashion than either Positivist or Catholic had ever dreamed. For the new conception is neither of benefactors dead and done for, inspiring us automatically from their dates in an almanac, nor, of shadowy saints imagined to intercede for us at Tribunals more shadowy still ; — but rather of a human unity, — close-linked beneath an unknown Sway, — wherein every man who hath been or now is makes a living element ; — inalienably incorporate, and imperishably cooperant, and joint-inheritor of one infinite Hope.

Of course, I am not here supposing that any human gaze can pierce deeply into the world unseen. Such communion as we may hold with spirits in any degree comparable with ourselves must needs be on a level far beneath the lowest of "Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers " ; — nay, must be in the very vestibule and antechamber of the outermost of the courts of Heaven. These souls of ours are but infantum animcz flentes in limine primo; — the first and humblest conscious links in a wonderful order ; — trembling still and half-bewildered at a future vaster than we know. I do not presume to forecast what we may come in time to learn; I only say that for the present hour there will be enough of motive to urge us to utmost effort to rise in the scale of being, if we can once be certain that such noble spirits as we have known by earthly intercourse or earthly record do still concern themselves with our progress, and still from their higher vantage-ground call to us that all is well.

Men objected of old to Copernicus that if our earth really swept /ound the sun in so vast an orbit, there should be an apparent displacement— a parallax — in the position of the fixed stars. Such parallax was long sought in vain ; till at last advancing skill detected it in some few stars nearer than the rest ; and our relation to these near luminaries proved to us our veritable voyage through the star-strewn deep. Perhaps in the spiritual world as well we have strained our gaze too exclusively on luminaries that are beyond the parallactic limit ; and eyes turned steadily on some nearer brightness may teach us at last our kinship and community in the firmament of souls.

Not, then, with tears and lamentations should we think of the blessed dead. Rather we should rejoice with them in their enfranchisement, and

know that they are still minded to keep us as sharers in their joy. It is they, not we, who are working now ; they are more ready to hear than we to pray; they guide us as with a cloudy pillar, but it is kindling into steadfast fire.

Nay, it may be that our response, our devotion, is a needful element in their ascending joy ; and God may have provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect ; — ut non sine nobis consummarentur.

To most of my hearers I doubt not that this forecast of a coming co-operation between incarnate and discarnate spirits will have seemed speculative and premature. My defence is that I believe that upon our own attitude towards these nascent communications their progress and development depend, so that we cannot too soon direct serious attention to the high responsibilities opening on our view. And now yet another practical question is ready, I think, for immediate discussion. All great changes in speculative belief must modify in some way man's immediate duty. In what way must our idea of duty be modified, be expanded, if a religion is offered to us which no longer depends on tradition and intuition only, but on reason also and on experiment; which is not locked away in an emotional compartment of our being, nor adapted to the genius of special races alone, but is oecumenical as Science is oecumenical, is evolutionary as Science is evolutionary, and rests on a permanent and provable relationship of the whole spiritual to the whole material world?

No full answer to such a question can as yet be attempted or divined. But one point is clear ; — and on that point it is already urgently necessary to insist. We must maintain, in old theological language, that the intellectual virtues have now become necessary to salvation. Curiosity, candour, care ; — these are the intellectual virtues ; — disinterested curiosity, unselfish candour, unremitting care. These virtues have grown up outside the ecclesiastical pale ; Science, not Religion, has fostered them ; — nay, Religion has held them scarcely consistent with that pious spirit which hopes to learn by humility and obedience the secrets of an unseen world. Here surely our new ideals suggest not opposition but fusion. To us as truly as to monk or anchorite the spiritual world is an intimate, an interpenetrating reality. But its very reality suggests the need of analysis, the risk of misinterpretation ; the very fact that we have outgrown our sacerdotal swaddling-clothes bids us learn to walk warily among pitfalls which call for all the precautions that systematic reason can devise.

Upon a new scheme of beliefs, attractive to the popular mind as the scheme which I prefigure, a swarm of follies and credulities must inevitably perch and settle. Yet let those who mock at the weaknesses of " modern Spiritualism " ask themselves to what extent either orthodox religion or official science has been at pains to guard the popular mind against losing balance upon contact with new facts, profoundly but

App. A] APPENDIX A 305

obscurely significant. Have the people's religious instructors trained them to investigate for themselves ? Have their scientific instructors condescended to investigate for them ? Who should teach them to apply to their " inspirational speakers " any test more searching than they have been accustomed to apply to the sermons of priest or bishop? What scientific manual has told them enough of the hidden powers within them to prevent them from ascribing to spiritual agency whatever mental action their ordinary consciousness may fail to recognise as its own?

The rank and file of Spiritists have simply transferred to certain new dogmas — for most of which they at least have some comprehensible evidence — the uncritical faith which they were actually commended for bestowing on certain old dogmas, — for many of which the evidence was at least beyond their comprehension. In such a case ridicule is no remedy. The remedy lies, as I have said, in inculcating the intellectual virtues ; — in teaching the mass of mankind that the maxims of the modern savant are at least as necessary to salvation as the maxims of the mediaeval saint.

Now here, I take it, lies the special, the characteristic duty of the Society for Psychical Research. It is a duty far wider than the mere exposure of fraud ; far wider than the mere production of specimens of patient and intelligent investigation. Our duty is not the founding of a new sect, nor even the establishment of a new science, but is rather the expansion of Science herself until she can satisfy those questions which the human heart will rightly ask, but to which Religion alone has thus far attempted an answer. Or rather, this is the duty, the mission, of the coming century's leaders of spiritual thought. Our own more special duty is to offer through an age of transition more momentous than mankind has ever known, that help in steadying and stimulating psychical research all over the world which our collective experience should enable us richly to bestow. Such function ought, I say, to be ours indeed. We alone have taken the first steps to deserve it. I see our original programme completely justified. I see our raison d'etre indisputably established. I see all things coming to pass as we foresaw. What I do not see, alas ! is an energy and capacity of our own, sufficient for our widening duty ; — enough of labourers for the vineyard so ripe for harvest. Speaking, if so I may, for the remnant of that small company of labourers of the first hour of the day, I must confess that our strength, at least, cannot suffice for the expanding task ; — nay, could not so suffice, even if Edmund Gurney were with us still ; — non, si ipse meus nunc adforet Hector. Other workers, good men and true, have joined themselves to us ; — but we have need of many more. We invite them from each department of science, from every school of thought. With equal confidence we appeal for co-operation to savant and to saint.

To the savant we point out that we are not trying to pick holes in the order of Nature, but rather, by the scrutiny of residual phenomena, VOL. n. u

to get nearer to the origin and operation of Nature's central mystery of Life. Men who realise that the etherial environment was discovered yesterday, need not deem it impossible that a metetherial environment — yet another omnipresent system of cosmic law — should be discovered to-morrow. The only valid a priori presumption in the matter is the presumption that the Universe is infinite in an infinite number of ways.

To the Christian we can speak with a still more direct appeal. " You believe," I would say, " that a spiritual world exists, and that it acted on the material world two thousand years ago. Surely it is so acting still ! Nay, you believe that it is so acting still ; for you believe that prayer is heard and answered. To believe that prayer is heard is to believe in telepathy, — in the direct influence of mind on mind. To believe that prayer is answered is to believe that unembodied spirit does actually modify (even if not storm-cloud or plague-germ) at least the minds, and therefore the brains, of living men. From that belief the most advanced ' psychical ' theories are easy corollaries. You may reply, indeed, that the Church or the Bible has told men all of the unseen world that they need to know, and that whatsoever is more than this cometh of evil. What say you to this argument when it is retorted on you by Omar with his Koran?"

But let us cease to speak as though the infinite Unseen World were a mere preserve or battleground of theologies. If every dogma ever promulgated from the Vatican were literal truth, Science would still affirm that scarcely anything of that world was known. If Religion be more than " the guess of a worm in the dust, and the shadow of its desire," it must be (I say once more) the spirit's normal answer to objective fact. The Cosmos is what it is, and Revelation can do no more than reveal it. Holiness itself must be the reflection of a reality behind the veil. If this be so, then Science has come not to destroy but to fulfil ; Religion must needs evolve into Knowledge ; for Religion can in no age admit an aim narrower than the prayer of Cleanthes, — the willing response of the soul to all she knows of cosmic law.

Out of the long Stone Age our race is awakening into consciousness of itself. We stand in the dawn of history. Behind us lies a vast and unrecorded waste — the mighty struggle humanam condere gentem. Since the times of that ignorance we have not yet gone far ; a few thousand years, a few hundred thinkers, have barely started the human mind upon the great aeons of its onward way. It is not yet the hour to sit down in our studies and try to eke out Tradition with Intuition — as one might be forced to do in a planet's senility, by the glimmer of a fading sun. Daphni, quid antiques signorum suspicis ortus ? The traditions, the intuitions of our race are themselves in their infancy; and before we abandon ourselves to brooding over them let us at least first try the upshot of a systematic search for actual facts. For what should hinder? If our inquiry lead us first through a jungle of fraud and folly, need that

App. B] APPENDIX B 307

alarm us? As well might Columbus have yielded to the sailors' panic, when he was entangled in the Sargasso Sea. If our first clear facts about the Unseen World seem small and trivial, should that deter us from the quest ? As well might Columbus have sailed home again, with America in the offing, on the ground that it was not worth while to discover a continent which manifested itself only by dead logs.

One final word to each main division of our critics ; — to those first who have been disappointed so often that they refuse to listen to any further promise of news from the Unseen ; — and then to those who, relying on some grander revelation, — whether, received from without them or from within, — disdain our slow, collective process and comminuted fragments of truth. I would remind the Agnostic that a pike was once kept in the same tank with a perch. There was at first a sheet of glass between them, and the pike bruised his nose so often in snapping at the perch, that in time he gave up that endeavour, — as the Agnostic his endeavour after proof of a spiritual world, — with a sigh or a sneer. Then silently the transparent screen was removed ; but now the pike was so convinced that his prey was unreachable, that, — like the Agnostic in presence of our new evidence, — he continued simply to let the perch alone.

For those other men I will resort to a bold metonymy, and will speak of that great incurrent truth to which each man severally holds under the figure of the great stone at Ephesus which fell down from Jupiter. The faithful who proclaimed that wondrous fall were essentially in the right, — were far more in the right than the freethinkers who derided it. But whence and why that stone had truly fallen, — how vast the significance of .that cosmic trajectory and rushing flame, — this could be known only when humble labourers had catalogued many a lesser congener of the mighty mass ; and had gathered the meteoric dust from the ocean's floor ; and had learnt that no field of heaven had been found so desolate as not to carry still the impress of ultimate energy and universal law.



Appendix B. The Decline of Dogmatism

THE DECLINE OF DOGMATISM

For many minds this last century of triumphant Science, of warring Theology, has acted as a kind of proof and purgation of the human spirit. It is strange to look back and to observe with how much of dogmatic rubbish even the strongest minds of earlier centuries were cumbered both in their belief and in their negation. For it was not only the so-called orthodox who suffered ; but those also who, revolting against arbitrary doctrine, were yet unable to dissociate such doctrine from any conception which they could form of a spiritual world. Such men would still speak as though the spiritual world, if it existed, must needs be a world ruled by caprice, and overshadowed by fear.

But now in the virtual abeyance of formal creeds the reactions monks and schoolmen have had time to dissolve and disappear. Vestigh beliefs which still encumbered the spirit have had time to atrophy.

The prospect on which Science gazed has been by comparison narrow one ; but Science at least has " seen it steadily and seen whole." The material world has taught us lessons of which our conception of the spiritual world stood in no less urgent need. The study of visible Nature has taught us Uniformity, Conservation, Evolution ; and these transform themselves in their spiritual aspect into an absolute Catholicity, an inescapable Justice, an ever-ascending Ideal. These great conceptions, I say, were achieved by Science, with her outlook temporarily narrowed to planetary life. And now that Science herself begins to teach us to expand once more the planetary into the cosmic view, we find that principles built up by minute and persistent observation of material law will expand and exalt themselves also to spiritual operation, and will give to the soul's future the stability of their own infinitude, the buoyancy of their own limitless march and assumption into realms higher and hopes unknown.

On one great matter the departed spirits utter, not indeed a halting or a dubious, but yet a somewhat indefinite reply. One and all, so far as I know them, they affirm that the Universe is good : that there is a supreme Power to whom all spirits bow, and who orders all things well. But beyond that they can give no fresh sanction to the tenets of any earthly creed. Rather they seem for a time perhaps to express their new convictions in their accustomed formulae, but soon to lose all thought of creed or formulae in the deep assurance of endless and ever-growing Love. This avowed limitation of their knowledge has caused some disappointment, and they have sometimes been fruitlessly pressed to declare themselves in clearer support of some earthly Church.

Yet must not any elevation of our being imply for us less of claim to formal knowledge, more of participation in an immanent Spirit ?

The idea of Divinity among the human race has risen and widened from the Fetish of a family to the Champion of a tribe, and from the Champion of a tribe to the Father of a planet. Must even that be the fixed and final conception of the Infinite God ? Nay, surely that conception should expand so as not to lose but to transcend Personality ; — retaining for us the Love and Mercy which bring the Divine into fellowship with man, but outgrowing all limiting analogies, all pretence at human comprehension of the Inconceivable Cause of All.

It is noticeable how with each onward step in our theoretical knowledge some false and outworn conception of practical duty tends to melt away. We now know (to Swedenborg belongs the credit of the first emphatic announcement) that this life and the next are morally continuous,— with no mere general dependence of the future life upon t present, — but continuous as though our earthly age melted into the hues

App. C] APPENDIX C 309

of a happier youth. It follows that the earthly life must ethically develop all its faculties in preparation for the heavenly. There must be no arbitrary narrowing of earth's experience under the guise of sanctity ; no pretence that something is gained in the next world by refusal of any of the normal duties of this.

There is no place for monasticism in such a scheme as this. There is no place for the puritanical, the ascetic spirit ; for any belief in merit attaching to suffering or privation as such. The aim of all will be spiritual, moral, intellectual efficiency; self- preparation for those higher duties which shall follow on the accomplishment of lower duties as the just and inseparable reward.

How far there shall still be place for the priest, for the minister of religion, it were premature to discuss. Sacerdotalism must disappear; no body of men will any longer persuade mankind of their exclusive right to promulgate or to interpret that catholic truth which is bestowed impartially upon all.

And note that if such a claim were afterwards to be put forth, not by priests but by sensitives, — by intermediaries of the new revelation who might claim to be its guardians also, — that claim would promptly carry with it its own refutation. We should not long believe in the authority of communicating spirits who might base their appeal to us on authority, instead of on evidence and on reason. Communicators and intermediaries alike are subject to an ordering wiser than our own. By their fruits we shall know them.



Appendix C. Prayer and Supplication

PRAYER AND SUPPLICATION

The question now arises : What ought to be our own attitude towards the spirits with whom we enter into communication?

To begin with, it goes without saying that our attitude should be at once responsive and serious ; — that there should be no frivolity, no credulity, and, on the other hand, no perverse or stubborn refusal to recognise the proofs which they offer.

But here a larger question opens out. What ought we to ask from them? In what way should we ask it? What does experience thus far show us that we may expect to receive? It is plain that such inquiries bring us to the threshold of the wider and deeper problem of Prayer and Supplication generally ; — of our whole appeal to the Unseen.

Approaching Prayer in this generalised manner, we feel the need of a definition which shall be in some sense spiritual without being definitely theological. Or let us leave to the solemn word Prayer its highest meanings ; — let us confine it to our attempts at communion — uttered or unexpressed— with the Supreme Spirit. Let us next try to define the word

3io CHAPTER X [App. C

Supplication in such a way as to distinguish it from a request made to a living friend.

For our present purposes, at any rate, it seems best to define supplication as " an attempt to obtain benefits from unseen beings by an inward disposition of our own minds." This excludes such attempts as rest on charms or on sorcery ; and at the same time begs no question as to the nature of the beings to whom we appeal. They are, at any rate, habitually unseen ; it remains for us to argue from the nature of the supplication, or of the answer, who or what the beings who may have sent that answer are likely to be.

For the sake of clearness, I may observe that in excluding charms, &c., from the category of true supplication, I mean to exclude any process which is supposed to gain the desired benefit by its own virtue without the operation of our own minds. Charms and incantations may have, as we shall presently see, another kind of efficiency, as mere self-suggestions. And experience seems to show (what might antecedently have seemed improbable) that if we wish to learn something from spirits speaking through mortal organisms, there may be some gain in our definite statement, in speech or writing, of the nature of the information desired.

This, however, is a detail, and I go on to the more important question of the benefits for which our supplications may rightly be offered up. What, broadly speaking, are the benefits which we do actually receive from other souls? either from the World-Soul, or from human souls still in the flesh ? We receive Life and Knowledge, which it is our business to develop into Love and Wisdom and Joy. Our own capacity of such development may still be classed as Life, — as spiritual Life, of which our physical life is but the temporary vehicle. Our spiritual life is fed by the love which we receive, our physical life by food and material aids of every kind. Knowledge, of course, is one of the main ways of feeding our spiritual life, and I have placed it apart here merely because its traceability through particular memories makes it the most convenient subjectmatter for psychical analysis.

A definite fact, an isolable piece of knowledge, will often fulfil a requirement which we long for in vain in physical experimentation. We should greatly like to be able to follow some individual scrap or parcel of energy through its successive mutations, — to track exactly the given unit of heat which is converted into a given unit of motion. Now with definite facts we really can do something of this kind. Each piece of knowledge is more or less distinctly ear-marked, as belonging to one or more assignable human memories, each of which memories contains a selection of facts different from the selection contained in any other memory. Omniscience of course contains all the facts, but omniscience is not likely to show in each case the specific limitations.

The upshot of this is that there is a certain class of requests made to

App. C] APPENDIX C 311

unseen agencies, the answers to which carry with them a strong presumptive proof of the identity of the minds which send them.

Such, for example, are the ordinary requests made to our discarnate friends for information on matters connected with their lives on earth, as illustrated by many cases through Mrs. Piper's trance. In these cases we have virtually supplicated these persons for certain definite knowledge, and they, — and so far as I can see, no vaster intelligence than theirs, — have directly answered our supplications. Such cases belong to the long series of requests made to the Unseen for knowledge, for truth, for light. Here is at last a definite avenue for successful supplication, — here are distinct requests granted by intelligences identifiable, although unseen.

Leaving the question of supplication for knowledge for the present, let us consider the results which have been found to attend supplications for mere physical life.

Readers of this work know what a large proportion of psychological experiment now actually going on falls under the category of supplication or prayer for life. The pilgrims of Lourdes implore the Virgin for life and health as the most urgent form of their devotions. Faith-healers pray to the Divinity for life and health, Christian Scientists meditate on the goodness of the Universe and on the love of Christ with the same practical object. And all of these groups, — as abundant testimony shows us, — are often successful in their prayers and meditations. They attain such results that (for instance) Charcot, himself no Catholic, used often to send his patients to Lourdes. Yet, as this juxtaposition of Charcot with Lourdes suggests, although we note the favourable results, we have no clear indication as to the source from whence those results come.

For we find that results equally surprising follow upon the suggestions of hypnotisers ; — and even upon mere self-suggestion. Self-suggestion is (as I have often insisted) at the core of almost all these healing and vivifying processes ; — and what is self-suggestion but an at present indefinable contention or disposition of the mind ?

In ancient and modern times, in East and West, among Pagans, Buddhists, Brahmins, Mahomedans, Christians, Infidels, — everywhere it has seemed possible for men and women, by a certain stress of soul, to become in great measure superior to pain, and often to renew vitality with a success for which medical science cannot account. The true meaning of this farreaching and multiplex power of self-suggestion is one of the standing puzzles — one of the growing puzzles — alike of biology and of psychology. Without pretending to solve it, I have nevertheless in an earlier chapter stated and defined it in a manner which may now serve to bring it into relation with an even wider range of phenomena. For I have spoken of it as a fluctuation in the intensity of the draft which each man's life makes upon the Unseen. I have urged that while our life is maintained by continual inflow from the World-soul, that inflow may vary in abundance or energy in correspondence with variations in the attitude of our own

minds. So soon as this definition is made, we see that every form of self-suggestion falls within the limits which we have assigned to supplication. The supplication of the Lourdes pilgrims, the adoring contemplation of the Christian Scientists, the inward concentration of the self-suggesters, the trustful anticipation of the hypnotised subject, — all these are mere shades of the same mood of mind, — of the mountain- moving faith which can in actual fact draw fresh life from the Infinite. Nor is the life thus indrawn a physical life alone. Even from the physician's post-hypnotic suggestion, — which seems the furthest removed of all these channels from a true spiritual inflow, — both moral and intellectual revivification will often follow.

But this reflection suggests afresh the question, already discussed in Chapter V., whether in some such cases of hypnotic suggestion the resultant inflow of life may not in some mediate fashion at least depend on and emanate from the physician himself. He, no doubt, must ultimately draw his own life from the Unseen ; but may there not be some virtue passing from him which vivifies his patient of its own force? I have already expressed my belief that in some cases there is such virtue, — which would show from our present point of view that it is in some cases useful to supplicate finite embodied spirits for increase of life.

May it then be desirable to supplicate finite disembodied spirits not only for knowledge, but for life ? Can they also transmit to us, — more directly, perhaps, than the embodied hypnotist, — some special stream of the informing energy of the universe?

I believe that there is evidence that they can sometimes produce this vivifying effect in various ways. Sometimes they seem able to transport the sensitive's spirit into their own realm, and to infuse at once a spiritual and a physical renovation. Sometimes they produce the impression of material touches or passes, like those employed by the earthly hypnotist. In that case the removal of pain, or the soothing effect, may seem to follow directly on some unseen manifestation.

And this brings us to one remaining service which we may sometimes, it seems, successfully ask disembodied spirits to perform. They will occasionally move objects for us ; — thus repeating yet further the services rendered by embodied friends. Not, of course, that we shall think of asking them for movements practically useful to us, like those ascribed to the " lubber-friends " of ancient fable. It will be enough if by any displacement of matter, however trivial in itself, they can manifest their persistent power.

On the whole, then, we see that supplication obtains for us from the Unseen a certain limited extension of the benefits which we know by everyday experience that we can obtain from the Universe on the one hand and from individual spirits on the other.

As regards the human spirits, in the first place, we find that our successful supplications to them are such as they might be likely to grant,

App. C] APPENDIX C 313

assuming that they still exist, and that they have certain continuing powers of acting upon embodied minds and upon matter in much the old way. While they were embodied they gave us knowledge, they gave us material help by moving objects and the like ; they renewed our strength, it may be by touches or passes which were for us channels of the inflowing cosmic life. Disembodied now, they operate in the same way. In some respects the loss of the body is a drawback. They can but slightly and rarely move ponderable matter. They can but seldom heal or vitalise with their spirit-touch. They can communicate their knowledge only through an organism which they invade for the purpose. But on the other hand their knowledge, when they do communicate it, is of absolutely priceless worth. Fragmentary and trivial though it may seem, it constitutes the one great assurance of a providential Universe and an eternal life.

Supplication to these spirits near ourselves has, then, assuredly not been in vain, — nay, is likely to become more and more fruitful as the conditions are better understood.

At the other end of the scale, again, the prayers addressed to the Universe, — to God, — or say, rather, to the Supreme which is above personality, are now seen to be the normal development and intensification of that mysterious power of self-suggestion which we witness every day. In so saying I am far from meaning that we affect our own spirits only by our fervent prayer. On the contrary, I have insisted that even the selfsuggestion which refuses to appeal to any higher power, — which believes that it is only calling up its own private resources into play, — must derive its ultimate efficacy from the increased inflow from the Infinite life which the spirit's powerful effort of attention — the faith of the suppliant — does in some manner induce. And the more penetrating this faith, the more striking the results are likely to be. Beyond this point we have no evidential warrant for going. We cannot specify from any real comparative experience what particular shade or colour of this saving faith is most effectual in evoking an answer. The great intermediate names — between the spirits of our own friends and the Source of All — have not given recognisable evidence, specific proof, of their recipience and reply. Such proof might be given, for example, if the cures at Lourdes were really " miraculous" in the sense that they were cures of maladies never cured elsewhere ; or even if patients at Lourdes were cured in markedly larger proportion than, say, the patients in a hypnotic clinique. But I have elsewhere (see 578 and 579) shown strong reasons for believing that this is not so ; — nay, that the general evidence offered for the Lourdes cures needs a strict sifting before the residuum of fact can be separated from the exaggerations due to strong moral prepossession, — from which the great pecuniary interests which have grown up around that place of pilgrimage can hardly be altogether excluded. I will not say more, for my object here is not to disparage any special type of prayer or supplica-

tion, but rather to insist on their importance and efficacy in general. I wish to show that so far from our needing to suppose that an answer to prayer is an interruption of the natural order of things, many answers to prayer are, on the contrary, manifest extensions, — natural developments, — of perfectly familiar phenomena. We already have life, and by disposing our spirits rightly, we can get more life ; we already have friends who help us on earth; those friends survive bodily death, and are to some extent able to help us still. It is for us to throw ourselves into the needed mental state ; — to make the heartfelt and trustful appeal. To the benefit which we may thus derive no theoretical limit can be assigned. It must needs grow with man's evolution ; for the central fact of that condition is the ever- increasing closeness of the soul's communion with other souls.

713 A]



Appendices to Chapter VII

713 A. It is possible that we might learn much were we to question dying persons, on their awakening from some comatose condition, as to their memory of any dream or vision during that state. If there has in fact been any such experience it should be at once recorded, as it will probably fade rapidly from the patient's supraliminal memory, even if he does not die directly afterwards. A curious case was published in Phantasms of the Living (vol. ii. p. 305), where a dying man returns, as it were, from the gates of death expressly to announce that he has had a vision, or " paid a visit," of this kind — which " visit," however, it was not possible to verify.

A somewhat similar instance, but with ultimate recovery of the patient, Dr. Wiltse, was printed in the St. Louis Medical and Surgical Journal, November, 1889, and in the Mid- Continental Review, February, 1890. Dr. Wiltse has since obtained for us the sworn depositions of the witnesses of importance. The experience is long, and for the most part of a thoroughly dreamlike type ; but in any view it is extremely unusual, nor can it be fairly understood from extracts alone. I quote, therefore, the essential part of the case in full (from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 180).

[After describing his gradual sinking in the summer of 1889 under an unusual disease — typhoid fever with subnormal temperature and pulse — Dr. Wiltse (of Skiddy, Kansas) continues as follows :] — I asked if I was perfectly in possession of my mind, so that what I might say should be worthy of being relied upon. Being answered in the decided affirmative, I bade adieu to family and friends, giving such advice and consolation to each and all as I deemed best, conversed upon the proofs pro and con of immortality, and called upon each and all to take testimony for themselves by watching the action of my mind, in the bodily state in which they saw me, and finally, as my pupils fell open, and vision began to fail, and my voice to weaken, feeling a sense of drowsiness come over me, with a strong effort, I straightened my stiffened legs, got my arms over the breast, and clasped the fast stiffening fingers, and soon sank into utter unconsciousness.

I passed about four hours in all without pulse or perceptible heart-beat, as I am informed by Dr. S. H. Raynes, who was the only physician present. During a portion of this time several of the bystanders thought I was dead, and such a report being carried outside, the village church bell was tolled.

Dr. Raynes informs me, however, that by bringing his eyes close to my face, he could perc&ive an occasional short gasp, so very light as to be barely perceptible, and that he was upon the point, several times, of saying, " He is dead," when a gasp would occur in time to check him.

He thrust a needle deep into the flesh at different points from the feet to the hips, but got no response. Although I was pulseless about four hours, this state of apparent death lasted only about half-an-hour.

I lost, I believe, all power of thought or knowledge of existence in absolute unconsciousness. Of course, I need not guess at the time so lost, as in such a state a minute or a thousand years would appear the same. I came again into a state of conscious existence and discovered that I was still in the body, but the body and I had no longer any interests in common. I looked in astonishment and joy for the first time upon myself— the me, the real Ego, while the not me closed it upon all sides like a sepulchre of clay.

With all the interest of a physician, I beheld the wonders of my bodily anatomy, intimately interwoven with which, even tissue for tissue, was I, the living soul of that dead body. I learned that the epidermis was the outside boundary of the ultimate tissues, so to speak, of the soul. I realised my condition and reasoned calmly thus. I have died, as men term death, and yet I am as much a man as ever. I am about to get out of the body. I watched the interesting process of the separation of soul and body. By some power, apparently not my own, the Ego was rocked to and fro, laterally, as a cradle is rocked, by which process its connection with the tissues of the body was broken up. After a little time the lateral motion ceased, and along the soles of the feet beginning at the toes, passing rapidly to the heels, I felt and heard, as it seemed, the snapping of innumerable small cords. When this was accomplished I began slowly to retreat from the feet, toward the head, as a rubber cord shortens. I remember reaching the hips and saying to myself, " Now, there is no life below the hips." I can recall no memory of passing through the abdomen and chest, but recollect distinctly when my whole self was collected into the head, when I reflected thus : I am all in the head now, and I shall soon be free. I passed around the brain as if I were hollow, compressing it and its membranes, slightly, on all sides, toward the centre and peeped out between the sutures of the skull, emerging like the flattened edges of a bag of membranes. I recollect distinctly how I appeared to myself something like a jelly-fish as regards colour and form. As I emerged, I saw two ladies sitting at my head. I measured the distances between the head of my cot and the knees of the lady opposite the head and concluded there was room for me to stand, but felt considerable embarrassment as I reflected that I was about to emerge naked before her, but comforted myself with the thought that in all probability she could not see me with her bodily eyes, as I was a spirit. As I emerged from the head I floated up and down and laterally like a soap-bubble attached to the bowl of a pipe until I at last broke loose from the body and fell lightly to the floor, where I slowly rose and expanded into the full stature of a man. I seemed to be translucent, of a bluish cast and perfectly naked. With a painful sense of embarrassment I fled toward the partially opened door to escape the eyes of the two ladies whom I was facing as well as others who I knew were about me, but upon reaching the door I found myself clothed, and satisfied upon that point I turned and faced the company. As I turned, my left elbow came in contact with the arm of one of two gentlemen, who were

713A] TO CHAPTER VII 317

standing in the door. To my surprise, his arm passed through mine without apparent resistance, the severed parts closing again without pain, as air reunites. I looked quickly up at his face to see if he had noticed the contact, but he gave me no sign, — only stood and gazed toward the couch I had just left. I directed my gaze in the direction of his, and saw my own dead body. It was lying just as I had taken so much pains to place it, partially upon the right side, the feet close together and the hands clasped across the breast. I was surprised at the paleness of the face. I had not looked in a glass for some days and had imagined that I was not as pale as most very sick people are. I congratulated myself upon the decency with which I had composed the body and thought my friends would have little trouble on that score.

I saw a number of persons sitting and standing about the body, and particularly noticed two women apparently kneeling by my left side, and I knew that they were weeping. I have since learned that they were my wife and my sister, but I had no conception of individuality. Wife, sister or friend were as one to me. I did not remember any conditions of relationship ; at least I did not think of any. I could distinguish sex, but nothing further.

I now attempted to gain the attention of the people with the object of comforting them as well as assuring them of their own immortality. I bowed to them playfully and saluted with my right hand. I passed about among them also, but found that they gave me no heed. Then the situation struck me as humorous and I laughed outright.

They certainly must have heard that, I thought, but it seemed otherwise, for not one lifted their eyes from my body. It did not once occur to me to speak and I concluded the matter by saying to myself : " They see only with the eyes of the body. They cannot see spirits. They are watching what they think is I, but they are mistaken. That is not I. This is I and I am as much alive as ever."

I turned and passed out at the open door, inclining my head and watching where I set my feet as I stepped down on to the porch.

I crossed the porch, descended the steps, walked down the path and into the street. There I stopped and looked about me. I never saw that street more distinctly than I saw it then. I took note of the redness of the soil and of the washes the rain had made. I took a rather pathetic look about me, like one who is about to leave his home for a long time. Then I discovered that I had become larger than I was in earth life and congratulated myself thereupon. I was somewhat smaller in the body than I just liked to be, but in the next life, I thought, I am to be as I desired.

My clothes, I noticed, had accommodated themselves to my increased stature, and I fell to wondering where they came from and how they got on to me so quickly and without my knowledge. I examined the fabric and judged it to be of some kind of Scotch material, a good suit, I thought, but not handsome ; still, neat and good enough. The coat fits loosely too, and that is well for summer. " How well I feel," I thought. " Only a few minutes ago I was horribly sick and distressed. Then came that change, called death, which I have so much dreaded. It is past now, and here am I still a man, alive and thinking, yes, thinking as clearly as ever, and how well I feel ; I shall never be sick again. I have no more to die." And in sheer exuberance of spirits I danced a figure, and fell again to looking at my form and clothes.

Suddenly I discovered that I was looking at the straight seam down the

3i8 APPENDICES [713 A

back of my coat. How is this, I thought, how do I see my back ? and I looke again, to reassure myself, down the back of the coat, or down the back of legs to the very heels. I put my hand to my face and felt for my eyes. They are where they should be, I thought. Am I like an owl that I can turn my head half-way round ? I tried the experiment and failed.

No ! Then it must be that having been out of the body, but a few moments, I have yet the power to use the eyes of my body, and I turned about and looked back in at the open door, where I could see the head of my body in a line with me. I discovered then a small cord, like a spider's web, running from my shoulders back to my body and attaching to it at the base of the neck in front.

I was satisfied with the conclusion that by means of that cord I was using the eyes of my body, and turning, walked down the street.

I had walked but a few steps when I again lost my consciousness, and when I again awoke found myself in the air, where I was upheld by a pair of hands, which I could feel pressing lightly against my sides. The owner of the hands, if they had one, was behind me, and was shoving me through the air at a swift but a pleasant rate of speed. By the time I fairly realised the situation I was pitched away and floated easily down a few feet, alighting gently upon the beginning of a narrow, but well-built roadway, inclined upward at an angle of something less than 45 degrees.

I looked up and could see sky and clouds above me at the usual height. I looked down and saw the tops of green trees and thought : It is as far down to the tree tops as it is high to the clouds.

As I walked up the road, I seemed to face nearly north. I looked over the right side of the road and under it could see the forest, but discovered naught to support the roadway, yet I felt no fear of its falling. I examined the material of which it was built. It was built of milky quartz and fine sand. I picked up one of the gravels and looked at it particularly. I distinctly remember that it had a dark speck in the centre. I brought it close to the eye and so discovered that it was a small hole apparently caused by chemical action of some metal. There had been a recent rain, and the coolness was refreshing to me. I noticed that, although the grade was steep, I felt no fatigue in walking, but my feet seemed light, and my step buoyant as the step of childhood, and as I walked I again reverted to my late condition of illness and rejoiced in my perfect health and strength. Then a sense of great loneliness came over me and I greatly desired company, so I reasoned thus : Some one dies every minute. If I wait twenty minutes the chances are great that some one in the mountains will die, and thus I shall have company. I waited, and while so doing surveyed the scenery about me. To the east was a long line of mountains, and the forest underneath me extended to the mountains, up their sides and out on to the mountain top. Underneath me lay a forest-clad valley, through which ran a beautiful river full of shoals, which caused the water to ripple in white sprays. I thought the river looked much like the Emerald River, and the mountains, I thought, as strongly resembled Waldron's Ridge. On the left of the road was a high bluff of black stone, and it reminded me of Lookout Mountain, where the railroad passes between it and the Tennessee River. Thus memory, judgment, and imagination, the three great faculties of the mind, were intact and active.

I waited for company, what I judged to be twenty minutes ; but no one

713A] TO CHAPTER VII 319

came. Then I reasoned thus : It is probable that when a man dies he has his individual road to travel and must travel it alone. As no two men are exactly alike, so, most likely, no two travel the same road into the other world. I reflected that as eternal existence was now assured, I had no need to hurry, and so walked very leisurely along, now stopping and looking at the scenery, or looking back over the road, if, perchance, some one might come along, and occasionally turning and walking backward, and thus watching the road behind me for company I so strongly desired. I thought certainly some one from the other world would be out to meet me, though, strangely enough, I thought of no person whom above others I desired to see. Angels or fiends, one, I said, will come out to meet me — I wonder which it will be? I reflected that I had not believed all the Church tenets, but had written and taught verbally a new and, I believed, a better faith. But, I reasoned, I knew nothing, and where there is room for doubt there is room for mistake. I may, therefore, be on my way to a terrible doom. And here occurred a thing hard to describe. At different points about me I was aware of the expressed thought, " Fear not, you are safe ! " I heard no voice, I saw no person, yet I was perfectly aware that at different points, at varying distances from me, some one was thinking that thought for my benefit, but how I was made aware of it was so great a mystery that it staggered my faith in its reality. A great fear and doubt came over me and I was beginning to be very miserable, when a face so full of ineffable love and tenderness appeared to me for an instant as set me to rights upon that score.

Suddenly I saw at some distance ahead of me three prodigious rocks blocking the road, at which sight I stopped, wondering why so fair a road should be thus blockaded, and while I considered what I was to do, a great and dark cloud, which I compared to a cubic acre in size, stood over my head. Quickly it became filled with living, moving bolts of fire, which darted hither and thither through the cloud. They were not extinguished by contact with the cloud, for I could see them in the cloud as one sees fish in deep water.

The cloud became concave on the under surface like a great tent and began slowly to revolve upon its perpendicular axis. When it had turned three times, I was aware of a presence, which I could not see, but which I knew was entering into the cloud from the southern side. The presence did not seem, to my mind, as a form, because it filled the cloud like some vast intelligence. He is not as I, I reasoned : I fill a little space with my form, and when I move the space is left void, but he may fill immensity at his will, even as he fills this cloud. Then from the right side and from the left of the cloud a tongue of black vapour shot forth and rested lightly upon either side of my head, and as they touched me thoughts not my own entered into my brain.

These, I said, are his thoughts and not mine : they might be in Greek or Hebrew for all power I have over them. But how kindly am I addressed in my mother tongue that so I may understand all his will.

Yet, although the language was English, it was so eminently above my power to reproduce that my rendition of it is as far short of the original as any translation of a dead language is weaker than the original ; for instance, the expression, " This is the road to the eternal world," did not contain over four words, neither did any sentence in the whole harangue, and every sentence, had it been written, must have closed with a period, so complete was the sense. The following is as near as I can render it : —

" This is the road to the eternal world. Yonder rocks are the boundary

between the two worlds and the two lives. Once you pass them, you can no more return into the body. If your work was to write the things that have been taught you, waiting for mere chance to publish them, if your work was to talk to private individuals in the privacy of friendship— if this was all, it is done, and you may pass beyond the rocks. If, however, upon consideration you conclude that it shall be to publish as well as to write what you are taught, if it shall be to call together the multitudes and teach them, it is not done and you can return into the body."

The thoughts ceased and the cloud passed away, moving slowly toward the mountain in the east. I turned and watched it for some time, when suddenly, and without having felt myself moved, I stood close to and in front of the three rocks. I was seized with a strong curiosity then to look into the next world.

There were four entrances, one very dark, at the left between the wall of black rock and the left hand one of the three rocks, a low archway between the left hand and the middle rock, and a similar one between that and the right hand rock, and a very narrow pathway running around the right hand rock at the edge of the roadway.

I did not examine the opening at the left — I know not why, unless it was because it appeared dark, but I knelt at each of the low archways and looked through. The atmosphere was green and everything seemed cool and quiet and beautiful. Beyond the rocks, the roadway, the valley, and the mountain range curved gently to the left, thus shutting off the view at a short distance. If I were only around there, I thought, I should soon see angels or devils or both, and as I thought this, I saw the forms of both as I had often pictured them in my mind. I looked at them closely and discovered that they were not realities, but the mere shadowy forms in my thoughts, and that any form might be brought up in the same way. What a wonderful world, I exclaimed, mentally, where thought is so intensified as to take visible form. How happy shall I be in such a realm of thought as that.

I listened at the archways for any sound of voice or of music, but could hear nothing. Solid substances, I thought, are better media of sound than air, I will use the rocks as media, and I rose and placed my left ear to first one rock and then the other throughout, but could hear nothing.

Then suddenly I was tempted to cross the boundary line. I hesitated and reasoned thus : " I have died once and if I go back, soon or late, I must die again. If I stay some one else will do my work, and so the end will be as well and as surely accomplished, and shall I die again ? I will not, but now that I am so near I will cross the line and stay." So determining I moved cautiously along the rocks. There was danger of falling over the side of the road, for the pathway around was but narrow. I thought not of the archways, I placed my back against the rock and walked sideways.

I reached the exact centre of the rock, which I knew by a carved knob in the rock marking the exact boundary. Here, like Caesar at the Rubicon, I halted and parleyed with conscience. It seemed like taking a good deal of responsibility, but I determined to do it, and advanced the left foot across the line. As I did so, a small, densely black cloud appeared in front of me and advanced toward my face. I knew that I was to be stopped. I felt the power to move or to think leaving me. My hands fell powerless at my side, my shoulders and head dropped forward, the cloud touched my face and I knew no more.

713A] TO CHAPTER VII 321

Without previous thought and without apparent effort on my part, my eyes opened. I looked at my hands and then at the little white cot upon which I was lying, and realising that \ was in the body, in astonishment and disappointment, I exclaimed : " What in the world has happened to me ? Must I die again ? "

I was extremely weak, but strong enough to relate the above experience despite all injunctions to quiet. Soon afterward I was seized with vomiting, severe and uncontrollable. About this time Dr. J. H. Sewel, of Rockwood, Tenn., called upon a friendly visit, not knowing I was sick* I was hiccoughing terribly, and in consultation he said, " Nothing short of a miracle, I fear, can save him."

After many days, it seemed to me, the. temperature began to creep up and soon ran above normal, but only a little, wavered back and forth for a few days, and settled at a half degree below, where it remained during the greater part of convalescence, when it mounted to normal, the pulse mounted to above fifty for keeps, as boys say at marbles, then went to seventy-six, and I made a rapid and good recovery, for having travelled some hundreds of miles during the interval, as I close this paper my pulse stands at eighty-four and is strong, just eight weeks from " the day I died," as some of my neighbours speak of it.

There are plenty of witnesses to the truth of the above statements, in so far as my physical condition was concerned. Also to the fact that just as I described the conditions about my body and in the room, so they actually were. I must, therefore, have seen these things by some means.

The following are questions addressed to Dr. Wiltse about his experience, and his answers : —

1. Q. You perceived two gentlemen standing in the door. Were they actually standing in the door? A. They were.

2. Q. Was your face as pale as you perceived it to be ? A. It was much paler as compared with some days before, but one witness states that, as compared with only a short time before becoming unconscious, the face appeared of a dark purple hue.

3. Q. Did you not recognise any person at all among those whom you perceived in the room ? A. I had no thought of names nor ideas of relationship. I had a strong sense of good fellowship, if I may so term it, but my interest in each seemed alike. I must have forgotten all personalities.

4. Q. Did the washes which you perceived the rain to have made actually exist? A. They did to a marked degree, there having been heavy rains for many days consecutively.

5. Q. Did the fabric in which you seemed to be clothed resemble any which you had ever worn ? A. It did not, and I distinctly recollect thinking that I had no such clothing in the house, although it did not then occur to me that I had never possessed such a suit. I think, however, that my brother who was visiting me had on something such a suit, but cannot be certain, as I cannot learn that I made any reference to any suit in the room as being like it while rehearsing my experience after awaking. If I could see a suit like it I should recognise it at once.

6. Q. Were you previously familiar with the notion that a delicate thread, in cases of trance, connects the ethereal organism with the ordinary body? A. Yes, and this will seem to you a case of expectancy. I deem it fair to your

VOL. ii. x

Society to state, however, that so far from believing the theory was I that in a volume of fiction upon which I am engaged I had set down an entirely different theory as emanating from one of the characters who is made to teach my own private views strongly enough. When I discovered the thread my mind did not go back to any previous recollections or ideas upon the subject, as I should suppose would naturally be the case.

Dr. Wiltse's narrative is followed by corroborative statements from five persons who were present in the sick-room, viz., his wife and sister, the physician in attendance, and two friends. These statements are given in full in the Proceedings, and show that the description of his experience given by Dr. Wiltse immediately after recovering consciousness was in all essential details the same as the account printed above. They also confirm what he reports of the actual external facts of the case, the illness and attendant circumstances.

Here, at any rate, whatever view we take as to the source or the content of Dr. Wiltse's vision, the fact remains that the patient, while in a comatose state, almost pulseless, and at a temperature much below the normal, did, nevertheless, undergo a remarkably vivid series of mental impressions. It is plain, therefore, that we may err in other cases by assuming prematurely that all power of perception or inference has ceased.

Setting aside the manifestly dream-like or symbolical element of the vision, we observe that Dr. Wiltse believes that his perception of the people in the room, and of the rain-washed streets outside, was of a clairvoyant type. But this cannot be proved ; for the picture of the streets might be due to unconscious inference ; and some acuteness of perception, like that of the lethargic hypnotised subject, might account for his knowledge of movements in the room made after his eyes were closed. However this may be, it is probable that if he had actually died, and if some kind of message from him had been subsequently received, that message might have included facts as to the scene of death which the survivors would have believed to have been unknown to him while still living, but which he did in fact acquire during his comatose condition.

I may add that since the first publication of Dr. Wiltse's narrative both Dr. Hodgson and I have made his personal acquaintance, and have further corresponded with him on psychical experiments, with the result that the experience just cited, though it cannot, of course, be made evidential, has risen in importance in our eyes. See also another experience of Dr. Wiltse's in 663 A.

A case similar in many respects to the one just quoted is that of the Rev. L. J. Bertrand, given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 194. During a dangerous ascent of the Titlis, Mr. Bertrand separated from his companions, sat down to rest, and became paralysed by the cold. His head, however, remained clear, and he experienced the sensation described by Dr. Wiltse of passing out of his body and remaining attached to it by " a

714 A] TO CHAPTER VII 323

kind of elastic string." While in this condition, he had clairvoyant impressions about his absent companions, and much astonished them on their return by describing their doings to them. The case, which I have not space here to quote, is very remote and therefore probably contains errors of detail ; but it is most likely that some genuine clairvoyance was exhibited.

714 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 450. The next case — I have given the percipients the name of Adie — is a curiously complicated one ; but its evidential value rests mainly on the similarity between a recognised phantom seen by a mourner (and therefore not in itself evidential) and an unrecognisable appearance observed at about the same time by a near relation, also aware of the death.

This latter phenomenon — a segment of illumination in a room otherwise dark, and closed against light — is undoubtedly rare. Retinal hyperaesthesia will sometimes make ' a room look light for a moment or two when the eyes are first opened, but the limitation of area seems to make this explanation improbable here.

Miss C. A. writes : —

July \2th, 1888.

About two months before the death of my dear father, which occurred on December loth, 1887, one night about from 12 to I A.M., when I was in bed in a perfectly waking condition, he came to my bedside, and led me right through the cemetery at Kensal Green, stopping at the spot where his grave was afterwards made.

He was very ill at that time and in a helpless condition — so far as his ability to walk up three flights of stairs to my room was concerned. I had at that time never been in that cemetery, but when I went there after his interment the scene was perfectly familiar to me.

He led me beyond his grave to a large iron gate, but my recollection of this part is confused. I there lost sight of him.

In a later letter Miss C. A. adds : —

It was just like a panorama. I cannot say if my eyes were closed or open.

Again, a day or two before his death, somewhere between the 4th and the loth of December (the day of his decease), when he was lying in an unconscious state in a room on the ground floor, and I sleeping on the second floor, I was awoke suddenly by seeing a bright light in my bedroom — the whole room was flooded with a radiance quite indescribable — and my father was standing by my bedside, an etherealised semi-transparent figure, but yet his voice and his aspect were normal. His voice seemed a far-off sound, and yet it was his same voice as in life. All he said was, " Take care of mother." He then disappeared, floating in the air as it were, and the light also vanished.

About a week afterwards, that is to say, between the I2th and the i;th of December, the same apparition came to me again, and repeated the same words. An aunt, to whom I related these three experiences, suggested to me that possibly something was troubling his spirit, and I then promised her that should my dear father visit me again I would answer him. This occurred a short time afterwards. On this, the fourth, occasion he repeated the same

words, and I replied, " Yes, father." He then added, " I am in perfect peace."

Apparently he was satisfied with this my assurance. Since that time I have neither seen nor heard any more.

I have never before or since had any such experience.

(Signed) C. A.

Mrs. Adie writes : —

March, 1889.

Towards the middle of the month of October 1887 [since fixed by letters of that year as Sunday, October 23rd, 1887], in fact, as nearly as I can recall, about the time when C.'s father first appeared to her in a spiritualised form, I had a singular and most vivid impression that the post would bring me bad news. We were then in Switzerland. I could daily from my window, at 1 1.20 A.M. to a moment, see the train arrive which brought our English letters. These were taken to the post-office close by and sorted ; and about twenty minutes after the train came in my letters (if any) were placed upon my table. On Sunday mornings the English Church service began at 10.30, so that by 11.40 the chaplain was well advanced in his sermon. On that one particular Sunday it was, as nearly as I can tell, exactly at that moment of time I suddenly felt much distressed and mentally disturbed, feeling convinced that bad news was awaiting me on my return to the hotel. I had to put considerable force upon myself to refrain from rising from my seat and leaving the church.

My presentiment was only too true ; on my writing-table I found a most agonising letter from T. (C.'s elder sister) telling me that their father had had a most alarming attack of illness (this was the first of the three seizures which resulted in his decease on December loth). One point I would especially notice ; apparently this letter conveyed no impression to my mind so long as it was in the train or at the post-office, but took effect upon me so soon as it was put upon my writing-table — came within my surroundings, as it were.

We returned to England on December ist. After C.'s father's death— during the night of December I2th-I3th— I was sleeping in a small back room on the ground floor of a lodging in London, a room which had only one window, closed by shutters and a thick curtain. The gas in the passage was put out when I went to bed, so that, after I had extinguished my candle, the room was shrouded in impenetrable darkness— darkness that could be felt. About 3 A.M. on the morning of the I3th I awoke en sursaut, as the French expression has it (that is to say, I was wide awake, not in a half-dreamy condition), to see the room up to the ceiling, for about the width of my bed, and extending to the fireplace opposite, flooded with a pale golden radiance, an unearthly lightquite unlike any we are acquainted with ; it seemed to come from behind 1 bed ; so bright was it that I could distinctly see the design on the wall-paper opposite me, and over the fireplace. This paper was a very pale Frend grey, of two tints, outlined here and there with a thin line of colour, effect lasted, as nearly as I can tell, about five minutes, during which I opene and shut my eyes several times, clasped and unclasped my hands, and hit self to be certain that I was not dreaming. When the light went I was total darkness as before.

That same day I confided the circumstance to T. (Clara's sister), b« her not to tell her about it, since C. was feeling her fathers death most acut but when a day or two later C. told me of his three appearances to her, ai this same remarkable golden light which accompanied them, I related to h

714A] TO CHAPTER VII 325

what I had myself seen, expressing my regret that awe or astonishment had prevented me from speaking or making some sign ; though, unlike herself, I had seen no shadowy form approach me. The thought then occurred to me that there might be something regarding which the deceased wished to be satisfied— something which prevented his spirit from obtaining perfect rest, and I suggested to her that should this experience be repeated to either of us we should answer him. The result is stated in C.'s account.

My own impression is that his spirit tried to communicate with me, but in my great amazement at the vision I was unable to receive his message. C. was prepared.

Later on — viz., in a letter, dated February 27th, 1888, C., when writing to me, says : " When I told you in my last letter, dear auntie, that I had spoken, it was from your advice, for you told me to do so. Now, I must try and explain to you just what happened. It was about four o'clock in the morning, or even earlier. A bright light suddenly came into my room — not a light like from a fire or a candle, but a glow of golden light. Then I saw a form, quite white, bend over me, and in my darling father's voice I heard these words : ' Take care of mother — I am in perfect peace.' I said : 'Yes, father.' And then the light by degrees disappeared. Since this, I have not seen or heard anything more, and I have a feeling that I shall never again, as I feel sure that all he wanted to say he has said, and is at rest since I answered him. What you tell me as having happened to you on the night of December I2th is, indeed, passing strange. I should so like to know what was meant to tell you. Have you any idea? It is strange that both you and I should see the same light. You see I told you first, so it could not have been a dream, as I might possibly have fancied if you had told of your strange light (for I do sometimes dream of things which I hear and read of). If anything should happen again I will write it down, and let you know at once; but, somehow, I feel I shall not."

In further letters Mrs. Adie says : —

April 1st, 1889.

I must now add to my statement in my last (so positively put), as to only a segment of my room being illumined, what I then omitted, viz., that what made me so certain of this fact was — that neither the white muslin-covered dressingtable on my right hand, nor the wardrobe standing against the wall on my left hand, were visible to me on that occasion ! No ; when I saw this luminosity I had heard nothing of my niece's experiences up to that date.

I have occupied the same room again in the interval which has since elapsed, and found that the room was so obscure that even in winter daylight (no fog) when lying on the bed I could not make out the design on the wall-paper opposite me, although on the occasion I there mention every little detail of form and colour was sharply defined.

My husband had to pass through my room to get to his, and when he left our sitting-room the whole house was in bed. It was his business to extinguish the feeble little gas-jet which was left burning. Had he forgotten to do this, the light from the burner could not have resembled what I saw. My niece has more than once assured me positively " that she at no other time has ever had any hallucination of the senses." I cannot recall ever having had any hallucinations which did not mean anything, or rather, which have not come true, — if I except [a vision which may or may not have corresponded to reality, but which cannot at present be tested].

716 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 25. Mrs. P. writes :

June gth, 1885.

Our mother died while we were all very young ; and as I, the fourth child of seven, was the eldest living daughter, I became early acquainted (from my eighth year) with sorrow of various kinds and degrees, principally caused, however, by the harshness and frequent neglect of housekeeper and servants ! towards my baby brother and sister. The two eldest boys — between whom and myself was a gap of some years — were almost always away from home, and ultimately went abroad, so that from the time I was quite a little child I was continually with my father, who made much of me, and at last I became his : constant companion. He never married again, and our love was probably, therefore, a closer union even than commonly exists between a father and i daughter while the latter is of tender years. It was a great pain to me ever to be away from him, especially after my fourteenth year, at which time he began i to make me his confidante as well as companion ; and we had frequent earnest talks and discussions on many subjects. At length, when I was about eighteen years old, a terrible grief befell us, viz., the death of my two elder brothers within a few weeks of each other, while they were still abroad.

My father's sorrow was great ; and at the same time he became seriously troubled with many doubts regarding various points of Christian faith, and so gradually lost nearly all his buoyancy of spirit, and became sadly depressed and worn-looking, though only forty-eight years old. For a year he thus suffered, \ when it was arranged that, so soon as he could plan to leave home, he should go to some seaside place, and try what new scenes would effect. He also persuaded— nay, insisted — that I should go away for awhile, without waiting for him, and accompany some friends to South Devonshire.

The writer then narrates how a sudden summons brought her back to find her father dead.

I went early to bed, to escape the presence and sympathetic ministrations of the many in that kind household who gathered around me ; and by my own choice I shared the room of a motherly-looking personage, whom I supposed to i be my cousin's nurse. She occupied the larger bed in the room, and I a smaller one placed at some distance from hers. She was soon asleep and breathing heavily ; but I was lying in deepest anguish, beset not only with the grief of the sudden loss sustained, but with the wretched fear that my beloved father had died too suddenly to find peace with God, regarding those miserable doubts that had so troubled him. As the night wore on, the pain of heart and thought grew worse and worse, and at length I knelt in prayer, earnestly pleading that my distressful thoughts might be taken away, and an assurance of my father's peace be given me by God's Most Holy Spirit. No immediate relief came, however, and it was early dawn when I rose from my knees, and felt that I must be patient and wait for the answer of my prayer.

Now a longing suddenly seized me to creep into that kind-faced woman's bed, and to feel perhaps less lonely there. Her bed was opposite a window, over which a white blind was drawn, and as I softly lifted the bedclothes and sat for a moment after drawing my feet up into the bed, I noticed the pale dawn feebly lighting up the window, and the movement of a little bird on the sill outside ; but the room itself was as yet almost dark.

716A] TO CHAPTER VII 327

I was just about to slip quietly down into the bed, when on the opposite side of it (that on which the nurse was sleeping) the room became suddenly full of beautiful light, in the midst of which stood my father absolutely transfigured, clothed with brightness. He slowly moved towards the bed, raising his hands, as I thought, to clasp me in his arms; and I ejaculated: "Father!" He replied, " Blessed for ever, my child ! For ever blessed ! " I moved to climb over nurse and kiss him, reaching out my arms to him ; but with a look of mingled sadness and love he appeared to float back with the light towards the wall and was gone ! The vision occupied so short a time that, glancing involuntarily at the window again, I saw the morning dawn and the little bird just as they had looked a few minutes before. I felt sure that God had vouchsafed to me a wonderful vision, and was not in the least afraid, but, on the contrary, full of a joy that brought floods of grateful tears, and completely removed all anguish except that of having lost my father from earth. I offer no explanation, and can only say most simply and truthfully that it all happened just as I have related.

You may find a solution to the occurrence in the sympathy which had existed between my dear father and myself ; or, as friends have often insisted, in the condition of excitement and exhaustion which I was suffering at the time ; but after all these years of life and experience, the memory of that wonderful morning is ever vividly fresh, and real, and true.

The writer's husband adds, under date June lyth, 1885 : —

The narrative, as related above, is substantially the same given to me by Mrs. P. as early as 1865, and at subsequent periods. W. B. P.

And Dr. and Mrs. C., referred to above, write, June i6th, 1885 : —

The preceding narrative was related to us by Mrs. P., substantially as here recorded, some four or five years ago. JAMES C.

ELLEN H. C.

Now comes the case which has evidential importance.

In the year 1867 I was married, and my husband took a house at S ,

quite a new one, just built in what was, and still is probably, called " Cliff Town," as being at a greater elevation than the older part of the town. Our life was exceedingly bright and happy there until towards the end of 1869, when my husband's health appeared to be failing, and he grew dejected and moody. Trying in vain to ascertain the cause for this, and being repeatedly assured by him that I was "too fanciful," and that there was "nothing the matter with him," I ceased to vex him with questions, and the time passed quietly away till Christmas Eve of that year (1869).

An uncle and aunt lived in the neighbourhood, and they invited us to spend Christmas Day with them — to go quite early in the morning to breakfast, accompanied by the whole of our small household.

We arranged therefore to go to bed at an early hour on the night of the 24th, so as to be up betimes for our morning walk. Consequently at 9 o'clock, we went upstairs, having as usual carefully attended to bars and bolts of doors, and at about 9.30 were ready to extinguish the lamp; but our little girl — a baby of fifteen months — generally woke up at that time, and after drinking some

warm milk would sleep again for the rest of the night; and, as she had not yet awakened, I begged my husband to leave the lamp burning and get into bed, while I, wrapped in a dressing-gown, lay on the outside of the bed with the cot on my right hand. The bedstead faced the fireplace, and nothing stood between but a settee at the foot of the bed. On either side of the chimney was a large recess, — the one to the left (as we faced in that direction) having a chest of drawers, on which the lamp was standing. The entrance door was on the same side of the room as the head of the bed and to the left of it — facing, therefore, the recess of which I speak. The door was locked ; and on that same side (to my left) my husband was lying, with the curtain drawn, towards which his face was turned.

[Plan of room given, omitted here.]

As the bed had curtains only at the head, all before us was open and dimlylighted, the lamp being turned down.

This takes some time to describe, but it was still just about 9.30, Gertrude not yet awake, and I just pulling myself into a half-sitting posture against the pillows, thinking of nothing but the arrangements for the following day, when to my great astonishment I saw a gentleman standing at the foot of the bed, dressed as a naval officer, and with a cap on his head having a projecting peak. The light being in the position which I have indicated, the face was in shadow to me, and the more so that the visitor was leaning upon his arms which rested on the foot-rail of the bedstead. I was too astonished to be afraid, but simply wondered who it could be; and, instantly touching my husband's shoulder (whose face was turned from me), I said, " Willie, who is this?" My husband turned, and for a second or two lay looking in intense astonishment at the intruder ; then lifting himself a little, he shouted " What on earth are you doing here, sir ? " Meanwhile the form, slowly drawing himself into an upright position, now said in a commanding, yet reproachful voice, " Willie ! Willie ! "

I looked at my husband and saw that his face was white and agitated. As I turned towards him he sprang out of bed as though to attack the man, but stood by the bedside as if afraid, or in great perplexity, while the figure calmly and slowly moved towards the wall at right angles with the lamp in the direction of the dotted line [shown in the plan]. As it passed the lamp, a deep shadow fell upon the room as of a material person shutting out the light from us by his intervening body, and he disappeared, as it were, into the wall. My husband now, in a very agitated manner, caught up the lamp, and turning to me said, " I mean to look all over the house, and see where he is gone."

I was by this time exceedingly agitated too, but remembering that the door was locked, and that the mysterious visitor had not gone towards it at all, remarked, " He has not gone out by the door ! " But without pausing, my husband unlocked the door, hastened out of the room, and was soon searching the whole house. Sitting there in the dark, I thought to myself, "We have surely seen an apparition ! Whatever can it indicate ? — perhaps my brother Arthur (he was in the navy, and at that time on a voyage to India) is in trouble : such things have been told of as occurring." In some such way I pondered with an anxious heart, holding the child, who just then awakened, in my arms, until my husband came back looking very white and miserable.

Sitting upon the bedside, he put his arm about me and said, " Do you know what we have seen ? " And I said, " Yes, it was a spirit. I am afraid it was

716B] TO CHAPTER VII 329

Arthur, but could not see his face "—and he exclaimed, " Oh ! no, it was my father!"

My husband's father had been dead fourteen years : he had been a naval officer in his young life ; but, through ill-health, had left the service before my husband was born, and the latter had only once or twice seen him in uniform, /had never seen him at all. My husband and I related the occurrence to my uncle and aunt, and we all noticed that my husband's agitation and anxiety were very great: whereas his usual manner was calm and reserved in the extreme, and he was a thorough and avowed sceptic in all— so-called — supernatural events.

As the weeks passed on my husband became very ill, and then gradually disclosed to me that he had been in great financial difficulties ; and that, at the time his father was thus sent to us, he was inclining to take the advice of a man who would certainly — had my husband yielded to him (as he had intended before hearing the warning voice) — have led him to ruin, perhaps worse. It is this fact which makes us most reticent in speaking of the event ; in addition to which, my husband had already been led to speculate upon certain chances which resulted in failure and infinite sorrow to us both, as

well as to others, and was indeed the cause of our coming to , after a year

of much trouble, in the January of 1871.

None of us were particularly ready to believe in such evidences, notwithstanding my experience at my father's death, because we had regarded that as a special answer to prayer ; so that no condition of " over-wrought nerves," or "superstitious fears," could have been the cause of the manifestation, but only, so far as we have been able to judge by subsequent events, a direct warning to my husband in the voice and appearance of the one that he had most reverenced in all his life, and was the most likely to obey.

Dr. and Mrs. C., friends of Mrs. and Mr. P., add the following note : —

June i6th, 1885. This narrative was told us by Mrs. P., as here recorded, some years ago.

J. C.

ELLEN H. C. Mr. P. confirms as follows, June iyth, 1885 : —

Without wishing to add more to the incidents recorded herein by my wife, I would simply note that the details of No. 2 are quite correct, and that the occurrence took place as stated. ... W. B. P.

716 B. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 236. In the narrative next to be cited, there is a record of prolonged speech, but in such cases, especially when few or no actual words are quoted, we can hardly be sure as to the degree of externalisation which the voice assumes. The apparition here seems to have at least comprehended the percipient's inward situation, although it is not clear that any prediction requiring supernormal insight was actually made. I owe the narrative to the kindness of Mr. Morell Theobald, who printed it first in Light for March 5th, 1892. It is written on an old piece of paper (sent to me) and marked "For Mr. B.'s private perusal." The history of the paper is as follows : — A Mr. C.

(I must not give the names), well known to Mr. Theobald, and holding a good position in one of the Australian colonies, discovered it among the private papers of his uncle, Mr. B., who died twelve years ago. The apparition, as will be seen, occurred on October 24th, 1860, and the account is endorsed on November Qth by the percipient's father. Further particulars, sent to Mr. B. by the percipient (who is here called Mr. D.) are dated November i3th, 1860. The first account seems to have been sent by the percipient to his father, and by the father to Mr. B.

The percipient has been identified, and confirms, as will be seen, this early narrative, which is as follows : —

On the evening of Wednesday, October 24th, 1860, having retired to bed about nine o'clock, I had slept, I conclude, about two hours, making it then about eleven o'clock P.M. I was awoke from my sleep by a hand touching my forehead, and the well-known voice of Mrs. B. pronouncing my name, E. I started up, and sat in bed, rubbed my eyes, and then saw Mrs. B. From the head to the waist the figure was distinct, clear, and well-defined : but from the waist downwards it was all misty and the lower part transparent. She appeared to be dressed in black silk. Her countenance was grave and rather sad, but not unhappy.

The words she first uttered were : " I have left dear John ; " what followed related entirely to myself, and she was permitted by a most kind Providence to speak words of mercy, promise, and comfort, and assurance that what I most wished would come to pass. She came to me in an hour of bitter mental agony, and was sent as a messenger of mercy.

I would have spoken more to her, but the form faded, and in answer to an earnest appeal, a voice came to me which, though apparently hundreds of miles away, was distinct and clear, saying, " Only believe," and she was gone.

Throughout the interview I felt no fear, but an inward, heavenly peace. It was new moon, but the room was as light as day !

Our next information consists of a statement of Mr. D.'s, written in reply to Mr. B.'s questions, November i3th, 1860, found (in Mr. B.'s handwriting) among Mr. B.'s papers, and now summarised for us by Mr. C.

Mr. D. had been asleep, but could not say how long. Had not seen Mrs. B. for several months. Can't recollect what dress she had on then. Was not in bad health. Was alone in the house. The subject of his anxiety was not known to Mrs. B. nor connected with her. The apparition seemed to wait for questions, and when put they were answered. The subject of the communication was one greatly influencing his thoughts and feelings, and had been deeply agitating him before he went to bed. It was not a religious matter; but Scriptural language was used; Mark xi. 23, 24 were quoted — a passage well known to the writer, and often dwelt upon by him. The window faces north. The night was wet and cloudy. The writer did not put it down at the time, believing it too real ever to be forgotten. He had not mentioned it to any one but his father and [Mr.] B. He saw the notice of the death for the first time on Saturday in the Observer. Resided about ten miles from Gawler, which is twenty-five miles from Adelaide.

716B] TO CHAPTER VII 331

Mr. C. has forwarded to us a printed extract from the South Australian Register of October 25th, 1860, which includes a notice of the death of Mrs. B. on October 24th, at Bank Street, Adelaide. The hour of the death is fixed by Mr. C.'s own recollection, depending on his own fixed habits at the time. He writes to Mr. Theobald under date May 3rd, 1892 : —

I was at that time a clerk in my uncle's office, which was at his house in Bank Street, Adelaide; but was staying just then at Glenelly. I left the office at 4 P.M. on the 23rd after saying good-bye to Mrs. B., leaving her in her usual state of health. She was taken ill about n P.M., and asked frequently for me, expressing a strong desire not to die before I arrived ; but when I got to the house at the usual time, about 10 A.M. next morning, I was met with the news that she had been dead about two hours.

The death, therefore, had taken place more than twelve hours before the apparition was seen.

Mr. D. makes a slight mistake in his original account, in saying that it was new moon, whereas the moon was then ten days old. But as it was a cloudy night, and his window faced north, the light by which the figure was seen was doubtless, as in so many of these cases, itself a part of the apparition.

At Mr. Theobald's request Mr. C. communicated with Mr. D., who is still living ; and we have therefore the opportunity of comparing a thirty years' old recollection with the same person's contemporary statement. The comparison shows that, — as I believe to be often the case, — the memory of the supernormal incident had not grown, but dwindled.

