This being all addressed to the young lady, Sophie, she replied that it would be difficult for her to carry out these directions on account of the slight acquaintanceship which existed between her and Nikolaus's family.

" Absurd ideas of propriety ! " was " Schura's" indignant reply.

14 But in what way shall I be able to influence him ? " asked Sophie.

" Thou wilt speak to him in my name."

" Then your convictions no longer remain the same?"

" Revolting error ! " was the reply.

I must now explain the meaning of this mysterious communication. " Schura " is the Russian pet name for Alexandrine. Nikolaus and Michael were her cousins. Michael, quite a young man, had unfortunately allowed himself to become entangled by the revolutionary ideas of our Anarchists or Socialists. He was arrested, tried, and condemned to imprisonment at a distance from St. Petersburg, where he lost his life in an attempt to escape. " Schura " loved him dearly, and fully sympathised with his political convictions, making no secret of it. After his death, which occurred in September 1884, she was discouraged in her revolutionary aspirations, and ended her life by poison, at the age of seventeen, on the 1 5th of January 1885, just one week before the seance above described. Nikolaus, Michael's brother, was then a student at the Technological Institute.

Mrs. von Wiesler and her daughter were aware of these circumstances, for they had long been acquainted with " Schura's " parents, and with those of her cousins, who belong to the best society of St. Petersburg. It will be obvious that I cannot publish the names of these families. I have also changed those of the young people. The acquaintanceship was, however, far from being intimate. They saw each other occasionally, but nothing more. Later I will give further details. We will now continue our narrative.

Naturally, neither Mrs. von Wiesler nor her daughter knew anything as to the views or secret conduct of Nikolaus. The communication was just as unexpected as it was important. It involved a great responsibility. Sophie's position was a very difficult one. The literal carrying out of "Schura's" demands was, for a young lady, simply impossible, merely from considerations of social propriety. What right could she have, on the ground of simple acquaintanceship, to interfere in family affairs of so delicate a character ?

i So. CHAPTER VIII [875

Besides, it might not be true; or, quite simply and most probably, Nikolaus might deny it. What position would she then find herself in? Mrs. von Wiesler knew only too well, from the stances she had taken part in with me, how little dependence can be placed on Spiritualistic communications. She counselled her daughter, in the first place, to convince herself of " Schura's " identity. This advice was followed without any hesitation as one way out of the difficulty.

On the following Tuesday " Schura " manifested at once, and Sophie asked for a proof of her identity, to which " Schura " forthwith replied : —

" Invite Nikolaus, arrange a seance, and I will come."

It will be seen from this reply that "Schura," who during her life had learnt to despise the conventionalities of society, as is the custom among the Socialists, remained true to her character, and again demanded what was an impossibility. Nikolaus had never been in Mrs. von Wiesler's house. Sophie then asked for another proof of her identity, without Nikolaus being brought in at all, and requested that it might be a convincing one.

" I will appear to thee," was the reply.

" How ? "

"Thou wilt see."

A few days later Sophie was returning home from a soire'e ; it was nearly 4 A.M. She was just retiring, and was at the door between her bedroom and the dining-room, there being no lights in the latter, when she saw on the wall of the dining-room, in sight of the door at which she stood, a luminous round spot, with, as it were, shoulders. This lasted for two or three seconds, and disappeared, ascending towards the ceiling. Sophie immediately assured herself that it was not the reflection of any light coming from the street.

At the stance on the following Tuesday, an explanation of this appearance being asked for, " Schura " replied : —

" It was the outline of a head with shoulders. I cannot appear more distinctly. I am still weak."

Many other details, which I have passed over, tended to convince Sophie of the reality of " Schura's " identity, yet she could not bring herself to carry out that which "Schura" desired her to do. She therefore proposed as a suitable compromise that she should acquaint Nikolaus's parents with what had occurred.

This proposal aroused " Schura's " strongest displeasure, expressed by violent movements of the saucer, and by the sentence : —

" That will lead to nothing;" — after which disparaging epithets followed, impossible to repeat here, especially applicable to persons of weak and irresolute character, with whom the energetic and decisive " Schura " had no patience — epithets which are not found in dictionaries, but which were expressions used by "Schura" in her lifetime, and characteristic of her. This was confirmed in the sequel.

Nevertheless Sophie continued to hesitate, and at each successive stance " Schura " insisted more and more imperatively that Sophie must act at once. This is very important to notice, as we shall see later. This want of resolution on the part of Sophie was ascribed by " Schura " to the influence of Mrs. von Wiesler. From the beginning " Schura" had seemed to bear a grudge against Mrs. von Wiesler. From the first stance she addressed Sophie only. She never permitted Mrs. von Wiesler to ask a question. Whenever she attempted

875] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 181

to do so, she met her with a—" Be silent— be silent ! " Whereas in addressing Sophie she overwhelmed her with the tenderest expressions.

How great was the astonishment and consternation of the ladies, when at the sdance on the 26th of February the first words were :•—

"It is too late. Thou wilt repent it bitterly. The pangs of remorse will follow thee. Expect his arrest ! "

These were " Schura's " last words. From this time she was silent. A seance was attempted on the following Tuesday, but there was no result. The seances of Mrs. von Wiesler and her daughter were from that time entirely given up.

While these stances were being held, Mrs. von Wiesler naturally kept me informed of what transpired, and consulted with me as to what was to be done in view of the extraordinary character of "Schura's" requests. Some time after they had ceased Mrs. von Wiesler, to satisfy her own conscience and to comfort her daughter, resolved to communicate the whole episode to the parents of Nikolaus. They paid no attention to it. Nothing was elicited that any fault could be found with. The family were quite satisfied in regard to Nikolaus's conduct. But it is important to bear in mind the fact that these Spiritualistic communications were made known to the parents before the final issue. When during the remainder of the year everything went on happily, Sophie became fully convinced that all the communications were only lies, and formed a resolution that she would never again occupy herself with Spiritualistic stances.

Another year passed without any special event. But on the gth of March, 1887, the secret police suddenly searched Nikolaus's rooms. He was arrested in his own house, and within twenty-four hours was exiled from St. Petersburg. It came out later that his crime was taking part in anarchical assemblies — assemblies which were held in the months of January and February 1885, exactly corresponding with the time when "Schura" was insisting that steps should then be taken to dissuade Nikolaus from taking part in such meetings. Only now were the communications of " Schura " estimated at their true value. The notes which Mrs. von Wiesler had made were read again and again by the families both of " Schura " and of Nikolaus. " Schura's " identity in all those manifestations was recognised as incontestably demonstrated, in the first place, by the main fact in relation to Nikolaus, by other intimate particulars, and also by the totality of the features which characterised her personality. This mournful occurrence fell like a fresh thunderclap on Nikolaus's family, and they had only to thank God that the errors of the young man were not followed by more fatal results.

In order to estimate this incident aright, it is of great importance to establish the relations which existed between the two young ladies. I have requested Madame and Mdlle. von Wiesler to give me on this, as on the previous points, a written memorandum in full detail ; and from that memorandum I extract what follows [somewhat abridged here] : —

In December 1880 Madame von Wiesler and her daughter paid a Christmas visit to " Schura's " grandfather, Senator N., where Sophie saw " Schura " for the first time. Sophie was then about thirteen years old, and " Schura " even younger. Sophie was astonished to see *' Schura's " writing-table covered with books [and had a talk with her about favourite authors]. The two girls often saw each other at a distance in the recreation- room of their school during the winter, but " Schura " was soon transferred to another school. [They met once

at a country-house without exchanging a word, and saw each other once across a theatre. Sophie, in fact, had had one childish talk with " Schura " ; Madame von Wiesler had never had any real talk with her.] Hence it is clear that the relations of these ladies with " Schura " were of the most distant kind, and that they could not know anything of her political secrets.

876. I now give a case which in one respect stands alone. It narrates the success of a direct experiment, — a test-message planned before death, and communicated after death, by a man who held that the hope of an assurance of continued presence was worth at least a resolute effort, whatever its result might be. His tests, indeed, were two, and both were successful. One was the revealing of the place where, before death, he hid a piece of brick marked and broken for special recognition, and the other was the communication of the contents of a short letter which he wrote and sealed before death. We may say that the information was certainly not possessed supraliminally by any living person. I give two other cases in 876 A and B where information given through automatists may hypothetically be explicable by telepathy from the living, although, indeed, in my own view it probably emanated from the deceased as alleged. In one of these cases the place where a missing will had been hidden was revealed to the automatist, but it is not clear whether the will was actually discovered or not before the automatic writing was obtained (although the automatist was unaware of its discovery), and in any case, apparently, its whereabouts was known to some living person who had hidden it, and may not have been known to the deceased before death.

In the other case the whereabouts of a missing note of hand was revealed to the automatists, and even if this could be regarded as absolutely unknown supraliminally to any living person, it is not by any means certain that the fact was known before death to the deceased person from whom the message purported to come.

These cases, therefore, are not such strong evidence for personal identity as the one to which I have referred above, and which I now give, as recording what purports to be the successful accomplishment of an experiment which every one may make ; — which every one ought to make ; — for, small as may be the chances of success, a few score of distinct successes would establish a presumption of man's survival which the common sense of mankind would refuse to explain away. If accepted, the incident shows a continued perception on the part of the deceased of the efforts made by friends to communicate with him.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 248-51.) l

1 An account of this case appeared in an article by Herman Snow in the Religio-Philosophical Journal for January 3 ist, 1891, and Mr. Snow also sent us an earlier article on the subject which he had written in 1881, and of which his second account was a mere repetition. The facts were related to him by the Unitarian minister of the place where Mrs. Finney lived ; and this third-hand account recorded by Mr. Snow fifteen years after the event closely coincides with Mrs. Finney's first-hand one, recorded twenty-five years after the event.

876] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 183

The following letters were received from the principal witness, Mrs. Finney : —

ROCKLAND, MASS., April ityh, 1891.

MR. HODGSON, — DEAR SIR, — Some weeks ago I received from you a few lines asking me to give you an account of the communication received from Cousin Benja in spirit-life, some twenty-five years ago.

For weeks and months before my brother left the form we conversed freely on the subject of spirit communion and such matters, and one morning he requested me to bring him a small piece of brick, also pen and ink; he then made two marks on one side, and one on the other with the ink, then breaking the brick in two, gave me one piece, telling me at the time to take care of it, and some day he would hide the other piece away where no one but himself would know, and after leaving the form, if possible, would return in some way and tell me where it was. I could then compare them together, and it would be a test that he could return and communicate, and my mind could not have any influence over it, as I did not know where he put it,

After he left the form our anxiety was very great to hear and learn all we could of communicating with spirits, and for months we got nothing satisfactory.

We then commenced sitting at the table at home (mother and myself), which we did for some little time ; at last it commenced tipping, and by calling the alphabet spelled out where we could find the piece of brick that he put away, — that was the way we got the test. To us that was truth that spirits can and do communicate with us, and nothing but the influence and power of Benja could tell us that test. — Truly yours, MRS. WM. A. FINNEY.

ROCKLAND, May yd, 1891.

MR. R. HODGSON, — DEAR SIR, — Yours of April zist received, and I will add a few more lines as to statement of brother Benja's communication.

By calling the alphabet we spelled out : —

" You will find that piece of brick in the cabinet under the tomahawk. — BENJA."

I went to that room and took the key, unlocked the cabinet, which had not been touched by any one after he locked it and put away the key. There I found that piece of brick just as it had spelled out, and it corresponded with the piece I had retained, fitting on exactly where he broke it off the piece I had. It was wrapped in a bit of paper and tucked into a shell, and placed in the bottom of the cabinet exactly imder the tomahawk, as was spelled out by the alphabet.

This is truth, and no power but Benja's could tell that.

Mother is not living; I am the only one of the family that is living. — Yours respectfully, MRS. WM. A. FINNEY.

ROCKLAND, May nth, 1891.

MR. R. HODGSON,— DEAR SIR,— Yours of 6th received. I will continue to say, in answer to your questions, that the piece of brick was entirely concealed in the shell, so that it could not be seen from outside of cabinet. It was wrapped in a piece of paper stuck together with mucilage and tucked into the end of the shell, then a piece of paper gummed over that, so that nothing was visible from the shell. The shell was on the lower shelf of the cabinet, and only the top of the shell was visible outside the cabinet.

1 84 CHAPTER VIII [876

One more little incident I will mention, for to me it is as valuable as the other. He wrote me a letter (about the time he gave me the piece of brick) and sealed it, saying at the time it was not to be answered, but the contents of the letter to be told. I got that in the same way I did the other, by calling the alphabet and the table tipping. It was these words : —

u Julia ! do right and be happy. — BENJA."

That was correct. Just the contents of my letter. I have no particular objection as to giving my name, for I have stated nothing but the truth.

At my home in Kingston I have that little shell with the piece of brick, and if you would like them I will send them to you. Will place the brick into the shell as it was when I found it. Of course, the paper that was around it then is worn out years ago. The cabinet is disposed of. JULIA A. FJNNEY.

Mrs. Finney further writes : —

ROCKLAND,/W«<? 26th, 1891.

I send you by express a box containing the letter and shell with the piece of brick. I have placed one piece in the shell just as it was when I found it, so you can see how nicely it was concealed in the shell. The papers that were around it then are worn out. You can retain them if you like, as I do not care for them now.

To me it is a positive truth that he did communicate to us, and our minds could have nothing to do with it. J. A. FINNEY.

ROCKLAND, July igf/t, 1891.

. . . The shell was placed on the same shelf with the tomahawk, and no other shells on that shelf. It was placed with the open side down, and the tomahawk stood directly over it. I cannot say why he did not tell us to look inside of the shell. We started to look as soon as he told us. It was in the cabinet under the tomahawk. We did not wait for any more to be said.

I am not intimately acquainted with many public people. As to my integrity, will refer you to Rev. C. Y. de Normandie, of Kingston.

J. A. FINNEY.

Dr. Hodgson writes : —

The shell is a large Triton, about ten inches long. The piece of brick was wrapped in folds of soft paper and tucked deeply into the recess. Another piece of paper was then gummed around the sides of the shell in the interior, so as absolutely to prevent the piece of brick from falling out. When I received the shell from Mrs. Finney and looked into the interior and shook the shell violently, there was nothing to indicate that the shell contained anything but the piece of gummed paper.

The piece of brick in the shell weighs one and a half ounces, and the piece of brick retained by Mrs. Finney weighs about two and a quarter ounces. The shell with the piece of brick and paper wrapping weighs about eleven and a half ounces.

Mrs. Finney also forwarded me the letter written by her brother. The shell and the pieces of brick and the letter are now all in my possession.

R. HODGSON.

We have a letter (in original) from the Rev. C. Y. de Normandie, of Kingston, Canada, to Mrs. Finney. " I expressed then," he says, speaking of a former note to Dr. Hodgson, which accidentally went astray, " that to the best

878] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 185

knowledge I had of you and to my firm belief your word could be implicitly relied on. I felt confident that you would state a matter as you understood it, as you regarded it, without reference to the consequences ; and that you would not be any more likely to be misled and deceived about a matter of that kind than others similarly situated."

877. The experiment which was in this case successful is one (I repeat) which might be tried by everybody (see 877 A). And I may add the remark that it is to experiment with automatic writing, crystal-vision, &c., rather than to spontaneous apparitions, that we must look for any real information as to the degree in which departed spirits retain their knowledge of the things of earth.

Once more I must express my astonishment and regret that amongst some tens — perhaps hundreds — of thousands of persons, scattered over many countries, who already believe that the road of communication between the two worlds is open, there should be so very few who can or will make any serious effort to obtain fresh evidence of so important a fact. But, quite apart from the Spiritist camp, there are now many inquirers who know that automatic writing is a real fact in nature, and who are willing to discuss with an open mind the origin of any message which may thus be given. Let these set themselves to the task, and the result of organised and intelligent effort will soon, as I believe, be made plain.

For aught that we can tell, there may be — I believe that there are — collaborators elsewhere who only await our appeal. Why should not every death-bed be made the starting-point of a long experiment? And why should not every friend who sails forth KIOJ/WI/ v-rrtp 'HpafcAe'os — into the unknown sea — endeavour to send us news from that bourne from which few travellers, perhaps, have as yet made any adequate or systematic preparation to return?

878. Here, then, let us pause and consider to what point the evidence contained in this chapter has gradually led us. We shall perceive that the motor phenomena have confirmed, and have also greatly extended, the results to which the cognate sensory phenomena had already pointed. We have already noted, in each of the two states of sleep and of waking, the variously expanding capacities of the subliminal self. We have watched a hyperaesthetic intensification of ordinary faculty, —leading up to telaesthesia, and to telepathy from the living and from the departed. Along with these powers, which, on the hypothesis of the soul's independent existence, are at least within our range of analogical conception, we have noted also a precognitive capacity of a type which no fact as yet known to science will help us to explain.

Proceeding to the study of motor automatisms, we have found a third group of cases which independently confirm in each of these lines in turn the results of our analysis of sensory automatisms both in sleep and in waking. Evidence thus convergent will already need no ordinary

boldness of negative assumption if it is to be set aside. But motor automatisms have taught us much more than this. At once more energetic and more persistent than the sensory, they oblige us to face certain problems which the lightness and fugitiveness of sensory impressions allowed us in some measure to evade. Thus when we discussed the mechanism (so to call it) of visual and auditory phantasms, two competing conceptions presented themselves for our choice, — the conception of telepathic impact, and the conception of psychical invasion. Either (we said) there was an influence exerted by the agent on the percipient's mind, which so stimulated the sensory tracts of his brain that he externalised that impression as a quasi-percept, or else the agent in some way modified an actual portion of space where (say) an apparition was discerned, perhaps by several percipients at once.

Phrased in this manner, the telepathic impact seemed the less startling, the less extreme hypothesis of the two, — mainly, perhaps, because the picture which it called up was left so vague and obscure. But now instead of a fleeting hallucination we have to deal with a strong and lasting impulse — such, for instance, as the girl's impulse to write, in Dr. Lie"beault's case (866) : — an impulse which seems to come from the depths of the being, and which (like a post-hypnotic suggestion) may over-ride even strong disinclination, and keep the automatist uncomfortable until it has worked itself out. We may still call this a telepathic impact, if we will, but we shall find it hard to distinguish that term from a psychical invasion. This strong, yet apparently alien, motor innervation corresponds in fact as closely as possible to our idea of an invasion — an invasion no longer of the room only in which the percipient is sitting, but of his own body and his own powers. It is an invasion which, if sufficiently prolonged, would become a possession / and it both unites and intensifies those two earlier conjectures; — of telepathic impact on the percipient's mind, and of " phantasmogenetic presence" in the percipient's surroundings. What seemed at first a mere impact is tending to become a persistent control ; what seemed an incursion merely into the percipient's environment has become an incursion into his organism itself.

879. As has been usual in this inquiry, this slight forward step from vagueness to comparative clearness of conception introduces us at once to a whole series of novel problems. Yet, as we have also learnt to expect, some of our earlier phenomena may have to be called in with advantage to illustrate phenomena more advanced.

In cases of split personality, to begin with, we have seen just the same phenomena occurring where certainly no personality was concerned save the percipient's own. We have seen a section of the subliminal self partially or temporarily dominating the organism ; perhaps (as in Anna Winsor's case, 237 A) controlling permanently one arm alone ; or perhaps controlling intermittently the whole nervous system; — and all this with varying degrees of displacement of the primary personality.

880] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 187

Similarly with post-hypnotic suggestion. We have seen the subliminal self ordered to write (say) " It has left off raining " — and thereupon writing the words without the conscious will of the automatist — and again with varying degrees of displacement of the waking self. The step hence to such a case as Mrs. Newnham's (849 A) is thus not a very long one. Mrs. Newnham's subliminal self, exercising supernormal faculty, and by some effort of us own, acquires certain facts from Mr. Newnham's mind, and uses her hand to- write them down automatically. The great problem here introduced is how the subliminal self acquires the facts, rather than how it succeeds in writing them down when it has once acquired them.

But as we go further we can no longer limit the problem in this way, — to the activities of the automatist's subliminal self. We cannot always assume that some portion of the automatist's personality gets at the supernormal knowledge by some effort of its own. Our evidence, as we know, has pointed decisively to telepathic impacts or influences from without. In the Kirby case (852), for instance, we have supposed that the spirit of the sleeping sister affected the brother by a telepathic impact, from without, which worked itself out by automatic movements just like those automatic movements which we have already described as originating wholly from within. What, then, is the mechanism here? Are we still to suppose that the automatist's subliminal self executes the movements — obeying somehow the bidding of the impulse from without? or does the external agent, who sends the telepathic message, himself execute the movements also, directly using the automatist's arm ? And if telekinetic movements accompany the message, (a subject thus far deferred, but of prime importance), are we to suppose that these also are effected by the percipient's subliminal self, under the guidance of some external spirit, incarnate or discarnate? or are they effected directly by that external spirit ?

880. We cannot really say which of these two is the easier hypothesis.

From one point of view it may seem simpler to keep as long as we can to that acknowledged vera causa, the automatist's subliminal self; and to collect such observations as may indicate any power on its part of producing physical effects outside the organism. Such scattered observations occur at every stage, and even Mrs. Newnham, (I may briefly observe in passing), thought that her pencil, when writing down the messages telepathically derived from her husband, was moved by something other than the ordinary muscular action of the ringers which held it. On the other hand, there seems something very forced in attributing to an external spirit's agency impulses and impressions which seem intimately the automatist's own, and at the same time refusing to ascribe to that external agency phenomena which take place outside the automatist's organism, and which present themselves to him as objective facts, as much outside his own being as the fall of the apple to the ground.

Reflecting on such points — and once admitting this kind of interaction between the automatist's own spirit and an external spirit, incarnate or discarnate — we find the possible combinations presenting themselves in perplexing variety ; — a variety both of agencies on the part of the invading spirit, and of effects on the part of the invaded spirit and organism.

What is that which invades ? and what is that which is displaced or superseded by this invasion ? In what ways may two spirits co-operate in the possession and control of the same organism ?

These last words — control and possession — remind us of the great mass of vague tradition and belief to the effect that spirits of the departed may exercise such possession or control over the living. To those ancient and vague beliefs it will be our task in the next chapter to give a form as exact and stable as we can. And observe with how entirely novel a preparation of mind we now enter on that task. The examination of " possession " is no longer to us, as to the ordinary civilised inquirer, a merely antiquarian or anthropological research into forms of superstition lying wholly apart from any valid or systematic thought. On the contrary, it is an inquiry directly growing out of previous evidence ; directly needed for the full comprehension of known facts as well as for the discovery of facts unknown. We need (so to say), to analyse the spectrum of helium, as detected in the sun, in order to check and correct our spectrum of helium as detected in the Bath waters. We are obliged to seek for certain definite phenomena in the spiritual world in order to explain certain definite phenomena of the world of matter.



Chapter IX. Trance, Possession, and Ecstasy

Vicit iter durum pietas.

— VIRGIL.

900. The appearance of this book has been delayed for several years by several causes, of which it is to be feared that the chief has been that cause which the gods call Sheer Indolence, and men the Pressure of Occupation. What evil may have resulted from the long deferment it is not for the author to say. What counterbalancing good there may have accrued ought to be manifest in the following chapter. For it is in this chapter that the main difference lies between what I should have written ten years ago, and what it seems to me not only permissible, but even urgently necessary to write to-day. It is in what must needs be said about Possession that the great change has come.

Possession, to define it for the moment in the narrowest way, is a more developed form of Motor Automatism. The difference broadly is, that in Possession the automatist's own personality does for the time altogether disappear, while there is a more or less complete substitution of personality ; writing or speech being given by a spirit through the entranced organism. The change which has come over this branch of evidence since the present work was first projected, in 1888, is most significant. There existed indeed, at that date, a good deal of evidence which pointed in this direction,1 but for various reasons most of that evidence was still possibly explicable in other ways. Even the phenomena of Mr. W. S. Moses left it possible to argue that the main "controls" under which he wrote or spoke when entranced were self-suggestions of his own mind, or phases of his own deeper personality. I had not then had the opportunity, which the kindness of his executors after his death afforded to me, of studying the whole series of his original note-books, and forming at first-hand my present conviction that spiritual agency was an actual and important element in that long sequence of communications. On the whole, I did not then anticipate that the theory of possession could be presented as more than a plausible speculation, or as a supplement to other lines of proof of man's survival of death.

1 The cases of Swedenborg, Cahagnet's subject, D. D. Home, and Stainton Moses will be discussed in the course of this chapter.

The position of things, as the reader of the S.P.R. Proceedings knows, has in the last decade undergone a complete change. The trancephenomena of Mrs. Piper — so long and so carefully watched by Dr. Hodgson and others — formed, I think, by far the most remarkable mass of psychical evidence till then adduced in any quarter. And more recently other series of trance-phenomena with other "mediums" — though still incomplete — have added materially to the evidence obtained through Mrs. Piper. The result broadly is that these phenomena of possession are now the most amply attested, as well as intrinsically the most advanced, in our whole repertory.

901. Nor, again, is the mere increment of direct evidence, important though that is, the sole factor in the changed situation. Not only has direct evidence grown, but indirect evidence, so to say, has moved to meet it. The notion of personality, — of the control of organism by spirit, — has gradually been so modified that Possession, which passed till the other day as a mere survival of savage thought, is now seen to be the consummation, the furthest development, of many lines of experiment, observation, reflection, which the preceding chapters have opened to our view.

Let us then at once consider what the notion of possession does actually claim. It will be better to face that claim in its full extent at once, as it will be seen that the evidence, while rising through various stages, does in the end insist on all that the ancient term implies. The leading modern cases, of which Stainton Moses and Mrs. Piper may be taken as types, are closely analogous, presenting many undesigned coincidences, some of which come out only on close examination.

The claim, then, is that the automatist, in the first place, falls into a trance, during which his spirit partially " quits his body " : enters at any rate into a state in which the spiritual world is more or less open to its perception ; and in which also — and this is the novelty — it so far ceases to occupy the organism as to leave room for an invading spirit to use it in somewhat the same fashion as its owner is accustomed to use it.

The brain being thus left temporarily and partially uncontrolled, a disembodied spirit sometimes, but not always, succeeds in occupying it ; and occupies it with varying degrees of control. In some cases (Mrs. Piper) two or more spirits may simultaneously control different portions of the same organism.

The controlling spirit proves his identity mainly by reproducing, in speech or writing, facts which belong to his memory and not to the automatist's memory. He may also give evidence of supernormal perception of other kinds.

His manifestations may differ very considerably from the automatist's normal personality. Yet in one sense it is a process of selection rather than of addition ; the spirit selects what parts of the brain-machinery he will use, but he cannot get out of that machinery more than it is con-

902] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 191

structed to perform. The spirit can indeed produce facts and names unknown to the automatist ; but they must be, as a rule, such facts and names as the automatist could easily have repeated, had they been known to him : — not, for instance, mathematical formulae or Chinese sentences, if the automatist is ignorant of mathematics or of Chinese.

After a time the control gives way, and the automatist's spirit returns. The automatist, awaking, may or may not remember his experiences in the spiritual world during the trance. In some cases (Swedenborg) there is this memory of the spiritual world, but no possession of the organism by an external spirit. In others (Cahagnet's subject) there is utterance during the trance as to what is being discerned by the automatist, yet no memory thereof on waking. In others (Mrs. Piper) there is neither utterance as a rule, or at least no prolonged utterance, by the automatist's own spirit, nor subsequent memory ; but there is writing or utterance during the trance by controlling spirits.

902. Now this seems a strange doctrine to have reached after so much disputation. For it simply brings us back to the creeds of the Stone Age. We have come round again to the primitive practices of the shaman and the medicine-man; — to a doctrine of spiritual intercourse which was once oecumenical, but has now taken refuge in African swamps and Siberian tundras and the snow-clad wastes of the Red Indian and the Esquimaux. If, as is sometimes advised, we judge of the worth of ideas by tracing their origins, no conception could start from a lower level of humanity. It might be put out of court at once as unworthy of civilised men.

Fortunately, however, our previous discussions have supplied us with a somewhat more searching criterion. Instead of asking in what age a doctrine originated — with the implied assumption that the more recent it is, the better — we can now ask how far it is in accord or in discord with a great mass of actual recent evidence which comes into contact, in one way or another, with nearly every belief as to an unseen world which has been held at least by western men. Submitted to this test, the theory of possession gives a remarkable result. It cannot be said to be inconsistent with any of our proved facts. We know absolutely nothing which negatives its possibility.

Nay, more than this. The theory of possession actually supplies us with a powerful method of co-ordinating and explaining many earlier groups of phenomena, if only we will consent to explain them in a way which at first sight seemed extreme in its assumptions — seemed unduly prodigal of the marvellous. Yet as to that difficulty we have learnt by this time that no explanation of psychical phenomena is really simple, and that our best clue is to get hold of some group which seems to admit of one interpretation only, and then to use that group as a point de repere from which to attack more complex problems.

Now I think that the Moses-Piper group of trance-phenomena cannot

be intelligently explained on any theory except that of possession. And I therefore think it important to consider in what way earlier phenomena have led up to possession, and in what way the facts of possession, in their turn, affect our view of these earlier phenomena.

If we analyse our observations of possession, we find two main factors — the central operation, which is the control by a spirit of the sensitive's organism; and the indispensable prerequisite, which is the partial and temporary desertion of that organism by the percipient's own spirit.

Let us consider first how far this withdrawal of the living man's spirit from his organism has been rendered conceivable by evidence already obtained.

903. First of all, the splits, and substitutions of phases of personality with which our second chapter made us familiar have great significance for possession also.

We have there seen some secondary personality, beginning with slight and isolated sensory and motor manifestations, yet going on gradually to complete predominance, — complete control of all supraliminal manifestation.

The mere collection and description of such phenomena has up till now savoured of a certain boldness. The idea of tracing the possible mechanism involved in these transitions has scarcely arisen.

Yet it is manifest that there must be a complex set of laws concerned with such alternating use of brain-centres; — developments, one may suppose, of those unknown physical laws underlying ordinary memory, of which no one has formed as yet even a first rough conception.

An ordinary case of ecmnesia may present problems as insoluble in their way as those offered by spirit- possession itself. There may be in ecmnesia periods of life absolutely and permanently extruded from memory ; and there may be also periods which are only temporarily thus extruded. Thus on Wednesday and Thursday I may be unaware of what I learnt and did on Monday and Tuesday; and then on Friday I may recover Monday's and Tuesday's knowledge, as well as retaining Wednesday's and Thursday's, so that my brain-cells have taken on, so to say, two separate lines of education since Sunday — that which began on Monday, and that which began on Wednesday. These intercurrent educations may have been naturally discordant, and may be fused in all kinds of ways in the ultimate synthesis.

These processes are completely obscure ; and all that can be said is that their mechanism probably belongs to the same unknown series of operations which ultimately lead to that completest break in the history of the brain-cells which consists in their intercalary occupation by an external spirit.

904. Passing on to genius, which I discussed in my third chapter, it is noticeable that there also there is a certain degree of temporary substitution of one control for another over important brain-centres.

906] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 193

We must here regard the subliminal self as an entity partially distinct from the supraliminal, and its occupation of these brain-centres habitually devoted to supraliminal work is a kind of possession, which illustrates in yet another way the rapid metastasis of psychical product (so to term it) of which these highest centres are capable. The highest genius would thus be the completest self-possession^ — the occupation and dominance of the whole organism by those profoundest elements of the self which act from the fullest knowledge, and in the wisest way.

905. The next main subject which fell under our description was sleep. And this state — the normal state which most resembles trance — has long ago suggested the question which first hints at the possibility of ecstasy, namely, What becomes of the soul during sleep? I think that our evidence has shown that sometimes during apparent ordinary sleep the spirit may travel away from the body, and may bring back a memory, more or less confused, of what it has seen in this clairvoyant excursion. This may indeed happen for brief flashes during waking moments also. But ordinary sleep seems to help the process ; and deeper states of sleep — spontaneous or induced — seem still further to facilitate it. In the coma preceding death, or during that " suspended animation " which is sometimes taken for death, this travelling faculty has seemed to reach its highest point.

906. I have spoken of deeper states of sleep, "spontaneous or induced," and here the reader will naturally recall much that has been said of ordinary somnambulism, much that has been said of hypnotic trance. Hypnotic trance has created for us, with perfect facility, situations externally indistinguishable from what I shall presently claim as true possession. A quasi-personality, arbitrarily created, may occupy the organism, responding to speech or sign in some characteristic fashion, although without producing any fresh verifiable facts as evidence to the alleged identity. Nay sometimes, as in a few of the Pesaro experiments, (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 563-565), there may be indications that something of a new personality is there. And on the other hand, the sensitive's own spirit often claims to have been absent elsewhere, — much in the fashion in which it sometimes imagines itself to have been absent during ordinary sleep, but with greater persistence and lucidity.

Our inquiry into the nature of what is thus alleged to be seen in sleep and cognate states has proved instructive. Sometimes known earthly scenes appear to be revisited — with only such alteration as may have taken place since the sleeper last visited them in waking hours. But sometimes also there is an admixture of an apparently symbolical element. The earthly scene includes some element of human action, which is presented in a selected or abbreviated fashion, as though some mind had been concerned to bring out a special significance from the complex story. Sometimes this element becomes quite dominant; phantasmal figures are seen ; or (as in Dr. Wiltse's case of apparent death, 713 A) there VOL. ii. N

may be a prolonged symbolical representation of an entry into the spiritual world.

Cases like these do of course apparently support that primitive doctrine of the spirit's actual wandering in space. On the other hand, this notion has become unwelcome to modern thought, which is less unwilling to believe in some telepathic intercourse between mind and mind in which space is not involved. For my own part, I have already explained that I think that the evidence to an at least apparent movement of some kind in space must outweigh any mere speculative presumption against it. And I hold that these new experiences of possession fall on this controversy with decisive force. It is so strongly claimed, in every instance of possession, that the sensitive's own spirit must in some sense vacate the organism, in order to allow another spirit to enter, — and the evidence for the reality of possession is at the same time so strong, — that I think that we must argue back from this spatial change as a relatively certain fact, and must place a corresponding interpretation on earlier phenomena. Such an interpretation, if once admitted, does certainly meet the phenomena in the way most accordant with the subjective impressions of the various percipients.

As we have already repeatedly found, it is the bold evolutionary hypothesis which best fixes and colligates the scattered facts. We encounter in these studies phenomena of degeneration and phenomena of evolution. The degenerative phenomena are explicable singly and in detail as declensions in divergent directions from an existing level. The evolutive phenomena point, on the other hand, to new generalisations ; — to powers previously unrecognised towards which our evidence converges along constantly multiplying lines.

This matter of psychical excursion from the organism ultimately involves the extremest claim to novel faculty which has ever been advanced for men. For it involves, as we shall see, the claim to ecstasy : — to a wandering vision which is not confined to this earth or this material world alone, but introduces the seer into the spiritual world and among communities higher than any which this planet knows. The discussion of this transportation, however, will be better deferred until after the evidence for possession has been laid before the reader at some length.

Continuing, then, for the present our analysis of the idea of possession, we come now to its specific feature, — the occupation by a spiritual agency of the entranced and partially vacated organism. Here it is that our previous studies will do most to clear our conceptions. Instead of at once leaping to the question of what spirits in their essence are, — of what they can do and cannot do, — of the antecedent possibility of their re-entry into matter, and the like, — we must begin by simply carrying the idea of telepathy to its furthest point. We must imagine telepathy becoming as central and as intense as possible ; — and we shall find that of two diverging types of telepathic intercourse which will thus present them-

908] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 195

selves, the one will gradually correspond to possession, and the other to ecstasy.

907. But here let us pause, and consider what is the truest conception which we are by this time able to form of telepathy. The word has been a convenient one ; the central notion — of communication beyond this range of sense — can at any rate thus be expressed in simple terms. But nevertheless there has been nothing to assure us that our real comprehension of telepathic processes has got much deeper than that verbal definition. Our conception of telepathy, indeed, to say nothing of telaesthesia, has needed to be broadened with each fresh stage of our evidence. That evidence at first revealed to us certain transmissions of thoughts and images which suggested the passage of actual etherial vibrations from brain to brain. Nor indeed can any one say at any point of our evidence that etherial vibrations are demonstrably not concerned in the phenomena. We cannot tell how far from the material world (to use a crude phrase) some etherial agency may possibly extend. But telepathic phenomena are in fact soon seen to overpass any development which imaginative analogy can give to the conception of etherial radiation from one material point to another.

For from the mere transmission of isolated ideas or pictures there is, as my readers know, a continuous progression to impressions and apparitions far more persistent and complex. We encounter an influence which suggests no mere impact of etherial waves, but an intelligent and responsive presence, resembling nothing so much as the ordinary human intercourse of persons in bodily nearness. Such visions or auditions, inward or externalised, are indeed sometimes felt to involve an even closer contact of spirits than the common intercourse of earth allows. One could hardly assign etherial undulations as their cause without assigning that same mechanism to all our emotions felt towards each other, or even to our control over our own organisms.

Nay, more. There is — as I have striven to show — a further progression from these telepathic intercommunications between living men to intercommunications between living men and discarnate spirits. And this new thesis, — in every way of vital importance, — while practically solving one problem on which I have already dwelt, opens also a possibility of the determination of another problem, nowise accessible until now. In the first place, we may now rest assured that telepathic communication is not necessarily propagated by vibrations proceeding from an ordinary material brain. For the discarnate spirit at any rate has no such brain from which to start them.

908. So much, in the first place, for the agenfs end of the communication.

And in the second place, we now discern a possibility of getting at the percipient's end ; of determining whether the telepathic impact is received by the brain or by the spirit of the living man,

or by both inseparably, or sometimes by one and sometimes by the other.

On this problem, I say, the phenomena of automatic script, of tranceutterance, of spirit-possession, throw more of light than we could have ventured to hope.

Stated broadly, our trance-phenomena show us to begin with that several currents of communication can pass at once from discarnate spirits to a living man; — and can pass in very varying ways. For clearness' sake I will put aside for the present all cases where the telepathic impact takes an externalised or sensory form, and will speak only of intellectual impressions and motor automatisms.

Now these may pass through all grades of apparent centrality. If a man, awake and in other respects fully self-controlled, feels his hand impelled to scrawl words on a piece of paper, without consciousness of motor effort of his own, the impulse does not seem to him a central one, although some part of his brain is presumably involved. On the other hand, a much less conspicuous invasion of his personality may feel much more central ; as, for instance, a premonition of evil, — an inward heaviness which he can scarcely define. Well, the motor automatism goes on until it reaches the point of possession / — that is to say, until the man's own consciousness is absolutely in abeyance, and every part of his body is utilised by the invading spirit or spirits. What happens in such conditions to the man's ruling principle — to his own spirit — we must consider presently. But so far as his organism is concerned, the invasion seems complete : and it indicates a power which is indeed telepathic in a true sense ; — yet not quite in the sense which we originally attached to the word. We first thought of telepathy as of a communication between two minds, whereas what we have here looks more like a communication between a mind and a body, — an external mind, in place of the mind which is accustomed to rule that particular body.

There is in such a case no apparent communication between the discarnate mind and the mind of the automatist. Rather there is a kind of contact between the discarnate mind and the brain of the automatist, in so far that the discarnate mind, pursuing its own ends, is helped up to a certain point by the accumulated capacities of the automatist's brain ; — and similarly is hindered by its incapacities.

909. Yet here the most characteristic element of telepathy, I repeat, seems to have dropped out altogether. There is no perceptible communion between the mind of the entranced person and any other mind whatever. He is possessed, but is kept in unconsciousness, and never ; regains memory of what his lips have uttered during his trance.

But let us see whether we have thus grasped all the trance-phenomena ; ; — whether something else may not be going on, which is more truly, more i centrally telepathic.

To go back to the earliest stage of telepathic experience, we can see

910] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 197

well enough that the experimental process might quite possibly involve two different factors. The percipient's mind must somehow receive the telepathic impression ; — and to this reception we can assign no definite physical correlative ; — and also the percipient's motor or sensory centres must receive an excitation ; — which excitation may be communicated, for aught we know, either by his own mind in the ordinary way, or by the agent's mind in some direct way, — which I may call telergic, thus giving a more precise sense to a word which I long ago suggested as a kind of correlative to telepathic. That is to say, there may even in these apparently simple cases be first a transmission from agent to percipient in the spiritual world, and then an action on the percipient's physical brain, of the same type as spirit-possession. This action on the physical brain may be due either to the percipient's own spirit, or subliminal self, or else directly to the agent's spirit. For I must repeat that the phenomena of possession seem to indicate that the extraneous spirit acts on a man's organism in very much the same way as the man's own spirit habitually acts on it. One must thus practically regard the body as an instrument upon which a spirit plays; — an ancient metaphor which now seems actually our nearest approximation to truth.

Proceeding to the case of telepathic or veridical apparitions, we see the same hints of a double nature in the process ; — traces of two elements mingling in various degrees. At the spiritual end there may be what we have called " clairvoyant visions," — pictures manifestly symbolical, and not located by the observer in ordinary three-dimensional space. These seem analogous to the views of the spiritual world which the sensitive enjoys during entrancement. Then comes that larger class of veridical apparitions where the figure seems to be externalised from the percipient's mind, some stimulus having actually been applied, — whether by agent's or percipient's spirit, — to the appropriate brain-centre. These cases of " sensory automatism " resemble those experimental transferences of pictures of cards, &c. And beyond these again, on the physical or rather the ultra-physical side, come those collective apparitions which in my view involve some unknown kind of modification of a certain portion of space not occupied by any organism, — as opposed to a modification of centres in one special brain. Here comes in, as I hold, the gradual transition from subjective to objective, as the portion of space in question is modified in a manner to affect a larger and larger number of percipient minds.

910. Now when we proceed from these apparitions of the living to apparitions of the departed, we find very much the same types persisting still. We find symbolical visions of departed persons, and of scenes among which they seem to dwell. We find externalised apparitions or phantasms of departed persons, — indicating that some point in the percipient's brain has been stimulated by his own or by some other spirit. And finally, as has already been said, we find that in certain cases of possession these two kinds of influence are simultaneously carried to an

extreme. The percipient automatist of earlier stages becomes no longer a percipient but an automatist pure and simple, — so far as his body is concerned, — for his whole brain — not one point alone — seems now to be stimulated and controlled by an extraneous spirit, and he is not himself aware of what his body writes or utters. And meantime his spirit, partially set free from the body, may be purely percipient; — may be enjoying that other spiritual form of communication more completely than in any type of vision which our description had hitherto reached.

911. This point attained, another analogy, already mentioned, will be at once recalled. There is another class of phenomena, besides telepathy, of which this definition of possession at once reminds us. We have dealt much with secondary personalities, — with severances and alternations affecting a man's own spirit, in varying relation with his organism. Fe"lida X.'s developed secondary personality, for instance (231 A), might be defined as another fragment — or another synthesis — of Felida's spirit acting upon her organism in much the same way as the original fragment — or the primary synthesis — of her spirit was wont to act upon it.

Plainly, this analogy is close enough to be likely to lead to practical confusion. On what grounds can we base our distinctions? What justifies us in saying that FeUida X.'s organism was controlled only by another modification of her own personality, but that Mrs. Piper's is controlled by George Pelham (959) ? May there not be any amount of selfsuggestion, colouring with the fictitious hue of all kinds of identities what is in reality no more than an allotropic form of the entranced person himself? Is even the possession by the new personality of some fragments of fresh knowledge any proof of spirit-control? May not that knowledge be gained (as by Le"onie B., see 230 A and 568 A) clairvoyantly or telepathically, with no intervention of any spirit other than of living men?

Yes, indeed, we must reply, there is here a danger of confusion, there is a lack of any well-defined dividing line. While we must decide on general rules, we must also keep our minds open to possible exceptions.

On the negative side, indeed, general rules will carry us a good way. We must not allow ourselves to ascribe to spirit-control cases where no new knowledge is shown in the trance state. And this rule has at once an important consequence, — a consequence which profoundly modifies the antique idea of possession. I know of no evidence, — reaching in any way our habitual standard, — either for angelic, for diabolical, or for hostile possession.

912. And here comes the question : What attitude are we to assume to savage cases of possession ? Are we to accept as genuine the possession of the Esquimaux, the Chinaman, — nay, of the Hebrew of old days ?

Chinese possession is a good example, as described in Dr. Nevius' book (an account of which by Professor Newbold I give in 912 A).

913] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 199

I agree with Professor Newbold in holding that no proof has been shown that there is more in the Chinese cases than that hysterical duplication of personality with which we are so familiar in France and elsewhere.

A devil is not a creature whose existence is independently known to science ; and the accounts of the behaviour of the invading devils seems due to mere self-suggestion. With uncivilised races, even more than among our own friends, we are bound to insist on the rule that there must be some supernormal knowledge shown before we may assume an external influence. It may of course be replied that the character shown by the " devils " was fiendish and actually hostile to the possessed person. Can we suppose that the tormentor was actually a fraction of the tormented?

I reply that such a supposition, so far from being absurd, is supported by well-known phenomena both in insanity and in mere hysteria.

Especially in the Middle Ages, — amid powerful self-suggestions of evil and terror, — did these quasi-possessions reach an intensity and violence which the calm and sceptical atmosphere of the modern hospital checks and discredits. The devils with terrifying names which possessed Soeur Angelique of Loudun (see 832 B) would at the Salpetriere under Charcot in our days have figured merely as stages of " clounisme " and " attitudes passionelles."

And even now these splits of personality seem occasionally to destroy all sympathy between the normal individual and a divergent fraction. No great sympathy was felt by Leonie II. for L6onie I. (230 A). And Dr. Morton Prince's case (234 A) shows us the deepest and ablest of the personalities of his "Miss Beauchamp," positively spiteful in its relation to her main identity.

Bizarre though a house thus divided against itself may seem, the moral dissidence is merely an exaggeration of the moral discontinuity already observable in the typical case of Mrs. Newnham (849 A). There the secondary intelligence was merely tricky, not malevolent. But its trickiness was wholly alien from Mrs. Newnham's character, — was something, indeed, which she would have energetically repudiated.

913. It seems therefore, — and the analogy of dreams points in this direction also, — that our moral nature is as easily split up as our intellectual nature, and that we cannot be any more certain that the minor current of personality which is diverted into some new channel will retain moral than that it will retain intellectual coherence.

To return once more to the Chinese devil-possessions. Dr. Nevius asserts, though without adducing definite proof, that the possessing devils sometimes showed supernormal knowledge. This is a better argument for their separate existence than their fiendish temper is ; but it is not in itself enough. The knowledge does not seem to have been specially appropriate to the supposed informing spirit. It seems as though it may have depended upon heightened memory, with possibly some slight tele-

pathic or telaesthetic perception. Heightened memory is thoroughly characteristic of some hysterical phases ; and even the possible traces of telepathy (although far the most important feature of the phenomena, if they really occurred) are, as we have seen, not unknown in trance states (like Leonie's) where there is no indication of an invading spirit.

Temporary control of the organism by a widely divergent fragment of the personality, self-suggested in some dream-like manner into hostility to the main mass of the personality, and perhaps better able than that normal personality to reach and manipulate certain stored impressions, — or even certain supernormal influences, — such will be the formula to which we shall reduce the invading Chinese devil, as described by Dr. Nevius, — and probably the great majority of supposed devil-possessions of similar type.

The great majority, no doubt, but perhaps not all. It would indeed be matter for surprise if such trance-phenomena as those of Mrs. Piper and other modern cases had appeared in the world without previous parallel. Much more probable is it that similar phenomena have occurred sporadically from the earliest times, — although men have not had enough of training to analyse them.

And, in fact, among the endless descriptions of trance-phenomena with which travellers furnish us, there are many which include points so concordant with our recent observations that we cannot but attach some weight to coincidences so wholly undesigned.1 But although this may be admitted, I still maintain that the only invaders of the organism who have as yet made good their title have been human, and have been friendly. "The devils of Loudun " and the like have, I repeat, entirely failed to substantiate their independent existence. The higher influences which inspired the " Martyrs of the Cevennes " are not at this distance of time clearly separable from the inspirations of genius. The teasing, mystifying " controls " whom we have encountered so often in earlier stages of motor automatisms (deceptive written messages and the like) are perhaps the most puzzling. They suggest — nor can we absolutely disprove the suggestion — a type of intelligences inferior to human, — animal-like, and perhaps parasitic. But we have seen already that for these cases too a simpler explanation is forthcoming. There is nothing in the mere fact of the teasing annoyance to negative the supposition that these controls are also fragments — we may

1 One important point of similarity is the concurrence in some savage ceremonies of utterance through an invading spirit and travelling clairvoyance exercised meantime by the man whose organism is thus invaded. The uncouth spirit shouts and bellows, presumably with the lungs of the medicine-man, hidden from view in profound slumber. Then the medicine-man awakes, — and tells the listening tribe the news which his sleepwanderings, among gods or men, have won.

If this indeed be thus, it fits in strangely with the experiences of our modern seers, — with the spiritual interchange which takes place when a discarnate intelligence occupies the organism and meantime the incarnate intelligence, temporarily freed, awakes to wider percipience, — in this or in another world.

915] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 201

call them splinters — of the man's own split personality. His will and character may divide up in manifestation just as his intellect may do.

914. Thus far, then, our field is clear, and with this clearance, I think, should vanish the somewhat grim associations which have gathered around the word possession. Th what is now to be described there may often be cause for perplexity, but I have never seen cause for fear. Nay, how far remote from fear is the resultant feeling, the sequel will show.

Assuming then, as I think we at present may assume, that we have to deal only with spirits who have been men like ourselves, and who are still animated by much the same motives as those which influence us, we may briefly consider, on similar analogical grounds, what range of spirits are likely to be able to affect us, and what difficulties they are likely to find in doing so. Of course, actual experience alone can decide this ; but nevertheless our expectations may be usefully modified if we reflect beforehand how far such changes of personality as we already know can suggest to us the limits of these profounder substitutions.

What, to begin with, do we find to be the case as to addition of faculty in alternating states ? How far do such changes bring with them unfamiliar powers ?

Reference to the recorded cases will show us that existing faculty may be greatly quickened and exalted. There may be an increase both in actual perception and in power of remembering or reproducing what has once been perceived. There may be increased control over muscular action, — as shown, for instance, in improved billiard-playing, — in the secondary state. But there is little evidence of the acquisition — telepathy apart— of any actual mass of fresh knowledge, — such as a new language, or a stage of mathematical knowledge unreached before. We shall not therefore be justified by analogy in expecting that an external spirit controlling an organism will be able easily to modify it in such a way as to produce speech in a language previously unknown. The brain is used as something between a typewriter and a calculating machine. German words, for instance, are not mere combinations of letters, but specific formulae ; they can only seldom and with great difficulty be got out of a machine which has not been previously fashioned for their production.

915. Consider, again, the analogies as to memory. In the case of alternations of personality, memory fails and changes in what seems a quite capricious way. The gaps which then occur recall (as I have said) the ecmnesice or blank unrecollected spaces which follow upon accidents to the head, or upon crises of fever, when all memories that belong to a particular person or to a particular period of life are clean wiped out, other memories remaining intact. Compare, again, the memory of waking life which we retain in dream. This too is absolutely capricious ; —I may forget my own name in a dream, and yet remember perfectly the kind of chairs in my dining-room. Or I may remember the chairs,

but locate them in some one else's house. No one can predict the kind of confusion which may occur.

916. We have also the parallel of somnambulic utterance. In talking with a somnambulist, be the somnambulism natural or induced, we find it hard to get into continuous colloquy on our own subjects. To begin with, he probably will not speak continuously for long together. He drops back into a state in which he cannot express himself at all. And when he does talk, he is apt to talk only on his own subjects ; — to follow out his own train of ideas, — interrupted rather than influenced by what we say to him. The difference of state between waking and sleep is in many ways hard to bridge over.

We have thus three parallelisms which may guide and limit our expectations. From the parallelism of possession with split personalities we may infer that a possessing spirit is not likely to be able to inspire into the recipient brain ideas or words of very unfamiliar type. From the parallelism of possession with dream we may infer that the memory of the possessing spirit may be subject to strange omissions and confusions. From the parallelism with somnambulism we may infer that colloquy between a human observer and the possessing spirit is not likely to be full or free, but rather to be hampered by difference of state, and abbreviated by the difficulty of maintaining psychical contact for long together.

917. And here observe how different is the form our expectations will gradually assume from the commonplace — or even from the poetic — notion of what communication with the dead is likely to be, if it can take place at all. We now expect to have to do, not with a voice " monotonous and hollow like a ghost's, denouncing judgment " ; — but rather with a voice incoherent and fugitive, like the voice of a sleeper ; — with memories broken and arbitrary, like the memories of a dream.

And similarly as to what the voice is to tell us. We have no reason for anticipating either "judgment" or high revelation. We feel pretty sure, indeed, that there will be no ideas expressed which much transcend the automatist's habitual range. And, moreover, on the principle of continuity which has guided us throughout this work, we cannot assume that the departed spirit has already gained any vast increment of knowledge.

Whatever his new opportunities, we feel that his own capacity for learning may not have undergone any sudden change. We can hardly at first expect from him much more than some such account of his new state as may be intelligible to our material conceptions.

This, I say, is what we who are prepared by these previous studies are likely to expect. And I shall presently show that this is very much what we actually find. The expectations of the ordinary public, however, as seen both in fiction, and in the disappointed comments with which our actual results are greeted, are of very different scope.

919] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 203

918. There are three strong currents of expectation of which we find constant traces, but with which the phenomena do not comply. The failure of compliance, indeed, leads to indifference or even to ridicule.

(i.) There is the orthodox or traditional line of expectation. This leads people to expect an immediate vision of Jesus Christ, or of angels or devils ; or some marked and definite division of good and evil souls ; — or at least some foresight of the Last Judgment. There is not, however, so far as I know, any confirmation at all, from apparitions or messages, of any of these anticipations.

Perhaps the most striking part of this negative evidence is the absence, in well-attested cases, of any mention of evil spirits other than human.1 The belief in devils has played an enormous part in almost all human creeds, and it was undoubtedly strong in the minds of many of the persons with whom communication has been held. Unhappy figures have been seen ; regret and remorse have been expressed. But of evil spirits other than human there is no news whatever.

Here is a definite case in which I venture to hope that theological dogma will be insensibly modified by fresh information, and that an error which has caused much misery will cease to trouble mankind.

(2.) The strain of religious anticipation merges gradually into what I have called the romantic. Men are tempted to think that the apparition or message of a departed friend is a special privilege ; — directly granted by Providence, or won in some way by strength of affection. In actual experience we find that although affection may help by inspiring the wish to communicate, the power is something quite independent of affection ; — something which love may lack and indifference possess. Nay, it is by no means certain that any act of will need be involved in the apparition, which may very probably occur in automatic fashion.

This has been made a subject of ridicule, — as though it were a meaningless thing that B should appear to A who cares nothing about him. Of course the meaning belongs to the realm of science, not of romance.

(3.) Again, there seems to be a common notion that messages from the next world ought to subserve some practical purpose in this. In fact, such a result seldom occurs : and its absence has been a frequent ground for doubting or deriding the message. Yet the coarseness of such a view hardly needs exposition.

919. The foregoing remarks may, I hope, have prepared the reader to consider the problems of possession with the same open-mindedness which has been needed for the study of previous problems attacked in the present work. I have shown indeed that this new problem may be regarded as the natural sequence or development of the old. I have shown that in the movements or utterances of the possessed organism we have motor automatism carried to its furthest stage ; that in the incursion

1 See Chapter VII., section 753.

of the possessing spirit we have telepathic invasion achieving its completest victory. And I have uttered, too, an initial warning against certain misconceptions which have in past time deterred men from serious study of the messages received through such channels.

It is time, then, to proceed to the actual evidence, to detail the various proofs which we have as yet collected to show that such possession has in fact occurred. When this shall have been done, we must again look round us; — and we shall find that in describing this complete or " mediumistic " form of trance, we have opened up analogies with other forms of trance also, which will be discerned as elements in a continuous and mutually corroborative chain of psychological facts.

920. Yet there must needs be one more delay. There is another aspect of possession which must be explained before we can go further ; — involving a group of phenomena which have in various ways done much, to confuse and even to retard our main inquiry, but which, when properly placed and understood, are seen to form an inevitable part of any scheme which strives to discover the influence of unseen agencies in the world we know.

In our discussion of all telepathic and other supernormal influence I have thus far regarded it mainly from the psychological and not from the physical side. I have spoken as though the field of supernormal action has been always the metetherial world. Yet true as this dictum may be in its deepest sense, it cannot represent the whole truth " for beings such as we are, in a world like the present." For us every psychological fact has (so far as we know) a physical side ; and metetherial events, to be perceptible to us, must somehow affect the world of matter.

In sensory and motor automatisms, then, we see effects, supernormally initiated, upon the world of matter.

Imprimis, of course, and in ordinary life our own spirits (their existence once granted) affect our own bodies and are our standing examples of spirit affecting matter. Next, if a man receives a telepathic impact from another incarnate spirit which causes him to see a phantasmal figure, that man's brain has, we may suppose, been directly affected by his own spirit rather than by the spirit of the distant friend. But it may not always be true even in the case of sensory automatisms that the distant spirit has made a suggestion merely to the percipient's spirit which the percipient's own spirit carries out ; and in motor automatisms, as they develop into possession, there are indications, as I have already pointed out, that the influence of the agent's spirit is telergic rather than telepathic, and that we have extraneous spirits influencing the human brain or organism. That is to say, they are producing movements in matter; — even though that matter be organised matter and those movements molecular.

921. So soon as this fact is grasped, — and it has not always been grasped by those who have striven to establish a fundamental difference

922] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 205

between spiritual influence on our spirits and spiritual influence on the material world, — we shall naturally be prompted to inquire whether inorganic matter as well as organic ever shows the agency of extraneous spirits upon it. The reply which first suggests itself is, of course, in the negative. We are constantly dealing with inorganic matter, and no hypothesis of spiritual influence exerted on such matter is needed to explain our experiments. But this is a rough general statement, hardly likely to cover phenomena so rare and fugitive as many of those with which in this inquiry we deal. Let us begin, so to say, at the other end ; not with the broad experience of life, but with the delicate and exceptional cases of possession of which we have lately been speaking.

Suppose that a discarnate spirit, in temporary possession of a living organism, is impelling it to motor automatisms. Can we say a priori what the limits of such automatic movements of that organism are likely to be, in the same way as we can say what the limits of any of its voluntary movements are likely to be? May not this extraneous spirit get more motor power out of the organism than the waking man himself can get out of it? It would not surprise us, for example, if the movements in trance showed increased concentration ; if a dynamometer (for instance) was more forcibly squeezed by the spirit acting through the man than by the man himself. Is there any other way in which one would imagine that a spirit possessing me could use my vital force more skilfully than I could use it myself?

I do not know how my will moves my arm ; but I know by experience that my will generally moves only my arm and what my arm can touch ; — whatever objects are actually in contact with the " protoplasmic skeleton " which represents the life of my organism. Yet I can sometimes move objects not in actual contact, as by melting them with the heat or (in the dry air of Colorado) kindling them with the electricity, which my fingers emit. I see no very definite limit to this power. I do not know all the forms of energy which my fingers might, under suitable training, emit.

922. And now suppose that a possessing spirit can use my organism more skilfully than I can. May he not manage to emit from that organism some energy which can visibly move ponderable objects not actually in contact with my flesh? That would be a phenomenon of possession not very unlike its other phenomena ; — and it would be telekinesis.

By that word (due to M. Aksakoff ) it is convenient to describe what have been called " the physical phenomena of spiritualism," as to whose existence as a reality, and not as a system of fraudulent pretences, fierce controversy has raged for half a century, and is still raging.

My own method of dealing with this thorny subject in this book will be as follows : — I have first indicated, in the pages just preceding, that telekinetic phenomena can be fitted, with no manifest illogicality, into that conception of possession which forms the most advanced point to

which our evidence leads us. I shall next feel bound to utter an earnest warning against the fraud and folly which have gathered with exceptional thickness round this special group of phenomena. I shall then refer to certain phenomena of telekinesis, in cases where they are inextricably mixed up with the psychological phenomena which I consider as my more especial field. And finally, in a long Appendix (926 A), I shall set forth a "Scheme of Vital Faculty" which will suggest some possible parallels between the operations of the supraliminal self, the subliminal self, and the possessing spirit.

923. Along this line, as I believe, we reach important truths ; — and truths entirely concordant with the psychological evidence of preceding chapters. And yet it is with a half-reluctant feeling that I admit the topic into this work. So sorely needed here is the word of warning of which I have spoken ; — so humiliating is the confession which must be made of the fraud and folly which have made of spiritualism a kind of by-word in scientific circles ; — which have presented the very men who have obtained the first inkling of momentous truths in the guise of a credulous sect, preyed upon by a specially repulsive group of impostors. The fact is, that just here, and not earlier, we reach the points where the enormous issues, which have in truth underlain each stage and step in our long inquiry, become conspicuous to the ordinary mind. We somewhat suddenly pass from speculations and experiments on which the public look with the indifference which they feel for philosophy to speculations and experiments on which they look with the interest which they feel in the religious dogmas which are to decide their own future. I do not say that the public interested has been a very wide one. It has indeed been wide enough, as I have said, to foster and support a particularly detestable group of charlatans; but it has not been wide enough, or earnest enough, to compile any considerable mass of careful experiment. I conjectured in a previous chapter that not a hundred men, at the ordinary professional level, had up till now made the study of the phenomena of hypnotism the main intellectual business of their lives. If for hypnotism we substitute these " phenomena of spiritualism " the list of serious students might probably be reduced to fifty.

It is well to point out the scantiness of efficient investigators of these problems, in view of the objection often made to the lack of progress in the difficult task. Outside some comparatively small group the number of spiritists rather resemble that multitude of indiscriminate givers who, in the days of haphazard charity, encouraged impostors, and brought philanthropy into contempt.

Confronted with these evils, the early members of the Charity Organisation Society had a painful and invidious task to perform. They had to repress where they would fain have stimulated ; to act as detectives where they would fain have acted as benefactors ; to pass judgment on men whose charitable impulses were as pure and ardent as their own.

925] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 207

Only through the seeming sternness of such training could the public learn to help the miserable without fostering the impostors.

The parallel at which I am pointing here is obvious enough ; but in the realm of psychical research — as indeed in the realm of almsgiving — that needed lesson has as yet been very imperfectly acquired. I propose to indicate in Appendices (923 A and B) some of the work which the Society for Psychical Research has done in exposing and guarding against fraud and credulity ; and I further refer my readers to a forthcoming book by my friend and colleague, Mr. Podmore, in which the imposture which has dogged so-called " Modern Spiritualism " from its inception will be exposed with a distinctness which needs must be salutary ; — even though in a history so complex it be always possible that more intimate knowledge might have modified judgment on one or other detail.1

924. This serious warning given, I may pursue my task of describing that most interesting of supernormal phenomena which we term Possession ; — a phenomenon to which the telekinesis which has often accompanied it lends an additional element of attractive mystery. It has, of course, been that interest, that mystery, which has attracted the fraudulent imitations of which I have spoken ; — and which it would not have been worth while to contrive except for some phenomena thus strongly manifesting spiritual presence and spiritual power.

This persistent simulation of telekinesis has, naturally enough, inspired persistent doubt as to its genuine occurrence even in cases where simulation has been carefully guarded against, or is antecedently improbable. Important though the phenomenon is, it is not so intimately linked with my own general thesis in this work as to render it needful for me to review its whole history in detail. I deal with it only where it comes immediately before me as an element in spirit-possession ; — especially noticeable in the two important cases of D. D. Home and of W. Stainton Moses.

And recognising, as I do, that telekinesis — like the simpler motor automatisms of which it forms the extreme term — reaches in cases of possession its maximum intensity, I feel bound (if it were only for the sake of analogical completeness) to show that, like other motor automatisms, telekinesis has appeared occasionally at earlier stages, although needing the free play of a possessed organism to develop itself to the full.

925. It is not, indeed, necessary to suppose that all telekinesis is due to spiritual action. Rather we may begin by regarding it as a form of motor automatism, initiated by the subliminal self. I believe that there is sometimes an element of telekinesis in such common phenomena as table-tilting and automatic writing with planchette or even with pencil (eg. in Mr. Wedgwood's and Mrs. Newnham's experiments, see 861, 862, and 849 A).

1 Modern Spiritualism ; a History and a Criticism, by Frank Podmore (Methuen and Co., London, 1902).

We cannot, of course, expect that any such slight and obscure admixture of telekinesis can be sifted out from an act of motor automatism in any evidential form. But from my point of* view this kind of evidential difficulty is pretty sure to occur, from the very nature of the supernormal movement. If that movement could be started with equal ease from any given point in space, and in any direction, we might fairly expect that such points would be chosen, and such movements performed, as gave the best evidence of the movement's independence of ordinary human agency. But the telekinetic force, in my view, is generally (I do not say always) a mere extension to a short distance from the sensitive's Organism of a small part of his ordinary muscular power. It even seems tg tend to simulate that ordinary action ; — much as other supernormal exercises of faculty follow, so far as they can, the modes in which normal faculty operates.

So gradual, so inconspicuous, are the beginnings of telekinesis ; — which presently develop, no doubt, into something which we can no longer ascribe to any hyperboulic activities of the subliminal self. It develops, indeed, in two directions, — into messages and into marvels. Genuine raps, or percussive sounds, are rare (see 925 A), nor is it possible by mere description of the noises to prove their genuineness in any given case, unmistakable and inimitable though they are when actually heard. But with one sensitive known intimately to me, — the lady described as Miss A. (see 859), — raps have occurred (as I know both by actually hearing them and by abundant attestation) as a means of attracting attention under many circumstances, and of conveying advice and information of all kinds ; — from such dicta as subliminal perception might furnish up to evidential messages ascribed to deceased persons.

Midway between the raps which spell out messages and the sheer marvels which may be performed " to show spirit-power " come the various displacements of objects, &c., which are attested as coinciding (like veridical phantasms) with moments of death or crisis (see, e.g., case III. in 716 C), — or merely as testifying to presences, — as of a dear friend recently dead.

926. Thus much it was needful to say in order to make certain cases of possession soon to be cited intelligible to the reader, but I should not have deferred my mention of telekinesis to this point in my book had I intended to deal with these physical phenomena as fully as with the psychical phenomena which I endeavour to expound and in some measure to connect and correlate.

While believing absolutely in the occurrence of telekinetic phenomena, I yet hold that it would be premature to press them upon my reader's belief, or to introduce them as an integral part of my general expository scheme. From one point of view, their detailed establishment, as against the theory of fraud, demands an expert knowledge of conjuring and other arts which I cannot claim to possess. From another point of

927] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 209

view, their right comprehension must depend upon a knowledge of the relations between matter and ether such as is now only dimly adumbrated by the most recent discoveries ; — for instance, discoveries as to previously unsuspected forms of radiation.

In a long Appendix, viz., "Scheme of Vital Faculty" (926 A)— originally written with reference to the manifestations through Mr. Stainton Moses — I have tried to prepare the way for future inquiries ; to indicate in what directions a better equipped exploration may hereafter reap rich reward. Even that tentative sketch, perhaps, may have been too ambitious for my powers in the present state not only of my own, but of human knowledge ; and in the text of this chapter I shall allude to telekinetic phenomena only where unavoidable, — owing to their inmixture into phenomena more directly psychological, — and in the tone of the historian rather than of the scientific critic. As a matter of history I shall give in 926 B references to the best extant accounts of telekinetic phenomena.

      i

927. The way has now been so far cleared for our cases of Possession that at least the principal phenomena claimed have been (I hope) made intelligible, and shown to be concordant with other phenomena already described and attested. It will be best, however, to consider first some of the more rudimentary cases before going on to our own special instances of possession, — those of Mr. Stainton Moses or Mrs. Piper.

I have reason to believe, both from what I have witnessed myself and from the reports of others, that occasional phenomena of ecstasy or possession are not infrequent in some family circles or groups of intimate friends (see, e.g., the case of Mr. O. in 927 A).

The persons concerned, however, generally do not realise the importance of accurate records ; in some cases the manifestations are sporadic in character and scarcely susceptible of any detailed investigation ; and often the very occurrence of the phenomena has been sedulously concealed from all outside the circle. Sometimes the sacredness of the manifestations has been pleaded as a sufficient reason for their concealment, or the tendency to trance on the part of the " sensitive " has been regarded as a calamity, to be checked and prohibited as though it were a distressing disease.

There are further occasional cases of the frankly " mediumistic " type (of which I give examples in 927 B and C). But the problems involved are so complicated, and the main question — that of the agency of discarnate spirits in the matter — is so difficult of determination, that no

1 The asterisks indicate the end of the part of this Chapter which was consecutively composed by the author. See Preface. The rest of the Chapter consists chiefly of fragments written by him at different times. In putting these together, the Editors felt it desirable to preserve as much as possible of the original form and to present as much of the material as was complete in itself, at the risk of some lack of transition and even of a certain degree of repetition.

VOL. II. O

collection of such fragmentary material could be of much service to us in our present inquiry unless perhaps to indicate that the fully-developed cases belong, after all, to a not uncommon type.

928. We have already seen that there is no great gulf between the sudden incursions, the rapid messages of the dead, with which we are already familiar, and incursions so intimate, messages so prolonged, as to lay claim to a name more descriptive than that of motor automatisms.

And similarly no line of absolute separation can be drawn between the brief psychical excursions previously described, and those more prolonged excursions of the spirit which I would group under the name of ecstasy.

