I have myself felt the full force of this objection, and I believe that some effort to meet it has become absolutely needful. Undoubtedly a record of facts without theories is the first essential. But the facts individually are like " stones that fall down from Jupiter," — isolated marvels, each of which seems incredible until we have made shift to colligate them all.

" Truth," as we have in this research constant need to remember, " emerges more readily from error than from confusion;" and it is in the place of absolute confusion — wandering as we are per incertam lunam, sub luce malignd — that I point to pathways which may lead somewhither, though it be with much of error by the way.

With this apology, made once for all, I enter upon a task whose provisional and hazardous character no one can feel more strongly than myself.

Let us begin, then, by taking the most generalised view possible of all these phenomena. They appear, at any rate, to depend upon the presence of living human beings ; and they are therefore in some sense phenomena of life. If, then, they are phenomena of life, they must be in some way derived from, or must bear some analogy to, the vital phenomena, the faculties and functions with which we are familiar in the experience of every day. Yet to say this brings us little nearer to our aim. Spirits may have ruled Mr. Moses' mind and body just as truly as our own conscious will rules our mind and body.1 But the results which they produced were so different from any results which we can produce that it is hard to know where to begin the comparison. Is there not some middle

1 This Appendix was written originally with a special view to the phenomena alleged to occur in the case of Mr. W. Stainton Moses. — EDITORS.

term, some intermediate series, with which both these extreme series may have points of resemblance ?

It is here that we ought to feel the advantage of previous discussions on man's own supernormal faculties, — on the powers of the Self below the threshold of ordinary consciousness. We have traced these powers in detail ; we have noted the extension of the normal spectrum of consciousness beyond both red and violet ends, in response to subliminal control. Perhaps the profounder conception of the Self thus gained may help us to bridge over that gulf between the performances of the ordinary man and those of the so-called medium which heretofore has involved so difficult a leap. We may find that the spirit's power over the organism which it controls or "possesses," — while possibly going much further than any subliminal power in the organism itself, as known to us, — may yet advance along similar lines, and receive explanation from hypnotic or telepathic phenomena. I will endeavour, then, to set side by side, in tabular form, the main heads of vital process or faculty as exercised (i) under normal or supraliminal control ; ( 2 ) under subliminal and telepathic control; (3) under what is claimed as disembodied or spiritual control.

In arranging this scheme my first object is to bring all such phenomena as we actually have before us into intelligible connection ; introducing by the way a few of the explanations given to Mr. Moses by his guides. Those explanations, however, are for the most part slight and vague, and our experimental knowledge of the phenomena is, of course, merely nascent and fragmentary. My scheme, therefore, cannot aim at complete logical arrangement. It must involve both repetitions and lacunae; nor can it be such as the physiologist would care to sanction. But it will, at least, be a first attempt at a connected schedule or rational index of phenomena apparently so disparate that the very possibility of their interdependence is even now constantly denied.

SYNOPSIS OF VITAL FACULTY. I.

FIRST SERIES : — PHENOMENA SUPRALIMINALLY CONTROLLED, OR OCCURRING IN ORDINARY LIFE.

1. Supraliminal or empirical consciousness; aware only of the

material world through sensory impressions.

2. Physical nutrition, including respiration.

(a) Physiological and pathological processes and products.

3. Physical expenditure ; action on material and etherial environment.

(a) Mechanical work done at the expense of food assimilated. (£) Production of heat, odour, sound, chemical changes, as the

result of protoplasmic metabolism. (c) Production of etherial disturbances ; as emission of light

and generation of electrical energy.

926 A] TO CHAPTER IX 507

4. Action on the incarnation of life on the planet.

(a) Reproduction, as physiological division.

5. Mental nutrition ; sensory receptivity.

(a) Ordinary sense-perception.

(b) Memory.

6. Mental expenditure ; response to stimuli.

(a) Intra-cerebral response ; ideation. (6) Emotion ; will ; voluntary innervation.

7. Modifications of supraliminal personality.

(a) Birth ; as physiological individuation.

(t>) Sleep ; with dreams, as oscillations of the conscious threshold.

(c) Metamorphoses ; as of insects and amphibians ; and poly-

morphism, as of hydrozoa ; multiplex personality.

(d) Death ; as physiological dissolution.

II.

SECOND SERIES : — PHENOMENA SUBLIMINALLY CONTROLLED.

1. Subliminal consciousness; obscurely aware of the transcendental

world, through telepathic and telaesthetic impressions.

2. Physical nutrition modified by subliminal control.

(a} Suggestion, self-suggestion, psycho-therapeutics. (£) Stigmatisation.

3. Physical expenditure modified by subliminal control.

(a) Mechanical work modified by psychical integration or dis-

integration ; hysteria.

(b) Production of heat, and other specific effects upon matter,

subliminally modified.

(c) Emission of light, and generation of electrical energy

modified.

4. Action on the incarnation of life on the planet.

(a) Prenatal suggestion through intermediate organism of parent.

5. Mental nutrition (sensory and supersensory receptivity) subliminally

controlled.

(a) Hyperaesthesia ; anaesthesia; analgesia.

(b) Hypermnesia ; manifested in dreams or automatisms.

(c) Telepathy ; veridical hallucinations ; sensory automatism.

(d) Telaesthesia or clairvoyance ; perception of distant scenes ;

retrocognition ; precognition.

6. Mental expenditure; response to stimuli modified by subliminal

control.

(a) Subliminal ideation ; the inspirations of genius.

(b) Motor automatism ; concurrent consciousness ; hyperboulia.

(c) Extradition of will-power beyond the organism; telergy;

self-projection.

7. Modifications of subliminal personality.

(a) Birth ; as spiritual individuation.

(b) Sleep and trance ; self-suggested or telepathically suggested;

with clairvoyant visions. (<;) Ecstasy.

(d) Death ; as irrevocable self-projection of the spirit.

III.

THIRD SERIES: — PHENOMENA CLAIMED AS SPIRITUALLY CONTROLLED.

1. Subliminal consciousness, discerning and influenced by dis-

embodied spirits in a spiritual world, who co-operate in producing objective phenomena.

2. Physical nutrition modified by spirit-control.

(a) Spirit-suggestion; psycho-therapeutics.

(b) Stigmatisation.

(c) Novel and purposive metastasis of secretion.

3. Physical expenditure modified by spirit-control.

(a) Mechanical efficiency increased and fulcrum displaced.

(b) Control over individual material molecules; resulting in

abrogation of ordinary thermal laws, and in aggregation and disaggregation of matter.

(c) Control over etherial manifestations ; with possible effects in

the domains of light, electricity, gravitation, and cohesion.

4. Action on the incarnation of life on the planet.

(a) Pre-conceptual suggestion or self-suggestion. (£) Ectoplasy or Materialisation ; temporary extradition or coi centration of vital energy.

5. Mental nutrition modified by spirit-control.

(a) Ordinary sensory perception spiritually controlled. (£) Memory controlled ; retrocognition spiritually given.

(c) Sensory automatism spiritually controlled ; phantasms of the

dead, &c.

(d) Telsesthesia developed into perception of spiritual environ-

ment; precognition.

6. Response to stimuli spiritually controlled.

(a) Ideation inspired by spirits.

(£) Motor automatism spiritually controlled ; possession.

(^) Extension of will-power into the spiritual world ; prayer.

7. Modifications of personality from spiritual standpoint.

(a) Birth ; as descent into generation.

(b) Sleep and trance induced, and visions inspired, by spirits.

(c) Precursory emergence into completer personality; ecstasy

with perception of spiritual world.

(d) Death ; as birth into completer personality.

(e) Vital faculty fully exercised in spiritual world.

926 A] TO CHAPTER IX 509

I. FIRST SERIES : — PHENOMENA SUPRALIMINALLY CONTROLLED, OR OCCURRING IN ORDINARY LIFE.

( i ) Supraliminal or Empirical Consciousness; aware only of the Material World through Sensory Impressions. — Beginning with the series of manifestations of supraliminal or " normal " faculty — normal merely in the sense that it is more habitually observed than the subliminal — I must needs make my first heading simply Consciousness. We must assume this starting-point from which to work, and we must briefly point out the limits within which this supraliminal consciousness is circumscribed. It is, as I hold, largely an outcome of the struggle for existence ; a fraction of the potential consciousness of each individual life, selected and developed by planetary evolution and earthly needs. I am conscious of some of my points of relation to this material world, because without such awareness my ancestors could never have subsisted here. I am unconscious of my profounder, my cosmic relations, if such there be, because while my ancestors were struggling upwards from the brute such knowledge would have been to them a bewilderment rather than a help. Nay, even the spectrum of ordinary consciousness, as I have termed it, extending from where it fades at the red end into unconscious organic processes to where it fades at the violet end among psychical hints and indications which we can no longer follow, — even that habitual range of perception is interspersed with many dark belts and lines. For that range of perception has been contrived by Nature, so to say, on no scientific principle, but merely so as to give, at the least physiological expense, a rough notion of some superficial features of a molar world. We gradually learn, indeed, by reason and calculation, that this apparently molar world consists (for our intelligence) of at least two interpenetrating environments, molecular and etherial ; but to the supraliminal consciousness all that lies beyond the range of eye and ear is matter of inference and artifice, not of direct apprehension.

(2) PHYSICAL NUTRITION, INCLUDING RESPIRATION.

(a) Physiological and Pathological Processes and Products. — In an environment thus conceived we have to build up and to expand the energies of body and mind, apparently inseparably united to form a personality which we have as yet no reason to suppose to be of more than earthly scope. The nutrition of the body is the first necessity, but most of the mechanism of this nutrition lies now beneath the conscious threshold — beyond the red end of our imaginary spectrum. Even upon the body with which it popularly identifies itself the supraliminal consciousness gazes as a mere outsider. We can do no more than register our own idiosyncrasies, and employ observed tendencies of our inward mechanism to repair its own aberrations. We become familiar with certain processes and reactions, physiological and pathological ; but why the elements of

5io APPENDICES [926 A

our body are thus associated and dissociated we know not ; nor can we (speaking broadly) produce any reaction by means other than those which the organism itself habitually employs.

(3) PHYSICAL EXPENDITURE; ACTION ON MATERIAL AND ETHERIAL ENVIRONMENT.

(0) Mechanical Work Done at the Expense of Food Assimilated. — Our body, thus built up by nutrition (including respiration) from its original germ, has acquired energy which it can expend on its environment, both molecular and etherial ; as well as exerting an obscurer form of action, of which we shall speak later, on the world of life to which the germ belongs. The most fully conscious and purposive form which the body's energy takes is that of mechanical work upon molar masses. Here we can, to a great extent, compute its work like an artificial engine's ; noting that the relation between food absorbed and work done is never such as to threaten disturbance of the general law of Conservation of Energy.

(b) Production of Heat, Odour, Sound, Chemical Changes, as the Result of Protoplasmic Metabolism. — The animal body exerts various effects, other than mechanical, upon different kinds of living and lifeless matter. It generates and imparts heat both by conduction and by radiation; it propagates sound-waves and odours which specifically affect certain prepared surfaces ; it may generate electric charges and electric currents ; both in its higher and lower forms it effects, without as well as within its own periphery, certain chemical associations and dissociations whose range is unknown.

(c) Production of Etherial Disturbances ; as Emission of Light and Generation of Electrical Energy. — One of these specific effects, exerted not on the molecular but on the etherial world — the production of light — is important enough, in view of what is to follow, to be placed under a heading by itself. It will be convenient, however, to defer dealing with this topic until a later stage in our discussion. The development of electro-motive force of considerable magnitude, as for instance, in some species of fishes, is a rare phenomenon ; but electrical manifestations of a feeble kind occur in the muscles and nerves of all animals, and even in the tissues of some plants.

(4) ACTION ON THE INCARNATION OF LIFE ON THE PLANET.

(0) Reproduction as Physiological Division. — The living organism has one further power ; — of all its powers at once the most complex and the most subliminal. It can influence by reproduction the incarnation of life upon this planet. From the supraliminal standpoint we can speak of reproduction only as of an elaborate process of physiological division. But the distinction between supraliminal and subliminal knowledge and purpose,— where the subliminal purpose has sometimes been held to be no

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 511

merely individual aim, — has here been guessed by philosophers in the illusion which Nature, for her own ends, throws around her children ;— leading them by roads which they blindly follow towards an end which, for aught she cares, they may even desire to shun.

(5) MENTAL NUTRITION; SENSORY RECEPTIVITY.

(#) Ordinary Sense Perception. — From the nutrition and expenditure of the bodily organism let us turn to the nutrition and expenditure of the mind, which, however inseparable its connection with the body may be deemed, — even if we regard it merely as a concatenation of " highest-level brain-centres " — must yet, for clearness' sake, be treated separately in any scheme of vital function. The nourishment of the mind (or highest-level centres) is through sensory impressions, which reach it from without through definite channels so soon as they attain a definite intensity.

(b) Memory. — The residual changes which these impressions leave constitute the physical basis of memory ; and supraliminal memory normally contains the residue only of supraliminal impressions.

(6) MENTAL EXPENDITURE ; RESPONSE TO STIMULI.

(a) Infra-cerebral Response; Ideation. — To these stimuli, freshly impinging, or become in a sense fixed and inherent, we find the mind or highest centres reacting, first in ideation, or intra-cerebral readjustments.

(<£) Emotion ; Will ; Voluntary Innervation. — Next we find them reacting in emotion and in will, — or motor innervation, which energises beyond the brain, and gives orders to voluntary muscles, — to eyes and tongue and hands and limbs, — which express the intelligent personality within. These orders are supraliminany conceived in molar terms, but they receive a molecular obedience. We say to the hand, Write ! But the answer is not a mere puppet-like movement of such molar mechanism as we could ourselves conceive, but — like the inward ideation itself — depends upon a rearrangement of molecules such as no science can at present trace or explain.

(7) MODIFICATIONS OF SUPRALIMINAL PERSONALITY.

(a) Birth ; as Physiological Individuation. — And, finally, both body and mind may pass through we know not how many phases without losing what we regard as the identity of either. Birth in this scheme we must regard as physiological individuation, obliging the new animal to seek food for itself, and thus compelling, in higher animals, a rhythmically recurring increase of alertness which we term the waking state.

(b) Sleep; with Dreams, as Oscillations of the Conscious Threshold. — But an abeyance in sleep of the supraliminal control perpetually recurs,

and is needful to the organism's preservation. And in the temporary obliteration of the conscious threshold thus induced, the fragmentary ideation immediately below the waking level makes itself manifest in dream (and the subliminal control becomes dominant in various ways and in varying degrees).

(c) Metamorphoses, as of Insects and Amphibia, and Polymorphism, as of Hydrozoa : Multiplex Personality. — Even profounder changes occur in animal metamorphoses, where the struggle for existence brings to the surface at different stages of life different selections from the potential syntheses of faculty included in the original germ, — those, namely, which are adapted to the environment in which the particular stage is passed. In the higher animals the variations that occur as the infant progresses through youth to maturity are much less marked and more gradual. In some few abnormal men, however, cerebral rearrangements may sometimes bring about sudden and complete changes in the superficial character and memory. These differ from the metamorphoses of the lower animals in having, as a rule, no relation to different stages of life, and remind us rather of the polymorphism of a colonial Hydrozoon, in which the different attributes and characteristics of a single complete organism are distributed among the various individuals of the colony. The man with a multiplex personality is like a single individual of such a colony, in that only certain elements of his ordinary self are manifest at once, the rest being for the time submerged.

(d) Death; as Physiological Dissolution. — And ultimately the individual organism loses the power of self-adaptation to its environment ; physiological dissolution ensues; and from the supraliminal standpoint we discern no energy which is not dispersed in lower forms at death.

Of thus much, then, and of thus much only of ourselves, the struggle for earthly existence has compelled us to be aware. It is an empirical or superficial cognisance ; and here, as truly as anywhere in nature, " all that we know is phenomenal of the unknown."

II. SECOND SERIES:— PHENOMENA SUBLIMINALLY CONTROLLED.

( i ) Subliminal Consciousness; obscurely aware of the Transcendental World, through Telepathic and Telcesthetic Impressions. — Let us turn now to our second scheme ; that which is to represent for us vital function under the nascent control of a subliminal consciousness, and amid the dimly-guessed operations of a transcendental world. The subliminal faculties whose existence I infer from our evidence will be traced in detail as we proceed. Here at the beginning I must merely explain on what principle I have assigned to some of these faculties and not to others a source in the subliminal self, or in telepathic action from other embodied minds, rather than in any extra-terrene or spiritual intervention. This distinction is often obscure ; but I have here drawn the line so as to avoid

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 513

unduly favouring my own argument. I am endeavouring to show that certain subliminal processes which I hold to be going on in each of us do form a real intermediate class between the processes of normal life and those attributed to spirit-control. I have, therefore, here left to the account of spirit-control all that can be at all plausibly claimed for it ;* believing that the remaining phenomena, those which seem almost indisputably referable to a source within ourselves, will be enough to carry us half-way across the apparently impassable gulf which separates Mr. Moses' and similar experiences from the experiences of the mass of mankind.

For these phenomena will not only in themselves show great accessions of power, but also will give plain indication of still more marked development to come. We shall not only see the spectrum of supraliminal consciousness largely extended in both directions, but shall also realise that this extension implies a new environment — an environment whose laws we have yet to learn, and whose denizens to encounter.

Let us discuss, then, the subliminally guided faculties in the same order in which we have just discussed the faculties of common life.

(2) PHYSICAL NUTRITION MODIFIED BY SUBLIMINAL CONTROL.

(a) Suggestion, Self-suggestion, Psycho-therapeutics. — And first as to the influence of subliminal control on bodily nutrition. We have here, as it happens, the most conspicuous and popular group in our whole range of unfamiliar phenomena. The experimental study of the subliminal self was virtually originated by the empirical discovery that " mesmeric passes," and afterwards that hypnotic suggestion in general, had power to alter the condition of the nervous system ; — to induce sleep, to relieve pain, to reestablish arrested secretion, and to restore morbid secretion to healthy normality. I have already discussed (in Sections 568-570) the part which an actual effluence, or a telepathic impact, may play in such operations as these, and will take here the only remaining logical view, which assumes that suggestion from a hypnotiser is virtually self-suggestion ; the hypnotiser's order having merely the power of reaching in some unexplained way the subject's subliminal self, and setting in action that hyperboulia, so to term it, — that extension of will-power over parts of the organism unreachable by supraliminal will, — which enables the hidden self to achieve the marvellous restorations of " psycho-therapeutics." For this submerged and intimate will can wield, as it were, the very vis medicatrix naturcz, and chase back the runaway molecules into a road made familiar to them by long memories of healthy action.

(b} Stigmatisation. — Yet this, though the easiest, is not the only road down which the dominated molecules can be driven. The various pheno-

1 The reader must observe that the standpoint adopted for the purpose of this special argument differs from that of the book as a whole, in which the onus probandi is laid on the spiritistic theory. — EDITORS.

VOL. II. 2 K

mena of modified secretion to which the conventional name of stigmatisation has been given consist in a selective direction of cells or of even minuter bodily elements away from their settled customary performance, through changes which the predecessors of these cells have indeed traversed before, — but never without specific objective cause — never on so impalpable an invitation. The serum which rises in the " suggested " blisters is in itself no novel product ; but its evocation without mechanical irritation shows (as I have urged elsewhere, see 543) a quite novel power to play upon the organism as with purposive manipulation from within.

(3) PHYSICAL EXPENDITURE MODIFIED BY SUBLIMINAL CONTROL.

(#) Mechanical Work Modified by Psychical Integration or Disintegration ; Hysteria. — And next as to the effect of subliminal control upon the organism's expenditure ; in the first place upon its expenditure in muscular energy. The amount of muscular energy which the supraliminal self can control may at first sight be regarded as a compromise, achieved in the struggle for existence, between present and future convenience. It can put forth, that is to say, just so much energy as is generally compatible with avoiding any serious risk of injury to the organism. But this explanation will not take into account all the elements of the problem. The human organism is an imperfectly unified colony of cells; and there is nothing to show us that the precise degree of integration to which we attain in ordinary life is such as to enable our organism to exert its maximum of energy without risk of injury.

We find, in fact, that a capacity of greater effort may be the result or the concomitant either of disintegration or of further integration. The great increase of muscular power which sometimes accompanies mania is an instance of the first, and the manner in which the increased energy in such cases becomes apparent throws some light on subliminal operation generally. This subject has been fully discussed in Chapters II. and III. I have shown that the same increase of energy may follow on increased integration, of which I regard Genius as the palmary instance. In short, and as might have been expected, the katabolic as well as the anabolic forces, the output as well as the intake of the bodily frame, are amenable, in more ways than we can suppose ourselves to have yet discovered, to subliminal control.

(£) Production of Heat, and other Specific Effects upon Matter, Subliminally Modified. — Turning now to effects other than mechanical produced upon the material world, we find rather suggestions for experimentation than records of experiment adequately performed. The subjective sensation of heat can, of course, readily be produced by hypnotic suggestion, and in a sensitive subject perspiration may follow,— si dixeriSy Aestuo, sudat : — but I know of no experiment which has compared the total heat emitted by the organism in a normal state and under

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 515

suggestion. Suggestions involving bodily odour and chemical conditions have thus far been confined to psycho-therapeutics, although here also there might well be experiments with a purely scientific aim. But the most important effect of a supernormal kind alleged to have been produced upon matter in the course of experiment on subliminal faculty is the old-fashioned mesmeric effluence, which, in the opinion of Elliotson, Esdaile, &c., was proved to affect not only the human organism, but water and other inanimate matter (see 541 E and K). This view is entirely out of fashion now, and we ourselves have wholly failed to confirm it by experiment; but the history of hypnotism has consisted so largely in the confident disavowal, followed by the gradual re-discovery, — though often with a new interpretation, — of phenomena alleged by the earlier mesmerists, that it would, I think, hardly be safe to set aside this " mesmerisation of objects " as due merely to suggestion, until it shall have been tested by many more experiments, performed with modern exactitude and care.

(<:) Emission of Light, and Generation of Electrical Energy Modified. — A like need for experiment exists with regard to phenomena of luminosity, alleged from time to time to accompany abnormal conditions of the human frame. " Some startling but apparently well -authenticated cases," says the writer of the article on " Phosphorescence " in the Encyclopedia Britannica, " are on record of human beings having been luminous owing • to certain states of disease." Of such cases I shall have more to say presently. This phenomenon has been frequently noted both in and by persons in a trance condition ; but usually under circumstances where one cannot be sure that the effect was not a merely subjective one. With Mr. Moses, however, it was repeatedly observed during stances, being generally visible to Mrs. Speer, and sometimes to all the sitters. Mrs. Speer writes : " I have often seen Mr. Moses enveloped in a luminous cloud or white mist, and when he rubbed his hands phosphorescent light seemed to be emitted from his fingers. This light enabled him to see his own hands in the dark." I find an entry in Mr. Moses' notebooks to the effect that on one occasion at least he saw his hands luminous when he had returned to his own rooms after a stance. I shall return to this subject hereafter when dealing with " Spirit-Lights " ; but this phosphorescence of the sensitive himself seems to belong rather to the category of subliminal control. It seems not improbable that such manifestations may be made more intelligible by further discoveries on the lines of those recently made by physicists as to the luminescent effects produced by obscure radiations whose existence was previously unsuspected.

(4) ACTION ON THE INCARNATION OF LIFE ON THE PLANET.

(a) Prenatal Suggestion through Intermediate Organism of Parent. — We come next to the problem of the influence of subliminal control on the realm of life, — on the manner in which the sum of life on earth is

5i6 APPENDICES [926 A

supplied by fresh incarnations from the unknown environing energy. The first question will be as to the power of suggestion, by influencing the mother, to influence the unborn child. And so large a collection has now been made of cases where an impression, produced (more often, of course, by accident than by design) upon the mother has been reflected by the offspring (see 526) that I feel entitled to assume such influence as highly probable, if not established.1 This fact,«if fact it be, is of an importance greater than has yet been realised. We cannot fix a terminus a quo before which such influence is impossible; and the much-needed science of " eugenics " seems likely to depend largely upon a psychical factor.

(5) MENTAL NUTRITION (SENSORY AND SUPERSENSORY RECEPTIVITY) SUBLIMINALLY CONTROLLED.

(a) Hyper ces the sia ; Anaesthesia / Analgesia. — We have now dealt with the influence of the subliminal self in upbuilding the organism, and in modifying the organism's effect upon its environment. With the discussion of its effect upon the world of life we have reached as it were the watershed of physical and psychical determination ; and we proceed now to the region of intellectual effects ; — of influence subliminally exercised, first upon sensory receptivity, and then upon motor response.

Subliminal modifications of sensory receptivity, important as they are. have been already so fully discussed in Chapter V. that we need here do no more than recapitulate them, thus preparing the reader for the still more potent sway which we shall find ascribed to spirits over the perception of men. Briefly, then, the senses can be either stimulated or suspended to an extent hardly yet fathomed. Cases of hyperasthesia are recorded which seem scarcely compatible with that we know of the structure of the sensory end-organs themselves.

So profound an ancesthesia, on the other hand, may be produced that prolonged and painful operations can be undergone without evoking a murmur. Nay, what is even more remarkable, the sense of pain may be abrogated while other sensations remain intact, and an analgesia produced which is no result of disease or disintegration, but apparently the highest — the most serviceable — condition to which the organism has yet been raised.

(b) Hypermnesia, Manifested in Dreams or Automatisms. — The subliminal control of memory — of the stored-up knowledge derived from past sensation — shows a similar advance upon the supraliminal. To retain in supraliminal memory — or sufficiently near the threshold to be summoned at will — even facts or scenes upon which we have deliberately fixed atten-

1 The best list of references is to be found in a book otherwise of little value, " yEdoeology," by S. B. Elliott, M.D., Boston, U.S.A., 1893. See also Professor Macalister on Stigmatisation (ad fin.} in Encyclopedia Britannica. The list of cases has been much extended since Professor Macalister wrote.

926 A] TO CHAPTER IX 517

tion is a task which often exceeds our powers. But some reason has been shown for believing that in the subliminal memory we possess at least a much fuller, if not a complete, record of all that has passed, even, as we say, " unnoticed," across our visual or auditory field ; and in hypermnesic dreams and crystal vision we seem to peep for the moment into a treasurehouse whose existence was not suspected till now.

There seem, moreover, to be various influences, as yet hardly realised or defined, which should rather rank as sensory than under any other heading, namely, the heterasthesicz discussed in 541.

(t) Telepathy ; Veridical Hallucinations / Sensory Automatism. — And here we reach a critical point in our series; the introduction, namely, among phenomena which may be regarded as merely extending powers already known, of those newly recognised and manifestly supernormal faculties of telepathy and telaesthesia (or clairvoyance) with which so much of our work in psychical research has been concerned. Can we still regard ourselves as passing only from one to another degree of faculty exercised in the already known environment? or are we beginning to observe human faculty operating in an environment new to science ? At first sight, the least inconceivable explanation of telepathy might seem to lie in assuming a fresh form of ether-waves which should carry the vibrations of one brain and imprint them on another.

I have already shown (632-634) the inadequacy of this theory to explain even many simple experimental cases — still more cases of collective percipience, of telepathy from the dead, and of the faculties analogous to telepathy to be discussed immediately, — telaesthesia and clairvoyance, precognition and retrocognition. We may still, however, find some points of transition between at least the supraliminal manifestations of telepathy and phenomena already known. And telepathy is thus linked with the senseperception and the memory which we have just been discussing ; — even as we shall presently find it linked with emotion and will. In the first place, the hypercesthesia which I have claimed for the subliminal self seems sometimes to pass gradually beyond the point which any sensory influence can be stretched to cover. We must then assume at least a mingling of some form of supernormal acquisition of knowledge ; — telepathy if we have an agent's mind already possessed of that knowledge, telaesthesia if no such agent can be suggested.

The hypermnesia, again, of which we were but now speaking seems often to act as a kind of nidus for germs of knowledge borne home from some other quarter. In itself this extension of subliminal memory is most significant of hidden faculty. For the extended memory itself implies intellectual operation ; it is not a mere indiscriminating photograph, but an impressionist or sometimes even a symbolical picture, where facts subjectively important are brought into intentional prominence. And that picture — let us take for example an actual picture seen in a crystal — is selected from amongst a presumable multitude of its congeners, and pre-

APPENDICES [926 A

sented to supraliminal view at the useful moment. And often, as I have said, among the contents of this subliminal memory unexpected items float up into cognisance ; crystal-vision or hallucination turns out to be veridical— -to tell truly of a fact which no actual observation, however acute, can ever have stored up in the subliminal memory. We find, in short, that the subliminal consciousness does not only acquire and retain a fuller picture of its material surroundings than the every day waking man can boast, but also acquires knowledge by means of its own, and especially1 by telepathic impression from other minds.

(</) Telasthesia or Clairvoyance • Perception of Distant Scenes ; Retrocognition, Precognition.—^te knowledge which is received by telepathy is knowledge which has been already worked up, so to say, into manageable form in another mind. Is it possible that this power of spiritual perception can be still further extended? that the human spirit can absorb knowledge without the aid either of its own bodily senses or of other minds?

I believe that our answer must be affirmative, and indeed that this power of telcesthesia is a faculty perhaps of wider range than telepathy itself. Naturally, we cannot always distinguish such a phenomenon from telepathy ; and in many cases of " telepathic clairvoyance " both powers seem to have been at work ; — the agent's crisis summoning the percipient's subliminal attention, and the percipient then discerning details of which the agent was not himself directly conscious. Such scenes seem to come midway between telepathy proper and the telaesthetic perception of quite indifferent scenes, presented to the percipient in waking vision or crystalpicture or dream, as it were at random ; — as though the casual slipping of a shutter in some vast camera obscura had thrown upon the mind's receptive surface a remote and irrelevant segment of the reflected totality of things.

Nor is this all. For it is, perhaps, under this wide heading of telsesthesia that mention should be made of a still more surprising extension of view, from things distant in space to things distant in time also. I need not here repeat the arguments which indicate that these perceptions, although partly due to spiritual communications, seem also partly due to faculties of the subliminal self.

(6) MENTAL EXPENDITURE; RESPONSE TO STIMULI MODIFIED BY SUBLIMINAL CONTROL.

(a) Subliminal Ideation ; the Inspirations of Genius. — From this brie review of the influence of the subliminal self on mental nutrition, let turn to consider its influence on mental expenditure. There is, of c< no hard and fast line between the two, 'Eoyxev cVepycia, and all our coi sciousness is Will in the making. All cerebration, in other words, probably at once sensory and motor; and at any rate when we dealing with " subliminal messages " it must seem a matter almost

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 519

chance whether the message shall take the sensory form of hallucination, visual or auditory, or the motor form of an impulse to write or speak. But first we have to deal, under this heading, with something which is not for us in common parlance either sensory or motor ; — namely, ideation; or such intra-cerebral readjustments as involve only images which fall short of hallucination and impulses which have not yet set the muscles in action.

I have urged elsewhere (in Chapter III.) that even our habitual current of thought bears abundant testimony to cerebration beneath the ordinary threshold of consciousness.1 With all of us there are subliminal uprushes — incursions of ideas and images ready-made and vivid into the superficial stratum of more continuous, but less ardent, less flashing thought. Such uprushes, although alike in mechanism, leave products of very different worth. For most men nothing better than dust and scoriae is flung up from the subterranean chambers ; for few only do the rock- fragments bear in their cavities the precious crystals which have gathered in hidden laboratories into the emerald's or the ruby's glow.

(b) Motor Automatism ; Concurrent Consciousness ; Hyperboulia. — So long as we confine ourselves to these intra-cerebral responses to external stimuli, we have no obvious line to draw between the ideas which we manufacture piecemeal above the threshold and those which come to us ready-made from below. Even here, no doubt, there are physiological effects already indicating an extension of mental influence over the bodily frame. When, in the poet's words, " a great thought strikes along the brain, and flushes all the cheek," the sudden uprush of ideation has affected the vaso-motor system in a way which we cannot deliberately rival. But yet this glowing thought has come mixed with cooler thoughts ; it runs, so to say, into the amalgam of common life. We have now to note that a point may be reached, in some men if not in all, where the two streams of faculty are not conjoint but concurrent; the subliminal faculty using the organism in a separate and definite manner, in writing, namely, or speech, which in reference to the man's habitual processes seems automatic or even quasi-external, and which suggests to him that some intelligence other than his own must be moving his hand or speaking through his mouth. Sometimes, as I believe, such an external intelligence is indeed at work ; oftener the man's own deeper self is thus acting on his empirical self, and writing its own messages with the hand to which it has, after all, an equal claim.

1 It may be worth while to remind the reader that the first important statement in English of the Leibnitzian view of "latent modifications" of minds occurs in Sir W. Hamilton's "Lectures on Metaphysics" (Lect. XVIII.). Dr. Carpenter, to whom the theory is sometimes popularly ascribed, added little except the term "unconscious cerebration." But in reality Leibnitz, with his " insensible perceptions," was nearer the truth (as I conceive it) than either Hamilton or Carpenter; for he did not explicitly deny accompanying consciousness; and that there is a subliminal consciousness I regard (as my readers know) as certain.

From many points of view these automatic motor messages form for us a central and instructive phenomenon. In the first place it is obvious that they are closely allied with — sometimes interchangeable with — sensory hallucinations. They thus materially support the view that these phantoms also are in the same sense automatic ; that is, that they are for the most part at least shaped by the percipient's own subliminal self, and presented to his supraliminal perception as a method of informing or influencing him from the depths of his own being. In the second place, they enable us to set out a continuous series from the transitory phenomena of hypnotic suggestion at the one end to changes of personality and " spirit-possession" at the other end. We start, say, from Edmund Gurney's posthypnotic experiment, where you tell a man a fact in the trance which on waking he forgets, — but which he can nevertheless write out automatically with no recognition of its source. Here we know perfectly whence the fact originally came : we can feel sure that no telepathic, no disembodied influence has been brought to bear. Then come the ordinary mass of spontaneous automatic messages, presumably self-originated, since they contain no fact which the automatist may not have learnt by ordinary sensory means. And from this point the automatisms may diverge in several directions. They may, as I have already said, begin to show knowledge which, cannot have been acquired by normal means ; — which seems as if it must have come telepathically from living men ; — or even knowledge which, alike in its substance and in its lacunae, seems coincident with the presumable knowledge and ignorance of some departed spirit.

This is of course the most interesting form of development. But the automatisms may also become markedly impressive in a different way. While still showing no actual knowledge beyond the automatist's normal reach, they may nevertheless assume a character so distinct, — a mode of self-expression so deeply involving the entire organism, — that they come to rank as new phases of personality, representing fresh positions of relative stability into which the man's psychical being may be thrown.

And here again, while thus led forward to our impending notice of Modifications of Personality, we are also led backward to our previous account of psycho-therapeutics and self-suggestion, of the modification of physical nutrition by subliminal control. What we there described, so to say, from the outside, we are now regarding from the inward or subjective point of view. For these motor automatisms pass insensibly into hyperboulia; that is to say, the same subliminal motor response to stimuli which guides the automatist's hand in this strange fashion is not limited in power to mere writing or vocal utterance ; it can work upon stomach or liver as well as upon hand or tongue. It has overpassed the traditional bounds in one direction; it shows next that it can overpass them in another ; it leaves us asking what bounds it may not overpass. Much in the same way did Frenchmen once speculate as to what causes in a

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 521

paper constitution the First Consul was likely to respect. The nervesystem is a kind of traditional Constitution ; the Will is a force whose strength, whose very nature, is all unknown. The Will, we say, acts directly on striped muscle and not on unstriped. What is this but a convention which wills obey because they have always obeyed it ? What boundary line can the physiologist draw through the phenomena of man's bodily life, assuring us that here the purposive must necessarily end, and the unpurposed, the inevitable begin ? If Will does anything, why should it not do all?

(c) Extradition of Will-power beyond the Organism ; Telergy ; Selfprojection. — And if the despot chooses to ignore his own country's Constitution, what guarantee have we that he will respect treaty-obligations abroad ? The access of one man to another, the power of one man over another is limited, so to say, by international laws so ancient that no one dreams of infringing them. Then suddenly — to take the best-known case of hypnotisation at a distance — Dr. Gibert throws the absent Leonie into a trance, and impels her to hasten through Havre to his house. This is an invasion of an independent kingdom, against all rules of war. And yet it finds, as Napoleon's invasions often found, a party in the invaded realm itself which supports the invader; the impulse given from a distance to Leonie's subliminal self finds something in that self not only competent to discern it but willing to obey.

Mere metaphor, however, cannot satisfy us here. We have reached

! a point where it is indispensable that we should form at least some provisional working conception not only of what telepathy is not — but of what it possibly may be. Its laws, we have concluded, are not cognate to the known laws of the material world. It is a transference, not of a

' pattern of vibrations, but of a knowledge, an impulse, which seems to implant itself in the percipient's mind like a living thing. The " telepathic impact," as we have sometimes called it, is no blunt shock. It may be sudden ; but it may also be persistent ; it may sometimes be overwhelming, but it can be insinuating too. It is not a bolt discharged and done with ; it is a vital influence at work on the percipient's subliminal self.

No argument has been as yet urged in this discussion to show that man possesses a spirit which preceded birth or which survives death. The question of individual pre-existence, individual survival, belongs to a later stage of our review of vital faculty. But, nevertheless, I think that those who have been willing to go even thus far with the general

: scheme here set forth will feel that the subliminal self whose influence

: over the organism seems to be at once so latent and so profound must be regarded as something other than a mere coenesthetic focus. It must (so to express it) be at least an earthly soul, a provisional spirit.

We have, then, to imagine this spirit or quasi-spirit as acting first normally upon its own organism and then telepathically upon the organisms of others. How are we to conceive it at work ? In its own

organism, to begin with, it acts, I suppose, especially upon the nervous system ; — primarily on the brain. To act on the brain — to direct its thought and volition — the spirit must, I again suppose, be able to modify in countless ways each individual cell. And must not such a selective ordirective influence be intimate enough to affect severally each molecule of which each cell is composed ? Something must so affect them ; and to stop short of this power for the spirit would simply be to postulate some other intelligence engaged in preparing the spirit's work. Assuredly neither the molecule nor the atom is the last word of analysis, as even the ordinary physicist would now agree. The whole process may be something far subtler than an action on molecules ; but thus much of subtlety there needs must be. Selective guidance of each individual molecule ; — let us at least, then, use this formula as a compendious expression for the entirely interpenetrating control which we must assume that a man's own spirit exercises over his brain.

And next, in a case of telepathy, the agent is somehow the cause that the percipient's brain shall be influenced in this same delicate, penetrating way. How shall we imagine the mechanism of such influence? Shall we say that the spirit of the agent affects the spirit of the percipient, and thus the spirit of the percipient influences his own brain ? Or shall we say that the agent's spirit directly influences the percipient's brain in like manner as it influences his own ? There may seem little to choose between two such unprovable conceptions. Yet, looking forward to evidence which we shall presently have to meet, I think that the second alternative should provisionally not be excluded. For we shall have cases where inanimate matter outside an organism is, as I believe, directly affected by some spirit ; and the question will arise whether the spirit so acting must necessarily be a spirit discarnate, and outside the medium, or may also possibly be the medium's own. I do not wish to prejudge this question, as against the possibility that the medium's own spirit may be the agency which, in such a case, directly affects the external world ; but if such is ever to be our explanation, it is certainly simpler to suppose that here also the agent's spirit is directly affecting the percipient's brain, — not needing, so to say, to invite the percipient's own spirit to accomplish that task.

On this view we shall have an intelligible series — though a series advancing by leaps and bounds — to represent the achievements of Will, as it shakes itself free from the limitations which are but shadows as contrasted with its own reality. In the first place we have hyperboulia ;— the extension of the Will's power over tissues in the organism which its mandates have ordinarily failed to reach. In the second place, we have telergy ; — the extension of its power over the brain molecules of an organism other than that with which it is primarily in connection. And in the third place we shall have "telekinesis" and the like ; — a group of phenomena involving control over inorganic matter, and over organic matter both within and without its own organism.

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 523

This last extension, however, will lead to our third category, — the category of phenomena claimed as controlled by spirits external to the agent or medium himself. Before passing on to such matters we must briefly review the phases of personality which subliminal influence creates or reveals in the living or dying man. We must thus lead up to some comprehension of the nature of Death, before we deal with spirits whom we assume to have passed through that crisis undestroyed.

(7) MODIFICATIONS OF SUBLIMINAL PERSONALITY.

(a) Birth; as Spiritual Individuation. — With the profounder conception of the Self which our inclusion of its subliminal elements implies, we find associated profounder severances and re-arrangements in its constituent elements ; — more significant changes, so to say, in its internal configuration. I desire to compare these with the modifications of personality which occur in ordinary life ; to compare them, of course, with the purpose of ultimately showing that here also we are making a forward step in precisely that path of which spirit-control is in some sense the goal. The first modification of personality of which we have cognisance, the first on our former list of supraliminal changes, was the crisis of birth. From our former point of view that crisis was one of physiological individuation only. Regarding the organism now as in truth an organon — as an instrument through which a spirit essentially distinct therefrom exercises the faculties which subserve its self-expression — we shall ask ourselves what else has occurred at birth, besides the separation of a new bud from the genealogical tree which is rooted in earth's prehistoric past. At present we have seen reason for conjecturing that this at least has occurred ; — the individuation, in connection with the organism, of some form of spiritual faculty , — of faculty, that is to say, which must have been called into being in some other environment, since the struggle for existence in this material world could not have originated or developed it. Such, as I have elsewhere urged, are the faculties concerned in telepathy and clairvoyance; they are modes of perception which the corporeal organism may restrict but can hardly in any conceivable way have evolved. Yet although we may trace this one side of our lineage to ? spiritual or metetherial world, it does not follow that we can therefore ^lairn that our personalities now incarnated in these bodies are the continued manifestation of personalities which have already lived as distinctive entities elsewhere, or which can survive as personalities that Dther crisis of bodily death to which the fact of incarnation necessarily exposes them. Let us see whether other phases of terrene personality •;hrow any light upon this problem.

.(<£) Sleep and Trance ; Self-suggested or Telepathically-suggested ; with Clairvoyant Visions. — Parallel with our heading of " sleep " in the column rf supraliminal faculties we have the heading of " trance " in the sub-

liminal. And in its first and simplest aspect trance is suggested sleep,— sleep imitated by the subliminal self from the familiar spontaneous pattern, but often improved in the imitation, both in restorative efficacy and in fitness for ends other than physical recuperation. From the thought-transference experiment with lightly hypnotised subjects to the sommeil a distance inspired by Dr. Gibert or Dr. Janet in " Leonie " ;— from the hypersesthesia of some of M. Binet's subjects to the " travelling clairvoyance" of "Jane" (573 B) we find each supernormal faculty in turn facilitated by the abeyance of man's habitual attention to the stimuli of the material world. The degree to which this protection from intrusive thought, or intrusive pain, may be carried is hardly yet explored ; but the same abstraction which is enough to induce in many subjects a complete indifference to severe surgical operations, may perhaps hereafter be utilised to assist in securing undisturbed intensity of thought.

And in the meantime most of these states of sleep or trance present an unsolicited crop of ideas and pictures of their own. All dreams, indeed, according to my definition, are properly subliminal ; they do not belong to the superficial memory, although they lie so close to it that they may get included in it by a sort of accident. They are bubbles breaking upon that surface from the deep below. It is natural, therefore, that this easiest method of communication should be taken advantage of by the subliminal self to send upward messages of deeper import. All the newly-noted forms of faculty which we have already touched upon find expression either in dreams or in the sleep- waking intervals which are a kind of transitory emergences into a condition on the other side of sleep. Hypermnesia is oftenest shown in dreams, and clairvoyance in the sleep-waking or somnambulic stage of hypnotic trance. In dreams also retrocognition and precognition are manifested ; faculties which, since their origin is obscure, I am now claiming solely for the unaided subliminal self.

(c~) Ecstasy. — Under this heading I include experiences where the subliminal self in trance changes its environment and passes for a time into the spiritual world, retaining such relations to the organism as enable it to return to its ordinary condition.

(d) Death ; as Irrevocable Self-projection of the Spirit. — Then when the last change comes, and we ask ourselves with what added ground for speculation we now strain our gaze beyond that obscurest crisis, we find, I think, two considerations which the study of subliminal powers has suggested ; one of them in harmony with the highest thought of philosopher and poet ; the other, not indeed positively inconsistent therewith, but still recalling us to the psychology of the Stone Age, and the crude animism of hardly human men.

For first we shall say that in estimating what there is in our being which may conceivably survive the tomb, we can now claim to have discerned something within us which belongs to an environment which is

)26A] TO CHAPTER IX 525

exempt from earthly conditions, and which may antecede at once and nterpenetrate our material scheme of things. Those ancient views, therefore, which represent the soul's immortality as determined by its very nature and origin find themselves now as never before supported and reinrorced.

I refer especially to such cases as those described in Chapter VI. of 'projection of thought," or — as I there called it — "psychical invasion," #hich show some kind of energy or perception exercised by the spirit at ji distance from its physical base of operation, — telepathically upon other rninds, telaesthetically in other parts of space. In " telepathic clairvoyance,' ' ;he percipient seems to himself to be present in the scene where the so-:alled agent actually is at the time. And in reciprocal cases, not only is :he percipient conscious of invading the agent's presence, but the latter is .n some way aware of the invasion. Further, the descriptions of several ^ases of experimental self- projection concur in the impression felt of spiritual transportation, of tethering connection with the body, of return ;hereinto with a shock.1 And two narratives of animation suspended to he verge of death (Dr. Wiltse and M. Bertrand, see 713 A) , have dwelt n that crisis as an apparent escape of the spirit from the body, to which t is ultimately retracted by a remaining psychical link of attachment. These cases begin like some of the cases which we class as " hallucinations experimentally produced " ; they remind us, as they proceed, of narratives ,}f " travelling clairvoyance " ; and they reach a point where the new :entre of perception seems within an ace of altogether superseding the rid.

These singular and possibly purely subjective cases are no actual proof ,:>f anything whatever. But they deserve notice here, where we are taking stock of any such indications of the true nature of death as can be gathered from evidence which does not even pretend to come from departed spirits, or to rest on anything beyond the personal experience }f living men.

"EO-O-VT €7retyo/x evrj — " with a rush it hurried forth " — says Homer of the .ssuing spirit, — whose significance for him still hung between breath and wul. Homer may be too old a witness, and Dr. Wiltse too new; but, .ndeed, what other intelligible conception can we find in the ages between :hem ? What, save the ghastly monkish dream — ghastly though enshrined, ,u.his also, in world-shaking verse — of the sleep in the charnel-house, and ;the trump that echoes per sepulcra regionum and summons into a new concretion the dust of the dead ?

At least we have done with that ; and, pausing here before we review ,such evidence as may seem to have come to us from behind the veil, we may at least feel that it is a spiritual entity and not a re-integrated skeleton, which we now follow with dim anticipation upon its unknown solitary way.

1 See Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 29, and pp. 270 sqq.

III. THIRD SERIES: — PHENOMENA CLAIMED AS SPIRITUALLY CONTROLLED.

(i) Subliminal Consciousness, Discerning and Influenced by Disembodied Spirits in a Spiritual World ; who Co-operate in Producing Objective Phenomena. — And here at last we have reached the point where we should begin to reap the benefit of this long introduction. In entering on the third of our parallel series — that to which the other two have been intended to lead up, — our scheme, that is to say, of vital faculty as observed under the control of some spiritual agency, we are not now plunging into a chaos of entirely new problems. Most of those problems, although of course not solved, have at least been already stated, in some similar form ; and at ; each point we shall be taking up a line of thought on which we have made some beginning.

We have, then, to deal with the human spirit under new conditions ; as brought into immediate relations with the spiritual world. We shall be concerned primarily with the subliminal consciousness ; for it is in that region that the link of union lies ; and many of the phenomena are discernible to the "purged eye" of so-called clairvoyance alone. But nevertheless this commerce with disembodied spirits, like commerce with embodied spirits, affects man's whole being ; and we shall have to discuss many phenomena of an absolutely objective kind.

In one way, indeed, to get on to direct spirit-intercourse from the obscure subliminal phenomena which we have till now been discussing is a sort of emergence into a clearer air. What we have dimly inferred now plainly asserted ; what we have conjectured among contending possibilities is now set plainly before us. We are in the position in which a tadpole would be who had learned theoretically that what he was breathing in his pond was not the water but the oxygen dissolved therein ; anc who then should have it granted to him to raise his head above water, anc to perceive frogs and other animals respiring the translucid air. So, foi us too, the metetherial element has thus far been dissolved amid materia things ; we are now to come in contact with beings for whom that hypothetical environment is the natural and predestined home.

Before we go into detail, let us reflect for a moment on the fact that such intercourse should be possible. Given the fact of telepathy, neec this be a surprise? We have seen that the existence of such a form o: metetherial energy involved in human life, though it cannot actually prove the spirit's survival, yet suggests it so strongly that evidence to surviva from other quarters need no longer seem hard to reconcile with the known scheme of things. And if survival there be, then the fact that spirits should influence men will certainly not in itself be surprising. It will seem now no isolated or unique phenomenon, but the inevitable deduction from a universal law. That law is the direct transmission of thought and emotion from mind to mind, and the telergy — to use here a word more active in its connotation than telepathy — the telergy by which this trans-

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 527

mission is effected may be as universally diffused in the metetherial world as heat in the material.

(2) PHYSICAL NUTRITION MODIFIED BY SPIRIT- CONTROL.

(a) Spirit- suggestion ; Psycho- therapeutics. — To the limiting conditions under which this energy reaches the chosen sensitive among the mass of men, we shall have to return hereafter. It will be well to proceed first to trace some of the effects of that " control," or intercourse, under the same series of headings which we have now twice already pursued.

First, then, as to the effects of spirit-control on bodily nutrition. Obviously if we are agreed in thinking that the suggestion of a living hypnotiser is virtually nothing more than a hint somehow conveyed to the self- suggestive powers of the patient, it will not be easy to be sure that a spirit's alleged command or benediction, or promise of cure, is really operating otherwise than as a similar stimulus to something which is really done by the patient himself. In Mr. Moses' case there were assurances given that his physical condition was often benefited by spirit- power ; but in the few definite instances which he records of a healing effect, it is to actual touches and strokings — like mesmeric passes — that the benefit is ascribed. Similar experiences are attributed to D. D. Home. We shall have something more to say of this mesmerisation later on ; and also of that form of psycho-therapeutic which consists in a clairvoyant diagnosis alleged to be given by a spirit, and followed perhaps by advice avowedly based upon a recollection of earthly learning.

(b) Stigmatisation. — The agency of spirits in the production of stigmatisation is open to the same kind of doubt. Religious stigmata, indeed, as following upon more intense feeling than mere experimental stigmata (such as suggested blisters resembling some letter of the alphabet) seem even more manifestly connected with the workings of the addolorata? s own spirit. Mr. Moses has three curious cases. In one of them the mere written suggestion of a spirit is followed by the appearance of letters on his arm, — resembling, apparently, the linear wheals which follow a line drawn with the finger-nail in some cases of nettlerash, and which depend on a slight diffusion of serum beneath the skin. In another case an erythematous patch on the forehead follows on a perhaps imaginary touch during a dream or vision. In a third case what seems to have been a real touch at a stance breaks the skin, and leaves an inflamed wound.

It is noticeable, with regard to what will follow later, that something like actual material contact should sometimes be insisted upon, as appears from Mr. Moses' records, in the production by spirits of a phenomenon which we have seen the subliminal self produce with no material intervention.

(c) Novel and Purposive Metastasis of Secretion. — Except, however, for this insistence on actual touch, the stigmatic phenomena have thus far followed the now well-known type. Yet it may occur to us to ask

whether spirits acting thus on the organism, and endowed with the more intimate insight into 'the molecular constitution of things with which I have credited them, could not go further still, and split up the proteids of the body in some unfamiliar way. These are, of course, complex enough to be split up, not only into the various proximate elements, normal or pathological, which have already been detected in the body, but into an indefinite number of other compounds as well. It may be said, indeed, that novel products of proteid decomposition, even if they could be produced, would escape recognition save by the accomplished chemist. There is, however, one of our senses which in certain directions can even outmatch in delicacy the chemist's skill. And there is in animal bodies an unexhausted reservoir of potential odours capable of stimulating this sense to the full. Where the skunk is possible, all is possible ; and it need not be a hopeless task to draw from the human organism fragrances which may bear to skunk or musk-rat the relation which the most delicate tint of mauve bears to the original tar. On one secretion in particular Professor Ramsay, F.R.S., has favoured me with the following remarks : " Perspiration consists of caproate of glyceryl, mixed with the free acid, I believe. It does not smell nice ; but pure caproates are very fragrant if the right alcoholic base is combined. I fancy that woodruffe and verbena are of the nature of turpentine, and have probably the same percentage composition. However, so far as I know, they have not been investigated."

Bearing all this in mind, let us return to certain passages which have perhaps hitherto seemed among the most grotesque and incredible which the records of Mr. Moses* stances contain. I refer to the frequently attested welling or stillation of various " liquid scents," mainly verbena and woodruffe, and on one occasion at least altering on request, from a circumscribed patch on the top of Mr. Moses' head. The guides affirm that this secretion is restorative ; and on one occasion especially, when Mr. Moses is tried and depressed by sitting long amidst a rough crowd, it is stated that the scent is produced and evaporated in unusual quantities in order to protect him from the exhausting influence of his surroundings.1

i I may give here another instance of this phenomenon, contributed by Mr. J. F. Collingwood to Light of November 2nd, 1892. " I was one evening sitting with him," says Mr. Collingwood, " when he complained of not feeling well. I perceived a very sweet perfume, and remarked, as it increased, ' What a delicious scent ! Where does it come from ? ' ' From me, the top of my head,' he replied. I felt the crown, which was wet with a pleasant odorous substance. I dipped the corner of my handkerchief in it, and kept it for months hardly diminished in potency. Mr. Stainton Moses told me that the development of these perfumes was intended as a healing process, and he was often relieved in that way." It may be observed that circumscribed patches of hyperidrosis occasionally occur on the scalp ; so that we have here, in my view, an evolutive phenomenon taking the same form as a morbid or dissolutive one. It should be added that in bromidrosis the odour has been in various cases compared to that of various flowers and fruits. — (Hyde's Diseases of the Skin, p. 102.)

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 529

The reader will readily see the interpretation which, in my view, these facts must receive. I regard the disembodied spirit's influence on the organism as more instructed, so to say, than the influence of the subliminal self; — just as the influence of the subliminal self is more instructed than that of the supraliminal. Where the one can adapt, the other can originate ; where the subliminal self can reproduce by a novel method the secretion which the organism has already learnt to form, the other can compose a fresh secretion, with a definite aim.

A definite aim, I say, speaking at present of the odoriferous and recognisable character alone. But it is not impossible that the secretion may have had a therapeutic value as well. It may conceivably have carried off waste products more effectively than the ordinary perspiration of which it seems to have been a modified form.

However this may be, the above brief discussion may have suggested to us that it is by the comparative method here adopted that we have the best chance of bringing these grotesque marvels into some true analogy with experiments already known to science.

(3) PHYSICAL EXPENDITURE MODIFIED BY SPIRIT-CONTROL.

(a) Mechanical Efficiency Increased and Fulcrum Displaced. — Having thus dealt briefly with spirit-influence as exercised upon the processes of nutrition, let us go on to consider in what way this influence seems to affect the output of energy, — streaming from the organism into the molecular or the etherial world. And, first, let us consider mechanical work done in simple, molar form — the movements of heavy untouched objects which recur so habitually in records such as these. When we hear of such a movement we ask ourselves whether it can be shown to be consistent with the ordinary mechanical law of action and reaction, and with the wider generalisation of the conservation of energy. Where is the fulcrum? How great, and whence derived, is the energy employed? The question of the fulcrum might conceivably be settled by actual experiment. In its present condition it forms part of the more general problem of so-called " ectoplasy," or extrusion from the organism of vital energy, which will be considered under a later heading. As to the source of the energy, we must needs suppose that to be in the organism of the medium, unless it should be shown to exceed any amount of which we can suppose his organism capable. At first sight it has sometimes seemed (as with D. D. Home) to exceed this amount. But in our estimation we must bear in mind that (as was said above) an increase of at least momentary muscular power may come from one of two causes — may be either the result of integration or the concomitant of disintegration. As the concomitant of disintegration, in hysteria or mania, the symptom is a familiar one, and indicates the unequal conservation of efferent and inhibitory stimuli. A reckless order—as for a Balaclava charge — is given to the muscles, and there is no wise superior officer to countermand or restrain. VOL. ii. 2 L

But, on the other hand, the weakness of the general, while it permits of rashness in the army which has got out of hand, may also fail to utilise the healthy ardour of an obedient host. The strong-willed, educated savant can sometimes compress the dynamometer more forcibly than the robust ploughman ; — not because his hands are stronger, but because he can at a given moment throw a greater proportion of his total energy into them. How far such increase of power might go we know not. The limit of the force which human muscles could theoretically exert is far from being reached in common life.

If, then, it is asked whether these phenomena appear to transgress the law of Conservation of Energy, we can affirm that they do not, — in the sense that the work done, so far as measurable in foot-pounds, does not manifestly exceed the work which the sensitive's organism, could we suppose it handled as a familiar instrument by a mind completely understanding it, could probably accomplish without permanent injury. And we may add that, according to statements made by the controls in Mr. Moses' and other cases, some of the force thus used is taken from other persons present ; in which case there would probably be an ample surplus, after all the recorded feats had been performed.

But the possible satisfaction — in some obscure manner — of the law of Conservation of Energy brings us but little nearer to a justification of the alleged phenomena. We do not know, in fact, how much energy such phenomena would need, for no amount of energy, applied in any way known to ourselves, could possibly produce them.

(b) Control over Individual Material Molecules ; Resulting in Abrogation of Ordinary Thermal Laws, and in Aggregation and Disaggregation of Matter. — These novel dealings with matter, while very various in character, are all of them such as to suggest that here also the agent (though perhaps not consciously) is acting upon molecules and not upon masses; here, also, in the inanimate and inorganic world, just as it seemed to me might be the case in spirit-action upon a living brain.

Let us consider for a moment the advance in power over nature which such a mode of action would imply.

Habitually we deal with matter in a molar manner ; taking little or no account of the molecular changes involved in the execution of our molar designs. Since the rise of the kinetic theory of gases — say for this last half-century — we have also been able to deal with matter molecularly, but merely (as Maxwell expresses it) in statistical fashion ; — dealing with molecules in immense numbers, and achieving results which, though far more delicate and penetrating than any molar results could be, must nevertheless seem rude and wholesale to any intelligence which can actually discern the molecules which we merely infer. " Our actual knowledge of concrete things," says Maxwell,1 "is of an essentially statistical nature, because no one has yet discovered any practical

1 Theory of Heat, chap. xxii.

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 531

method of tracing the path of a molecule, or of identifying it at different times."

The mathematical physicist and the chemist, in fact, have somewhat the same sort of knowledge of their molecules that the Registrar-General has of the population. So much hydrogen combining with so much oxygen will make water ; explode them together and you get your drop ; but who can say which hydrogen-atom will combine with a given atom of oxygen? " There will be about so many marriages next year," says the Registrar-General ; but he perforce leaves the individual brides and bridegrooms to sort themselves. To foresee or to guide the affinities of each several molecule would be for the physicist as great a step in advance as it would be for the Registrar-General could he foresee or guide every impulse to wedlock in the United Kingdom.

Assume, then, for the sake of argument, a power like this. Assume that we can distinctly see and easily deal with each of the countless millions of molecules contained in a single room. We see them distinguished one from another by speed, by direction of movement, by size, by complexity, by intrinsic vibration ; — this last difference corresponding to what we deem difference of elemental constitution. We can therefore direct or combine all these as we will. We can, for instance, to take one of the phenomena here recorded, disequalise the temperature of two parts of a closed chamber by directing the swiftly- moving molecules to one side of an imaginary partition, the more slowly-moving to the other, and thus making the belts of cooler and warmer air of which Mr. Moses tells us. But here I pause ; for the argument has reached a point where it is liable to attack on two opposite sides. On the one side it will be regarded as intolerably novel and extravagant ; while on the other side it will be set down as the mere plagiarism of a familiar physical speculation. It was, in fact, at about this point of an argument which, as the reader has seen, had led me by a vital or psychological rather than by a physical road to this conception of selective molecular action, that it became plain to me that Professor Clerk Maxwell's Sorting Demons had been already trained — if I may so say — to the very performances which I was now ascribing to spirit-power. The reader has probably already recollected these imaginary creatures ; invented by the great physicist to illustrate a process by which it would be theoretically possible to arrest the dissipation of energy and to disequalise anew the temperature of the Universe. I turned to Lord Kelvin's Popular Lectures and Addresses, vol. i. p. 144, for the fullest description of the natural history of this minutest species of Chimsera, — bombitans in vacuo to some purpose now ! I found what virtually amounts to an explanation, on this hypothesis, of most of the phenomena of Mr. Moses' stances, so far as concerned with inanimate matter.

He is a being (says Lord Kelvin, of Maxwell's Demon) with no preternatural qualities, and differs from real living animals only in extreme smallness and agility. He can at pleasure stop, or strike, or push, or pull any single

atom of matter, and so moderate its natural course of motion. Endowed ideally with arms and hands and fingers — two hands and ten fingers suffice — he can do as much for atoms as a pianoforte player can do for the keys of tht piano — just a little more, he can push and pull each atom in any direction.

He cannot create or annul energy; but just as a living animal does, he can store up limited quantities of energy, and reproduce them at will. By operating selectively on individual atoms he can reverse the natural dissipation of energy, can cause one half of a closed jar of air, or of a bar of iron, to become glowing hot, and the other ice-cold; can direct the energy of the moving molecules of a basin of water to throw the water up to a height, and leave it there proportionately cooled (i deg. Fahrenheit for 772 ft. of ascent); can "sort" the molecules in a solution of salt or in a mixture of two gases, so as to reverse the natural process of diffusion, and produce concentration of the solution in one portion of the water, leaving pure water in the remainder of the space occupied ; or in the other case separate the gases into different parts of the containing vessel. The classification, according to which the ideal demon is to sort them, may be according to the essential character of the atom ; for instance, all atoms of hydrogen to be let go to the left, or stopped from crossing to the right, across an ideal boundary ; or it may be according to the velocity each atom chances to have when it approaches the boundary— if greater than a certain stated amount it is to go to the right ; if less, to the left. This latter rule of assortment, carried into execution by the demon, disequalises temperature and undoes the natural diffusion of heat — the former undoes the natural diffusion of matter. By a combination of the two processes the demon can decompose water or carbonic acid, first raising a portion of the compound to dissociational temperature (that is, temperature so high that the collisions shatter the compound molecules to atoms), and then sending the oxygen atoms this way, and the hydrogen or carbon that way ; or he may affect decomposition against chemical affinity otherwise thus : Let him take in a small store of energy by resisting the mutual approach of two compound* molecules, letting them press as it were on his two hands, and store up energy as in a bent spring ; then let him apply the two hands between the oxygen and the double hydrogen constituents of a compound molecule of vapour of water, and tear them asunder. He may repeat this process until a considerable proportion of the whole number of compound molecules in a given quantity of vapour of water, given in a fixed closed vessel, are separated into oxygen and hydrogen at the expense of energy taken from translational motions.1

Let us then consider with what degree of success a well-trained demon

1 Having appealed to Lord Kelvin's authority in the above discussion, I feel bound at once to add that no one would probably be less willing than the illustrious author himself to sanction the use which I proceed to make of his brilliant conceptions. In a lecture, delivered 1883, and republished 1891, in the second edition of Popular Lectures and Addresses (Nature Series), vol. i. p. 265, Lord Kelvin gives his view on our whole range of subjects with perfect clearness.

" Now I have hinted at a possible seventh sense — a magnetic sense — and though out of the line I propose to follow, and although time is precious, and does not permit much of digression, I wish just to remove the idea that I am in any way suggesting anything towards that wretched superstition of animal magnetism, and table-turning, and spiritualism, and mesmerism, and clairvoyance, and spirit-rapping, of which we have

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 533

from Lord Kelvin's laboratory could have acquitted himself at a seance of Mr. Moses' or of D. D. Home's.

He can cause one half of a closed jar of air or of a bar of iron to become glowing hot, and the other ice-cold.

Here at once he scores a success which will make him an almost unique " mediumistic " reputation. Among modern civilised mediums at any rate — whatever may be the case in savage countries — Home is the only one who has obtained the fire-test under good observation. When he put his own head in the glowing fire, or handed blazing coals to the company in a lady's pocket handkerchief, as described by Sir William Crookes, Lord Crawford, and others, all he needed was the familiar demon who took care that between the glow and the handkerchief there should always be a layer of slowly- moving, cool, fresh, carbon-molecules, while the frenzied spinning carbon-molecules at a red heat were kept easily and completely within their imaginary wall. Having accomplished this, it would be mere child's play for our demon to disequalise the temperature of Dr. Speer's study, and to produce the alternate belts of cold and warm air of which Mr. Moses has told us above. The recorded fall of six degrees in the minimum thermometer, and the cold winds over heads and hands, would be trifling examples of the same power.

He can direct the energy of the moving molecules of a basin of water to throw the water up to a height and leave it there proportionately cooled.

Grant him liquid scent, then, of which more presently, and he can make it fall in cool dew from the ceiling as easily as not. Or he may have been at work when the following incident, testified to by Lord Dunraven, occurred with Home. (Experiences in Spiritualism, p. 77.) " He then again raised the glass [of brandy] over his head, and the liquid was withdrawn. He then told me to come and hold my hand above the glass ; I did so, and the liquid fell over and through my fingers into the glass, dropping from the air above me."

He can sort the molecules in a solution of salt, so as to reverse the natural process of diffusion, and produce concentration of the solution in one portion of the water, leaving pure water in the remainder of the space occupied.

He could, then, have continued the little experiment described above.

heard so much. There is no seventh sense of the mystic kind. Clairvoyance, and the like, are the result of bad observation chiefly, somewhat mixed up, however, with the effects of wilful imposture, acting on an innocent, trusting mind."

If, as to my innocent, trusting mind seems not impossible, the time should some day come when critics shall say of these Proceedings that they have merely brought out as novelties things which every one already knew, it may be of interest to refer to this

. utterance of the President of the Royal Society, and foremost savant of Great Britain. And if, as I also conjecture, Lord Kelvin's own speculations on matter and energy should find both confirmation and development in a better understanding of these telekinetic phenomena — we shall have a palmary example of the historic truth that a leader of thought in one age often prepares, while he protests against, the thought of the

, next ; — may be at once its most contemptuous opponent and its most illuminating precursor.

" [Home] then said, ' I am going to take the strength from the brandy/ and he began making passes over the glass and nipping his fingers, sending a strong smell of spirit through the room. In about five minutes he had made the brandy as weak as very weak brandy and water ; it scarcely tasted at all of spirit. Both Lindsay [now Lord Crawford] and I tasted it at the moment, and also some after the stance was over."

A little practice would have enabled our demon to carry this trick a step further, as follows : —

" Home then made some very curious experiments with flowers ; he separated the scent into two portions, one odour smelling exactly like earth, the other being very sweet." And so a fresh lemon with its acid removed, " the flavour being a sort of mawkish alkali ; some describing it as like magnesia, others as like washing soda."

Visiting, we will suppose, Mr. Moses' stances after these exploits, our demon would very easily have drawn the scent from the flowers, as described below.

The classification according to which the ideal demon is to sort them [the atoms~\ may be according to the essential character of the atom ;for instance, all atoms of hydrogen to be let go to the left, <5rv.

This looks promising for that manufacture of liquid scents, pearls, and imitation gems which went on briskly at Dr. Speer's. Only our demon may be puzzled to get at his hydrogen, for instance, which he may not find lying about loose in a gentleman's study. Water and coal gas, however, he will probably find there ; will these do ?

The demon can decompose water or carbonic acid, first raising a portion of the compound to dissociational temperature, and then sending the oxygen atoms this way and the hydrogen or carbon that way.

He has really now, I think, gone through all that is necessary, and we need hardly trouble him to keep his little hands uncomfortably strained, in order to store up energy ; unless, indeed, this be needed for a feat which he cannot well have practised in outlying space ; namely, that triumph over the force of cohesion which is necessary to get a handbell through a party wall, or an orange through the keyhole.

In some such half-ironical fashion, as it seems to me, can we best deal at present with these mysteries of the constitution of matter, which are in reality as- yet almost equally beyond the grasp of sage or of simpleton. I have shown that the things which Mr. Moses' guides are said to do are things of which great minds have loved to fancy the doing. I have shown that since in their view there was not a spirit to do them, they have found it necessary to invent one. " Whom therefore they ignorantly worship " — the being whom they conceive as moving at ease and naturally in a clearly seen molecular world — him do these records declare to them as the operative agency amid marvels which once again " contempt prior to examination " has led most of our best minds to neglect and ignore.

I shall not venture further in proprid persona upon this dangerous

926 A] TO CHAPTER IX 535

ground. But I will quote here one of the answers of Mr. Moses' guides when appealed to on these points, that the reader may, at any rate, judge how far what they say is in accordance with speculations of which it is not likely that either they or their medium had ever heard. In fairness to them and to him I quote first (from Mr. Moses' note-books, see 943 A), one of their emphatic declarations that in his case all physical phenomena were absolutely subsidiary to the spiritual development which was their central aim : —

April i6tb, 1876. — No good end was to be got by lingering on the plane where everything is more or less vague and shifting ; and where whatever truth may be gained is only an elementary enlightenment of material ignorance. It is not for you to deal with the plane of Physics ; come upward to the realm of Spirit. For others it may be well to investigate the lines of contact between Matter and Spirit. It is not your work. Leave it. For others it may be well to develop the tentative attempts of spirit to project itself on the plane of matter. Leave it. It is not your work. Your organism is unfitted for it, and you could not attempt it without risk.

I will now quote a few words on the removal of scent from a flower : —

I want to ask how my flower came to be so dead ?

"The odour was all drawn from it. Hence the perfumes that you had during the se'ance. The vital principle of the flower was gone. Hence it was dead ; and the decay was owing to that fact. The principle was abstracted, even as the vital force is drawn from you."

Then was the strain on it mere decay ?

" Yes, it withered and died because its spirit was gone ; even as your earth body will wither and die when the spirit leaves it. You saw much of this before, when Odorifer scented flowers for you, and drew the perfume from them. It is not new. + RECTOR."

We have now considered both some apparently molar displacements of matter, and some that must needs have involved molecular rearrangement. And it will probably be admitted that even the coarser phenomena — movements of tables and the like — must have involved some molecular process to get the requisite power from the medium's organism to operate at the new fulcrum. We have, therefore, a mixture of processes resembling the way in which we ourselves work with processes quite strange to us. It seems as though these might often be interchanged at pleasure ; and there are passages which describe two cameos — one of them as having been actually cut and chipped in the stance-room by invisible hands, and the other as having been shaped directly by "will-power," with no carving process. A third way of effecting the same end is also mentioned ; — that of suggesting the work to a mortal artist.

One of the most interesting of all modifications of matter presumably contained in the room consists in " direct writing," — the disposition of coloured matter in a form simulating the handwriting of some identified

spirit. This phenomenon occurred at an early date in the experiences of Mr. Moses.

In such cases the content as well as the method of the writing is naturally important, in so far as it may throw light upon the identities concerned. There are here two separate questions. Firstly : Are the spirits who thus write directly the same as those who write through the medium's hand ? Secondly : Are they the spirits who they profess to be? The first of these questions must, I think, be answered in the affirmative. The direct signatures closely resemble the automatic signatures, and the two forms of writing are intimately intermixed. Sometimes, for instance, letters were formed under the shadow of Mr. Moses' hand, while he himself wrote as usual ; or the letters were even formed under his gaze (when he was alone) in the light. The authors of the automatic script always claimed authorship of the direct script also.

But on the other hand, I do not see that the direct writing adds to the evidence for identity supplied by the automatic writing, except in so far as it shows that the claim to identity pervades every manifestation. Beings who can make pearls and carve cameos can presumably deposit chalk and arrange patterns thereof just as they choose, imitating any signature known to them with none of that special difficulty in the imitation of characteristics of handwriting which is felt on earth. Direct writing, in short, seems to be conditioned in much the same way as other phenomena by the mind of the medium.

The colouring matter used might either be apparently derived from some chalk pencil already in the room, or might have no obvious source.

