" Soon after lying down last night, I had a rapid but most realistic glimpse of Mr. Kirk leaning against his dining-room mantelpiece ; the room seemed brightly lighted, and he looked rather bothered, and just as I saw him he appeared to say ' Doctor ' (a familiar name given to Miss G. by Mr. and Mrs. Kirk), ' I haven't got my pipe.' This seems very absurd, the more so as I do not know whether Mr. Kirk ever smokes a pipe. I see him occasionally with a cigar or cigarette, but cannot remember ever seeing him with a pipe : if I have, it must have been years ago. I do not know whether my eyes were open or closed, but the vividness of the impression quite startled me. This occurred just after the expiration of time appointed for experiment (10.45 — I'-fS)-"

Mr. Kirk reports in his account of the trial, written on the ist May, that he tried to transfer an image of himself, sitting on a low chair, and also the part of the room facing him in the light of the lamp. But after seeing Miss G.'s report, he adds : —

630D] TO CHAPTER VI 621

"The fact that I had another experiment to make, i.e. after the trial with Miss. G. , enables me to trace minutely my actions before beginning it. Immediately the time had expired with Miss G. , I got up and rapidly lit the gas and three pieces of candle, which I had ready in the cardboard box-cover, to illuminate the diagram. The room was therefore brilliantly lighted. I now rested my right shoulder against the mantelpiece, with my face towards Miss G. , but with my eyes bent on the carpet. In this position I thought intensely of myself and the whole room, and feeling really anxious to make a success, for at least six minutes. By this time my shoulder was aching very much with the constrained attitude and the pressure on the mantelpiece, and I broke off, using words (talking to myself) very similar to those given by Miss G. What I muttered, as nearly as I can remember, was, ' Now, Doctor, I'll get my pipe.' . . . Until within the last few weeks I have not smoked a pipe for many years, and I do not think it probable that Miss G. has ever seen me use one ; but it is an absolute certainty that she was not aware I had taken to smoke one recently."

In the fifth experiment of the series, made on the 9th May, the impression which appears to have been transferred was fortunately recorded beforehand. Mr. Kirk's report of that date, after describing an attempt to transfer an image of the room, and of an imaginary witch, runs as follows : —

" Continued to influence her some minutes after limit of time for experiment (11.30 P.M.). During this time' I was much bothered by a subcurrent of thought, which I in vain strove to cast off. In the morning, just before time to get up, I had a vivid dream of my lost dog ('Laddie').^ I dreamt he had returned, and that my wife. Miss G., and myself made much of him. I thought of him all day, and tried to suppress the thought, fearing it would interfere with the success of experiments ; feel worried and irritated at this, being really anxious to make an impression. Do not expect favourable result. Written same night. J. K."

Miss G.'s report is as follows : —

" Experiment last night (9-5-92) most unsatisfactory. Saw only a glow of light and once for a few seconds a figure (of a vase). Some minutes after 1 1. 30 (time for conclusion of experiment) it seemed as if the door of my room were open, and on the landing I saw a very large dog moving as though it had just come upstairs. I cannot conceive what suggested this, nor can I understand why I thought of Laddie during time of experiment. I do not think we have mentioned him recently. My door was locked as usual. L. G."

The sixth experiment (15th May 1892) was, in the words of Mr. Kirk's contemporary report, " devoted to making hypnotic passes, done with great energy and concentration of mind. The passes were made, not only over Miss G.'s (imagined) face and arms, but specially over her hands," with the view of inducing hypnotic sleep.

Miss G. reports that she "fell asleep before the time arranged had expired. But it was only to awake again very soon, through dreaming I was in a basement room . . . making frantic efforts to strike a match, prevented doing so by some one behind clasping my wrists. The sensation was so unpleasantly real that it awoke me.'' The time fixed for the experiment had then passed. This was the

1 Mr. Kirk explains later that this dog had been lost six years before. They had all been much attached to him, and his loss was still an occasional topic of conversation and of dreams by Mr. Kirk.

only occasion in this series on which Miss G. went to sleep during an experiment.

In the seventh experiment (5th June 1892) Mr. Kirk again made passes to send Miss G. to sleep. Miss G. on her side, saw only something " like the varied but regular movements one sees in turning a kaleidoscope, only without the colouring ; it was simply luminous, and lasted more or less distinctly from 15 to 20 minutes." This impression may conceivably have been due, as Mr. Kirk suggests, to the regular movements of his hands in making the hypnotic passes.

In estimating the value of the coincidences between Mr. Kirk's thought and Miss G.'s impressions in the fourth and fifth trials, it should not be overlooked that the percipient's impressions were not vague images such as are wont to crowd through our minds on the near approach of sleep, but clear-cut visions, approximating to visual hallucinations.

630 E, Mr. A. Glardon's Experiments. — The following experiments in the transference of diagrams were carried out by the Rev. A. Glardon, of Tour-de-Peilz, Vaud, Switzerland, as agent, with a friend of his, Mrs. M., as percipient, both being Associates of the Society for Psychical Research.

An earlier and somewhat less successful series of the same kind was carried out by them in 1893, at a distance of at least 200 miles from one another. (See Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 98-101.) This account is taken from the Journal S.P.R. vol. vii. pp. 325-329.

The original diagrams drawn by both agent and percipient, carefully dated and with the notes they made on them at the time, have been sent to us, and most of them are reproduced in the Plates. ... It will be seen from the account what proportion of success was attained, though it is not easy to estimate this with exactitude, because the percipient several times made a number of little scribbles which might be counted either as parts of one drawing, or all as separate drawings. See e.g. Plate II., R.3. Where we have given the number of drawings she made, without reproducing all of them (see e.g. Plate I., R. i b) we have, of course, counted as many as possible, in order not to over-estimate the argument against chance coincidence. Thus, such a case as R. 3 would have been counted as eight drawings.

The experiments will be best understood by a full description of the Plates, which we now proceed to give.

In all cases the letter O on the Plates denotes the drawings of the agent and the letter R those of the percipient; and the dotted lines mark off the drawings belonging to each experiment.

Plate I. — In the experiments here illustrated, the agent was at Tour-de-Peilz, and the percipient at Florence, and the former notes " 10 p.m. " on his sheet of diagrams as the hour of the experiments, also that he used the diagram O. I on May 8th and 9th [1893], and O. 2 on May loth and nth.

The percipient made one drawing, reproduced as R. i a, on May 8th. On May 9th she made eight attempts, of which the one most nearly resembling O. I is given, as R. i b. On her paper is noted " 1893, Tuesday, May 9th, 10.15." Dn May loth, she attempted nothing. The whole of what she drew on May i ith is reproduced as " R. 2 " ; her paper being marked, " May 11, '93 ; 10 P.M."

630 E] TO CHAPTER VI 623

Plate II. — The diagrams O. 3 and O. 4 were used in experiments in which the agent was at Tour-de-Peilz and the percipient at Torre PelHce, Italy; O. 3 was used on May 19th and O. 4 on May 22nd and 23rd; in all cases at 10 p.m. R. 3 represents all the drawings made by the percipient on May 19th ; her paper is marked "19 May 1893; 10 p.m.;" and also bears the note: "a small very bright design or object." On May 23rd, at 10.5 p.m., she made three drawings, two of which are reproduced as R. 4. It will be observed that the bracket in the agent's drawing seems to be reproduced in the second of these, but this may be a mere chance resemblance. O. 5 is the diagram used by the agent on June 2nd at 10 p.m., he being still at Tour-de-Peilz, and the percipient at Vevey. She made no drawing on this date, but notes: "June 2nd, 1893; 10 p.m. See nothing but a sort of frame and a crown j too sleepy to draw it."

The agent's drawing corresponding to R. 6 is shown as O. 6 on Plate III. In this experiment, the agent and percipient were both in the same house at Tour-de-Peilz, but in different rooms. It occurred on June 7th, 1893, and Mr. Glardon gives the following account of it : —

" Gryon-sur-Bex, \AV'D,/une 2-]tk, 1893.

" Mrs. M. was sitting alone in a room adjoining the one I was in. I drew the diagram and fixed my attention on it. After two or three minutes, Mrs. M. called aloud, saying, ' I am too much excited to-day, don't go on ; ' and on my entering the room, she said, * I can see nothing but the design of the embroidery I have been working at this morning, and I will not draw it because I think it too silly.'

" She sent me afterwards that design ; you can judge for yourself. The fact is that, unawares, I had drawn a diagram resembling closely that design." . . .

The rest of the diagrams on Plates III. and IV. belong to a later series of experiments, carried out between December 14th, 1893, and January 9th, 1894. They were sent to us in April 1894 by Mr. Glardon, who writes : —

Tour-de-Peilz, April 24iA, 1894.

"... I have made a new series with the same correspondent, Mrs. M., she being in Ajaccio, Corsica, where she is still, and I here. The time was half-past nine p.m., French time ; and the results have not been very satisfactory. During December 1893 and January 1894, we tried many times a week. Unfortunately, Mrs. M. did not always attend, and I myself was sometimes prevented by visits or committees from attending; so that, in all, we had only a dozen real experiments, both attending the same night and at the same moment. Of these, I send you four instances in which it seems to me that we achieved a fair amount of success. One is a striking example of delayed and persistent impression. Two nights running I tried to send a Maltese cross [see O. 10]. Mrs. M. sat on the same days, and the two days following — pencil in hand and eyes shut as usual — on the 5th, the 6th, the 8th, and the 9th of January ; and the approximation was every time greater, till the cross came out distinctly.

" On December 28th, Mrs. M. seems to have seen the comet I had drawn pretty well [see O. 9]. On the 14th, she had an impression of something resembling a crown, and I had drawn a rose [see O. 7]. Finally, on the 21st, she reproduced at once and exactly my drawing, as you will see from her own

Plate I

[630 E

630 E]

TO CHAPTER VI Plate II

VOL. L

2 R

Plate III

[630 E

630 E]

TO CHAPTER VI Plate IV

bit of paper [see O. 8 and R. 8]. It is a pity she did not use for our sittings anything larger than a common note-book.' However, I send you leaves torn from it, corresponding to my drawings."

In these four experiments, we have reproduced all the drawings made by the agent, and also all made by the percipient on each occasion, except in the experiment of January sth-pth, 1894, which is marked O. 10 and R. 10.

In her drawings marked in the Plate R. 7, she notes the date and hour as December 14th, 10 p.m.; and writes: "Like a pair of tongs — a tooth with prongs — a crown" the three descriptions apparently referring to her three drawings. The agent's drawing, O. 7, is dated December 14th, 1893. Her drawings marked R. 8 are dated December 21st, 1893, 9.30 p.m., the agent's, O. 8, being dated December 21st, 1893; and those marked R. 9 are dated December 28th, 1893, 9.30 p.m., the agent's, O. 9, being also dated December 28th, 1893.

With regard to the experiment of January 5th-9th, 1894, the original diagram was a Maltese cross (Plate III., O. 10), which the agent notes that he used on Januar)'' 5th and 6th, 1894. The percipient made on January 5th, at 9.30 P.M., four drawings, of which the one most like a Maltese cross is reproduced as R. 10 a. On January 6th, at the same hour, she made four drawings, none of which are at all like the cross. On January 8th, at 9.30 p.m., she made four drawings, the most successful of which is reproduced as R. 10 b. On January 9th, at 9.30 p.m., she made first two drawings, resembling each other pretty closely, and added the note, " same impression as last time." One of these is reproduced as R. 10 c. She seems then to have gone off on an altogether wrong tack, as nine diagrams of a different character, some of them resembling a flag or key, follow. Next she appears to have made a fresh start, drawing three diagrams, one of which is R. 10 d. To these she appends the note: "Always come back to the same thing. Probably he has sent nothing." Finally, on one corner of the sheet, she draws a Greek key pattern, marked " afterwards."

In this experiment, the large number of attempts made, and the fact that success was not attained until two or three days after the agent was trying to transfer the drawing, of course strengthen the probability that the success may have been merely due to chance. On the other hand, all the diagrams made on each day, except the last, resemble one another more or less closely, as if the percipient had had only one or two ideas of a form in her mind on each evening. On January 9th also, the drawings of each of the three sets just described show marked resemblances to one another. Consequently, the probability of a chance coincidence is not so great as the total number of drawings would make it appear to be.

We have also to remember that, as Mr. Glardon informs us, there was no written communication between agent and percipient during this time, so that she did not know that he was using the same diagram two days running. In answer to the question whether he attempted to transfer any diagrams to Mrs. M. on January 8th and 9th, Mr. Glardon says (May 2nd, 1S94) that he does not remember, but he believes not.

630 F. We have as yet received very few cases of anything like a series of telepathic messages. One carefully reported case, carried out

630F] TO CHAPTER VI 629

by Miss Goodrich-Freer with a friend of hers, was given in her paper, " A Record of Telepathic and Other Experiences " {^Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 377-397). Another series, also carefully noted, of apparently telepathic impressions of a trivial kind — occurring between a doctor and one of his patients — was printed in theyi?z^ri^a/ S.P.R., vol. vii. pp. 299-306, and 3 1 1-3 1 9. The following is a striking case of the same kind, obtained from a gentleman, Dr. J. S., who prefers his initials only to be published. The account is taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 455. We may observe in this case, as in others of the same kind, that some element of apparent prediction is included ; though this is probably often a mere conversion of the agent's expectation and inference into what appears to the percipient an actual fact. It must, however, also be remembered that the occasional want of contemporaneity adds slightly to the probability of chance coincidence between the thoughts of the two experimenters.

From the Pacific Theosophist^ San Francisco, August 1893.

The following experiments were conducted by a well-known physician of this city and his wife. Both were somewhat interested in the subject and, upon the latter leaving for a visit in the country, it was arranged that at a certain time of each day ten minutes should be devoted to an attempt to communicate telepathically, each alternating as transmitter and receiver.

The notes, carefully written down while separated nearly a hundred miles, speak for themselves. They also make it apparent that the physician accomplished something more than mere telepathy. In receiving supposed messages, he several times got accurate information of things which the wife had no idea she was imparting, and in one or two instances actually foresaw occurrences which could not possibly have been known to his transmitter. This shows how intimately our psychic senses blend one with the other, and how hard it is for an untrained person to distinguish just what psychic faculty is active. The phenomena recorded are commonplace in their character ; the interest lies in their truthfulness and the scientific accuracy of their observation. The results are as follows : —

May iztk. — Transmitter, Mrs. S. May 12th. — Received.

Arrived safely. Pleasant trip. B. Had a good trip. B. slept well,

feels fairly well. We have a nice House squarely built and plain; porch place in an old-fashioned house. surrounded by trees ; not fronting the

road ; rooms very sunny. [All accurate. What follows was seen clairvoyantly, apparently. — Ed.] Landlady wears sun-bonnet with jacket of same. Little boy three years old. [Boy expected, but did not arrive until next day. The description accurate.] Fire in northeast. [Fire occurred next night.]

[630 F

May \})ih. — Transmitter, Dr. S.

Theresa B. and her mother were here yesterday. Also Clara and Emma. Business somewhat dull. W.'s house burned yesterday.

May li,th.

Nothinof sent.

May \^th. — Transmitter, Dr. S.

E. and R. went to park. Mrs. A. is angry. S. paid his bill.

May i6tk. — Transmitter, Mrs. S. Paid a visit to K.'s. B. feels quite well.

May ijth. — Transmitter, Dr. S. Nothing sent; business prevented.

May \Zth. — Transmitter, Mrs. S.

B. does not feel well at all. Went for medicine.

May \()th.—

Case of D. courts 29th. Played whist.

•Transmitter, Dr. S.

will come off in the Business still quiet.

May 20th. — Transmitter, Mrs. S.

My clothes and shoes are all torn. I have poison oak on my arms. Hope it will not be bad.

May i-^th. — Received.

I think Theresa B. was there or is coming. Something, I can't make out, about business. I think it is bad.

May \\th. Forgot to keep the appointed time.

May \^th. — Received.

Could get nothing definite ; think you collected some money.

May i6th. — Received.

You took a long walk. I see a young man with a revolver in his hand. [A young man shot a dog in the garden that day.]

May ijih. — Received.

Could get nothing at all. Think you were out.

May 1 8///. — Received.

See a lot of wine casks and demijohns. Something about curtains. [Mrs. S. visited a large wine cellar on the 17th. The curtains in her room annoyed her very much. But nothing about either was consciously sent.]

May igth. — Received.

Think you had rain. You seem dissatisfied. You are telling me something about D., I am sure. [It did rain, but the fact was not consciously

sent.]

May 7.0th. — Received.

You went out riding. I see you holding a shoe in your hand. You have poison oak on your right arm. B. is better. You want me to mail you the Bulletin and Chj'onicle. [Mrs. S. did ride out to some sulphur springs. Poison oak was on right arm only. B. gained three pounds. She was hoping for the Bulletin supplement only.]

630 F]

TO CHAPTER VI

May 21 si.

Appointment forgotten.

May 22nd. — Transmitter, Mrs. S.

Visited springs. Very warm all day. I have a sick headache.

May 22,rd. — Transmitter, Dr. S. Up all night. Very tired. Nothing new.

May 21 si. Not at home ; did not sit to receive.

May 22nd. — Received.

It must be warm ; I see you fanning yourself; you were riding ; on a donkey, I think. [She rode in a carriage, but saw a donkey on her trip which amused her very much.]

May 22,rd. — Received. You are looking very cross and

May 2/^th. — Transmitter, Mrs. S. Sent nothing.

May 2Sth. — Transmitter, Dr. S. I have a bad sore throat. I am going to Drs. F. and S. (dentists) to give ether. It is a windy day.

tired

May 2\th. — Received.

I see a big church-like building — brick. [Mrs. S. went the evening previous to a church entertainment. The description correct. Not sent consciously.]

May 2'^th. — Received. You have unpleasant weather. You are trying to tell me something about Dr. F. and his partner. Dr. S., but I can't make it out.

Mrs. S. was somewhat doubtful about the success or even possibility of such experiments succeeding, and was fairly startled upon comparing memoranda on her return home. B. is a sister of Mrs. S., for whose benefit the trip was taken. The doctor had never been in that part of the country, and so could not have seen the house and church he so accurately described. The experiments throw much light on psychic faculties other than mere telepathy.

J. S., M.D., Physician and Surgeon.

San Francisco, November z^tk, 1893.

R. Hodgson, Esq., — Dear Sir, — In reply to yours of November iSth, my statement is that my experiment with my wife in telepathy resulted precisely as you find it given in the Pacific Theosophist. [In a later letter Dr. S. states that he is not himself a Theosophist.]

I came to try the experiment this way : I read in the daily papers of a certain drummer who, when absent from his home, made it a practice to sit at ten o'clock p.m., for about half-an-hour, his wife the same, and mentally communicate the news of the day to each other, as exchanging letters was inconvenient, he being compelled to change his location every day.

As my wife was to go away from San Francisco last summer with a sick sister of hers, we decided to try the experiment, with the result given in the Pacific Theosophist. My wife has grown up in an atmosphere of scepticism, consequently she did not give the subject as much attention as I did, otherwise we might have had better results. Now, of course, her p&rsonal experience convinced her of something.

No third person was aware of our doing, excepting what I state here : I

met Dr. J. Anderson in consultation about a patient, when I told him I believed in the possibilities of telepathy, and that I was making experiments just then with my wife. He asked me to show him the result, good or bad, which I did. Dr. Anderson never met my wife, neither did he know where she went to. She was in St. Helena, Sonoma County, about sixty-three miles from the city.

We agreed to sit twenty minutes at ten o'clock p.m. In sending news, I fixed my mind strongly on the messages ; in receiving, I made my mind as near blank as I could, excluding all thought. Everything I received came to me as a mental picture. Sometimes I would see things only partly, like half of a face. When I saw her arm, with the poison oak, it came very clearly. I almost thought I could speak to her, but I never heard anything like noise. . . .

(Signed) Dr. J. S.

I corroborate the above statement in every detail. Mrs. E. S.

Mr. W. E. Coleman, well known to Dr. Hodgson, writes to him as

follows : —

Chief Q. M, Office, San Francisco, California, December 21st, 1893. Upon inquiry I find that Dr. J. S. is a reputable physician of character and standing. AH speak well of him, and he is considered a man of veracity. I can find nothing against him as man or as doctor. W. E. Coleman.

630 G. Miss DespartTs Experwients. — The following case comes from two ladies well known to me. Miss R. C. Despard and Miss C. M. Campbell. After successful experiments with both in the same room, they made two trials, both of which were successful, with agent and percipient in different parts of London. Some time later they carried out another short series of experiments at a distance, which I quote in full from the Journal S.P.R., vol. vii. pp. 234-237. (For full details of all their experiments, see the Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 4-9, and vol. vii. pp. 234-238.)

The descriptions of each witness were always written before comparing notes with the other. All the letters quoted, with the envelopes corresponding to the first two of them, were sent to the Editor of the Journal S.P.R.

[Miss Despard describes the general conditions of the experiments thus: — ]

Agent in Surbiton, Percipient in London, W.C. district, distance about 14 miles.

Agreed upon: Agent to concentrate attention at 11 p.m.; percipient to then write down any impression received. Experiments to begin on December 27th, 1895 ; one experiment each night, alternately an object and a diagram. December 31st to be omitted.

[The first account is a letter written from Surbiton by the agent, Miss Despard, to Miss Campbell in London.]

Strathmore, Surbiton Hill Park, Surbiton, December 2-jth, 1895. 11-30 ^-M. Dear K., — As you know, we agreed a few days ago to try some experiments in thought-transference — to begin to-night at 1 1 p. M. — alternate nights to think

630 G] TO CHAPTER VI 633

of an object and a diagram. So to-night I fixed my attention about H.4P.M. on a brass candlestick with a lighted candle in it. I feel the result will not be very satisfactory, for I found difficulty in concentrating my mind, and not having decided previously what object to think of, I looked over the mantelpiece first and rejected two or three things before fixing on the candlestick. A very noisy train was also distracting my attention, so I wonder if you will think of that.

December 7&th, 11.45 P-*^- — I thought of this diagram [a cross inscribed in a triangle], the [triangle] in thick black, and the cross inside in lighter.

December 29/^, 11.40 p.m. — I hope this will be more successful. I found to-night I could bring up a much clearer mental picture of the object — a small Bristol-ware jug about six inches high, the lower part being brownish red, of a metalhc coppery colour, the upper part having a band of reddish and lightpurple flowers of a somewhat conventional rose pattern — handle greenish. I do not think you have seen this jug, as it has been put away in a cupboard and only lately brought out. I saw the jug chiefly by bright firelight.

December 30/^, 12 midnight. — I am very tired and fear the result is vague; this is the diagram.

My mental image was not as correct, but tended to slope up to the right.

Let me know your impressions soon. — Yours, &c.,

R. C. Despard.

[The corresponding account of the percipient. Miss Campbell, is as follows : — ]

77 Chesterton Road, W., December 2()th, 1895.

Dear R., — I have nothing very satisfactory to report. I am sorry to say I quite forgot on the 27th about our projected experiments until I was just getting into bed, when I suddenly remembered, and just then I heard a train making a great noise, and as I have never noticed it like that before, I wondered if it was one of your trains. I could not fix my mind on any object, but clock, watch, bath, all flitted past, and the circle of firelight in the front room ; the only word that came to me was " sand " and a sound like k or q 3.1 the beginning of a word (you know I as often hear the name of the object as see the thing itself). I stopped, for it seemed ridiculous, hut you must have attracted my attention, for just after I stopped I heard the clock here strike the half-hour, and found next morning it was twenty minutes fast, so when I "suddenly remembered," it must have been just after eleven.

Last night I believe yozi forgot, for I had no strong impression, but you see the paper enclosed.^ The scribbles in corner my pencil did without me ; the rectangle I believe was a guess ; as for the circle, my pencil would go round and round in the centre making that spot, the circle itself being a very shadowy impression.

II. 15 P.M. — The first thing that came into my mind was a sponge, but I think that was suggested by the sound of water running in the bath-room, and next I had more distinctly an impression of a reddish metallic lustre, and I thought it must be the Moorish brass tray on May's mantelpiece ; but at last I saw quite distinctly a small jug of a brownish metallic appearance below, with above that a white band with coloured flowers, lilac and crimson, on it. I can't be sure what it was like at the top, for that seemed to be in shadow and

1 The diagram enclosed is not at all similar to the agent's figure.

seemed to be darkish, — perhaps like the bottom, but I saw no metallic gleam. I don't remember anything like this among May's things, but the impression was so vivid I describe it.

2,0th, 1 1. 15 P.M. — Thought vaguely of a triangle and figure like this, but no vivid impression ; if you were thinking of any figure at all, were also thinking of something else.

3 1 J-/. — I send you this as far as it goes, and shall be glad to hear from you with your accounts. — Yours,

C. M. Campbell. 15 Heathcote Street, W.C.

[The post-marks on the envelopes of these letters proved that Miss Campbell posted her letter before receiving Miss Despard's; and almost proved — but for an illegibility in a portion of one post-mark — that Miss Despard posted hers before receiving Miss Campbell's.

Five more experiments were made, of which I quote the first two, the last three being failures. The following is the agent's account: — ]

Strathmore, Surbiton,

yamiary 1st, 1896. 11.40 P.M. Dear K. — Have thought of a small dog's whip hung on M.'s wall, but did not see it clearly, kept thinking of it in use ; was in E.'s room, looking at some dresses, and could not give whole attention to it.

January 2nd. 11. 15 P.M. — Thought of small almanac with a picture of pink roses on it. . . . R. C. Despard.

[The percipient. Miss Campbell, wrote as follows. Her envelope was addressed to Miss Despard at Surbiton, but apparently not posted for the reason given in her final sentence.]

15 Heathcote Street, W.C.

January isf, 1896. 11. 10 p.m. — [Sketch of a capital S, the upper part sloping to the right and the lower to the left.] First I had inclination to let my pen wriggle, then saw large capital S, and heard sound of letter, though this was most probably imagination.

Jamiary ind. 11.30 p.m. — Had a very vivid impression of your walking up to the chest of drawers in your room, opening the top drawer and touching those velvet and lace straps, as if you were meditating what you could think of, and looking in front of you at the little glass-fronted bookcase ; then there was a small scrimmage between the cat and the dog from downstairs and I lost the thread ; but next seemed to be touching a book — no, a single leaf, a sheet of writing-paper, and then it seemed to be pink and blotty ; but it all seemed very aimless and I had a bad headache, so could not concentrate attention well. ... CM. Campbell.

634 A. We have on record a few cases suggestive of telepathic communication between human beings and animals. Since, from the nature of the case, only the witnesses on one side can be examined, any interpretation of such occurrences must remain dubious at best. Apart from the possibility of independent clairvoyance, the supposed telepathic impulse might come from some other human being acquainted with the condition of the animal, — not from the animal itself.

634 A] TO CHAPTER VI 635

I quote an instance from the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiv. p. 285. The account was received in December 1890/ from Mrs. Bagot, writing from The Palace, Hampton Court. Both Mrs. Bagot and her daughter, who confirms the account, are known to me.

In the year 1883 we were staying at the Hotel des Anglais, at Mentone. I had left at home (in Norfolk), in the care of our gardener, a very favourite little dog, a black and tan terrier, named Judy. I was sitting at table d'hote and suddenly saw my dog run across the room, and unthinkingly exclaimed, " Why, there's Judy ! " There was no dog in the hotel, and when I went upstairs I told my daughter, who was ill, what I had seen. A few days after I got a letter saying that Judy had gone out with the gardener as usual in the morning quite well, but when he returned at breakfast-time she was suddenly taken ill, and died in half-an-hour. At this distance of time I cannot distinctly remember whether the dates agreed, but my impression is that she had died the day I saw her. Mary Bagot.

Mrs. Bagot's daughter, Mrs. Wodehouse, sent me on February 9th, 1896^ the following corroboration, stating that the quotations were an exact copy of the references to the dog in her diary for March 24th and 28th, 1883. It will be observed that there is no proof that the dog was seen on the day of its death, but it is clear that Mrs. Bagot had not heard of its death till afterwards.

56 Chester Square, S. W.

{Copy of Diary .') March i^th, 1883. Easter Eve {M.^'a.\.on€). — " Drove with A. and picked anemones. Lovely bright day. But m)' head ached too much to enjoy it. Went to bed after tea and read Hettner's ' Renaissance.' Mamma saw Judy's ghost at table d'hOte ! "

March zSth, Wednesday (Monte Carlo). — "Mamma and A. came over for the day. Judy dead, poor old dear."

Note, — I distinctly remember my father and mother and sister (Mrs. Algernon Law) and my cousin (Miss Dawnay) coming into my bedroom all laughing and telling me how my mother had seen Judy (black and tan terrier) running across the room whilst they were at table d'hote. My mother was so positive about it, that one of the others (I think my father) had asked the waiter if there were any dogs in the hotel, and he had answered in the negative. I can find no further mention of the time or day of the dog's death in my diary.

I may also be mistaken in the day on which my mother saw Judy, for although I usually write my diary every evening, I sometimes leave it for two or three days and then write it in as best I can remember. But I distitictly remember lying in my bed at Mentone when they told me the story, and equally clearly I remember receiving the news of Judy's death at Monte Carlo.

Adela H. Wodehouse.

1 In February 1896, Mrs. Bagot wrote a second account of the same incident, which was printed in Xho. Journal S.P.R. for April 1896 (vol. vii. p. 243), with her daughter's confirmation, then obtained for the first time. The earUer account, here given, is practically identical with the later one, so that Mrs. Bagot's recollection of the circumstances does not seem to have varied.

For another somewhat similar case, see the Journal S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 289.

642 A. General Criticism of the Evidence for Telepathy. — Various possible sources of error and the general canons of evidence in the case of spontaneous telepathy were discussed fully by Gurney in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. chap, iv., of which the following is a brief abstract.

The most general objection to the evidence is that all manner of false beliefs have in their day been able to muster in their support a considerable amount of evidence, — even educated evidence, — much of which was certainly not consciously fraudulent ; the behef in witchcraft is a favourite instance. But an enormous proportion of the witch evidence consisted in confessions extracted by torture or intimidation ; in many other cases, actual occurrences were attributed, on no grounds whatever, to any suspicious persons who happened to be in the neighbourhood. In the remaining cases (i) the testimony on which the alleged facts were believed came exclusively from the uneducated classes ; and (2) the easy acceptance of this evidence by better-educated persons was due to the then almost universal ignorance of the phenomena of hallucination, hysteria, trance, and hypnotism. As a result of this ignorance, it was thought that there were only two alternative interpretations of the evidence : {a) that the facts happened as alleged, or (b) that the witnesses were practising deliberate fraud. There was, of course, some fraud, but the fact that many of them gained nothing but suffering for their statements showed that the testimony was on the whole honestly given. Fraud being thus excluded, the facts were believed genuine.

The phenomena of witchcraft which were then put down to " possession " can now be explained by hallucination, since we know that subjective hallucinations may appear absolutely real to the percipient, that they may easily be produced by hypnotic suggestion (which was probably often used by witches), and that they are also frequent in spontaneous trance and hysteria, both which conditions are contagious and no doubt were often present. With regard to such marvels as aerial rides and transformations into animals, there is absolutely no first-hand evidence — even from uneducated peasants — that these were actually witnessed. The evidence relied on for transformations was usually that the accused person proved to have some bodily hurt on the day the animal associated with her had been wounded.

There are, however, a few cases recorded on really good authority of the apparent possession of telepathic powers by the witches or their subjects. No stress can, of course, be laid on this, but it is noteworthy that the only cases of supposed magic with which persons of sense and education seem at the time to have come into close quarters were similar in

See " Note on Witchcraft " in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 172, for an account, with numerous references, of the historical evidence for witchcraft.

642A] TO CHAPTER VI 637

character to cases for which persons of sense and education are still found to offer their personal testimony.

But in whatever light these residual cases are regarded, the general conclusion remains the same, — that the phenomena which were characteristic of witchcraft and which are an accepted type of exploded superstitions never rested on the first-hand testimony of educated and intelligent persons ; and the sweeping assertion which is often made that such persons were, in their days, witnesses to the truth of these absurdities needs, therefore, to be carefully guarded. What the educated and intelligent believers did was to accept from others, as evidence of objective facts, statements which were really only evidence of subjective facts, the necessary means of correction not being within their reach. Those who were in any direct sense witnesses to the facts were invariably persons inclined to such beliefs to begin with, — who had been brought up in them and had accepted them as a matter of course.

When we come to compare the evidence for witchcraft with the modern evidence for telepathy, it will be seen that a very large number of our first-hand witnesses are educated and intelligent persons, by no means generally inclined beforehand to admit the reality of the phenomenon, nor even interested in it afterwards. The facts alleged are not connected with any special form of received belief ; for while apparitions of the dead have been believed in widely from the earliest ages, the idea of apparitions at the time of death or of serious crises in life has no established vogue, though sporadic instances have often been reported.

There are, notwithstanding, several sources of error which may affect the testimony of honest and educated persons to events that are both unusual and of a sort unrecognised by contemporary science.

First, as to errors of observation these can only relate to real objects, seen and misinterpreted, e.g. a real figure seen out of doors and at some distance may be wrongly recognised, and the person supposed to have been seen may happen to have died on that day.

In most cases, however, the experience is clearly hallucinatory, and the next class of errors — those of inference — are therefore unimportant. The only question is, — not, how did the witness interpret his impression, but, what did he seem to himself at the time to perceive ?

Errors of narration and of memory may be more serious. As to the former, there is the tendency to exaggerate, — to make the account graphic and picturesque ; but this would vitiate oral rather than written accounts, and — as might be expected from general experience — affects especially second-hand accounts.

Errors of memory are much more difficult for a thoroughly honest person to avoid, since very few are aware of the untrustworthiness of their own memory. This ignorance aids unconscious tendencies to bring events into harmony with one's own beliefs and opinions — whether religious or scientific — and with each other ; to exaggerate the clearness and precision

of recollections, and to simplify them, either by bringing any group of events into a connected whole or merely by dropping some of the details. The total effect may be an exaggeration of the marvellous elements in a story, or occasionally the reverse ; e.g. a waking hallucination may be remembered as a dream.

Having reviewed these various possible sources of error, we may now pass on to consider the canons of evidence in the case of telepathy. In a typical instance of a telepathic phenomenon, there are three points on which indisputable evidence is required : (i) that the agent has had an unusual experience, — say, has died ; (2) that the percipient has had an unusual experience, including a certain impression of the agent, — say, has, while awake, had a vision of the agent in the room ; (3) that the two events coincided-^ in time, which implies that their respective dates can be accurately fixed.

(i) Of the agent's experience, evidence independent of the percipient's statements can generally be obtained, either from printed notices if he has died, or, if not, from the man himself. (2) The percipient's experience consists in an impression affecting himself alone, to which therefore no one else can bear direct witness. But if this impression is made known at once to some other person, so that the latter's confirmation may date from a time before the condition of the agent was k?iow7i, such confirmation is valuable as being practically independent of the percipient. (3) Evidence is required that the experiences of the agent and percipient happened on the same day,^ since the closeness of the coincidence may easily be exaggerated in memory, especially after the lapse of some time.

The worth of the evidence of course varies greatly in different cases, and the evidential conditions may be summarised according to their value as follows : —

A. Where the event which befell the agent, with its date, is recorded in printed notices, or in contemporary documents which we have examined ; or is reported to us by the agent himself independently, or by some independent witness or witnesses ; and where

(i) The percipient (a) made a written record of his experience, with its date, at the time of its occurrence, which record we have either seen or otherwise ascertained to be still in existence ; or (/?) before the arrival of the news^ mentioned his experience to one or more persons, by whom the

1 Supposing the facts proved, we have still to meet the objection that the coincidence of events may have been due to chance and not to telepathy (see account of the Report on the Census of Hallucinations, 612 A, for discussion of this) ; but the first step obviously is to prove the facts.

" Since numerical data are required to estimate the argument for chance coincidence, an arbitrary limit of time for the coincidence must be fixed, and we include all cases in which the interval between the two events is not more than twelve hours, though it appears generally to be much less than this.

" The words " the news " mean always in this connection the news of what has befallen the supposed agent.

642A] TO CHAPTER VI 639

fact that he so mentioned it is corroborated ; or (y) immediately adopted a special course of action on the strength of his experience, as is proved by external evidence, documentary or personal.

(2) The documentary evidence mentioned in (la) and (ly) is alleged to have existed, but has not been accessible to our inspection ; or the experience is alleged to have been mentioned as in(i/S), or the action taken on the strength of it to have been remarked as in (ly), but owing to death or other causes, the person or persons to whom the experience was mentioned, or by whom the action was remarked, can no longer corroborate the fact.

This second class of cases is placed here for convenience, but should probably rank below the next class. At the same time the fact that the percipient's experience was noted in writing by him, or was communicated to another person, or was acted on, before the arrival of the news, is not one which is at all specially likely to be unconsciously invented by him afterwards.

(3) The percipient did not (a) make any written record, nor (^) make any verbal mention of his experience until after the arrival of the news, but then did one or both ; of which fact we have confirmation.

This class is, of course, as a rule, decidedly inferior to the first class. At the same time, cases occur under it in which the news was so immediate that the fact of the coincidence could only be impugned by representing the whole story as an invention.

(4) The immediate record or mention on the arrival of the news is alleged to have been made, but owing to loss of papers, death of friends, or other causes, cannot be confirmed.

(5) The percipient alleges that he remarked the coincidence when he heard the news ; but no record or mention of the circumstance was made until some time afterwards.

Such cases, of course, rapidly lose any value they may have as the tim.e increases which separates the account from the incident. Still, sometimes we have been able to obtain the independent evidence of some one who heard an account previous to the present report to us ; or we have ourselves obtained two reports separated by a considerable interval. And where a comparison of accounts given at different times shows that they do not vary, this is to some extent an indication of accuracy.

B. Where the percipient is our sole authority for the nature and date of the event which he alleges to have befallen the agent.

In many of these cases, the percipient is also our sole authority for his own experience ; and the evidence under this head will then be weaker than in any of the above classes. But where we have independent testimony of the percipient's mention of the two events, and of their coincidence, soon after their occurence — he having been at the time in such circumstances that he would naturally know the nature and date of what had befallen the agent — the case may rank as higher in value than some of those of Class A (5).

The analysis just given refers exclusively to first-hand evidence, that is, evidence in which the main account comes to us direct from the percipient. There is one, and only one, sort of second-hand evidence which can on the whole be placed on a par with first-hand ; namely, the evidence of a person who has been informed of the experience of the percipient while the latter was still unaware of the corresponding event ; and who has had equal opportunities with the percipient for learning the truth of that event, and confirming the coincidence. The second-hand witness's testimony in such a case is quite as likely to be accurate as the percipient's, for though his impression of the actual details will no doubt be less vivid, yet on the other hand he will not be under the same temptation to exaggerate the force or strangeness of the impression in subsequent retrospection. The risks of error in all other second-hand evidence have been so abundantly proved by experience (some illustrations of this are given in this section of chapter iv. oi Pharitasms, pp. 149 to 157) that it is better to leave it altogether out of consideration, and the great majority of the cases given in Phantasms are first-hand.'^

As regards the accuracy of the records, though it has been possible to draw up a sort of table of degrees, such a table affords, of course, no final criterion. Each case must be judged on its merits by reference to a considerable number of points. It is essential for judgment that the narrative should be given in the percipient's own words, — not converted into second-hand evidence by being paraphrased. This principle has been followed throughout, as well as that of obtainmg, whenever possible, corroborative evidence of all sorts, whether from private sources, public notices, or official records.

Further, a very large proportion of the narratives in Phantasms have stood the test of cross-examination of the witnesses in personal interviews. This part of the investigation was carried out by the authors of the book and their colleagues, especially Professor and Mrs. Sidgwick, and it greatly added to their own confidence that the testimony they published came from trustworthy and intelligent witnesses. The practice of making the personal acquaintance of the witnesses has been continued as far as possible with all the best evidence received since by the Society for Psychical Research.

Another argument for the general trustworthiness of the evidence is the fact that amid all their differences, the cases present one general characteristic — an unusual affection of one person, having no apparent relation to anything outside him except the unusual condition, otherwise unknown to him, of another person. This characteristic gives them the

Except in the Supplement, which includes a good many second-hand accounts, as well as first-hand accounts where the evidence, from lack of corroboration or other causes, falls short of the standard attained in the body of the work. The principle in selecting cases for the Supplement was to take only those which — supposing telepathy to be established as a fact in Nature — would reasonably be regarded as examples of it.

642B] TO CHAPTER VI 641

appearance of a true natural group, and involves the hypothesis that the facts, if truly stated, are probably due to a single cause. It involves further, a very strong argument that the facts are truly stated ; since it is extremely unlikely — if all the accounts are erroneous — that the various supposed errors of inference, lapses of memory, and exaggerations and perversions of narration should issue in a consistent body of evidence, presenting one well-defined type of phenomenon, free in every case from excrescences or inconsistent features, and explicable and completely explicable by one equally well-defined hypothesis. What is the likelihood that a number of narratives, if we assume them to have diverged in various ways from the actual facts, should thus converge to a single result? We find that all of them stop short at or within a given line — the line being the exact one up to which a particular explanation, not of the witnesses but of ours, can be extended, and beyond which it could not be extended. Tempting marvels lie further on — marvels which in the popular view are quite as likely to be true as the facts actually reported, and which the general traditions of the subject would connect with those facts. But our reporters one and all eschew them. To take, for instance, he group of cases which the reader will probably find to be the most interesting, as it is also the largest, in our collection — apparitions at the time of death. Why should not such apparitions hold prolonged converse with the waking friend ? Why should they not produce physical effects — shed tears on the pillow and make it wet, open the door and leave it open, or leave some tangible token of their presence? It is surely noteworthy that we have not had to reject, on grounds like these, a single narrative which on other grounds would have been admitted.

On the other hand, these details are found abundantly in second-hand cases, and they are precisely of the sort which the telepathic hypothesis could by no possibility be made to cover. The existence of such features in second-hand narratives shows how wide is the possible range of incidents in stories where ordinary human faculties are alleged to have been transcended. Of this wide field, the hypothesis of the action of mind on mind covers only a single well-defined portion. We can hardly suppose, then, that if error were widely at work in the case of our first-hand evidence, its results would always fall inside and not outside this very limited area — should all, that is, conform to the purely telepathic type.

Meanwhile, it is not, of course, claimed that the evidence is such as must convince every candid inquirer, and after setting forth the standard desired, and discussing the force of that actually attained, we may pass on to a consideration of some of the principal criticisms that have been directed against the latter.

642 B. Contemporary Documentary Evidence. — Some attacks were made on the ground of the scarcity of contemporary documentary evidence ; for instance, one by Mr. A. Taylor Innes, in a paper entitled "The Psychical Society's Ghosts," in the Nineteenth Century for Nov-VOL. I. 2 s

ember 1891. He alleged that the natural thing to do after witnessing a "wraith or other intimation " would be at once to post a letter informing some one of it, and observed, " In all the most important of the Psychical Society stories of 1886 we have one such letter alleged — sometimes even two." The production of these letters would prove the stories, and with regard to some of them, " if such a letter exists, with contents and postmark undisputed, it is worth a thousand guineas in the market." But, he stated, there was not one case in which the editors of Phantasms had " seen or ascertained a letter or document issued at the time by the narrator, so as to prove his story to be true." Since, then, in a large proportion of the cases, contemporary documents had been alleged to have been written, the fact that none of them had been forthcoming showed, he m^ntained, that the evidence was worthless.

Mr. Innes's statements were misleading in two respects : — (i ) they gave a very exaggerated impression of the proportion of cases in which documentary evidence was alleged to have existed ; and (2) it was incorrect to say that such evidence was not forthcoming in any of them.

The following is a list of some of the cases authenticated by such evidence : —

{a) In Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 93, Mr. S. H. B. ; p. 108, Mr. S. H. B. (quoted in 668) ; p. 197, Mr. Keulemans (quoted in 662 A) ; p. 199, Mr. Wingfield (quoted in 429 C) ; p. 221, a lady, name not given; p. 324, Mr. Sladen; p. 407, Mr. Jukes ; p. 425, Mrs. T. (quoted in 428) ; p. 527, Miss R. (quoted in 6S7 A).

Ibid. vol. ii. p. 31, Mr. Gottschalk (quoted in 662 B) ; p. 154, Mr. W. (quoted in 428 D) ; p. 693, Mr. Teale.

In all these cases, the written note of the percipient's experience, made before ascertaining whether it was veridical or not, was seen by one of the authors of Phantasms.

(J)) In the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 31, Mr. Cameron Grant (also referred to in vol. viii. p. 212, and in Phantasjns of the Living, vol. ii. p. 688) ; vol. xi. p. 431, Mr. Glardon ; p. 438, Mrs. Chase; vol. xii pp. 268 and 270, Mrs. D.

{c) In ih.& fournal S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 265, Mr. Boyle (quoted in 423) ; p. 267, Mr. Hamilton (quoted in 424); vol. vii. p. 239, Mr. Nascimento (quoted in 421 J) ; vol. ix. p. 134, Mrs. Verrall.

{d) In the Proceedings of the American S.P.P., vol. i. p. 226, a lady, name not given ; p. 227, Mrs. T. ; p. 395, Mr. J. T.

In reply to Mr. Innes's suggestion of he commercial value of documentary evidence, Mr. Podmore (in he National Review for April 1892) observed that, " although a well-attested ghost story may be, to its possessor, of more value than gold, it is very doubtful whether an investigator can afford to give sixpence for it. The Society for Psychical Research, at any rate, early decided that it could offer no remuneration whatever to informants, holding it essential to avoid any inducement to the production of false or doctored evidence." (It is obvious, of course, that documentary

642 BJ TO CHAPTER VI 643

evidence could easily be forged, and rests therefore, generally speaking, on the bona fides of the witness. But supposing that the witness is not accused of practising deliberate fraud, but merely of remembering events inaccurately, the value of the documentary evidence simply lies in its independence of his memory.)

Mr. Podmore discusses various reasons why letters or other notes of the occurrences should seldom be made, and why only a small proportion of those made should be preserved, and goes on to give six cases received during the few years since the publication of Phantasms, in which the original documents had been preserved and seen.

The question is discussed more fully in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. ( " Report on the Census of Hallucinations," pp. 220-223), from which I quote a short extract, as follows : —

"The importance and value of contemporary documentary evidence for telepathy was first pointed out in Phantasms of the Living (vol i. pp. 134-147), and has been constantly and emphatically reiterated by those who are working at psychical research, with the result that, in addition to what existed at the time Phantasms of the Living was written, the amount of it has since been steadily, though slowly accumulating. Some of the critics of the Society's work have assumed that in a large proportion, probably about one in seven, of the cases where a sensory hallucination is experienced, the percipient would at once write a letter on the subject to some friend, and that letters containing such accounts would, in general, be carefully preserved. They have accordingly maintained that the absence of documentary evidence in the great majority of cases constitutes a positive argument against the telepathic explanation. The force of this argument depends, of course, primarily on the frequency with which contemporary notes of possibly telepathic incidents are made. We have therefore endeavoured to obtain information as to the cases in which any notes were taken at the time of the hallucinatory experience. From the information received, it appears that in 49 out of the 1942 cases recorded — that is, in 2.5 per cent. — some note was made, or some letter mentioning the hallucination written, within 24 hours of the occurrence, and before knowing whether it was coincidental or not, either by the percipient himself, or by some person who was told of it at the time. We have included in the 49 some cases in which it is not quite certain from the expressions used whether our informant meant that he had made a written or a mental note of his experience, in order to obtain an outside estimate of the number of cases in which contemporary documentary evidence of any kind ever existed."

[Of these 49 cases, 8 were hallucinations coinciding with deaths (of which 6 were recognised apparitions), 9 were coincidental with other events, and 32 were non-coincidental. With regard to the kinds of hallucinations, 24 out of the 49 were recognised apparitions of living persons, 4 of dead persons, and 9 other visual hallucinations; 10 were auditory

hallucinations and 2 tactile. The writers proceed to give reasons why the amount of documentary evidence should be so small, and continue : — ]

" Of the 1 7 coincidental cases which were noted at the time, the note has been seen by us in two cases ; '^ in the third case a letter which was written in answer to one from the percipient describing her experience, and which establishes the coincidence, has been seen by us ; in a fourth case we have received a copy of a similar letter ; and in five other cases we have evidence — either from the persons who received the letters, or from those who witnessed the making of the notes — confirmatory of the percipient's statement that the letters or notes were written at the time."

642 C. Hallucinations and Illusions of Metnory. — Another important objection was raised on the score of possible hallucinations of memory as to the incidents alleged. Now, ilhisions of ??te?nory — inaccurate recollections of actual events — are as familiar as illusions of the senses — perceptions based on misinterpretations of material objects. It is also possible that there may be hallucinations of memory — or recollections of events that have never really occurred at all — analogous to sensory hallucinations, or perceptions based on no material objects. In the case of memory, it is very difficult to draw the line in any concrete instance between illusion and hallucination ; but it is important to recognise the theoretical distinction between the two types and not to assume without proof that what can be predicated of one type necessarily applies also to the other.

The hypothetical " pseudo-presentiments " by which Professor J. Royce attempted to explain a large number of impressions reported as veridical belong to the class of hallucinations of memory. To quote his own description (see Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical Research, vol. i. p. 366) : "This hypothesis is that in certain people, under certain exciting circumstances, there occur what I sliall henceforth call pseudopresejttime7its, i.e. more or less instantaneous and irresistible hallucinations of memory, which make it seem to one that something which now excites or astonishes him has been prefigured in a recent dream, or in the form of some other warning, although this seeming is wholly unfounded, and although the supposed prophecy really succeeds its own fulfilment." Thus, on hearing of a death, one might think that one had just dreamt or had a presentiment of it. " Members of the same family would," he suggests, " be especially apt to be similarly subject to this form of illusion, and then the same news would show them all the same mirage of memory, with startling results in the way of ' telepathic ' evidence." He compares this with the familiar illusion of " double memory " or the deja vu, — the feeling that an experience which is being passed through is an exact repetition of something that has happened before, — though he admits

For exact references to all these cases, see Report on the Census of Hallucinations, p. 223.

642 C] TO CHAPTER VI 645

that this latter illusion generally corrects itself at once.^ The only positive evidence brought forward in support of the supposed new type of illusion is afforded by two cases quoted from Professor Emil Kraepelin (^Archiv fiir Psychiatric, vol. xviii. p. 397) of insane patients who, among other delusions, constantly fancied that whatever happened to them, or attracted their attention, had already been predicted to them.

In reply, Gurney pointed out (i) that in recent cases where we have evidence that the percipient's experience was related to some one else before the arrival of the news, the hypothesis of collective illusion fails to account for the difference in the recollections of the witnesses, — one remembering that he has had a certain impression, and the other that this impression has been related to him. (2) Professor Royce omitted altogether to consider the type of case most important evidentially, namely, veridical sensory hallucinations. Supposing that the news of an exciting event has some tendency to produce the impression that one had known of it before, this would not show that the receipt of news, say, of the death of a friend, had any tendency to produce the impression of having recently seen an apparition of the friend, which did not announce, or even suggest his death. Further, the assignment of the supposed recollection to a particular time constitutes an essential difTerence from the familiar illusions of " double memory," which are quite unlocalised in time.

Mr. Hodgson (see Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical Research, p. 542) points out further that the hypothesis can only — with any show of reason — be applied to cases of certain kinds, namely, remote cases, and those depending only on the evidence of the percipient, especially where the experience is merely a dream or mental impression, still more if it is supposed to foreshadow future events, or if the percipient has forgotten it and is only reminded of it by receiving the news.

The conception of " pseudo-presentiments " has been adopted, greatly extended, and applied in a wholesale manner to the telepathic evidence by E. Parish. He fails altogether to grasp the distinction between illusions of memory, for which there is ample evidence, and hallucinations of memory, for which the evidence is exceedingly meagre — resting, in fact, almost entirely on the rare morbid cases quoted again from Kreepelin. By premising both positive and negative defects of memory. Parish disposes at one blow of the argument that apparitions at the time of death are proportionately too numerous to be attributed to chance ; he simply supposes that non-coincidental apparitions are very frequent, but that almost all of them are fo?-gotten ; while coincidental ones hardly ever really occur, but are oittn falsely re?nembered.

1 For a discussion of this phenomenon, to which I have given the name oipromnesia, see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 340-347.

"^ See Ueber die Trugwahrnehmung, by E. Parish (Leipzig, 1894], and Reviews of it in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 162, and in Mr. A. Lang's The Makijig of Religion, p. 337 (Appendix on "Oppositions of Science"). Also Zur Kritik des telepathischen Beweis-Materiels, by E. Parish (Leipzig, 1897), and Review of it in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. p. 589.

A piiori speculations as to the working of memory will obviously lead to whatever conclusion it is desired to support. But positive evidence is more worthy of serious consideration, and it is possible to obtain this by comparing the recollections of the same person at different times, and also by comparing the recollections of different persons. The great mass of records collected by the S. P. R. have been examined by their investigators with this special end in view. In particular, the study of one important type of cases (see " The Possibilities of Mal-observation and Lapse of Memory from a Practical Point of View : Introduction," by R. Hodgson ; *' Experimental Investigation," by S. J. Davey ; Proceedings S. P. R., vol. iv. pp. 381—495) has shown what kinds of error occur in actual experience. Many events are found to be absolutely forgotten ; the blank in memory may be filled by conjectured details, or may close up, so that events really separated by an interval of time may be remembered as occurring close together; a detail afterwards remembered may be interpolated in a record ; or an event occurring at one time may be remembered as occurring at another. All these are errors of omission, exaggeration, or distortion of a generally — though more or less vaguely — recognised kind ; but few persons who have not made a special study of the subject realise the extent to which testimony is vitiated by them. Such false memories are illusions, which develop and consolidate gradually as time goes on. But investigation of the experiences of sane persons has not revealed any instances of Professor Royce's hypothetical hallucinations of memory which arise instantaneously in a complex and fully elaborated form.

Illusions of memory have also been studied from the point of view of their bearing on the subject of "hypnotic crimes" (see 555 A), stress having been laid especially on the facility with which hysterical or weakminded persons may be made to imagine, or may spontaneously imagine, that they have witnessed fictitious occurrences, and may thus be brought to bear false witness. Bernheim also found that by hypnotic suggestion he could produce actual hallucinations of memory in a few specially susceptible subjects. But these cases, again, are obviously not comparable with Professor Royce's " pseudo-presentiments," which are supposed to arise suddenly and spontaneously in persons in a normal condition.

645 A. The following case of repeated apparitions is taken from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 82, the account being given by the Rev. T. L. Williams, vicar of Porthleven, near Helston.

August 1st, 1SS4.

Some years ago (I cannot give you any date, but you may rely on the facts), on one occasion when I was absent from home, my wife awoke one morning, and to her surprise and alarm saw my cl'ScuXov standuig by the bedside looking at her. In her fright she covered lier face with the bedclothes, and when she ventured to look again the appearance was gone. On another occasion, when I was not absent from home, my wife went one evening to week-day evensong, and on getting to the churchyard gate, which is about forty yards or so from the

645 A] TO CHAPTER VI 647

church door, she saw me, as she supposed, coming from the church in surplice and stole. I came a little way, she says, and turned round the corner of the building, when she lost sight of me. The idea suggested to her mind was that I was coming out of the church to meet a funeral at the gate. I was at the time in church in my place in the choir, where she was much surprised to see me when she entered the building. I have often endeavoured to shake my wife's belief in the reality of her having seen what she thinks she saw. In the former case I have told her, "You were only half awake and perhaps dreaming." But she always confidently asserts that she was broad awake, and is quite certain that she saw me. In the latter case she is equally confident.

My daughter, also has often told me, and now repeats the story, that one day, when hving at home before her marriage, she was passing my study door, which was ajar, and looked in to see if I was there. She saw me sitting in my chair, and as she caught sight of me I stretched out my arms, and drew my hands across my eyes, a familiar gesture of mine, it appears. I was not in the house at the time, but out in the village. This happened many years ago, but my wife remembers that my daughter mentioned the circumstance to her at the time.

Now nothing whatever occurred at or about the times of these appearances to give any meaning to them. I was not ill, nor had anything unusual happened to me. I cannot pretend to offer any explanation, but simply state the facts as told me by persons on whose words I can depend.

There is one other thing which I may as well mention. A good many years ago there was a very devout young woman living in my parish, who used to spend much of her spare time in church in meditation and prayer. She used to assert that she frequently saw me standing at the altar, when I was certainly not there in the body. At first she was alarmed, but after seeing the appearance again and again she ceased to feel anything of terror. She is now a Sister of Mercy at Honolulu. Thomas Lockyer Williams.

[The circumstances, and the frequency, of this third percipient's experiences decidedly favour the view that they were merely subjective.]

Mrs. Williams writes : —

June 2Qtk, 1885.

As requested, I write to tell you what I saw on two occasions, I am sorry that I am unable to give you the dates, even approximately, as many years have passed since I had the experiences referred to. On one occasion my husband was absent in Somersetshire, and on waking one morning I distinctly saw him standing by my bedside. I was much alarmed, and instinctively covered my face with the bedclothes. My friends have often tried to persuade me that I was not broad awake, but I am quite certain that I was, and that I really saw my husband's appearance.

The other occasion was on a certain evening I was going to church, and on getting to the churchyard gate, which is about twenty yards from the door of the church, I saw my husband come out of the church in his surphce, walk a little way towards me, and then turn off round the church. I thought nothing of it until on entering the church I was startled at seeing him in his place in the choir, about to conduct the service. It was then broad daylight, and I am quite sure that I saw the appearance. Nothing whatever occurred after either of these appearances, and, of course, I can in no way account for them.

Emma Williams.

[In reply to the question whether his wife or daughter had ever experienced any other hallucination of the senses, Mr. Williams replies confidently in the negative.]

See also a case given in Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 83.

645 B. The next account (quoted from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 85) is from Mrs. Stone, of Shute Haye, Walditch, Bridport, and was written in 1883.

On three occasions, each time by different persons, I have been seen when not present in the body. The first instance that I was thus seen was by my sister-in-law, who was sitting up with me, the night after the birth of my first child. She looked towards the bed where I was sleeping, and distinctly saw me and my double ; the first my natural body, the second spiritualised and fainter ; several times she shut her eyes, but on opening them there was still the same appearance, and the vision only faded away after some little time. She thought it a sign of my death. I did not hear of it for many months.

The second instance was by my niece ; she was staying with us at Dorchester. It was rather early on a spring morning; she opened her bedroom door, and saw me ascending the flight of steps opposite her room, fully dressed in the mourning black gown, white collar, and cap, which I was then wearing for my mother-in-law. She did not speak, but saw me, as she thought, go into the nursery. At breakfast she said to her uncle, " My aunt was up early this morning; I saw her go into the nursery." "Oh no, Jane," my husband answered, " she was not very well, and is going to have her breakfast before coming down."

The third instance was the most remarkable. We had a small house at Weymouth, where we occasionally went for the sea. A Mrs. Samways waited on us when there, and took care of the house in our absence ; she was a nice quiet woman, thoroughly trustworthy, the aunt of my dear old servant Kitty Balston, then living with us at Dorchester. She had written to her aunt the day before the vision occurred, telling her of the birth of my youngest child, and that I was going on well. The next night Mrs. Samways went to a meeting-house, near Clarence Buildings; she was a Baptist. Before leaving, she locked an inner door leading into a small courtyard behind the house, and the street-door after her, carrying both keys in her pocket. On her return, unlocking the street-door, she perceived a light at the end of the passage, and on going nearer saw, as she thought, the yard-door open. The light showed the yard and everything in it, but in the midst she clearly recognised me, in white garments, looking very pale and worn. She was terribly frightened, rushed into a neighbour's house (Captain Court's), and dropped in the passage. After recovering, Captain Court went with her into the house, which was exactly as she had left it, and the yard-door securely locked. I was taken very faint about the same time, and lingered for many weeks, hovering between life and death.

1 Taken in connection with these instances, the following e.xperience of Mrs. Stone's own is of considerable interest : —

" When about nine or ten years old I was sent to a school in Dorchester as a day boarder ; it was here my first curious experience occurred that I can clearly remember. 1 was in an upper room in the school, standing with some others, in a class opposite our

645 C] TO CHAPTER VI 649

Professor Sidgwick visited Mrs. Stone, and after thoroughly questioning her on her narrative, he wrote (September 23, 1884) : —

She certainly understands thoroughly the importance of accuracy. She said she had heard of her apparition direct from the seers, in the first two cases mentioned. She had never heard of her sister-in-law having had any other hallucination before this time (1833) or afterwards, until very lately, when she has had an apparition of a dead person. She is old, and Mrs. Stone is unwilling to trouble her on the matter. Nor does she think that her niece, Jane Studley (who is dead), ever had any other hallucination. As regards the third instance, Mrs. Stone only heard it after her recovery, from Kitty Balston, whose account — as repeated by Mrs. Stone — was that Mrs. Stone was taken ill in the evening, or rather just before the evening, and was quite unconscious at the time when she was seen by Mrs. Samways.

645 C. Taken from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 91. The account comes from Captain A. S. Beaumont, of i Crescent Road, South Norwood Park : —

February 2^th, 1885.

About September 1873, when my father was living at 57 Inverness Terrace, I was sitting one evening, about 8.30 p.m., in the large dining-room. At the table, facing me, with their backs to the door, were seated my mother, sister, and a friend, Mrs. W. Suddenly I seemed to see my wife bustling in through the door of the back dining-room, which was in view from my position. She was in a niazive dress. I got up to meet her, though much astonished, as I believed her to be at Tenby. As I rose, my mother said, '' Who is that ? " not (I think) seeing any one herself, but seeing that I did. I exclaimed, " Why, it's Carry," and advanced to meet her. As I advanced the figure disappeared. On inquiry, I found that my wife was spending that evening at a friend's house, in a mauve dress, which I had most certainly never seen. I had never seen her dressed in that colour. My wife recollected that at that time she was talking with some friends about me, much regretting my absence, as there was going to be dancing, and I had promised to play for them. I had been unexpectedly detained in London. Alex. S. Beaumont.

The following corroboration is from the friend who was present : —

II Grosvenor Street, W., March t^tk, 1885.

As far as I can recollect, Captain Beaumont was sitting talking, when he looked up, and gave a start. His mother asked him what was the matter. He replied, " I saw my wife walk across the end of the room, but that is nothing ; she often appears to people ; her servants have seen her several times." The room we were in was a double dining-room, one end was lit with gas, and the

teacher, Miss Mary Lock ; suddenly I found myself by her side, and looking towards the class saw myself distinctly — a slim, pale girl, in a white frock and pinafore. I felt a strong anxiety to get back, as it were, but it seemed a violent and painful effort, almost struggle, when accomplished. I was much frightened, but did not mention it till many years after."

I may mention that Mrs. Stone's daughter has had a similar experience ; so that here is perhaps another example of hereditary tendency.

6so APPENDICES [645 C

other, where Mrs. Beaumont appeared, was comparatively dark. No one else saw her except her husband. Mrs. Beaumont was at the time in Wales, and this happened in Inverness Terrace, Bayswater. Florence Whipham.

Mrs. Beaumont says : —

I distinctly remember hearing from my husband, either the next day or the second day after his experience ; and in his letter he asked, " What were you doing at such an hour on such a night ? " I was able to recall that I was standing in a group of friends, and that we were regretting his absence. I was in a mauve dress, which I am confident that he could never have seen.

C. Beaumont.

Captain Beaumont adds that he has never had any other hallucination of the senses except on the occasion next described. This other case, in which the same agent and percipient were concerned, and a third case appended to it, would be quite without evidential value if they stood alone ; but they are of interest in connection with the foregoing stronger example.

February 2£ftk, 1885.

In 1 87 1 I was staying at Norton House, Tenby, for the first time, and had just gone to bed, and was wide awake. I had the candle on my right side, and was reading. At the foot of the bed and to the right was a door, which was locked, and, as I learnt afterwards, pasted up on the other side.

Through this I saw the figure of my future wife (the lady of the house) enter, draped in white from head to foot. Oddly enough, I was not specially startled. My idea was that some one was ill, and that she had come to get something out of the room. I averted my head, and when I looked up again the apparition was gone. I suppose that I saw it for two or three seconds.

Alex. S. Beaumont.

Mrs. Beaumont says : —

February 2\th, 1S85. In 1872, two or three months after my marriage, Captain Beaumont and I returned from London to Tenby. I went up into my dressing-room and gave the keys of my luggage to my servant, Ellen Bassett. I was standing before the looking-glass with my back turned to her, and I heard her utter a little sharp cry. I turned round, saying, " What's the matter ? " and saw her with my nightcap in her hand. She said, " Oh, nothing, nothing," and I went downstairs. The day after, my husband saw her taking off the paper which pasted up the door between my bedroom and the dressing-room. He said, " What are you doing ? " She said she was opening that door. He said, " Why, the first night that I slept in this house, I saw your mistress walk through that door." (I must explain that Captain Beaumont had been a guest in this house on a good many occasions before our marriage. On the occasion mentioned, he had imagined that perhaps some one was ill in the house, and that I had entered his room to get something, thinking him sure to be asleep.) Then the maid told him that she had seen me the night before we came home — she did not know exactly what day we were coming, and had been sleeping in the same bed as he had been in when he saw me. She was just going to step into bed when she saw me enter " through the door," with a nightcap on, and a candle

645D] TO CHAPTER VI 651

in my hand. She was so terrified that she rushed out of the room by the other door, and told the other servants she was sure I was dead. They comforted her as well as they could, but she would not return to the room. The cause of her crying out, when I heard her do so, was that, in unpacking, she recognised the identical nightcap that the apparition had worn. The curious point is that the nightcap was one that 1 had bought in London, and had not mentioned to her, and was perfectly unlike any that I had ever worn before. It had three frills. I had been accustomed to wear nightcaps of coloured muslin without frills.

The same servant, some months after the nightcap incident, went into the kitchen and said to the other servants, " We shall have news of missus to-day; I've just seen her standing in the dining-room door ; she had on a black velvet bonnet and black cloak." (We had been in London some weeks.) This occurred about 9 o'clock a.m. About 10.30 she received a telegram from us to say we should be home that evening; the telegram was sent from Paddington Station as we waited for our train. The bonnet and cloak had been bought in town without her knowledge.

The maid was with me for years, and was certainly not nervous or hysterical. I have now parted with her for some years. C. Beaumont.

645 D. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 129. The case is recorded by the Misses H, M. and L. Bourne.

Additional evidence of the hallucinatory character of the figure seen is afforded by the details having been more clearly discernable than those of a real figure at the same distance would have been, and also by the second appearance, where the percipient had the impression of being transported to a different scene.

Miss L. Bourne writes : —

On February 5th, 1887, my father, sister, and I went out hunting. About the middle of the day my sister and I decided to return home with the coachman, while my father went on. Somebody came and spoke to us, and delayed us for a few moments. As we were turning to go home, we distinctly saw my father, waving his hat to us and signing us to follow him. He was on the side of a small hill, and there was a dip between him and us. My sister, the coachman, and myself all recognised my father, and also the horse. The horse looked so dirty and shaken that the coachman remarked he thought there had been a nasty accident. As my father waved his hat I clearly saw the Lincoln and Bennett mark inside, though from the distance we were apart it ought to have been utterly impossible for me to have seen it. At the time I mentioned seeing the mark in the hat, though the strangeness of seeing it did not strike me till afterwards.

Fearing an accident, we hurried down the hill. From the nature of the ground we had to lose sight of my father, but it took us very few seconds to reach the place where we had seen him. When we got there, there was no sign of him anywhere, nor could we see any one in sight at all. We rode about for some time looking for him, but could not see or hear anything of him. We all reached home within a quarter of an hour of each other. My father then told us he had never been in the field, nor near the field, in which

6S2 APPENDICES [645 D

we thought we saw him, the whole of that day. He had never waved to us, and had met with no accident.

My father was riding the only white horse that was out that day.

Louisa Bourne. H. M. Bourne.

The second signature was added later, with the words : " This was written by my sister and me together."

Miss H. M. Bourne enclosed the above in the following letter to Mrs. Dent, to whom we are indebted for the case : —

Weston Subedge, Broadway, Worcestershire, May 2ist, 1 891.

My dear Mrs. Dent, — Louisa has asked me to send you the enclosed account of the impression she, the coachman, and I had of seeing papa on Paddy in the hunting-field. It was on the 5th February 1887 it happened, and in March the same year, when I was out walking alone, I thought I saw papa and Paddy stop at a little plantation of his close to, and look at the wall, which had fallen in [in] one part. He then appeared to ride a few yards towards me, but afterwards turned round and went back past the plantation and out of sight. When I went in I asked him if he had not seen me, and why he turned back, when it transpired he had not been past that plantation all day, but had ridden home another way. He said it must have been some one else on a white horse, and asked where I was when I saw him, and then, not before, it dawned on me that it was utterly impossible to see either plantation or wall from where I was. Since then I have often been along the same road, and stood, and looked, and wondered how it was I so distinctly saw the broken wall and papa on the white horse ; a turn in the road makes my having really done so quite impossible. I am sorry I cannot give you the exact date of this : I know it was in March 1887, but cannot remember the day, except that it was noif on the 5th. The other " experience " is, I always think, far more interesting, as having been seen by three, and also from the fact that Paddy was the only white or grey horse in the hunting-field that day ; so that unbelievers could not say it was some one else on a white horse that we had mistaken. . . . Nina M. Bourne.

Mrs. Sidgwick writes : —

February Zi^th, 1892. I saw Miss H. Bourne and her father this afternoon. Miss Bourne told me the stories of her seeing her father, first with her sister, and later by herself, and signed the account which she and her sister had, she says, made out together about it. The groom who saw the figure at the same time has since been dismissed, and cannot be asked for his evidence. Canon Bourne remembers hearing of the matter the day it happened. The groom rode up to the ladies as they were looking, and said: " The Canon is beckoning. Miss, and I think you had better go to him ; his horse looks as if he had had a fall " (that is, muddy). The figure was beckoning to them with their father's usual (and peculiar) gesture. He is a heavy man, and his white horse, adapted to carry weight, was quite unlike any other horse in the neigbourhood. Every one agrees as to the impossibility of mistaking the horse. The horses of the neighbourhood were well known to the neighbourhood in general and to the

645 E] TO CHAPTER VI 653

Miss Bournes in particular, as they were at that time constantly out with the hounds. The incident seems quite unaccountable.

645 E. From the " Report on the Census of Hallucinations," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 275. This case is particularly interesting because the agent, Miss Maughan (now Mrs. G. Rayleigh Vicars), has been successful in producing an experimental apparition of herself (see 668 D), while one of her sisters was the agent in another case of spontaneous telepathy (see " Report on the Census of Hallucinations," p. 291).

[Extract from letter received by Miss Maughan on March 12th from Miss Gatty. The original letter is in our possession.]

Holbein House, Sloane Square, S.W. Wednesday, March wth^ 1891.

I wonder whether you have been experimenting psychically, or if it be a mere curious coincidence that I should have had a distinct vision of you last night.

The facts are these. Being very seedy yesterday — writing to you probably tired me a good deal, and feeling very helpless where you were concerned distressed me more than a little — I went off to [bed] at about 8 o'clock. I read for an hour or thereabouts, and then fell asleep. I woke again when mother passed through to go to her own room, and several times in the night after dreaming in an unexciting fashion. Then I lay awake for some time, and thought about a Roman Catholic I know, &c.

A little while after, I don't know what it was that made me turn my head towards one special corner of the room, where I saw you standing (in a nightdress trimmed with Swiss embroidery), in a most ill-balanced posture. So much did this strike me that I got out of bed (the cold of the floor was excessive), and went to catch you, so that you might not fall over on your face. You remained there until I had made the motion of touching, when I found nothing there any longer. This is all, except that you looked as if you had candlelight or some faintly perceptible yellowishness behind you. I went back to bed, and, not liking to disturb mother by asking her the time, I listened for the chimes, and shortly after heard four strike. Of course I didn't go to sleep again, but lighted my candle and read until day dawned. At breakfast I told mother, who accounts for everything by the word " somnambulism," but says she heard me moving about. I am perfectly convinced of my wakefulness, but in any case, as I am unused to sleep-walking, that would be strange enough in itself to make me wonder if there should be any cause for it beyond my subjective reason of anxiety about you. The time is the most curious part, is it not?

E. K. G.

Miss Maughan writes : —

East Kirkby Vicarage, Spilsby, Lincolnshire, May 21st, 1891.

I left W , in Derbyshire, on March loth, and arrived at Collingham, in

Nottinghamshire, about 3 p.m. I was not alone, or able in any way to give my attention to any one subject until nearly midnight, when I went to bed. During the whole evening, though I had been busy hearing and giving news of

mutual interest, I had experienced a sort of "undertone" of thought about my friend E. G. [Miss Gatty]. I had only once spoken of her incidentally during the evening, but I felt my mind revert to her in a general vv^ay for a few moments several times. When I got to bed I lay awake and thought of her again. Why, I did not really know. I had heard from her the day before, saying she was not well, but that was not specially in my mind, as I did not suppose she was more than temporarily indisposed. I remember wondering at the time why she was so present to my mind, as I had a great many things to think of that day totally apart from any connection with her.

I fell asleep at last, to wake up suddenly. It must have been after 3 a.m., as the fire had burnt very low — almost out.

During the short time I lay awake I remember clearly that the thought of E. G. returned strongly to my mind. I felt an instinctive turning towards her for the mental sympathy certain circumstances might render me in need of, and I felt with a sort of flash that she would be better able to understand what I wanted than any friend I had. I know I dwelt on this with strengthening confidence until I fell asleep.

I had not been dreaming consciously of anything : I merely woke up, thought of E. G., and mentally claimed her sympathy, but with no intention whatever of trying to influence her in any possible way. The whole attitude of my mind was unconscious and involuntary, and, but for the letter I received from her on the 12th, I should have attached no importance to the matter.

Edith Maughan.

Mrs. Sidgwick writes : —

June 26th, 1891.

I saw Miss Edith Maughan . . . this afternoon. ... As to the appearance to Miss Gatty, Miss Maughan is quite sure that she did think of her in a special way, as the person who would be able to help her in an anticipated difficulty. This suddenly occurred to her in the middle of the night. It appears that Miss Gatty was troubled about Miss Maughan, wishing she could help her in her difficulty. Miss Maughan told me that she had written to Miss Gatty about this difficulty, and begged her to write to her often while it lasted. Miss Maughan is not sure whether the embroidery seen on the apparition by Miss Gatty was of the kind that she was wearing then.

Another case of the apparition of a person being seen twice is given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 356.

651 A. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 144.

The following statement (which was first published in the Spiri^alist) was drawn up sixteen days after the incident occurred, through the prompt energy of Mr. W. H. Harrison, and on the suggestion of the late Mr. Cromwell F. Varley, F.R.S., who had questioned Captain Blacklock on the subject.

The steamship Robert Lowe returned to the Thames on Tuesday, October nth, 1870, from St. Pierre, Newfoundland, where she had been repairing one of the French Atlantic Telegraph Company's cables. An engineer on board, Mr. W. H. Pearce, of 37 Augusta Street, East India Road, Poplar, was taken ill with the typhus fever, and on the 4th of October last he died. One of his mates, Mr. D. Brown, of i Edward Street, Hudson's Road, Canning Town,

651 A] TO CHAPTER VI G55

