"My uncle David, whose death Mrs. Piper predicted at the sitting which I had with her on March 7, 1892, died at Chicago on last Tuesday, the 2ist of March. As far as I know, his health was perfectly good at the time of the sitting."

(d) From Dr. Hodgson's account of the sittings of Dr. A. B. Thaw with Mrs. Piper, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. p. 352.

Several minor prophecies proved correct ; one important prophecy concerning the success of certain machines was wrong as to time, as well as other circumstances connected with them ; but another concerning the death of a brother, who was never present at a sitting, was right. This brother was a

chronic invalid with asthma. At the sitting of May loth, 1892, Phinuit said that his kidneys were out of order, and it was discovered for the first time that he had kidney disease on a careful medical examination made two weeks later. At the same sitting Phinuit said that he would die " within six months or a year," and, in reply to the question how, said, " He's going to sleep, and when he wakes he'll be in the spirit. Heart will stop." On May 22nd, the time was given as " six months or a little less." He died in sleep,' of heart failure, on the 3rd of the following September.

980 A. I cited in 858 A a case, communicated by Dr. Ermacora, of Padua, of foreknowledge of a letter's arrival on the part of a sensitive well known to him, Signorina Maria Manzini, the knowledge purporting to come from her control, "Elvira." An article by Dr. Ermacora in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 235, records a long series of observations made by him with the same sensitive, and two other precognitive cases of hers — of which I quote one below — are given in vol. xi. pp. 466-476. Dr. Ermacora was not able to decide whether "Elvira" is a separate entity, or merely a modification of the medium's own mind. There is, in fact, much the same perplexity as in the case of Phinuit and Mrs. Piper.

Whatever Elvira may be, she possesses certain supernormal powers which for us are perhaps the more instructive in that their scope is somewhat narrowly limited. Among these powers Elvira claims precognition ; admittedly on what may be termed a puny scale, and dealing with trivial matters, but nevertheless involving some real knowledge of the coming course of events, and of the part which human actions, apparently free, will play therein. The question now before us is whether Elvira's apparent foreknowledge may not be explained as inference from a slightly wider knowledge of the present, combined with a power of suggestion exercised not only upon Maria Manzini herself (which on any hypothesis is obviously probable), but even upon strangers.1 Dr. Ermacora, as may be seen from his full report, kept these points in mind; and his conclusion was that Elvira had shown some foreknowledge of events, paltry indeed in themselves, but yet such as suggestion can hardly be pressed to cover. (See the incident of sale of pawn-tickets, and others, in Rivista di Studi Psichid, 1895.) The question will then be, — and these trivial incidents may help us quite as well as more important ones towards its solution, — whether that supernormal knowledge of actually existing thoughts and things with which Elvira must at any rate be credited (see 858 A) may be enough to suggest by mere forward-looking inference,— itself perhaps supernormally acute, — the events foretold in the following and some similar cases.

1 Dr. Ermacora once informed me that Elvira had made a prediction involving a mistake to be made by Maria in cutting out some garments, and then withdrew it, as not wishing that Maria should thus waste the stuff, and resolving to influence her not to make the mistake. Elvira herself, therefore, admits that she can influence the so-called predictions by suggestions of her own.

980A] TO CHAPTER IX 625

Dr. Ermacora writes : —

Signorina Maria Manzini, at my request, kept an account of the dreams which occurred in her ordinary sleep. Some were remembered spontaneously in the morning and some in her next somnambulic state. In the latter case I suggested to her that she should remember and record them after waking.

I think the following case was remembered in somnambulism, but this is of no consequence, because Signorina Maria, following my advice, recorded not only the date of dreams, but also the date and the hour when she wrote them down. In any case the present dream was recorded before its fulfilment.

This is what I find in the record of Signorina Maria's dreams : —

March 2"jth, 1894, n P.M. " Night of March 26th-2;th, 1894.

" I dreamt that the door bell rang on the S. Pietro side of the house.1 I went to open and found a tall man about forty years old, with greyish trousers and a darker overcoat. He was very polite, and asked if I would subscribe to the issue of a novel, saying that afterwards I should have a pair of earrings as a prize. I said no, because I thought it was an imposture."

I did not read the account of this dream till after its realisation, but am perfectly certain that Signorina Maria told it to me directly, and I also distinctly recollect that when Signorina Maria related the realisation a few days later, she 'said I ought to remember her preceding dream ; and I remember also that I not only recalled it, but that I looked at once at the record to see if it had been written down according to rule. I found that it was correct, and that it agreed with the viva voce story. Besides, though Signorina Maria may not always be diligent in recording dreams she hardly remembers, she is very careful to put the exact date, and is therefore quite certain that the dream occurred either in ihe night of March 26th-27th, or at most (supposing the case to have been implicated by a paramnesia which displaced the dream in time) on March E7th, at 9 P.M. ; about which time, as can be seen from my journal of the jomnambulic experiments, Signorina Maria was in somnambulism in my presence.

On the evening of March 3ist, i.e. four days after the dream, Signorina M. :old me that on that day about 3 P.M. the visit of which she had dreamed had aken place. Everything coincided; the entrance of the person by the door Awards S. Pietro, his age, his insinuating manners, the colour of his trousers ind overcoat, and the object of his visit.

I called her mother, and asked her to describe the visit with all possible letails ; meanwhile I took the following notes : " The person came twice ; the irst time about n A.M., when Maria was out. Signora Annetta (her mother) vas alone in the house. The visitor had very pleasant manners, and was about hirty-five years old (Signorina Maria thought forty). He had a box covered nth black cloth with him, such as is used by commercial travellers. He said te came to show them a novelty. In order to get rid of him, Signora Annetta aid that Signorina Maria was not at home ; he replied that he would return,

, l Signorina Maria's house has two doors, one in the Via S. Pietro, and the other urned towards the river Bacchiglione. VOL. H. 2 R

and Signora Annetta told him to come at 2 P.M. At 2 P.M. he returned and rang at the door on the S. Pietro side. Signora Annetta opened to him, and says that when he entered the room Maria seemed much astonished (Maria said at once that she was astonished at recognising him). He proposed thai they should subscribe to the issue of a novel ; there were to be prizes when the issue was finished ; two pictures, or a small organ, or a pair of earrings. In his box were the organ and an alarum, as samples, and he had with him, but not in the box, samples of the earrings, of the frames, and two oleographs between pasteboards.

Luigia Monti and Linda Bigoni were also present. Maria refused the offers. When they and the man were gone, Maria remarked with surprise that she had already dreamt of the scene with all its details, i.e. as far as the man was concerned. Signora Annetta added that from girlhood she also had frequently dreamed of coming events.

March $ist, 1894,9.30 P.M. (written in the presence of Annetta and Maria). It was necessary to prove two things, before the case could be supposed to be evidential. First, that the visit was real, and not an odd hallucination of the senses or memory, and secondly, that the man had not made the tour of Padua offering his merchandise, many days before the dream ; in which case Signorina Maria might have become aware of it in some way or other, and thus have originated the dream herself.

In order to clear up the first point, I went on the following day (April ist about 6.30) to see Signorina Linda Bigoni, and asked her to tell me all aboir the visit at which she had been present. She replied that she had gone to set Maria the day before, about 2.30, while the man was there, and she confirmee all the details about the object of his visit, his remarks, the things he had wit! him, his politeness, his age, and the colour of his clothes. He had made th< same proposition to her as to Maria. As she had arrived after him, she coulc not say by which door he had entered ; but she said he had left before her, am had gone out by the kitchen door, towards the river. On being questioned she replied that she had not seen Signorina Maria since the visit. Before leaving her, I requested her, if the man should come to her house, or if she shouh meet him in the street, to ask him on what day he had come to Padua; whicl she promised to do.

The same evening I went back to Signorina Maria, and before telling he of my talk with Signorina Linda, I questioned her and her mother again Signorina Maria said she did not remember by which door the man ha< gone out, or rather, she had paid no attention ; but her mother said she wa certain that he had gone out by the kitchen door, because he had seen som one enter that way, and on leaving had said that as there was a door ther also he would go out by it. The mother did not know, however, whether h or Signorina Linda B. had left first, but Signorina Maria was sure he ha gone away first, because afterwards she had continued her conversation wit Signorina Linda about their own affairs, and this conversation, begun befor he left, had prevented her noticing by which door he quitted the house.

Both then said they remembered Signorina Linda B.'s coming at abou 2.30 while the man was there, and that he had come before 2 and stayed near! an hour.

Thus all the testimony is in accordance, and no doubt remains that th event with all its details really happened.

)80A] TO CHAPTER IX 627

On the evening of April i8th, Signorina Maria told me that her friend, Mgnorina Linda B., had something to tell me, but in order to keep her promise ,he would tell it only to me. Signorina Maria said that Linda B. was coming o see her on the morrow, when I could meet her.

The following day (April iQth) I went to see Signorina Maria at the time ixed, and found Linda B. at the house. The latter told me she had met the nan in the street ; that he had recognised her and had renewed his offer. She ook advantage of this to ask him when he had arrived in Padua, and he said ie had come on March 2pth, and that he had not visited Padua before for everal years.

This proves that the dream occurred two days before the arrival of the icrson implicated, and that consequently it could not have resulted from a icre sensorial impression of Signorina Maria's.

Of such a type as this — gradually evolved, slightly inexact, and Itogether trivial — are all the predictions given through Elvira. I do ot think, however, that their triviality affords in itself any clear inication as to their origin. They are the attempts of an intelligence 'hich, whether embodied or unembodied, is not much above a child's ivel, to prove a fact of the highest importance — namely, the possibility f foreseeing future events. In comparison with the value of the result lus aimed at, the actual incidents by which it may be attained matter ttle. It is of greater interest to have a pedlar's visit foretold, if only lat visit could not have been foreseen by any ordinary intelligence, than ) have, say, a death foretold, if we suspect that that more impressive rophecy may have helped to work its own fulfilment.

