thing that was not natural to us all, and she became very much afraid, and we took her to the other room and tried to soothe her, for she was trembling all over. Ghost ! why, the thought never entered our minds for a second; but we started chopping wood and making a fire for the evening meal. The very idea of any one being in the bed was ridiculous, so we attributed it to imagination, and life at the house went on as usual for about two days, when one afternoon, as we were sitting in the kitchen round the fire, it being a cold, wet day outside, L. startled us by exclaiming, " There is the old woman again, and lying the same way." L. did not seem to be so much afraid this time, so we asked her to describe the figure ; and with her eyes fixed on the bed and with motion of the finger, she went on to tell us how that the old wife was not lying under the blankets, but on top, with her clothes and boots on, and her legs drawn up as though she were cold ; her face was turned to the wall, and she had on what is known in the Highlands as a " sow-backed mutch," that is, a white cap which only old women wear; it has a frill round the front and sticks out at the back, thus.1 She also wore a drab-coloured petticoat, and a checked shawl round her shoulders, drawn tight. Such was the description given ; she could not see her face, but her right hand was hugging her left arm, and she saw that the hand was yellow and thin, and wrinkled like the hands of old people who have done a lot of hard work in their day.

We sat looking at the bed for a long time, with an occasional bit of information from L., who was the only one who saw the figure.

This happened often — very often, indeed so frequently that we got used to it, and used to talk about it among ourselves as " L.'s old woman."

Midsummer came, and the rest of our people from the city, and then for the first time we became intimate with our neighbours and two or three families at the shore. On one occasion my elder sister brought up the subject before a Mrs. M'P., our nearest neighbour, and when she described the figure to her, Mrs. M'P. well-nigh swooned away, and said that it really was the case; the description was the same as the first wife of the man who lived in the house before us, and that he cruelly ill-used his wife, to the extent that the last beating she never recovered from. The story Mrs. M'P. told runs somewhat like this, of which I can only give you the gist : —

Malcolm, the man of the house, and his wife Kate (the old woman), lived a cat and dog life ; she was hard-working, and he got tipsy whenever he could. They went one day to market with some fowls and pigs, &c., and on their way back he purchased a half-gallon of whisky. He carried it part of the way, and when he got tired gave it to her ; while he took frequent rests by the wayside. She managed to get home before him, and when he came home late he accused her of drinking the contents of the jar. He gave her such a beating that he was afraid, and went down to this Mrs. M'P., saying that his wife was very ill. When Mrs. M'P. went up to the house she found Kate, as my sister described, with her clothes on, and lying with her face to the wall for the purpose, as Mrs. M'P. said, of concealing her face, which was very badly coloured by the ill-treatment of her husband. The finish-up was her death, she having never recovered.

The foregoing is as nearly a complete compendium of the facts as I, with the help of my sister J., can remember.

My sister L. is now dead, but we often go back to the house when we are any way near the locality, because it is a bright spot in our memory.

(Signed) D. M. TYRE.

1 A sketch of the profile was here given.

Mr. Tyre adds, in a letter to Mr. David Stewart, of Kincaid House, Milton of Campsie, N.B., who procured this account for us : —

I was at the house last month ; there is no one in it just now ; the last tenant has gone abroad, and the house is somewhat dilapidated, and the garden a ruin. We had a look through the window at the old kitchen and saw our own grate still remaining.

Mr. Stewart wrote to us on August i3th, 1885 : —

I know how valuable the actual names and localities would be, as well as Mrs. MT.'s independent account, but I have asked so repeatedly, and been told that Mrs. M'P. had great objections to publicity, in case it would rake up old stories connected with the case, that I do not like to ask again.

735 A. In a case -published in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 90, Mr. Wambey heard a phantasmal voice as though in colloquy with his own thought. He was planning a congratulatory letter to a friend, when the words "What! write to a dead man? write to a dead man?" sounded clearly in his ears. The friend had been dead for some days. I add here a case where a message seemed to be given by the decedent's voice in a dream. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 455.)

Mr. George King, of 12 Sunderland Terrace, Westbourne Park, W., writes : —

November %th, 1885.

The following is a brief account of an occurrence that took place eleven years ago. I repeat the facts exactly as they happened, and make no attempt at comment or explanation. It is necessary to give a few words of prefatory narrative.

My brother D., a few years my junior, was a handsome, powerful young man, twenty-one years of age at the time of his death, and he was an unusually vigorous swimmer. He had greatly distinguished himself at school and college, and he was enthusiastically devoted to scientific pursuits. On leaving the Scottish University where he had studied, he adopted telegraphic engineering for a profession, and as all his tastes were in that direction his progress was rapid. His more especial department was the construction and laying of deepsea cables, and when only twenty years of age he was appointed to the responsible post of superintendent of the scientific department in laying a cable for the Brazilian Government. In the performance of his duties on the stormy Atlantic coast of South America he had to encounter many perils ; and finally the steamer Gornos, on which he was, was totally wrecked, and the cable was lost. All lives were saved, though for many hours the danger had been extreme. My brother returned immediately by mail to London, and throughout the summer months of 1874 was engaged in superintending the manufacture of fresh cable to replace that which had become lost in the Gornos. During these few months D. and I had much affectionate intercourse, and the bonds between us (he was my only brother) were drawn even closer than before.

In November 1874 the cable was finished and shipped on board the La Plata, a magnificent steamship, carrying with her every appliance that could be required to render the expedition safe. By the wreck of the Gornos much valuable time had been lost, and for six months a huge sum of capital

735 A] TO CHAPTER VII 363

had been lying idle. Only a small section of cable was required to complete the line, and the contractors, Siemens Brothers, spared no expense to make certain of success on the second attempt. While, therefore, we might fear for my brother the unhealthy climate of some parts of the coast of Brazil, we had no anxiety as regards the perils of the sea.

I bid D. farewell on Wednesday, November 2nd [evidently meaning 25th, see below], 1874. I had a lecture to deliver that afternoon, and I could not go to see him off, and we parted at the door of my office. He was the picture of health and strength, and we spoke cheerfully of meeting again in a few months' time, when his work should be completed. The next morning I had a line from him, written at the docks, and on Saturday a happy little letter, which was posted by the pilot when he landed at the Isle of Wight. Everything tended to reassure me, and I had no sense of impending calamity.

Next Wednesday evening, December 2nd, I attended a conversazione at King's College, given by Sir W. Thomson, President of the Society of Telegraphic Engineers, and, taking myself a keen interest in^ science, my mind was intensely occupied with all that I saw and heard. While examining the beautiful instruments exhibited, I often wished that my brother had been there to explain them to me, and the many friends that I met spoke to me of him. He was thus pleasantly in my thoughts, but my mind was not brooding or concentrated on him. On the contrary, it was disturbed by the multitude of objects, and only casual glances were cast towards D. Rather excited, I went home to my solitary chambers, and retired to bed shortly after midnight. I was soon asleep, but how long I remained so I know not. So far as recollection goes, I had not been dreaming, but suddenly I found myself in the midst of a brilliant assembly, such as that I had recently left at King's College. I stood in evening dress on the steps at the entrance to a great and crowded hall. I was looking towards the garden, brightly lighted with a multitude of lamps. Illuminated fountains were playing in front of me, and groups of gentlemen and ladies sauntered up and down the paths. The cool night air was blowing on my face, and I had a delicious feeling of pleasure and peace. Two gentlemen, strangers to me, stood talking on the gravel a few paces from me. I heard their voices, and could almost catch their conversation. Suddenly my brother stepped out from behind them, and advanced towards me. He was in evening dress, like all the rest, and was the very image of buoyant health. I was much surprised to see him, and, going forward to meet him, I said: "Hallo! D., how are you here?" He shook me warmly by the hand, and replied: "Did you not know I have been wrecked again ? " At these words a deadly faintness came over me. I seemed to swim away and sink to the ground. After momentary unconsciousness I awoke, and found myself in my bed. I was in a cold perspiration, and had paroxysms of trembling, which would not be controlled. I argued with myself on the absurdity of getting into a panic over a dream, but all to no purpose, and for long I could not sleep. Towards morning I again slumbered, and the fear passed off from me. On Thursday, December 3rd, I was to breakfast with a friend, at his hotel, before he started for Scotland, and I went to Euston by the Metropolitan Railway. The bookstalls on my side of the station were not yet opened, but across the line the boys were arranging the papers, and they spread out the placard of the Daily Telegraph. In large letters on it were the words : " Terrible disaster at sea. Loss of a steamship

and sixty lives." I felt as if iced water had been poured over me, and the dread of the night before returned; but my train glided up to the platform, and I could not get a paper. The gentleman next me in the carriage was reading the Daily Telegraph, and I looked over his shoulder, and saw, under a sensational heading, the words : " By the arrival in the Thames, yesterday, of the Antenor, &c."; but the motion of the train prevented me from reading properly, and 1 thought the sentence ran : " By the arrival of the Thames, news of the Antenor, &c. &c." I therefore gathered that the Antenor had been lost. On arriving at my destination I got the Times, and looked it over from the beginning to the end, but it contained no mention of the shipwreck. Later on I went to my office and began my work, but presently one of the messengers, with a strange look in his face, came to me and said : " Is it true, sir, that your brother has been lost in the La Plata f " I started up and ran to the Marine Company next door, and there the very worst fears were confirmed. The La Plata foundered in the Bay of Biscay at about noon on Sunday, November 24th [evidently a slip for 29th, see below], 1874, after being exposed for only a few hours to a terrific gale. No satisfactory reason for the catastrophe was ever forthcoming. Why a well-found and powerful steamer should have gone down in open sea, when a common rowing-boat should have survived, is a mystery which remains unsolved. The event created a great sensation at the time, and a long Board of Trade inquiry was held, but the riddle was never answered.

I saw some of the survivors of the crew, and learned from them about my brother. Although the weather had been rough, danger was not feared until Sunday morning, when water began to rush into the engine-room, and quickly put out the fires. My brother toiled with the sailors to get steam up in the donkey-engine on deck so as to work the pumps, and he nobly encouraged the men. This, however, proved useless, and when the boat pushed off from the ship, the last seen of my brother was that he was helping to launch the life-raft.

The La Plata foundered at about noon on Sunday, November 29th, and possibly D. perished then and there. But he may possibly have survived for several days. He was of strong constitution ; he was a powerful swimmer ; he had on an air-belt, and he was beside the life-raft when the ship went down. On December 2nd, two sailors were picked up alive. Half-immersed in the icecold water, they had clung to the life-raft and drifted about the Atlantic for three whole days. I add this last note to show that it is just possible that I had the vision of my brother near the morning of his death, although more probably he died three days before.

In conclusion, I must say that I speak of a "vision " because the whole of my sensations while the scene was passing before me, and subsequently, were quite different from those that accompany an ordinary dream. Also I can see everything now in my mind as clearly as at the moment when I awoke, whereas with me even the most vivid dreams always gradually fade away.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. King says : —

November \$th, 1885.

The vision of my brother was quite unique. I never before or since had a vision of a person whom I believed to be in the flesh, and never had an external event such as the shipwreck thus conveyed to me. Much less have I ever had

736A] TO CHAPTER VII 365

a vision which was falsified by the event. Also never before or since have I had sensations similar to those that accompanied the vision of my brother.

GEORGE KING.

The first announcement of the wreck of the La Plata appeared in the Daily Telegraph, December 3rd, 1874, and in the same issue an account appears of a conversazione given the night before at King's College, Strand, by Sir Wm. Thomson, President of the Society of Telegraph Engineers.

On December loth, in the same paper, a telegram is printed giving an account of the rescue of the boatswain and quartermaster of the La Plata, who were found clinging to some wreckage by a Dutch cutter. It is stated that the steamer foundered on November 2pth, and that those two men clung to the wreckage until picked up at 10 A.M. on December 2nd.

The La Plata left Gravesend for Rio Janeiro on November 26th, 1874, and foundered in the Bay of Biscay, as we learn from the Marine Department, Board of Trade, on the 29th. The survivors were picked up by the Gare Loch, and transferred to the homeward-bound ss. Antenor, which arrived with them and the first news in the Thames on December 2nd.

736 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 218. The following account was written out by me on December 22nd, 1888, from notes taken during an interview with Mrs. Davies the same day ; and was afterwards revised and signed by Mrs. Davies.

About twenty years ago I was living with my mother and brother at Islington. Near us lived a family whose name is not important to the narrative. One of their daughters married a Mr. J. W., who went to India. Mrs. J. W. continued living at her father's house. Her father, however, changed his residence, and as Mr. J. W.'s address in India was not known at the time, Mrs. J. W. could not inform him of the change of address. The house where she was living with her father when her husband left home passed to a family whom I will call Brown, with whom I was acquainted, as I also was with Mrs. J. W. and her family.

One evening I paid a visit to Mrs. Brown, and she gave me an Indian letter which had arrived for Mrs. J. W. at the house now occupied by the Browns. Mrs. Brown asked me to transmit this letter to Mrs. J. W. through my brother, who frequently saw a brother of Mrs. J. W.'s. There had thus been some little delay, and perhaps slackness in getting the letter sent on to Mrs. J. W. I promised to give it to my brother, and took it home. It was a dirty-looking letter, addressed in an uneducated handwriting, and of ordinary bulk. I placed it on the chimney-piece in our sitting-room, and sat down alone. I expected my brother home in an hour or two. The letter, of course, in no way interested me. In a minute or two I heard a ticking on the chimney-piece, and it struck me that an old-fashioned watch which my mother always had standing in her bedroom must have been brought downstairs. I went to the chimney-piece, but there was no watch or clock there or elsewhere in the room. The ticking, which was loud and sharp, seemed to proceed from the letter itself. Greatly

surprised, I removed the letter and put it on a sideboard, and then in one or two other places; but the ticking continued, proceeding undoubtedly from where the letter was each time. After an hour or so of this I could bear the thing no longer, and went out and sat in the hall to await my brother. When he came in I simply took him into the sitting-room and asked him if he heard anything. He said at once, " I hear a watch or clock ticking." There was no watch or clock, as I have said, in the room. He went to where the letter was and exclaimed, " Why, the letter is ticking." We then listened to it together, moved it about, and satisfied ourselves that the ticking proceeded from the letter, which, however, plainly contained nothing but a sheet of paper. The impression which the ticking made was that of an urgent call for attention. My brother took the letter to Mrs. J. W. either that night (it was very late) or next morning. On opening it, she found that her husband had suddenly died of sunstroke, and the letter was written by some servant or companion to inform her of his death. The ticking no doubt made my brother and myself hand on the letter more promptly than we might otherwise have done.

I have never experienced any other hallucination of the senses. I once heard a strong push at the street-door at the minute (for I looked at my watch) that my father died at a distance ; but, though I went to the door at once and saw no one, I cannot, of course, be sure that some passer-by might not have pushed the door and got out of sight ; for the house was in a street with many passers. I have also heard ticks before a death ; but these may very likely have been caused by the death-watch insect ; which certainly was not the case with the ticks which came from the letter. The incident of the letter made a deep impression on me. (Signed) ANNA DAVIES.

Mr. Davies, brother to Mrs. Davies (who married a gentleman of the same name), gives his independent recollection as follows : —

64 CHURCH ROAD, SOUTHGATE ROAD, N., February i$th, 1889.

I am afraid my recollection of the details after so long a time has elapsed is rather limited and somewhat hazy, so that if my sister has expanded into details, and her version should slightly differ from mine, please consider that I bow to her superior memory, and accept her account as correct. The main features of the incident are, however, as nearly as I can recollect, as follows : — One night, it must be nearly, if not quite, thirty years ago, I returned home between ten and eleven o'clock, and my sister told me that she had brought home from the house of a friend of hers a letter from India, addressed to a Mrs. Walker, who had formerly lived at the house the letter was directed to, and being acquainted with Mrs. Walker (whose brother was an intimate friend of mine), I was asked to be the bearer of the letter to her. I found it on the mantelshelf, and my sister and myself heard very distinctly a clear ticking noise, as loud as, and similar to, that of a small clock, which we spent some time in trying to account for, and which we could so clearly trace to the vicinity of the letter that it seemed to proceed from the letter itself, but we could find nothing which would in any way account for what we heard. I delivered the letter to my friend the following day to hand to his sister, Mrs. Walker, and afterwards heard that it contained the news of the decease of her husband in India. I am not quite sure but almost so, that on hearing the mysterious noise we remarked on the probable contents of the letter, but we were certainly

736B] TO CHAPTER VII 367

struck with the coincidence of the noise being heard whilst the letter was on the shelf (and apparently proceeding from it) and discontinuing on its removal.

I have no means of fixing the date, or even the year, as Mrs. Walker and her brother have both been dead for some years. L. A. DAVIES.

736 B. I give next an account of a case briefly mentioned by Gurney in Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 690, about which we afterwards obtained further evidence. After mentioning two other cases in which entries in the diary of the percipient— Mr. Cameron Grant— confirmed his recollection of strong impressions nearly coincident with deaths, Gurney continues : —

I have studied in Mr. Grant's diary the full record of a third case which was even more remarkable than the first, as it included the peculiarity that, for some time after his first impression, he felt forcibly impelled to draw the figure of the person who died. The case was made the more striking to me by the fact that Mr. Grant was so certain that the death (the time of which he had only very vaguely learnt) must have coincided in date with his impression, that he had actually not taken the trouble to verify the coincidence. He left it to me to find in the Times obituary — as he confidently foretold that I should — that the death (which was quite unexpected) occurred, thousands of miles from the place where he was, on the day preceding that on which the entry in his diary, relating his impression of the previous night, was written. The impression of that night did not, however, bear distinct reference to the particular person who died, but was a more general sense of calamity. Certain reasons which at present make it desirable not to publish the details of this case may in time cease to exist.

Now, on a fuller inspection of Mr, Grant's voluminous journal (largely a business record), which he has kindly permitted me to make, it appeared that the impulse to draw the dying man was the most marked feature in the whole incident, and furthermore that this impulse came on some months after the death — but on the night previous to the day on which Mr. Grant saw, in a casual newspaper received in Brazil, the announcement of his friend's demise in Scotland.1

The possibility of a telepathic impulse from the surviving members of the family of course suggests itself : but Mr. Grant was in a wild up-country station in Brazil ; and it seems impossible that any one could guess at what date the news would reach him. The rough sketch which Mr. Grant was impelled to make contained two figures (of which the second was a servant) and a window ; and it truly represented, as he afterwards learnt, the circumstances of the death.

The case has been further strengthened by permission to print the passages from Mr. Grant's diary, and by interviews of my own with the widow and daughter of the deceased person, Lord Z. (not the true initial), who were present at the time of the death.

1 I am not sure how many hours the impulse lasted, Mr. Grant having been obliged to return to Brazil before sending me a copy of the passage in his journal.

The following is Mr. Grant's statement, made to me, July 28th, 1889 (which I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 212).

The first form in which this impression came to me was that of deep sympathy for [a member of Lord Z.'s family]. After this had lasted for some time I found myself rudely drawing a tall man stooping forwards on to another man. I had a conviction that Lord Z. was dead — that the falling forward indicated death. I also dimly perceived the position of windows behind the falling figure, though I did not draw these. I wrote to my mother at once to say that I knew that Lord Z. was dead. [Letter not preserved.] I was then up the country in Brazil, and saw few papers. I heard from England that Lord Z. was dead ; but (as I told Mr. Gurney) did not look for date in papers, and did not, so far as I know, hear the date in any letter.

On reaching England I was partially hypnotised by a physician of my acquaintance [name given] ; but did not lose consciousness. During my semi-trance I became aware that I was seeing the room and windows and the falling figure more clearly than ever before. I talked of this scene to the physician. Afterwards he invited me to look in a crystal. I did so ; and saw the same room, the windows, bed, and figure, more distinctly.

I afterwards went to stay in the house where Lord Z. died. As soon as I entered I asked Lady Z. to allow me to describe to her the room where I had seemed to see Lord Z. dying. Lady Z. was at first incredulous ; but on my describing the position of bed and windows she admitted that it was correct. Lord Z. had died in a dressing-room adjacent to his bedroom. The temporary bed and windows were exactly as I had seen them. He had fallen forwards into the arms of a male attendant, dying suddenly.

The first impression of the death, which was nearly coincident, was on December 24th, 1885 (date verified by Mr. Gurney). Entry in diary December 25th, 1885 : "There was something upon my mind all day from yesterday — a sense of a death or loss of some one dear to me. I spoke to E. C. [Mr. Catlin, the manager, who wrote in corroboration] about it ; and I don't know how it is, but as I wrote the above [a member of Lord Z.'s family] has been constantly in my thoughts."

Then on Tuesday, January 26th, 1886, is an entry — read by me in Mr. Grant's journal, and copied for me by him — as follows : —

" Impression at about one o'clock and drawing and reasoning therefrom on death."

January 'i'jth. — " Very tired, but did not sleep a wink all night. I am sure that something has happened to [a member of Lord Z.'s family]. I heard every hour strike, and kept thinking of [all the members of the family] but not of the dear old gentleman {i.e., imagining them in sorrow, but not Lord Z. himself]. I got up and wanted to draw him. His features seemed before me. I had before shown Mr. Catlin a face in the Graphic that was like him, also that of a dead man. I had the greatest difficulty not to draw his portrait with his head forward and sunk on his breast, as if he had been sitting in a room with a window on his right hand and an old man-servant ; and then his head just went forward, and he fell asleep. Weeks ago [i.e., December 25th] I thought of him — some time about Christmas; and ever since I have been feeling [pity, &c., for members of family]."

736C] TO CHAPTER VII 369

On the next day, Thursday, January 28th, 1886, Mr. Grant received by accident a Scotch paper in which Lord Z.'s death was mentioned, but apparently without the precise date.

I have received a letter (which I have unfortunately mislaid) from Mr. Catlin corroborating Mr. Grant's statements as to his having shown him drawings and spoken of the death of a friend at home.

Lady Z. and Miss Z. gave me in April 1892 the following corroboration : —

Lord Z. died December 24th, 1885, in a dressing-room adjoining his own larger room. The dressing-room was narrow, with a window at one end, and a small bed, then occupied by a man-servant who attended on him. Lord Z. had entered this room to speak to the servant, when he fell forward, the servant catching him in his arms, and shortly afterwards breathed his last. His death was unexpected, although he had long been ill. I remember that Mr. Cameron Grant visited our country seat — where this occurred — for the first time some months after Lord Z.'s death; and that he said something to me as to his having known of it, or recognised the scene ; but I cannot now remember the details. (Signed) [Lady Z.]

I remember that Mr. Cameron Grant, before going upstairs, when he arrived on the visit referred to, asked whether my father had not fallen forwards into the arms of a man in a long room with a window at one end of it.

(Signed) [Miss Z.]

This case should be studied along with Mr. Cameron Grant's other records of experiences (Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. pp. 688-690).

It would in a certain way explain these intimations if we could suppose that Lord Z. (who was, and who knew Mr. Grant to be, much interested in such phenomena) first impressed Mr. Grant at the time of his own death, and then renewed the impression when he knew, in some inconceivable manner, that Mr. Grant was about to receive, quite casually, a newspaper announcement of the decease. On that occasion the deceased person seems to have been able to impress a picture of the scene of death on Mr. Grant's subliminal mind ; an impression which worked itself out in the rude drawings, as a motor message, and afterwards returned both as a vision in hypnotic trance, and as a crystal-vision in the waking state. Here, however, as in all similar cases, we cannot exclude the possibility of a wide clairvoyance on the percipient's own part.

736 C. From the "Report on the Census of Hallucinations," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 373. In the following case the hallucination occurred shortly after the death, — perhaps within twenty-four hours of it, — and the apparition indicated leave-taking. It is an interesting example (the only one in the Census) of a primd facie veridical hallucination coinciding with the arrival of a letter bearing on the subject. Another remarkable feature in the case is the persistent repetition of the percept. The account was written by Miss E. L. M. in 1889.

On the morning of January I4th, 1876, I was in the B. schoolroom, a small VOL. n. 2 A

village near to A. in Hants, when I saw what appeared to me to be a favourite cousin. She was close beside me, and appeared in good health, as I had every reason to suppose her to be. I should here explain that I held in my hand a letter which had just been brought to me, and which I had not yet opened, telling me ;that my cousin was seriously ill with scarlet fever. The fact was that at the time she was actually dead, her death having occurred after the posting of the letter. I was waiting for children to assemble in school, and was in good health and in no grief or anxiety. I knew immediately that it was my cousin whom I saw, and believed her to be at the time at her own home. I could not understand what she meant by saying " Good-bye," which I cannot say I heard, but saw by the movement of her lips.

The village children and my sister [were present]. The former I have no reason to think saw anything, and my sister only laughed at me. I continued to see her all day, and when indoors my sister would persist in strumming on the piano, although I remonstrated with her, — " How can you keep on with that noise when Jessie is dead ? " I received a letter the next morning inform, ing me that she was dead, after which I saw her only at intervals that day and part of the next, when the appearances ceased.

Miss M. had had previously another veridical experience, described in the " Report," relating to the death of an aunt.

Miss M.'s sister writes : —

November gfb, 1889.

I distinctly remember the circumstances respecting my cousin Jessie. All one day my sister was telling me she saw her, and that she knew she was dead, and we had a letter next morning with the news, so that we knew before the letter arrived.

I have asked my mother about it, and she remembers my sister telling her at the time.

739 A. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 175. The following is a case which was noted at the time, before it was known to be veridical. It occurred to the Rev. E. K. Elliott, Rector of Worthing, who was formerly in the navy, and who made the entry in his diary as quoted when he was cruising in the Atlantic out of reach of post or telegraph. The diary was still in his possession when we received the account, in August 1895.

Extract from diary written out in Atlantic, January itfh, 1847: —

" Dreamt last night I received a letter from my uncle, H. E., dated January 3rd, in which news of my dear brother's death was given. It greatly struck me."

My brother had been ill in Switzerland, but the last news I received on leaving England was that he was better.

The "January 3rd" was very black, as if intended to catch my eye.

On my return to England I found, as I quite expected, a letter awaiting me saying my brother had died on the above date. E. K. ELLIOTT.

WORTHING.

739B] TO CHAPTER VII 371

739 B. In the next case, which I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 409, the apparition was seen several weeks after the death. The account came from Mrs. Clark, 8 South View, Forest Hall, Newcastle-

on-Tyne.

January 6tti, 1885.

I send you a short account, describing what I experienced at the time of the apparition of my friend, who was a young gentleman much attached to myself, and who would willingly (had I loved him well enough) have made me his wife. I became engaged to be married, and did not see my friend (Mr. Akhurst) for some months, until within a week of my marriage (June 1878), when in the presence of my husband he wished me every happiness, and regretted he had not been able to win me.

Time passed on. I had been married about two years and had never seen Mr. Akhurst, when one day my husband told me he (Mr. Akhurst) was in Newcastle and was coming to supper and was going to stay the night. When my husband and he were talking, he said my husband had been the more fortunate of the two, but he added if anything happened to my husband he could leave his money to whom he liked and his widow to him, and he would be quite content. I mention this to show he was still interested in me.

Three months passed and baby was born. When she was about a week old, very early one morning I was feeding her, when I felt a cold waft of air through the room and a feeling as though some one touched my shoulder ; my hair seemed to bristle all over my head and I shuddered. Raising my eyes to the door (which faced me), I saw Akhurst standing in his shirt and trousers looking at me, when he seemed to pass through the door. In the morning I mentioned it to my husband. I did not hear of Mr. Akhurst's death for some weeks after, when I found it corresponded with that of the apparition, and though my father knew of it before, he thought in my weak state of health it were better I should not be told.

He was found lying on the bed with his shirt and trousers on, just as he had thrown himself down after taking a sleeping draught.1

I myself am quite convinced that Mr. Akhurst's thoughts had been so concentrated upon me, before the draught proved fatal, that his spirit visited me on its way to that glorious land where it shall dwell in the presence of Him who said, " Come unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest."

To me the memory of Mr. Akhurst will always be as of a dear brother greatly esteemed and deeply regretted. EMILY CLARK.

Mrs. Clark adds later : —

May \yh, 1885.

My husband will certify as to my mentioning to him seeing the apparition before I heard of Mr. Akhurst's death, but I am sorry I cannot tell you where it happened, nor the exact date of the death, but I remember when we heard about it my husband and I traced it to about the time of my "vision." . . .

July 2yd, 1885.

I never experienced anything of the kind before. I think Mr. Akhurst's death happened somewhere in Yorkshire. What makes me think the time

1 This, as will be seen, was probably a mistake, and it seems possible that the reminiscence of the Corsican Brothers may have helped to shape the hallucination.

corresponded with his death, was, my asking how long ago it was from my hearing of his death, and the actual occurrence ; and then knowing the time of my little girl's birth, I came to the conclusion it was about the same time. I think this is all the information I can give you. I shall ask my husband to send you a few lines to-morrow.

Mr. Edward Clark, solicitor, County Chambers, Newcastle-on-Tyne, writes : —

July 2#h, 1885.

At the request of my wife, Mrs. Clark, of 9 South View, Forest Hall, I beg to inform you of my knowledge of the supposed apparition of Mr. Akhurst. Shortly after my wife had been confined of my second daughter, about the end of September, 1880, my wife one morning informed me she had seen Akhurst about one o'clock that morning. I of course told her it was nonsense, but she persisted, and said he appeared to her with only his trousers and a shirt on, and the remark she made was that he was dressed just as she had seen him in the Corsican Brothers (he was an actor). She also described her feelings at the time. I tried to persuade her it was a dream, but she insisted that it was an apparition.

As near as I can remember, about six months after, I met a mutual friend of Akhurst's and my own, and in conversation I inquired after Akhurst. He said, " Don't you know he is dead ? " I said, " No, when did he die ? " He said, " I don't know the exact date, but it was about six months ago ; " and further informed me that he died about one o'clock in the morning in the dress as my wife described him, from an overdose of chloral. I have endeavoured to see my friend to find out the place (Bradford, I think), but he is now in America. His name is John Brown, and he is the son of the leader-writer to the Chronicle here. If I meet him again I will try to get accurate particulars and forward them to you.

August 2ist, 1885.

. . . My wife has, I find, no reason to think she has been mistaken as to the time when she supposed she saw W. J. Akhurst, as the date is fixed by the birth of my second little girl, which took place in September 1880.

In the Era Almanac for 1881, the obituary for 1880, p. 93, gives the entry, " Akhurst, Walter James, actor, aged twenty- four, July 1 2th."

The Era newspaper of July i8th, 1880, gives an account of the inquest. Mr. H. W. Akhurst gave evidence to the effect that he and his deceased brother went to the chemist's on Saturday (i.e. loth), and procured a sleeping draught. Deceased complained of pains in his body and of feeling lonely. The next day (Sunday) he only got up to have his bed made ; Monday he died. W. H. Cope, surgeon, attributed death to suffocation caused by heart disease. The verdict returned was " Death from natural causes."

739 C. The next case, which I quote from Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 444, was received towards the end of 1882 from Mr. J. G. Keulemans, who has already been mentioned in 662 A.

In December 1880 Mr. Keulemans was living, he tells us, with his family in Paris. The outbreak of an epidemic of small-pox caused him to

740A] TO CHAPTER VII 373

remove three of his children, including a favourite little boy of five, to London, whence he received, in the course of the ensuing month, several letters giving an excellent account of their health.

On the 24th of January 1881, at half-past seven in the morning, I was suddenly awoke by hearing his voice, as I fancied, very near me. I saw a bright, opaque, white mass before my eyes, and in the centre of this light I saw the face of my little darling, his eyes bright, his mouth smiling. The apparition, accompanied by the sound of his voice, was too short and too sudden to be called a dream : it was too clear, too decided, to be called an effect of imagination. So distinctly did I hear his voice that I looked round the room to see whether he was actually there. The sound I heard was that of extreme delight, such as only a happy child can utter. I thought it was the moment he woke up in London, happy and thinking of me. I said to myself, *' Thank God, little Isidore is happy as always."

Mr. Keulemans describes the ensuing day as one of peculiar brightness and cheerfulness. He took a long walk with a friend, with whom he dined ; and was afterwards playing a game of billiards, when he again saw the apparition of his child. This made him seriously uneasy, and in spite of having received within three days the assurance of the child's perfect health, he expressed to his wife a conviction that he was dead. Next day a letter arrived saying that the child was ill ; but the father was convinced that this was only an attempt to break the news ; and, in fact, the child had died, after a few hours' illness, at the exact time of the first apparition.

Mrs. Keulemans says : —

May 29^, 1885.

I remember that, the day when little Isidore died, my husband said that he felt strongly impressed that there was something wrong with the little boy in London. It was in the evening that he asked me whether I had received any news from my mother about Isidore. I replied that no letter had come, and asked him why he wanted to know. He made the same remark as before, but would not further explain himself. I tried to dispel his gloomy forebodings by referring to a letter we had from my mother, stating that Isidore was very happy, and was singing all day long. My husband did not seem pacified. When the letter mentioning his illness came, my husband was very much dejected, and told me that it was no use 'trying to make a secret of it, as he knew the worst had happened. He said afterwards that he had seen a vision. A. KEULEMANS.

740 A. The following case is printed in full in the Journal S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 68 (May 1889). I give an abstract only of it here. The narrative comes from a lady known to me. Miss W. begins by describing the death of her father on November i6th, 1862, at about midnight, in the presence of his family. She says : —

The fire (which faced the foot of the bed) gave a steady and subdued light, and there was only one lighted candle in the room. [A few minutes after

he died,] while we were looking on, scarcely realising what had occurred, suddenly I and my youngest brother simultaneously whispered, " Look ! " and we both beheld distinctly a vaporous luminosity quivering in a circle over my father's head. It was as if the breath itself had become radiant and hovered over the prostrate form. . . . None of the others saw it. ... A night or two after I was lying awake, when all at once I saw above me a light, similar to the one just described, only larger and brighter. [It] did not last more than a brief minute, and then vanished as suddenly as it appeared. I sat up in bed and tried to discover some rational cause for it, but could not. [Details are given, showing that the light was almost certainly hallucinatory.]

Miss W.'s brother and sister signed a corroboratory note, stating that they well remembered the mention of the incidents at the time of their occurrence.

This impression has a certain analogy with that of Dr. Wiltse in 713 A. It cannot, of course, be maintained that an experience occurring under such circumstances, in spite of its collective nature, has any evidential force ; but though not evidential, it may yet represent a reality, clothed in a symbolism which is obviously derived from tradition.

741 A. From the Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical Research, vol. i. p. 446. This is a case of two apparently synchronous "visions of consolation" representing the same deceased person. The percipients were the mother and husband of a lady who had been dead five months. She died in December, 1879, and the incidents occurred about the end of April 1880. Mrs. Crans, the mother, was then residing in New York, and her son-in-law, Mr. C. A. Kernochan, in Central City, Dakota. Mrs. Crans writes to Dr. Hodgson as follows : —

345 WEST 34TH STREET, NEW YORK,/«/>/ i^th, 1888.

. . . After lying down to rest, I remember feeling a drifting sensation, of seeming almost as if I was going out of the body. My eyes were closed ; soon I realised that I was, or seemed to be, going fast somewhere. All seemed dark to me ; suddenly I realised that I was in a room ; then I saw Charley lying in a bed asleep ; then I took a look at the furniture of the room, and distinctly saw every article— even to a chair at the head of the bed, which had one of the pieces broken in the back. ... In a moment the door opened and my spiritdaughter Allie came into the room and stepped up to the bed and stooped down and kissed Charley. He seemed to at once realise her presence, and tried to hold her, but she passed right out of the room about like a feather blown by the wind ; and then, after a moment, she came back again [several further incidents are here described]. Then I thought I would open my eyes, and with difficulty I got my eyes open. They seemed so heavy to me, but when I succeeded in opening them I received a sudden shock, such as if I had fallen from the ceiling to the floor. It frightened and woke up both Mrs. B. and my daughter [but Mrs. B. has been lost sight of, and the daughter was a child at the time], who asked what was the matter. Of course I told them my experience, and the following Sunday I wrote, as was always my custom, to my son-inlaw, Charley, telling him of all my experience, describing the room as I saw it furnished.

742A] TO CHAPTER VII 375

It took a letter six days to go from here to Dakota, and the same length of time, of course, to come from there here ; and at the end of six days judge of my surprise to receive a letter from Charley telling me thus : " Oh, my darling mamma Crans ! My God ! I dreamed I saw Allie last Friday night ! " He then described just as I saw her; how she came into the room and he cried and tried to hold her, but she vanished [with other details, similar to those of Mrs. Crans' dream]. Then at the end of six days, when my letter reached him, and he read of my similar experience, he at once wrote me that all I had seen was correct, even to every article of furniture in the room, also as his dream had appeared to him. . . . MRS. N. J. CRANS.

The letters referred to, which were written at the time of the experiences, had unfortunately not been preserved ; but Mr. Kernochan wrote to Dr. Hodgson as follows : —

NEW YORK,/«/>/ 4^, 1888.

The facts written you this day by Mrs. N. J. Crans in regard to a letter written to me one Sunday morning in the year 1880, and one written by me on the same date to her, are correct in every particular. I was then living in Central City, Dakota, boarding at the American house. It is impossible to give the exact date, as I have destroyed the letter, for which I regret. I think it was about the last of April 1880. ... C. A. KERNOCHAN.

742 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 437. The account is given by Mrs. Judd.

August 6tk, 1885.

My grandmother was a tall, stately, and handsome woman, even at an advanced age. She was one of the Gastrells, an old and aristocratic family. Her latter years were spent with my mother (her daughter), and in her eightyfourth year she died. She had suffered long ; she had attained a great age ; therefore, though we missed her, our grief was not of that poignant and excessive kind which produces hallucination.

My sister and myself had always slept in a room adjoining hers, and — for want of space in her apartment — there stood by our bedside a large oldfashioned clock, which had been presented to our grandmother on her weddingday. More precious than gold was this old clock to her heart ; " by it," she often said, " have I hundreds of times watched the slow hours pass in my early married days when my husband had to leave me ; by it have I timed the children's return from school"; and she begged us, her grandchildren, to leave our bedroom door unlocked at night that she might consult the old clock when she rose each morning. We have often opened our sleepy eyes at four on a summer morning and smiled to see the stately figure already there. For up to the last illness she retained the habits of her youth, and rose at what we deemed fearfully primitive hours.

About three weeks after her death I awoke one morning in October, and saw distinctly the well-known tall figure, the calm old face, the large dark eyes uplifted as usual to the face of the old clock. I closed my eyes for some seconds, and then slowly reopened them. She stood there still. A second time I closed my eyes, a second time opened them. She was gone.

I was looked upon by my family in those days, and particularly by the sister who shared my room, as romantic. Therefore I carefully kept to myself the vision of the morning and pondered over it alone.

At night, however, when we were once more preparing for rest, my sister — my eminently practical and unromantic sister — spoke to me. " I cannot go to bed without telling you something, only don't laugh, for I am really frightened ; I saw grandmamma this morning!" I was amazed. I inquired of her the hour, what the vision was like, where it stood, what it was doing, &c., and I found that in every respect her experience was similar to mine. She had preserved silence all day for fear of ridicule.

I may add that we even now speak of this incident with awe, though twenty long years have since passed over our heads, and we invariably end by saying, each of us, " It was very strange; it is impossible to understand it."

CAROLINE JUDD.

In reply to our request for an account of the incident from the other percipient, Mrs. Judd wrote : —

I send you herewith all that my sister, Mrs. Dear, recalls of the vision, doubly seen, of our late grandmother. She objects to the weariness of composition, therefore I took down her reminiscences, and she signed it as true.

CAROLINE JUDD.

Some years ago, a few months after the death of my grandmother, I awoke in the dim light just before dawn, to see an appearance exactly like her standing in the old accustomed place from whence, when alive, she was wont to consult an old clock, her own property, at very early hours. I said nothing to any one till we retired again for the night, when I found to my surprise, my sister, who slept with me, had seen the same appearance at the same time.

MARY DEAR.

Mrs. Judd's sister, Miss Harris, confirms the above account as

follows : —

BEWEL, ALFRICK, NEAR WORCESTER, August 2otk [1885].

Both sisters mentioned seeing my grandmother the day of the apparition before father and mother, then alive, and myself. I think she must have died about 1866, but I was then very young, and can't remember exactly. I will find out if it is important, but my sisters have often mentioned it since.

ANNIE HARRIS.

743 A. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 522, footnote. The account was written down, a few months after the occurrence, from the dictation of the percipient — Sister Bertha, Superior of the House of Mercy at Bovey Tracy, Newton Abbot — who read it through on December 2pth, 1885, pronounced it correct, and signed it.

On the night of the loth of November, 1861 (I do not know the exact hour), I was up in my bed watching, because there was a person not quite well in the next room. I heard a voice, which I recognised at once as familiar to me, and at first thought of my sister. It said, in the brightest and most cheerful tone, " I am here with you." I answered, looking and seeing nothing, " Who are you ? " The voice said, " You must n't know yet." I heard nothing more, and saw nothing, and am certain that the door was not opened or shut. I was not

744A] TO CHAPTER VII 377

in the least frightened, and felt convinced that it was Lucy's [Miss Lucy Gambier Parry's] voice. I have never doubted it from that moment. I had not heard of her being worse ; the last account had been good, and I was expecting to hear that she was at Torquay. In the course of the next day (the I ith), mother told me that she had died on the morning of the loth, rather more than twelve hours before I heard her voice.

The narrator informs us that she has never in her life experienced any other hallucination of the senses. Mrs. Gambier Parry, of Highnam Court, Gloucester, step-mother and cousin of the " Lucy " of the narrative, writes : —

Sister Bertha (her name is Bertha Foertsch) had been living for many years as German governess to Lucy Anna Gambier Parry, and was her dearest friend. She came to us at once on hearing of Lucy's death, and told me of the mysterious occurrence of the night before.

744 A. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 619. This case, if telepathically originated, is an interesting instance of the appearance of a phantasm to certain percipients on local, not personal, grounds. The account comes from Miss Edith Farquharson, who writes : —

June 1885.

In the year 1868, No. 9 Drummond Place, Edinburgh, was in the occupation of Mr. Farquharson, formerly a Judge of the High Court of Jamaica. On the night of Good Friday in that year, two of his daughters, Miss Edith Farquharson, her sister Marianne [now Mrs. Henry Murray], and a little cousin, Agnes Spalding, aged six years, were sleeping in a room at the top of the house. About 11.45 P.M., the two sisters were awakened by hearing loud screams from the child, who was sleeping on a mattress placed on the floor beside their bed. The mattress was against the door leading into a dressingroom ; this door was locked and sealed with white tapes and black wax ; it had been thus closed by a member of the family to whom the house belonged before Mr. Farquharson entered upon his tenancy. The death of the head of the family, and the delicacy of health of one of the daughters, had caused them to wish to leave Edinburgh and spend the winter in Torquay.

On hearing the child's screams of terror, Miss M. F. touched her sister and said, "Do you hear the child screaming?" Miss E. F. replied that she did, and turned her head round to listen better. When the child was asked what she was screaming about, she said, "I am wide awake, and I have seen a figure which was leaning over me," and when further questioned where the figure went to, said, " Round the side of your bed."

Miss E. F., when she turned round, saw a figure slide from near the child's bed and pass along the foot of the bed whereon she and her sister were. (At the first moment she thought it was a thief.) The latter, on hearing her say in French, " // y a quelqu'un" was so terrified that she hid her head under the bed-clothes.

Miss E. F. describes the figure as being dressed in a rough brown shawl held tightly round the bust, a wide-brimmed hat, and a veil. When the child was questioned afterwards she gave the same account of the costume. Miss E. F. says that after passing along the foot of the bed with a noiseless gliding

motion, the figure disappeared into the darkness. Except the door which was locked and sealed, the only door of exit to the room was one which was quite close to the bed ; at right angles with the door and with the head of the bed was a large hanging cupboard.

Both the ladies got up instantly. They found the door of their room closed as they had left it. Their brother's room was next to theirs ; they knocked at his door to rouse him, at the same time keeping a sharp look-out on the door of their own room to see that no one escaped. The whole party then made a thorough search in the room and cupboard, found nothing disturbed, and once more retired to rest. The next morning the page-boy said that he had been unable to sleep all night on account of the sounds he heard of some one scratching at his window. He declared that he had shied all his boots and everything he could lay hold of in the direction whence the noise came, but without effect. He could stand it no longer, and went to the room where some of the women servants slept, begging to be let in. They had heard nothing, however, though they, like himself, slept in the basement of the house.

The whole family were hardly assembled on the Saturday morning, when the son-in-law of the late owner of the house arrived, and asked to see Mr. Farquharson. He wished particularly to know exactly what day this gentleman and his family intended leaving the house (their term would expire the following week), for he had just received a telegram informing him that his sister-in-law had died that night, and they were anxious to bring her body there immediately for burial.

With respect to this last paragraph, the narrator's father writes : —

The above is a correct statement of the occurrence.

C. M. FARQUHARSON. Miss Farquharson continues : —

The possible solution of what we presume to have been an apparition of this lady is, that the bedroom occupied by the Misses Farquharson being the one she habitually used, in her dying moments she desired to visit it once more, or else that there was something in the dressing-room which she particularly wished for. EDITH A. FARQUHARSON.

The following independent account is from Mrs. Murray : —

COBO, GUERNSEY, June ztfh, 1885.

Our home was in Perthshire; but in the winter of 1868 my father took a house for four mouths in Drummond Place, No. 8 [? 9] in Edinburgh, in order to give us a change. The house belonged to General Stewart, who had a delicate daughter, and he let it, to take the daughter to Torquay for the winter. We did not know the Stewarts, so our imagination could not have assisted in any way to account for the curious apparition that was seen. I myself did not see it, but I was in the room with my sister and little cousin, who both did. My belief is that Providence prevented my seeing it, as I am of a very nervous temperament, and it might have had a very bad effect on me if I had. Well, the apparition took place on Good Friday night at about twelve o'clock. This little cousin, who was only about six years old, had come into town from the country, and as our house was very full she had a shake-down beside our bed on my side. I was the first to be awakened by hearing her calling out in a

744A] TO CHAPTER VII 379

frightened way. So I said, " What is the matter, Addie ? " " Oh," she said, " Cousin Marianne, I am so frightened. A figure has been leaning over me, and whenever I put out my hands to push it off it leant back on your bed ! " At this I was alarmed and awoke my sister, who lifted her head from her pillow and looked up, when she saw a figure gliding across the foot of our bed wrapped in a shawl, with a hat and veil on. She whispered to me in French, "// y a quelqu'un" thinking it was a thief, whereat we both jumped out of bed together and went to the next room to get our brother, Captain Farquharson. His bedroom door had a shaky lock which made a noise, so he had barricaded it with a portmanteau. While he was coming to our help, we kept our eyes fixed on our door in case any one should have escaped, but we saw nothing, and after our all searching every corner of the bedroom we came to the conclusion that no one had been there, for everything was intact. We then questioned little Addie as to what she had seen, and what the figure was like. She described it as that of a lady with a shawl on and a hat, and a veil over her face, and said that as I spoke she had gone across the foot of the bed in the same direction that my sister had seen her go. This child, I must tell you, had been most carefully brought up by her mother, and was not allowed to read even fairy tales for fear of having foolish ideas in her head, which makes the thing more remarkable, for she had certainly never heard of a ghost. . . .

Then the next morning we were relating our adventures, when a ring came to the door, and the servant said a gentleman wanted to speak to my father. This gentleman was a Mr. Findlay, who had married a Miss Stewart. He came to ask when we were to leave, for he knew it was about the time, as he had received a telegram that morning to say that Miss Stewart had died in Torquay during the night, and they wanted to bring her body to Edinburgh. We heard afterwards from friends of the Stewarts that the bedroom we had had been hers. I forgot to mention that the child's bed lay across the door of a small room which had been locked up by the Stewarts, and they had put tapes across and sealed them with black wax.

We have none of us ever had any hallucinations either before or after this strange affair. MARIANNE MURRAY.

We find from the Scotsman and the Edinburgh Courant that Miss Stewart died on April n, 1868, the day following Good Friday. If the death took place in the course of a few hours after midnight, " during the night " would of course be the natural expression.

The above account was first printed in the Journal S.P.R., soon after which we received a letter from a lady who stated that she had heard of the incident "just as related in the Journal" within a few days of its occurrence from some cousins of the Miss Farquharsons, who had been told by the house-agent that the description of the lady in the large hat and veil exactly resembled Miss Stewart. Mrs. Murray, however, says : " I do not think any of us mentioned it to Mr. Boyd [the agent] . I have no reason to believe that the dress of the figure was in any way characteristic of Miss Stewart." Thus it appears that the resemblance of the figure seen to the lady who died is entirely problematic. Its association with her depends only on the coincidence of its appearance in her old home on the night of her death. It must also be observed that in this

38o APPENDICES [744 B

case the apparition was seen shortly before the death, though it seems to belong to the same general category as the other cases in this section.

744 B. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 57. The following incident occurred to a gentleman personally known to me. The initials here given are not the true ones. On October i2th, 1888, Mr. J. gave me viva voce the following account of his experience in the X. Library, in 1884, which I took down from memory next day, and which he revised and corrected : —

In 1880 I succeeded a Mr. Q. as librarian of the X. Library. I had never seen Mr. Q., nor any photograph or likeness of him, when the following incidents occurred. I may, of course, have heard the library assistants describe his appearance, though I have no recollection of this. I was sitting alone in the library one evening late in March, 1884, finishing some work after hours, when it suddenly occurred to me that I should miss the last train to H., where I was then living, if I did not make haste. It was then 10.55, and the last train left X. at 11.5. I gathered up some books in one hand, took the lamp in the other, and prepared to leave the librarian's room, which communicated by a passage with the main room of the library. As my lamp illumined this passage, I saw apparently at the further end of it a man's face. I instantly thought a thief had got into the library. This was by no means impossible, and the probability of it had occurred to me before. I turned back into my room, put down the books, and took a revolver from the safe, and, holding the lamp cautiously behind me, I made my way along the passage — which had a corner, behind which I thought my thief might be lying in wait— into the main room. Here I saw no one, but the room was large and encumbered with bookcases. I called out loudly to the intruder to show himself several times, more with the hope of attracting a passing policeman than of drawing the intruder. Then I saw a face looking round one of the bookcases. I say looking round, but it had an odd appearance as if the body were in the bookcase, as the face came so closely to the edge and I could see no body. The face was pallid and hairless, and the orbits of the eyes were very deep. I advanced towards it, and as I did so I saw an old man with high shoulders seem to rotate out of the end of the bookcase, and with his back towards me and with a shuffling gait walk rather quickly from the bookcase to the door of a small lavatory, which opened from the library and had no other access. I heard no noise. I followed the man at once into the lavatory ; and to my extreme surprise found no one there. I examined the window (about 14 in. X 12 in.), and found it closed and fastened. I opened it and looked out. It opened into a well, the bottom of which, ten feet below, was a sky-light, and the top open to the sky some twenty feet above. It was in the middle of the building, and no one could have dropped into it without smashing the glass nor climbed out of it without a ladder — but no one was there. Nor had there been anything like time for a man to get out of the window, as I followed the intruder instantly. Completely mystified, I even looked into the little cupboard under the fixed basin. There was nowhere hiding for a child, and I confess I began to experience for the first time what novelists describe as an " eerie " feeling.

I left the library, and found I had missed my train.

Next morning I mentioned what I had seen to a local clergyman, who on hearing my description, said, u Why, that's old Q.! " Soon after I saw a photo-

745A] TO CHAPTER VII 381

graph (from a drawing) of Q., and the resemblance was certainly striking. Q. had lost all his hair, eyebrows and all, from (I believe) a gunpowder accident. His walk was a peculiar, rapid, high-shouldered shuffle. Later inquiry proved he had died at about the time of year at which I saw the figure.

I have no theory as to this occurrence, and have never given special attention to such matters. I have only on one other occasion seen a phantasmal figure [that of his mother, seen when he was a boy of ten].

When I saw the figure of [Q.] I was in good health and spirits.

The evidential value of the above account is enhanced by the fact that the principal assistant in the library, Mr. R., and a junior clerk, Mr. P., independently witnessed a singular phenomenon, thus described by Mr. R. in 1889 :—

A few years ago I was engaged in a large building in the , and during

the busy times was often there till late in the evening. On one particular night I was at work along with a junior clerk till about I r P.M., in the room marked A on the annexed sketch [sketch omitted]. All the lights in the place had been out for hours except those in the room which we occupied. Before leaving we turned out the gas. We then looked into the fireplace, but not a spark was to be seen. The night was very dark, but being thoroughly accustomed to the place we carried no light. On reaching the bottom of the staircase (B), I happened to look up ; when, to my surprise, the room which we had just left appeared to be lighted. I turned to my companion and pointed out the light, and sent him back to see what was wrong. He went at once and I stood looking through the open door, but I was not a little astonished to see that as soon as he got within a few yards of the room the light went out quite suddenly. My companion, from the position he was in at the moment, could not see the light go out, but on his reaching the door everything was in total darkness. He entered, however, and when he returned, reported that both gas and fire were completely out. The light in the daytime was got by means of a glass roof, there being no windows on the sides of the room, and the night in question was so dark that the moon shining through the roof was out of the question. Although I have often been in the same room till long after dark, both before and since, I have never seen anything unusual at any other time.

Mr. P. endorses this : " I confirm the foregoing statement." Mr. R. states that he has never had any other hallucination. The light was seen after the phantom ; but those who saw the light were not aware that the phantom had been seen, for Mr. J. mentioned the circumstance only to his wife and to one other friend (who has confirmed to us the fact that it was mentioned to him), and he was naturally particularly careful to give no hint of the matter to his assistants in the library.

745 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. no. The narrative is written by General Sir Arthur Becher, of St. Faith's Mede, Winchester.

April \\th, 1884.

General Sir A. Becher, who held a high appointment on the Staff in India, went, accompanied by his son and A.D.C., to the Hill Station of Kussowlie,

about March 1867, to examine a house he had secured for his family to reside in during the approaching hot season. They both slept in the house that night. During the night the General awoke suddenly and saw the figure of a native woman standing near his bed, and close to an open door which led into a bathroom. He called out, " Who are you ? " and jumped out of bed, when the figure retreated into the bath-room, and in following it the General found the outer door locked and the figure had disappeared.

He went to bed again, and in the morning he wrote in pencil on a door-post, " Saw a ghost," but he did not mention the circumstance to his wife.

A few days after, the General and his family took possession of the house for the season, and Lady Becher used the room the General had slept in for her dressing-room. About 7 P.M. on the first evening of their arrival, Lady Becher was dressing for dinner, and on going to a wardrobe (near the bath-room door) to take out a dress, she saw, standing close by and within the bath-room, a native woman, and, for the moment thinking it was her own ayah, asked her "what she wanted," as Lady Becher never allowed a servant in her room while dressing. The figure then disappeared by the same door as on the former occasion, which, as before, was found locked! Lady Becher was not much alarmed, but felt that something unusual had occurred, and at dinner mentioned the event to the General and his son, when the General repeated what had occurred to him on the former occasion. That same night their youngest son, a boy about eight years of age, was sleeping in the same room as his father arid mother, his bed facing an open door leading into the dressing-room and bath-room, before mentioned, and in the middle of the night the boy started up in his bed in a frightened attitude and called out, " What do you want, ayah? what do you want?" in Hindustani, evidently seeing a female figure in the dressing-room near his bed. His mother quieted him and he fell asleep, and the figure was not seen by us on that occasion, nor was it ever again seen, though we lived for months in the house. But it confirmed our feeling that the same woman had appeared to us all three, and on inquiry from other occupants we learned that it was a frequent apparition on the first night or so of the house being occupied.

A native Hill, or Cashmere woman, very fair and handsome, had been murdered some years before in a hut a few yards below the house, and immediately under the door leading into the bath and dressing-room, through which, on all three occasions, the figure had entered and disappeared. My son sleeping in another side of the house never saw it.

I could give the names of some other subsequent occupants who have told us much the same story.

Subsequently Sir Arthur Becher writes : —

WINCHESTER, May i\th, 1884.

I write to say Lady Becher does not desire to write anything more personally on the subject of the " Ghost Story " I before detailed, as she says my account of it was given in connection with and entirely in accordance with her recollection of the circumstances. The woman appeared to me in the night, and in the ordinary light of a room without any blinds or shutters.

In answer to inquiries, he further tells us that the bath-room door was locked on the inside ; that the rooms were on the ground floor ; but that

745B] TO CHAPTER VII 383

there was no exit but by the doors referred to. Also that the child had certainly not heard of the ghost before he saw it.

745 B. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 178. The following narrative was sent to us with the true names, but with a request to conceal them, and some local details, on account of the painful nature of the incident described. Our informant, whom I will call Mrs. M., writes under date December i5th, 1891.

Before relating my experience of having seen a ghost, I should like my readers thoroughly to understand that I had not the slightest idea that the house in which my husband and I were living was haunted, or that the family residing there for many years before us had had any family troubles. The house was delightfully situated [&c.]. The house being partly new and partly old, we occupied the old part for our sleeping apartments. There were two staircases leading to them, with a landing and window, adjoining a morning sitting-room. One night on retiring to my bedroom about 1 1 o'clock, I thought I heard a peculiar moaning sound, and some one sobbing as if in great distress of mind. I listened very attentively, and still it continued ; so I raised the gas in my bedroom, and then went to the landing window of which I have spoken, drew the blind aside ; and there on the grass was a very beautiful young girl in a kneeling posture before a soldier, in a general's uniform, sobbing, and clasping her hands together, entreating for pardon ; but, alas ! he only waved her away from him. So much did I feel for the girl, that without a moment's hesitation I ran down the staircase to the door opening upon the lawn, and begged her to come in and tell me her sorrow. The figures then disappeared ! Not in the least nervous did I feel then ; — went again to my bedroom, took a sheet of writing-paper and wrote down what I had seen. [Mrs. M. has found and sent us this paper. The following words are written in pencil on a half sheet of notepaper: " March 13th, 1886. Have just seen visions on lawn :— a soldier in general's uniform,— a young lady kneeling to him. 11.40 P.M."] My husband was away from home when this event occurred, but a lady friend was staying with me, so I went to her bedroom and told her that I had been rather frightened with some noises ;— could I stay with her a little while ? A few days afterwards I found myself in a very nervous state ; but it seemed so strange that I was not frightened at the time.

It appears the story is only too true. The youngest daughter of this very old, proud family had had an illegitimate child ; and her parents and relatives would not recognise her again, and she died broken-hearted. The soldier was a near relative (also a connection of my husband's) ; and it was in vain she tried to gain his— the soldier's— forgiveness. [In a subsequent letter Sir X. Y.'s career is described. He was a distinguished officer.]

So vivid was my remembrance of the features of the soldier that some months after the occurrence, when I happened to be calling with my husband at a house where there was a portrait of him, I stepped before it and said : " Why, look ! There is the General ! " And sure enough it was.

In a subsequent letter Mrs. M. writes :—

I did see the figures on the lawn after opening the door leading on to the lawn ; and they by no means disappeared instantly, but more like a dissolving view, viz., gradually ; and I did not leave the door until they had passed away.

It was impossible for any real persons to act such a scene. . . . The General was born and died in [the house where I saw him]. ... I was not aware that the portrait of the General was in that room [where I saw it] ; it was the first time I had been in that room. The misfortune to the poor girl happened in 1847 or 1848.

Mrs. M. then mentions that a respectable local tradesman, hearing of the incident, remarked : " That is not an uncommon thing to see her about the place, poor soul ! She was a badly used girl."

Mr. M. writes as follows, under date December 23rd, 1891 : —

I have seen my wife's letter in regard to the recognition of Sir X. Y.'s picture

at . Nothing was said by me to her on the subject ; but knowing the

portrait to be a remarkably good likeness I proposed calling at the house [which was that of a nephew of Sir X. Y.'s], being anxious to see what effect it would have on my wife. Immediately on entering the room she almost staggered back, and turned pale, saying — looking hard at the picture — " Why, there's the General ! " . . . Being a connection of the family, I knew all about the people, but my wife was then a stranger, and I had never mentioned such things to her ; in fact, they had been almost forgotten.

This case may remind us of Gurney's description of a somewhat similar vision (that quoted in 733 B), a suggesting the survival of a mere image, — what I have termed a veridical after-image, — of past events or emotions with no active counterpart in the present. We are, indeed, always uncertain as to the degree of the deceased person's active participation in post-mortem phantasms, — as to the relation of such manifestations to the central current of his continuing individuality. But it is in dealing with these persistent pictures of a bygone earth-scene that this perplexity reaches its climax. They may, as I have already said, be the mere dreams of the dead ; — affording no true indication of the point which the deceased person's knowledge or emotion has really reached.

745 C. In each of the two next cases the interval after death was considerable, and the percipient was an absolute stranger to the deceased. This condition must, of course, usually involve the disadvantage that the identification of the appearance with a particular person can be based only on the percipient's subsequent description of what he had seen. But in the case which I shall quote first, this sort of identification was reinforced by the percipient's recognition of a photograph of the deceased. The account, taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 416, comes from Mr. John E. Husbands, of Melbourne House, Town Hall Square, Grimsby.

September \$th> 1886.

DEAR SIR, — The facts are simply these. I was sleeping in a hotel in Madeira in January 1885. It was a bright moonlight night. The windows were open and the blinds up. I felt some one was in my room. On opening my eyes, I saw a young fellow about twenty-five, dressed in flannels, standing at the side of my bed and pointing with the first finger of his right hand to the

745C] TO CHAPTER VII 385

place I was lying. I lay for some seconds to convince myself of some one being really there. I then sat up and looked at him. 1 saw his features so plainly that I recognised them in a photograph which was shown me some days after. I asked him what he wanted ; he did not speak, but his eyes and hand seemed to tell me I was in his place. As he did not answer, I struck out at him with my fist as I sat up, but did not reach him, and as I was going to spring out of bed he slowly vanished through the door, which was shut, keeping his eyes upon me all the time.

Upon inquiry I found that the young fellow who appeared to me died in that room I was occupying. . . . JOHN E. HUSBANDS.

The following letters are from Miss Falkner, of Church Terrace, Wisbech, who was resident at the hotel when the above incident happened.

October StA, 1886.

The figure that Mr. Husbands saw while in Madeira was that of a young fellow who died unexpectedly months previously, in the room which Mr. Husbands was occupying. Curiously enough, Mr. H. had never heard of him or his death. He told me the story the morning after he had seen the figure, and I recognised the young fellow from the description. It impressed me very much, but I did not mention it to him or any one. I loitered about until I heard Mr. Husbands tell the same tale to my brother; we left Mr. H. and said simultaneously, " He has seen Mr. D."

No more was said on the subject for days; then I abruptly showed the photograph. Mr. Husbands said at once, " That is the young fellow who appeared to me the other night, but he was dressed differently " — describing a dress he often wore — " cricket suit (or tennis) fastened at the neck with sailor knot." I must say that Mr. Husbands is a most practical man, and the very last one would expect " a spirit " to visit. K. FALKNER.

October 2oth, 1886.

I enclose you photograph and an extract from my sister-in-law's letter, which I received this morning, as it will verify my statement. Mr. Husbands saw the figure either the 3rd or 4th of February 1885.

The people who had occupied the rooms had never told us if they had seen anything, so we may conclude they had not. K. FALKNER.

The following is Miss Falkner's copy of the passage in the letter : —

" You will see at back of Mr. du F 's photo the date of his decease

[January 2Qth, 1884]; and if you recollect 'the Motta Marques ' had his rooms from the February till the May or June of 1884, then Major Money at the commencement of 1885 season. Mr. Husbands had to take the room on February 2nd, 1885, as his was wanted. I am clear on all this, and remember his telling me the incident when he came to see my baby."

Gurney adds : —

I have received a full account of this case, viva voce, from both Mr.

Husbands and Miss Falkner. They are both thoroughly practical, and as far

removed as possible from a superstitious love of marvels ; nor had they any

previous interest in this or any other class of abnormal experiences. So far

VOL. n. 2 B

as I could judge, Mr. Husbands' view of himself is entirely correct— that he is the last person to give a spurious importance to anything that might befall him, or to allow facts to be distorted by imagination. As will be seen, his account of his vision preceded any knowledge on his part of the death which had occurred in the room. He has never had any other hallucination of the senses.

Another case much resembling this, but in which the evidence for identification of the figure is weaker, is that of Mrs. Lewin, in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 462.

745 D. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 466. In the following case it is possible that a real person may have been mistaken for an apparition, but the details, as reported, tell strongly against this view. The account is given by Mrs. Clerke, 68 Redcliffe Square, S.W.

In the autumn of 1872, I stayed at Sorrento with my two daughters, and established myself for some months at the Hotel Columella, which stands on the high road, within half a mile of the town. My suite of apartments consisted of a large drawing-room, ante-room, and three bedrooms ; it was shaped like the letter U, and each end opened on a large terrace. The hotel waskept by two men, Rafaelle and Angelo, and the service of the rooms was conducted by their wives, a family arrangement which worked harmoniously for the guests.

On the evening in question we left the dining-room before the tea was finished, anxious, after the heat of the day, to enjoy the freshness and beauty of the terrace. After a few moments, I returned to my bedroom to fetch a candlestick and a shawl, and so much disliked going that I loitered unreasonably after I said I would go. I entered the ante-room and passed through the long drawing-room, its porcelain tiling echoing my steps with a sharp creak, till I reached my bedroom door. One side of the door stood open; it was a doorway divided in two, or as the French say, a deux battants, and I resolved not to close it, as I perceived everything had been put in order for the night

I got my shawl and my candlestick, and was preparing to return through the drawing-room, when, on turning towards the half-open door, I saw it filled by the figure of an old woman. She stood motionless, silent, immovable, framed by the doorway, with an expression of despairing sadness, such as I had never seen before. I don't know why I was frightened, but some idea of its being an imbecile or mad woman flashed through my mind, and in an unreasoning panic I turned from the drawing-room door, with its melancholy figure, and fled through the bedrooms to the terrace. My daughter, on hearingof my fright, returned to the rooms, but all was in its wonted stillness ; nothing was to be seen.

The next morning I spoke to the women of the house of the old woman who had come to my room, as I thought she might be in some way connected with the establishment, and they were dismayed at my account of her, and assured me that there was no one answering the description in the house, perceived there was much consternation caused by my narration, but paid little attention to it at the time.

745 D] TO CHAPTER VII 387

A fortnight afterwards we had a'visit from the parish priest, a friend of our landlord, and the spiritual adviser of the family. At a loss for conversation, I told him of my visitor, who arrived punctually at 8 o'clock, " fora del de/unii" The padre listened to me with the greatest gravity, and said, after a pause : — " Madam, you have accurately described the old mistress of this house, who died, six months before you came, in the room over yours. The people of the hotel have been already with me about it ; it has caused them much anxiety lest you should leave, and they recognised in your description the old padrona, as she was called."

This explained to me various presents of fruit and special attentions I had received. Nothing more came of it, and I saw the apparition no more. In our walks we looked for even some semblance of the dress in which the woman appeared, but never saw it. Short as my glance towards her was, I could have painted her likeness had I been an artist. She was pale, of the thick pallor of age, cold grey eyes, straight nose, thick bands of yellowish grey hair crossing her forehead. She wore a lace cap with the border closely quilted all round, a white handkerchief crossed over her chest, and a long white apron. Her face was expressionless, but fixed and sad. I could not think she had any knowledge of where she was, or who stood before her, and certainly, for breaking through the barrier of the unseen, it was a most objectless visit.

I ought to mention that I had no knowledge of there having been such a person in existence until her likeness stood at my bedroom door.

KATE M. CLERKE.

In another letter Mrs. Clerke states that as far as she knew, the apparition had not been seen again, but that the women of the house were afraid afterwards of entering her room alone. She adds : —

The peculiarity of it is my literally describing a person whom I had never seen or known about. Every one was overwhelmed by the portraiture, even a lady who had seen the old mistress.

Mr. Podmore adds the following notes of an interview with Mrs. Clerke.

August i$th, 1884.

Called on Mrs. Clerke to-day. She told me that she had never believed in ghosts before, and now believed in very few besides her own. She was quite sure that the description she gave of the figure was detailed enough to be recognised. Indeed, the dress as she saw it, though like that actually worn by the old mistress, was not a common one in the district. Mrs. Clerke never saw one at all like it in Italy. When she saw the figure, the dress struck her a? being like that of an old Irish nurse of hers, and she told her daughter so, when she rejoined them, adding that the face was quite unlike the nurse's. Miss Clerke confirmed this statement to me.

Mrs. Clerke admitted that it would have been quite possible for the figure which she saw, had it been that of a real woman, to have escaped. She is, however, quite convinced that she saw a ghost ; partly because of the resemblance, partly because of the unreasonable terror which seized her when she saw the figure, for she is not a nervous woman naturally.

There were no noises or other disturbances in the house during their stay.

F. P.

747 A. The next case (taken from the/^z/r/z^/S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 27) is an instance of a kind of auditory hallucination, the hearing of music, that seems to occur much more rarely than the hearing of voices. Some similar cases — also associated with deaths — were published in Phantasms of the Living. (See vol. ii. pp. 221 and 223.) The fact that the sounds were heard collectively suggests at first sight that they may have been real — an explanation which it is always more difficult to exclude in auditory than in visual cases. But the whole circumstances, when closely examined, make this explanation an extremely unlikely one.

The following account was given by Miss Home, daughter of the percipient, in a letter to which Mrs. Home's signature was afterwards added, so that the account, though written in the third person, is really a first-hand one.

508 UNION STREET, ABERDEEN, November 25^, 1890.

It is nearly thirty years ago now, but it is as vividly impressed on her memory, as if it had happened yesterday.

She was sitting in the dining-room (in a self-contained house), which was behind the drawing-room, with Jamie, my eldest brother, on her knee, who was then a baby scarcely two years old. The nurse had gone out for the afternoon, and there was no one in the house except the maid downstairs. The doors of the dining-room and drawing-room both happened to be open at the time. All at once she heard the most divine music, very sad and sweet, which lasted for about two minutes, then gradually died away. My brother jumped from mamma's knee, exclaiming " Papa ! papa," and ran through to the drawing-room. Mamma felt as if she could not move and rang the bell for the servant, whom she told to go and see who was in the drawing-room. When she went into the room, she found my brother standing beside the piano and saying " No papa ! " Why the child should have exclaimed these words was that papa was very musical, and used often to go straight to the piano when he came home. Such was the impression on mamma that she noted the time to a minute, and six weeks after she received a letter saying her sister had died at the Cape, and the time corresponded exactly to the minute that she had heard the music. I may tell you that my aunt was a very fine musician.

[Miss] EMILY M. HORNE. (Signed) December iith, 1890. [MRS.] ELIZA HORNE.

In answer to further inquiries, Miss Home wrote : —

December nth, 1890.

I am sorry to say the note, which mamma took at the time, has been lost, though she had it for more than twenty years after the event occurred.

The name of my aunt was Mary Sophia Ingles, she died on the 2oth February 1861, at Durban, Natal. . . . Mamma bids me say that her note corresponded not only to the hour but to the minute of her sister's death.

This account is followed in the same Journal by another case of a collective hallucination of music heard a few hours after the funeral of a musician.

751 A. The following case is in some respects one of the most remark-

751 A] TO CHAPTER VII 389

able and best authenticated instances of " haunting" on record, although, as will be seen, the evidence for the identity of the apparition is inconclusive. The case was fully described in a paper entitled " Record of a Haunted House," by Miss R. C. Morton, in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 311-332. Besides the account of the principal percipient, MissR. C. Morton, the paper contains independent first-hand statements from six other witnesses, — a friend, Miss Campbell, a sister and brother of Miss Morton's who lived in the house, and a married sister who visited there, and two former servants; also plans of the whole house. For the full details I must refer the reader to the original paper ; I have space here only for abbreviated extracts from Miss Morton's account.

An account of the case first came into my hands in December 1884, and this with Miss Morton's letters to her friend, Miss Campbell, are the earliest written records. On May ist, 1886, I called upon Captain Morton at the "haunted house," and afterwards visited him at intervals, and took notes of what he told me. I also saw Miss Morton and Miss E. Morton, and the two former servants whose accounts are given in Miss Morton's paper. The phenomena as seen or heard by all the witnesses were very uniform in character, even in the numerous instances where there had been no previous communication between the percipients. Miss Morton is a lady of scientific training, and was at the time her account was written (in April, 1892) preparing to be a physician. The name " Morton " is substituted for the real family name. With that exception the names and initials are the true ones.

After describing the house and garden, Miss Morton proceeds : —

It was built about the year 1860; the first occupant was Mr. S., an Anglo-Indian, who lived in it for about sixteen years. During this time, in the month of August, year uncertain, he lost his wife, to whom he was passionately attached, and to drown his grief took to drinking. About two years later, Mr. S. married again. His second wife, a Miss I. H., was in hopes of curing him of his intemperate habits, but instead she also took to drinking, and their married life was embittered by constant quarrels, frequently resulting in violent scenes. The chief subjects of dispute were the management of the children (two girls, and either one or two boys, all quite young) of the first Mrs. S., and the possession of her jewellery, to preserve which for her children, Mr. S. had some of the boards in the small front sitting-room taken up by a local carpenter and the jewels inserted in the receptacle so formed. Finally, a few months before Mr. S.'s death, on July i4th, 1876, his wife separated from him and went to live in Clifton. She was not present at the time of his death, nor, as far as is known, was she ever at the house afterwards. She died on September 23rd, 1878.

After Mr. S.'s death the house was bought by Mr. L., an elderly gentleman, who died rather suddenly within six months of going into it. The house then remained empty for some years — probably four.

During this time there is no direct evidence of haunting, but when inquiry was made later on much hearsay evidence was brought forward. In April 1882, the house was let by the representatives of the late Mr. L. to Captain

Morton, and it is during his tenancy (not yet terminated) that the appearances recorded have taken place.

