All I can at all remember about the Venus is that Mr. Watts told us one morning that a strange thing had happened, he having dreamt that the statue had been decapitated, and on going into the garden he found it was so, and that the head of the Venus had been cut clean off, and had rolled on to the path from the figure, which had been placed in the rockery among the ferns. He was very much astonished, as the dream was vivid, and he saw the headless statue as he had seen it in his dream. We could never explain how it happened, the head being as it were cut off. M. Adams.

421 C. Again this quasi-instinctive knowledge, realised on awaking from sleep, of the mutilation of a secluded statue may be compared with cases where a seer becomes aware of the position of a dead body, — sometimes of no special interest to himself.

From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 375.

The following case was borrowed originally from the Religio-Philosophical Journal, which described it as follows : —

" A prominent Chicago journalist states [in the Chicago TIdics] that his wife asked him one morning while still engaged in dressing, and before either of them had left their sleeping-room, if he knew any one named Edsale or Esdale. A negative reply was given, and then a ' Why do you ask ? ' She repHed : ' During the night I dreamed that I was on the lake shore, and found a coflin there with the name of Edsale or Esdale on it, and I am confident that some one of that name has recently been drowned there.' On opening the morning paper, the first item that attracted his attention was the report of the mysterious disappearance from his home in Hyde Park of a young man named Esdale. A few days afterwards the body of a young man was found on the lake shore."

In answer to Dr. Hodgson's inquiries, the late Colonel Bundy, who was then editor of the Religio-Philosophical Jotirnal, wrote : —

421 C] TO CHAPTER IV 383

I have known the gentleman and his wife mentioned in case No. 10, byreputation, for some fifteen years, and personally for six years. I obtained from each of them a report of the case when first published, October 14th, 1885, and each said that the statement was true as published in the Chicago Times o£ that date. I saw both of them September 23rd [1888], just prior to publishing the report, and read it to them; each declared it to be a true report of the occurrence. After receipt of Mr. Hodgson's letter I called to see what further information they could furnish in regard to the other points mentioned therein. After reading the letter, the gentleman, who is Mr. Franc B. Wilkie, the well-known editorial writer, and " Poliuto " of the Chicago Times, at once volunteered the following statement : —

Chicago, October 26th, 1S88. In October, 1885, I was one of the editorial writers on the Chicago Times, and wrote the item referred to. I am the individual mentioned therein. The date of the occurrence was about a week prior to the date of the report in the Times. I did not make any written memorandum on the day it occurred ; as the coincidence was so strong and distinctly marked, it made such an indelible impression on my mind, I did not forget any of the details during the time prior to writing the item. The name was one unknown to me previous to seeing it in the Chicago Daily News the morning referred to. I had not seen any reference to the disappearance before that morning. My wife said at the time, and still says, that she had never seen the name, or heard in any way of the disappearance. I was, of course, on the look-out for any report of the return of the young man, or of the finding of his body, and saw the account of the finding of the body in the Chicago papers a few days after the appearance of the first item in regard to his disappearance ; and then wrote the item for the Times of October 14th. I had at the time carefully examined the case in all its bearings, and although I may not agree with the various explanations or theories that might be offered in regard to it, I gave it as a curious coincidence and one that I knew to be true. Franc B. Wilkie.

To which Mrs. Wilkie adds the following : —

Having read the foregoing statement, I wish to certify to its truth. The dream was the cause of considerable comment for the few days following, as to the various features of the case, and whether the dream would be verified. My previous presentiments had been with reference to intimate friends, which made this one appear the more marked, and caused Mr. Wilkie to examine the matter more carefully in all its details.

The residence of the young man was eight miles from our home. I am not aware that we have ever known any of the young man's friends, or any one who knew him; and am certain that had the fact of his disappearance been mentioned in my hearing prior to the morning after the dream, I should have remembered the name, for I distinctly remembered that it seemed peculiar to me when I saw it in apparently large silver letters on the coffin.

Mrs. Franc B. Wilkie.

In the Chicago Daily Neivs of the morning of Wednesday, October 7th, 1885, appeared the following: —

W. E. Esdaile, in the employ of Robert Warren & Co., commission merchants in the Royal Insurance Building, and residing at 4523 Woodlawn

Avenue, Kenwood, has been missing since last Friday morning. Mr. Esdaile is a Canadian, unmarried, and twenty-seven years of age. His family resides at Montreal. He has been resting from business during the last week, and has spent much of his time strolling along the lake shore. As his accounts are all right, and there is no assignable reason for his disappearance, his friends fear that he has committed suicide. Overwork, it is thought, and an injury to his skull, received some years ago, may possibly have brought on insanity. The police are searching for him.

The following further evidence was obtained : —

The records in the coroner's office for Cook County, 111., show that inquest No. 941 was held on October loth, 1885, on the body of Wm. E. Esdaile, drowned October 2nd, in Lake Michigan, whether by accident or otherwise the jury were unable to determine.

Mr. Robert Warren, of the above-named firm of Robert Warren & Co., saj's that he landed in New York on his return from a trip to England on Monday, October 5th, 1885, and reached Chicago, Wednesday, p.m., October 7th ; that he did not hear of the disappearance of Mr. Esdaile until he reached home, and knows of no public announcement of the disappearance prior to that in the News of October 7th ; that, had there been any, he would very likely have heard of it between New York and Chicago, as he was on the look-out for news from Chicago.

Mr. Ward, who had charge of Mr. Warren's business during his absence, says that he was informed of Mr. Esdaile's disappearance on Friday evening, October 2nd. On Saturday, a.m., he examined the papers, &c., found in the young man's room ; found no evidence of suicidal intent, but indications that he was not in his right mind, and concluding that he might have wandered off, a detective was employed to search for him. The matter was kept very quiet, so as to prevent publication of sensational reports that would alarm his friends, and also render it unpleasant for the young man should he be found. Mr. Ward is not aware that any announcement of the matter was made in any papers before the item in the News of October 7th. They were following on the track of a young man, whose description corresponded somewhat with that of Mr. Esdaile, who had been seen at the waterworks of Hyde Park (and Kenwood), and then had travelled around the end of Lake Michigan into Indiana, and were expecting to find him very soon, when on Saturday morning, October loth, notice was received that the body of Esdaile had been found on the lake shore near his home.

In referring to the matter, the Chicago Tribune of Saturday, October loth, 1885, says: " It will be seen that the detectives are on a warm trail and will probably overtake the young man, who is believed to be insanely wandering about without aim or purpose." [There was thus no general belief that he had been drowned.']

A Chicago reporter, who resides at Kenwood, and was acquainted with Esdaile, says that he first heard of the disappearance through the school children, who said that the teacher had told them that Mr. Esdaile was missing, and requested them to tell their parents, and ask if any one had seen him. The reporter, knowing Mr. Ward, called on him to obtain the particulars for publication, but Mr. Ward objected, saying that Mr. Warren had been away for some time; that Mr. Esdaile had been practically in charge of the affairs of the

421 D] TO CHAPTER IV 385

firm; that Mr. Warren had just landed in New York, and a pubHc announcement of the matter in the papers would cause him unnecessary alarm. The reporter says that the item in the papers, Wednesday, October 7th, was the first public announcement of the matter.

421 D. In the following case, the dream conveys information concerning past business transactions, entirely unknown to the dreamer, and which, had the dream been true, might have seriously affected his interests. But the facts are so presented as to be wholly misleading ; and in a way in which no other assignable intelligence (unless it were a forgetful dream of the deceased debtor's or of the satisfied creditor's) would have been likely to have presented them. The dream, however, may have conceivably originated in the dreamer's subliminal perception of the amount in the ledger.

From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 403. The account was originally addressed to Professor James.

Law Offices of H. & P.,

New Orleans, ya«?/(z;'jc 8^/^, 1894.

My dear Sir, — In May 1889 I had purchased the residence property where I now live, and of course had looked into the title, as to conveyances and liens. This work was concluded, when one night I dreamed this dream.

I was walking through the business part of the city, and met our sheriff, who said, " I am going to sell that house and lot, corner of 2nd and Chestnut Streets,

for the claim of R. M v. J. C , for 446.50 dols." I was annoyed, of

course, thinking that there might have been some mistake in the search for judgment liens — and then I woke up.

J. C had been a former owner. On my way down to my office next

morning I stopped to see his son, W. C , — his successor in business, — and

as a kind of joke, told him my dream. As I told him his face lengthened visibly, and without saying anything, he. went to his ledger, and after looking at it said, "You made a slight mistake in figures — it was 444.50 dols." — and then, with a sort of awe, continued, " But with the interest, figured here in pencil, it

was just 446.50 dols." I should add that J. C had been embarrassed before

his death, but had settled up his debts, so I had no trouble. Now, had the claim been sued on, the sheriff and lien part of my dream had no truth, but the debt and amount were precise. I knew R. M very well, but never associated him in any way with J. C , nor had the shghtest reason, that I can

recall, to suspect that C had ever had any dealings with M , C

being "in cotton" and M " in sugar.'' W. W. Howe.

In answer to Professor James' inquiries, the following letter was

received : —

No. 54 Union Street, New Orleans, March \\th^ 1894.

Professor William James, — Dear Sir, — Your favour of the loth inst. is at hand, and in reply : The occurrence referred to was certainly quite startling, and it was about as follows : —

The heirs of my father, deceased, had sold a property here to Judge W. W.

H , and some time after the sale had been passed and completed and pur-

VOL. I. 2 B

chase price paid, Judge H called at our office one morning and said that

he had had a dream (probably the night before) which had annoyed him a little, although he was not disposed to attach any importance to it, but simply to satisfy a not-understood desire to do so, he had come around to mention it to me, and it was this : —

That his dream was that, notwithstanding his careful research of the title of the property and that all encumbrances found had been removed, there had

been presented to him for payment a judgment obtained by Mr. R. M for an

amount which he specified in dollars and cents. I remarked to him that it was ver}' remarkable indeed that that amount would vary very little from what a liability

would have been to Mr. M had it not been paid, and had drawn interest to

that date. I referred to data and computed the interest, and was, as said before, quite startled to find that there was no difference between the figures mentioned by him and what I found the liability to Mr. M would have been,

had it not been paid off. I regret very much that I did not make memorandum of this amount, and the date, so that it might have been given you explicitly and definitely, but did not, and without knowing the date, I cannot give even approximately the amount mentioned.

I told the Judge, however, that there was an inaccuracy in the dream, and

that was that Mr. M 's claim had never gone to judgment, nor had there

been any legal contention or contest about it, but that it was a liability that had been settled in the regular course of business at the proper time.

Wm. H. Chaffe.

421 E. The next case is again explicable on the supposition that the subliminal self of the dreamer perceived the positions of the vessels and gave the warning. Mr. Brighten is known to Mr. Podmore, — who concurs in what appears to be the estimate generally formed of that gentleman, namely, that he is a shrewd, unimaginative, practical man. The account is taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 400. Mr. Brighten writes : —

Argyle House, Southend-on-Sea, Dece77iber 6th, 1884.

I owned a 3S-ton schooner, and in August 1876, in very calm weather, I dropped anchor in the Thames at the North shore, opposite Gravesend, as it was impossible to get to the other side, there being no wind.

The current being exceedingly swift at that part we let out plenty of chain cable before going to bed. I had captain and crew of three men on board, besides visitors. Towards morning I found myself awake in my (owner's) cabin with the words ringing in my ears, "Wake, awake, you'll be run down." I waited a few moments, then dropped off to sleep, but was again awakened by the same words ringing in my ears. Upon this I leisurely put on some clothes and went on deck and found the tide rushing past very swiftly, and that we were enveloped in a dense fog, and all was calm and quiet in the early morning, and there was already some daylight. I paced the deck once or twice, then went below, undressed, got into my berth, and fell asleep, only to be again awakened by the same words. I then somewhat more hastily dressed, went on deck, and climbed some way up the rigging to get above the fog, and was soon in a bright, clear atmosphere, with the fog like a sea at my feet, when looking

421 F] TO CHAPTER IV 387

round I saw a large vessel bearing down directly upon us. I fell, rather than scrambled, out of the rigging, rushed to the forecastle, shouted to the captain^ who rushed on deck, explained all in a word or two; he ran to the tiller, unlashed it, put it hard aport : the swift current acting upon the rudder caused the boat to slew across and upward in the current, when on came the large vessel passing our side, and it would have cleared us, but her anchor which she was carrying (having lifted it in consequence of having heaved anchor at low tide with very little cable) caught in our chain, when she swung round and came alongside, fortunately, however, doing us very little damage. I at once jumped on her deck and woke up some men who appeared on deck in various stages of intoxication, who stupidly wanted to remain as they were, but by dint of coaxing and threatening in turn I induced them to take some turns at their capstan, which had the effect of freeing their anchor from my chain, and she soon left us and dropped her anchor a little lower down. I at once narrated the above facts to the captain, and next day informed my visitors of the voice to which we all owed our preservation. I cannot think that it was really a human voice, as in consequence of the fog no one could have seen the relative position of the vessels, and no other vessels were near us within half a mile or more. My visitors at once desired me to return to Greenhithe, and discontinued their trip.

Wm. E. Brighten.

I was one of the visitors on the occasion above referred to, and Mr. Brighten related the occurrence to us on the following day. Robert Parker.

421 F. The next case is analogous to the preceding one, and may also be explained by supposing that the subliminal self of the dreamer had some perception of the schooner and the shipwrecked crew. It is quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 5 70. It is not quite clear how much of Captain Scott's narrative was taken from contemporary notes, and probably no further evidence could be obtained as to this now.

Docmnent I. — From Bishop Hale. •..> > v)\

March gth, 1892.

The colony of Western Australia (called at the time the Swan River Settlement) was founded in 1829. Captain Scott must have gone there very shortly after that period.

In the year 1848, I being then Archdeacon of Adelaide, went to Western Australia in attendance upon the Bishop of Adelaide. Captain Scott showed great readiness to assist the Bishop, and both he and I received from him many acts of kindness.

He, one day, told me about his dreams and the circumstances connected therewith. He told it all with such animation and such varying expressions of face that he gave one the idea that the things he spoke of were passing vividly before his mind's eye as he described them.

I was, of course, greatly struck by the narrative, and said I should like very much indeed to have it in writing. He said at once that I should have it; he would have the copy of his log, which he had by him, transcribed for me. I received the MS. a few days afterwards.

His last illness was a long and wearisome one, and the old man was pleased when any friend would look in and sit with him for a time. I was

then Bishop of the Diocese, and I was aware that the clergyman of his parish (Fremantle), Mr. Bostock, was in the habit of sometimes taking his seat by the old man's bedside, in addition to the performance of the usual devotional services.

I never had upon my own mind the shghtest doubt about the truth of the narrative, but I was quite aware that some persons to whom I might chance to show it might feel doubtful about it, and it occurred to me that Mr. Bostock's friendly visits to the old man afforded an excellent opportunity for getting some declaration such as that which he did obtain.

Mathew B. Hale (Bishop).

Document II. — Captain Scott's Account.

Jinie \otk, 1825.

On the night of the 7th of June I dreamed that I saw a schooner, and apparently water-logged, with several men in her and a black man among them. On the 8th I dreamed the same and got up and started the mate up aloft. I stayed on deck until daylight. On the 9th the same dream occurred. Got up and altered the ship's course, having passed between Guadeloupe and Antigua, the day previous, and at 8 p.m. heavy squalls with heavy thunder and lightning ; shortened sail. Daylight made all sail, fine pleasant weather. On the loth, at 8 o'clock, altered the ship's course from W.S.W. to S W. two points for the purpose of ascertaining the true position of the Bird Islands, or to see if these really existed (as on my chart it was marked doubtful). I was at this time very uneasy in my mind, supposing that something was going to happen to my ship. I had related my dream to my mate and passengers, Don Joseph Sevarra, John Poingestre and William Richenburg, Esquires, merchants at Carthagena, who wrote the circumstances to the Humane Society and to their house in London.

On the morning of the loth, at 9.3 a.m., we were all at breakfast; the officer on deck called down the skylight and said that a squall was coming. I immediately repaired on deck to take in the small sails. On looking astern the ship where the squall was coming from, we saw a boat with a large flag flying on an oar, and a man standing up in the bow holding it. I immediately hove the ship to and took in all studding and small sails. My men that were aloft furling royals said that they could see a number of men and that they thought it was a pirate. One of the men stated that was just the way that he was taken the year previous in the same seas. My passengers and officers then requested me to keep the ship away, which I did, they stating that if they should turn out to be pirates, I should not recover my insurance for my ship. I then kept her away under her reefed sails and went down to breakfast. After my entering my cabin, I felt very uneasy and returned to the state-room. Immediately my dream came forcibly in my mind. I then put two pistols and my cutlass by my side and went on deck, called all hands on deck, and again hove the ship to and desired Mr. Poingestre to take the wheel and steer the ship. I then ordered the first officer to lower his boat down and go and see what the boat was. I then ordered the guns to be loaded, made sail, and made a tack towards the boats. On my coming up with them, found that my mate had taken the captain and his men out of the boat and taken them into his. Captain Jellard's boat having a great quantity

421 F] TO CHAPTER IV 389

of water in, very nearly up to the thwarts, also a large shark, and had her in tow.

After getting Captain Jellard on board, and his men, who were in a very weak state, not able to speak with the exception of the black man, from him I got all the particulars, as follows : It appeared that they belonged to the schooner James Hambleton, of Grenada, from America, bound to Grenada, and being short of water, having a very long passage through light winds, were going on shore for water on the Island of Saints, it then being calm. After leaving their ship a light breeze sprang up and the schooner kept her ground, but the boat pulling in a different direction and the current running so strong that the boat's crew became quite exhausted. That at daylight they had the mortification of seeing the schooner inshore of them as far as they could see from the boat, the boat still drifting farther from land and ship until they lost sight of her altogether. The following day they had a very dreadful time of it; it blew a heavy gale, with thunder and hghtning; they had to make fast the oars, mast, and sail to the painter of the boat, and let the boat drift to break off the sea that was running. During all this time they had no water or anything to eat. The following day was nearly calm, very' light winds and a hot scorching sun : being in the latitude of 16° 21', longitude 63° 14', their sufferings were very great all day. Both captain and men tore their clothes off their backs and poured water on themselves to keep them cool. On the morning that I discovered them the black man appealed to his God, saying, " If God hear black man as well as white man, pray send me fish or shark for massa to eat, no let him die." The all-merciful Father heard his prayers and sent him a large shark, which was lying in the boat on her being brought alongside, of which they had drunk the blood and eaten part of the flesh. I immediately knocked in the head of a waterpuncheon and made them a warm bath and put them severally into it for the purpose of cooling them and getting some parts of their shirts off their skin which were sticking to their backs, their skin being all blistered with the sun and salt water. I gave them a little tea to moisten their mouths every few minutes, until some of them prayed for food and asked for some biscuit ; and gave them rice-water and barley-water occasionally. After a good sleep Captain Jellard sent for me below and wished to speak to me. On searching his pockets to see if the black man had told the truth about his ship, I found his register and manifest of his cargo. This satisfied me all was correct, and that they were not pirates. During our conversation I found that I had been in company with Captain Jellard in St. John's, Newfoundland, in the year 1814, he then commanding a fine schooner called the Catch Me Who Can, belonging to Spuryar & Co., of Cool.

In a few days they all came round. I gave them up to the British Consul at Carthagena and requested him to lose no time to send them on, as we feared that something would be brought against the mate of the schooner, Captain Jellard having all his papers with him. On my arrival in England, I found that Captain Jellard only arrived there three days previous to the execution of his mate and remaining three men, they having been tried for murdering their captain and the other three men. Had not the Consul sent them over in the packet to Jamaica, and requested the admiral to send them up to Grenada with all despatch, these four poor souls would have lost their lives innocently. [Signed] Daniel Scott,

Commanding the Brig Ocean from [illegible] bound to Carthagena.

I, George James Bostock, Chaplain of Fremantle, W. Australia, do hereby certify that I attended Daniel Scott in his last illness, February 1865, wherein he repeated the substance of the above as most solemnly true, and ascribed the whole event to the direct guidance of an over-ruling Providence.

[Signed] George J. Bostock.

[We have endeavoured to trace the log-book referred to in Bishop Hale's letter, but without success. Inquiries have been made through Lloyd's Shipping Agency and the Board of Trade, but no log dated as far back as 1825 can be produced; it was not till 1854 that trading vessels were compelled to render official log-books.]

421 G. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 140. The following statement of experiences by Miss Luke was sent to us by Dr. R. Osgood Mason, of New York, author of Telepathy and the Subliminal Self . Dr. Mason wrote on January 9th, 1896, concerning Miss Luke : "I have two or three recent dreams or night visions and their fulfilment, of which she told me only a few days since, and which can be dated and substantiated." The statement was finally sent apparently in September 1896.

Miss Mary Luke, 202 Hudson Street, New York City, the percipient in the following cases of veridical dreams, has been very well known to me for more than fifteen years, I having been the attending physician in the family during that time. Her own health, however, has been almost perfect ; she is free from all hysterical or nervous symptoms ; in fact, I have hardly had occasion to prescribe for her during this whole period. She is a busy, energetic, self-reliant, but very kind-hearted woman, now nearly forty years of age, though looking at least ten years younger. She is unmarried.

She has from childhood been an inveterate somnambulist, walking almost every night, until two years ago when I hypnotised her and suggested that she should not again leave her bed in her sleep. The effect was prompt and decided. She has never since that time walked nor even left her bed while asleep.

She is exceedingly impressionable, an^ seldom fails to receive definite and true ideas and impressions regarding people who come into her presence or with whom she sits — a faculty which she often exercises, but never for any remuneration. On one occasion a few years ago she varied from this rule, for charity. Being on a visit in a distant country village where she was quite unknown, during a church fair she was asked to occupy the gipsy tent and tell fortunes, a character for which her personal appearance as well as her peculiar psychical endowment especially fitted her. The first day she had the usual share of patronage, but on the second day — the accuracy of her delineations having become the talk of the town — there was a constant stream of visitors to her tent, and more than 300 dollars were realised for the charity.

She has had a large number of veridical dreams, but she was so ridiculed by her family on account of them that she seldom told them, especially not before their fulfilment, so they are not available for the Society for Psychical Research.

Within the past two years, however, since I have known something of her psychic experiences, the dream here related occurred, and fortunately [it was] related before the events were known. . . .

421 G] TO CHAPTER IV 391

I will give it substantially in her own language, as I took it down while she related it. I will premise that she occupies a three-storey and basement house. Her sister, Mrs. S., with her family, occupies the third floor; she rents the second floor to lodgers, and uses the first floor and basement for her own business. The second floor front, over her parlour, was occupied by a man and his wife, named L., who had been with her six months; they seemed very pleasant people, and she had no occasion to mistrust their honesty. The back room on the same floor was occupied by Mr. B., who had been her tenant for six years.

She says : —

On Wednesday, August 28th, 1895, I had been absent all day; I came in late in the evening and went directly to bed. I noticed nothing out of the way excepting that I missed a small and rather pretty alarm clock from the parlour mantel; I supposed, however, that my lodger Mr. B. had taken it, as he sometimes did if he wished to be aroused at a particular hour, and I thought no more about it.

That night I dreamed or rather seemed to see Mr. and Mrs. L.'s room in great disorder; Mr. and Mrs. L. were gone and everything belonging to them, and also everything of mine which was valuable was gone, and the house was robbed of valuables generally. The scene of the room was very vivid and exact.

In the morning I went directly up to my sister's apartment and asked her, "When have you seen Mrs. L. ? " She replied, " She was up here with me at three o'clock yesterday afternoon ; she brought up some refreshments and was particularly agreeable." I said at once, " I dreamed last night that she had gone and had robbed the house of its valuables, and had left the room in great disorder." My sister had not seen either of them nor heard any sound in their room after three o'clock. My sister, who had always been inclined to laugh at my dreams, exclaimed, "Your dreams are so queer, M., I cannot help feeling anxious." I went down to my own apartment on the first floor and listened for sounds of people moving overhead, but all was silent. I then went up to their room and rapped repeatedly, but got no reply. I then used my duplicate key and opened the door. The room was unoccupied and in great disorder ; all their own property, together with everything of value belonging to me, had disappeared, and the room presented the exact appearance in every respect that I had seen in my dream.

An examination of the house directly afterwards showed that they had taken all my jewellery and trinkets, and the little clock which I had missed the evening before. They had also taken a suit of new clothes and an umbrella from the room of their neighbour B. on the same floor.

Miss Luke adds : —

This is a perfectly correct account of my dream and its fulfilment.

Mary Luke.

Mrs. Stallings' Statement.

202 Hudson Street, New York, September ytk, 1896.

My sister Mary, known in Dr. Mason's statement as M. L., came upstairs

on Thursday morning, August 29th, 1895, and said to me, " When have you

seen Mrs. L. 1 " I said, " Not since three o'clock yesterday. She was up here

then, brought some refreshments, and was very agreeable." Mary then said, " I

dreamed last night that she had gone and had stripped the house of everything valuable. I saw the room empty and in disorder — everything valuable was taken away, both hers and mine. I have not heard a sound from them overhead this morning." I said, " Your dreams are so queer, Mary, I can't help feeling anxious." She went downstairs, and soon after went into the room and found it empty ; everything valuable was taken. Afterwards it was found that she had taken my sister's jewellery and trinkets, and also a suit of clothes and an umbrella from a lodger on the same floor. Henrietta Stallings.

In reply to inquiries, Dr. Mason wrote : —

New York, October.tk, 1896. My dear Dr. Hodgson, — . . . Regarding tracing the robbery. Miss Luke went to the office of the detective force, where she was treated so indifferently because there was '' nothing in it" for them, that she surprised them by giving them a piece of her mind and walked out. Afterwards, fearing she would make the matter public, they sent two or three times offering to take the matter up, but she would have nothing more to do with them. . . .

R. Osgood Mason.

421 H. The following case is taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiv. p. 279. It comes from Sir Lawrence Jones, Bart.; the account having been written on the day of the incident.

Ventnor, March 2yd, 1891.

I was called at eight this morning, and my letters left outside the door. I fell asleep again, and had what seemed a long and troublesome dream about a cheque which I had to fill up and sign. At nine I awoke, with a vivid recollection of my dream, got up, opened a packet of letters forwarded from home, and found among them a registered letter containing a cheque for a large sum, which I had to sign as trustee. L. J. J.

N.B. — I had no reason to expect the receipt of the cheque. The dream was not in any way concerned with the real cheque, but was rather my ineffectual attempts to draw a cheque properly on a blank sheet of paper. But the coincidence was very remarkable.

Lady Jones writes : —

April 1st, 1893. I can entirely corroborate from my own memory the story of my husband's dream about the cheque. Evelyn M. Jones.

Sir Lawrence Jones writes later : —

Cranmer Hall, Fakenham, April ist, 1893. I related my dream to Lady Jones immediately after opening my letter. This dream was unusually vivid, and the impression of it remained with me much longer than usual. I dream a good deal, but rarely remember anything except in the case of morning dreams, when I have woken early and gone to sleep again.

421 J. The next case (quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiv. p. 280) rests on specially good evidence, since it was noted before verification, while the full account of it was written from notes made immedi-

421 J] TO CHAPTER IV 393

ately after by Professor A. Alexander, of Rio Janeiro. He says, in sending the account : —

February ^th, 1896. My informant, Senhor Nascimento, is a life member of the " Society of Arts," and received his technical education in London.

Rio, February yd, 1896. A recent case of apparent clairvoyance has been communicated to me by a Brazilian engineer, called Jos^ Custodio Fernandes do Nascimento, who is himself the percipient. I have been acquainted with this gentleman for several years, and know him to be a careful and trustworthy witness. It will be seen that he has enabled me also to give direct testimony to the care with which he has provided for proper evidence.

In thus proceeding, he endeavours to atone for former laxness, inasmuch as some seven or eight years ago he failed to take adequate note of a probably veridical dream, in which he seemed to be trying to escape with his family from the deck of a burning vessel, and to witness the jumping overboard of a man whose clothes had caught fire. A telegram from a northern Brazilian port subsequently gave the news that about that time fire had broken out on board a certain vessel, and that on the occasion some individual had in reality jumped into the sea, more or less in the manner perceived in the dream.

Shortly after three p.m. on Saturday, January nth, 1896, I met Senhor Nascimento in the Rua do Ouvidor in this city, and he at once gave me verbal particulars of a second experience of the kind, which he had had on that very date.

He stated that, as the result of slackness in his business, he had lately been straitened for want of means, and had felt this impecuniosity all the more that his eldest daughter is shortly to be married to the son of a Don J., a merchant resident in Montevideo.

On the preceding evening of the loth, the young man J. came to visit \i\s fiancee at the usual hour, and mentioned that a letter from his father was waiting for Senhor Nascimento in the Rua da Alfandega at the firm of Jorge Dias Brothers, the correspondents in Rio of Don J. He had not brought it himself, as it was to be delivered to Senhor Nascimento personally.

My informant awoke on the following morning at an early hour, and fell again into a state of slumber between five and six o'clock. He then dreamt that he had called at Dias Brothers, and that they handed him a present from Don J. of one conto of reis (about ^40), which he was so glad to receive that he embraced the members of that firm with an eflTusion of tears. In the dream he seemed to count the money.

He rose with the conviction that his vision would be realised, although no ordinary reasons concurred to make him suppose that such would be the case. This belief led him to write down on a slip of paper (which is herewith enclosed) the following note : —

" Sonhei que ao ir receber a carta dos Senhores Jorge Dias estes me entregaram a somma de i : 000 $000 de reis, e que eu commovido abracei-os chorando." 11-1-96.

(" I dreamt that on going to receive the letter from Senhores Jorge Dias, the latter dehvered to me the sum of i : 000 $000 of reis, and that I, being moved, embraced them with tears." 11-1-96.)

Senhor Nascimento said nothing to his wife or children about the dream. He merely put the above note under other papers in a pigeon-hole of his bureau, which he then locked. He went into town; called at half-past ten at the house of Jorge Dias Brothers, and received the letter, which he afterwards opened in the street. This letter he showed to me when we met. In it Don J. makes a present of one conto of reis to his future daughter-in-law, and instructs Senhor Nascimento to draw the money at the house of John Moore & Co. of this city. This sum Senhor Nascimento had duly received about i o'clock on that day, and he invited me to accompany him home to verify what he had stated regarding the note taken in the morning. The conto of reis was showa to me; the bureau was opened in my presence, and the slip of paper was taken out of the pigeon-hole and immediately delivered into my keeping.

On Monday the 13th, I returned for further information. By direct questioning, Senhor Nascimento had learnt that his friends, the Dias Brothers, were not aware of the contents of the letter at the time of its receipt. A similar declaration was made in my hearing by the young man J., who added, however, that he had afterwards {i.e. at an hour later than that of the dream) been informed by a brother of his what their father had done.

John Moore & Co. are not personally known to my informant. J.'s brother has no other connection with him than that established by the coming union between the families, and yet the dream coincided with the arrival of the letter at Rio and not with its despatch from Montevideo. The circumstances of the case, then, seem to render the explanation by clairvoyance more plausible than that by telepathy.

Senhor Nascimento states that, although he sometimes has waking presentiments, the two dreams above narrated are the only vivid ones of the kind he recollects having had in his experience. He does not remember ever receiving similarly positive indications in a vision which have remained unfulfilled.

(The above is written out from notes taken by me on the date of the occurrence.) A. Alexander.

Professor Alexander's account is confirmed as follows by the percipient : —

Rio, February yd, 1896. I can testify to the fulness and exactness of all the details above given. I still have a vivid remembrance of the dream of the burning vessel, the confirmation of which came on the same day. A man was reported to have jumped overboard with his clothes on fire, just as I saw him in my dream.

I reside at No. 33 Travessa de Sao Salvador, Haddock Lobo, half-an-hour's journey from town in the tramcars, and I never come home during the course of the day.

Jose C. Fernandes do Nascimento.

The original note, made by Senhor Nascimento on the morning after his dream and before its verification, was sent with the narrative by Professor Alexander.

422 A, The following account (taken from Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 202) comes from Mrs. West, of Hildegarde, Furness Road, Eastbourne. It was written in 1883.

422 A] TO CHAPTER IV 395

My father and brother were on a journey during the winter. I was expecting them home, without knowing the exact day of their return. The date, to the best of my recollection, was the winter of 1871-72. I had gone to bed at my usual time, about 11 p. M. Some time in the night I had a vivid dream, which made a great impression on me. I dreamt I was looking out of a window, when I saw father driving in a Spids sledge, followed in another by my brother. They had to pass a cross-road, on which another traveller was driving very fast, also in a sledge with one horse. Father seemed to drive on without observing the other fellow, who would without fail have driven over father if he had not made his horse rear, so that I saw my father drive under the hoofs of the horse. Every moment I expected the horse would fall down and crush him. I called out " Father ! father ! " and woke in a great fright. The next morning my father and brother returned. I said to him, " I am so glad to see you arrive quite safely, as I had such a dreadful dream about you last night." My brother said, " You could not have been in greater fright about him than I was," and then he related to me what had happened, which tallied exactly with my dream. My brother in his fright, when he saw the feet of the horse over father's head, called out, " Oh ! father, father ! "

I have never had any other dream of this kind, nor do I remember ever to have had another dream of an accident happening to any one in whom I was interested. I often dream of people, and when this happens I generally expect to receive a letter from them, or to hear of them in the course of the next day. I dreamt of Mrs. G. Bidder the night before I received her letter asking me for an account of this dream ; and I told Mr. West, before we went down to breakfast, that I should have a letter that day from her. I had no other reason to expect a letter from her, nor had I received one for some time, I should think some years, previously. Hilda West.

Mrs. West's father, Sir John Crowe, late Consul-General for Norway, is since dead ; but her brother, Mr. Septimus Crowe, of Librola, Mary's Hill Road, Shortlands, sends us the following confirmation : —

I remember vividly, on my return once with my father from a trip to the North of Norway in the winter time, my sister meeting us at the hall door as we entered, and exclaiming how pleased she was to see us, and that we were safe, as she said at once to me that she had had such an unpleasant dream the evening before. I said, "What was it.?" She then minutely explained to me the dream, as she related it to you, and which is in accordance with the facts. It naturally astonished my father and myself a good deal, that she so vividly in her sleep saw exactly what happened, and I should say, too, she dreamt it at the very time it happened, about 11.30 p.m. Septimus Crowe.

1 Our friend Mrs. Bidder, the wife of Mr. G. Bidder, Q.C., sends us the following recollection of the narrative as told at her table by Mr. S. Crowe, who is her husband's brother-in-law.

"Ravensbury Park, Mitcham, Surrey, " \oth January 1883.

"The following was related at our table by my husband's brother-in-law, Mr. Septimus Crowe. His father, since dead, was Sir John Crowe, Consul-General for Norway.

" ' My father and I were travelling one winter in Norway. We had our carrioles as sledges, and my father drove first, I following. One day we were driving very quickly

422 B. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. v, p. 40. The following narrative was sent to us by the Right Hon. Sir John Drummond Hay, K.C.B., G.C.M.G., who was for many years H.M.'s Minister in Marocco and resided at Tangier.

September i6tk, 1889. In the year 1879 my son Robert Drummond Hay resided at Mogodor with his family, where he was at that time Consul. It was in the month of February. I had lately received good accounts of my son and his family ; I was also in perfect health. About i a.m. (I forget the exact day in February), whilst sleeping soundly [at Tangier], I was woke by hearing distinctly the voice of my daughter-in-law, who was with her husband at Mogodor, saying in a clear, but distressed tone of voice, "Oh, I wish papa only knew that Robert is ill." There was a night lamp in the room. I sat up and listened, looking around the room, but there was no one except my wife, sleeping quietly in bed. I listened for some seconds, expecting to hear footsteps outside, but complete stillness prevailed, so I lay down again, thanking God that the voice which woke me was a hallucination. I had hardly closed my eyes when I heard the same voice and words, upon which I woke Lady Drummond Hay, and told her what had occurred, and got up and went into my study, adjoining the bedroom, and noted it in my diary. Next morning I related what had happened to my daughter, saying that, though I did not believe in dreams, I felt anxious for tidings from Mogodor. That port, as you will see in the map, is about 300 miles south of Tangier. A few days after this incident a letter arrived from my daughter-in-law, Mrs. R. Drummond Hay, telling us that my son was seriously ill with typhoid fever and mentioning the night during which he had been delirious. Much struck by the coincidence that it was the same night I had heard her voice, I wrote to tell her what had happened. She replied, the following post, that in her distress at seeing her husband so dangerously ill, and from being alone in a distant land, she had made use of the precise words which had startled me from sleep, and had repeated them. As it may be of interest for you to receive a corroboration of what I have related from the persons I have mentioned, who happen to be with me at this date, they also sign to affirm the accuracy of all I have related.

When I resigned, in 1886, I destroyed, unfortunately, a number of my diaries and amongst them that of 1879, or I should have been able to state the day, and might have sent you the leaf on which I noted the incident. . . .

( J. H. Drummond Hay.

Siarned

Annette Drummond Hay. EuPHEMiA Drummond Hay. Alice Drummond Hay.

down a steep hill, at the bottom of which ran a road, at right angles with the one we were on. As we neared the bottom of the hill we saw a carriole, going as quickly as ourselves, just ready to cross our path. My father reined in suddenly, his horse reared and fell over, and I could not, at first, see whether he was hurt or not. He, luckily, had sustained no injury, and in due time we reached home. My sister, on our approach, rushed out, exclaiming : " Then you are not hurt .'' I saw the horse rear, but I could not see whether you were hurt or not."' "

It will be seen that if Mrs. Bidder's report is strictly accurate, there is a discrepancy as to which of the two horses it was that reared. But even eye-witnesses of a sudden and confusing accident might afterwards differ in such a point as this.

424 A] TO CHAPTER IV 397

424 A. From \h.t Journal S.P.R., vol. v. p. 61. The account comes from Mr, Edward Crewdson, jun., of Tuckerville, Chester Co., Nebraska, U.S.A.

Mr. Crewdson explains that at the time of the occurrence described he owned two ranches in Nebraska, called the "East" and "West" ranches. On the former he resided with his family. The other consisted of three sections, partially separated from one another by a section of Government land. In order to acquire a piece of this to connect two of his sections, certain conditions were necessary, of which continuous residence for six months was one. He was building a "frame house" there for this purpose, and meanwhile had a sod-house built and went over every week with one or two of his three sons to stay a night or two.

He continues : —

November toth, 1889.

This brings me to about March 20th, 1885. My wife expected to have a baby towards the end of April. March 20th (as nearly as I can remember), I was leaving the East Ranche as usual, with blankets, food, &c., for the two eldest boys and myself, when the youngest boy Hugh came running out crying and begged to be taken. I forgot to mention that the three girls were at school in England. Mrs. Crewdson was standing by the buckboard, bidding us goodbye, and said, " Oh yes, do take Hughie, and I will have a thorough rest till you come back." So Hughie jumped up and we left. The West Ranche is fifteen miles from the East, and we got there about 6.30. I cooked our supper, had a pipe, and 1 suppose by 9.30 or 10 we were all sound asleep.

How long I slept I could not tell, but I was awakened by Hughie, who was sleeping with me, sitting up and crying, " Oh, pa ! pa ! " " What is it, Hughie ? " "Oh, pa, there is a little baby in bed with mamma." Now the child had no idea there was one expected— could have had none, for our children are absurdly innocent, even the older ones — awkwardly innocent at times. It was so strange, and I was so thoroughly awake that I did not go to sleep for some time, and was on the point of getting up and driving home, but felt that if there was nothing I should look so very foolish.

In the morning I hurried through my business, telling the last man my reason for cutting him short. Before I was five miles away from the ranche a cowboy met me with the news that a baby had been born in the night. We were without servants at the time, and though my old Scotch foreman had done his best in sending off for the nearest women and the doctor (twenty miles off), my wife had a very trying time, and it is quite possible that her intense wish for me may have had something to do with Hughie's communication.

Hughie is a very sensitive and clever boy — too clever. He wants no encouragement, but rather holding back ; not delicate in any way — none of our children are, I am thankful to say — but a sort of child who understands an explanation before you have said a dozen words; very excitable; will wake up, scream, and shiver if he has been too long in the schoolroom. The cowboys, of course, got up all sorts of ideas, which I paid no attention to — such as that they had long known that Hughie knew instinctively if it was going to rain, especially thunder rain.

The farmer's name to whom I told the incident, before leaving the West Ranche, is James Whitehead ; his address is Redfern, &c.

Edw. Crewdson, Jun.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Crewdson says : —

Hughie was 4^ years old. His exclamation occurred just at the time or shortly after the birth of our baby. He simply stated it as a fact, and did not say if he dreamt it or not, but, as he jumped up suddenly awakened, it seems likely that he dreamt it. No explanation was ever asked, nor could he, I think, have given one.

We wrote to Mr. Whitehead, who now resides at Broken Bow, Nebraska, and he replied : —

January 2'jtk, 1891.

The circumstances you call upon me to corroborate are substantially as follows : —

Mr. Crewdson, with three of his boys, was at his " West Ranche," looking after his interests there. His wife remained at Tuckerville, some eighteen miles distant. Some time during the night he was awakened by his youngest boy, Hughie, about 3^^ years old — nicknamed " Bah " — who said, " Pa, pa, ma has a little baby in bed with her." "Nonsense, 'Bah.' What makes you think that ? " asked the father. " Because I saw it laying beside her in the bed," the child replied.

The next morning, having some business with Mr. C, I visited his ranche, about one mile distant from my farm. With considerable relish and amusement he related his dream to me. Coming from a child so young, who could not possibly be aware of the condition of its mother, the time of whose confinement was drawing near, yet not sufficiently near at hand (as was supposed) to excite anxiety on the part of Mr. Crewdson owing to his enforced absence, the dream impressed me at the time as being remarkable. Later on, the same day, Mr. C. remained at my place and took dinner, repeating the dream to myself and family.

Starting for home, while still in sight, he met the young man (Mr. Morgan) he had left in charge at Tuckerville, who informed him that Mrs. Crewdson had given birth to a child during the night, about the hour he had been awakened by the child to hear his dream. Mr. C. hurried on home. Mr. Morgan, who was on horseback, rode up to my door, and remarked, " Hughie's dream is true." James Whitehead.

424 B. The next case is from Mrs. Richardson, of Coombe Down, Bath. It is quoted from Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 443.

August 26t/i, 1882. On September 9th, 1848, at the siege of Mooltan, my husband, Major-General Richardson, C.B., then adjutant of his regiment, was most severely and dangerously wounded, and supposing himself dying, asked one of the officers with him to take the ring ol^ his finger and send it to his wife, who, at that time, was fully 150 miles distant, at Ferozepore. On the night of September 9th, 1848, I was lying on my bed, between sleeping and waking, when I distinctly saw my husband being carried off the field, seriously wounded.

424 C] TO CHAPTER IV 399

and heard his voice saying, " Take this ring off my finger, and send it to my wife." All the next day I could not get the sight or the voice out of my mind. In due time I heard of General Richardson having been severely wounded in the assault on Mooltan. He survived, however, and is still living. It was not for some time after the siege that I heard from Colonel L., the officer who helped to carry General Richardson off the field, that the request as to the ring was actually made to him, just as I had heard it at Ferozepore at that very time.

M. A. Richardson.

The following questions were addressed by us to General Richardson, whose answers are appended : —

(1) Does General R. remember saying, when he was wounded at Mooltan, *' Take this ring off my finger, and send it to my wife," or words to this effect?

"Most distinctly; I made the request to my commanding officer. Major E. S. Lloyd, who was supporting me while my man had gone for assistance. Major Lloyd, I am sorry to say, is dead."

(2) Can he remember the titne of this incident ? Was it morning, noon, or night?

"As far as memory serves, I was wounded about 9 p.m. on Sunday, the 9th September 1848."

(3) Had General R., before he left home, promised or said anything to Mrs. R. as to sending his ring to her, in case he should be wounded ?

" To the best of my recollection, never. Nor had I any kind of presentiment on the subject. I naturally felt that with such a fire as we were exposed to I might get hurt."

The details as to the ring seem fairly to raise this case out of the category of mere visions of absent persons who are known to be in danger, and with whom the percipient's thoughts have been anxiously engaged.

424 C. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. v. p. 252. The following narrative was sent to Dr. Hodgson by Mr. William Tudor : —

AUBURNDALE, MaSS., /w/y Wth^ 189O.

Your favour of the 30th ult., addressed to Mrs. Tudor, I will answer, as the incident more directly concerned me.

Late in the evening of Monday, March 17th, near midnight, my nephew, Frederic Tudor, jun., fell in front of an electric car going to Cambridge, was dragged some distance, and so badly injured that for a time his life was in doubt, though he recovered with the loss of a foot. My wife heard of the accident on Tuesday afternoon, and was much distressed all the night of Tuesday, and quite restless and wakeful.

At this time I was in Gainesville, Florida, having important business there in connection with land purchases. On the night of Tuesday I went to bed rather early in a calm state of mind. I slept soundly, as I usually do. About midnight, as I should judge, I heard my wife call my name quite distinctly and waked instantly broad awake. I sat up in bed, but soon remembering where I was, fell asleep again and waked no more until morning. The next day the incident of the night made me quite uneasy, also during the following day, and

as I was obliged to leave on the afternoon of Friday for a rough journey in the country, I telegraphed to my wife to know what was the matter. I usually receive a letter from home every day and on these days no letter arrived, which added to my uneasiness. No answer was received to my first telegram, for the very good reason that it was never delivered. I was obliged to start, however, in the afternoon of this day, Friday the 2ist, and in the morning of the 22nd, from a small town called New Branford, sent another telegram, of which the following is the substance : " Shall be gone three days ; what has happened ? Answer Branford." I had a strong impression that something serious had occurred, that my wife was possibly ill, or some of the children were ill, or that some accident or death had occurred to a near relation, not however involving my immediate family. The following extracts from my letters will illustrate this feeling.

Letter of March 19th: —

" I thought you called me last night, I waked up and was much worried, I hope you are not ill."

Letter of March 22nd, from New Branford: —

" No answer comes to my telegram although I left word to have it forwarded here." " Surely some one would telegraph if you were ill. Surely 3^ou would let me know if anything had happened. I do not feel that anything serious has happened, and yet I cannot understand such a combination of circumstances." " I have no confidence in these telegraph people, and daresay you never received my message."

Letter of March 24th, from Gainesville, after telegram giving account of accident was finally received : —

" I had a feeling that something was wrong, but that you were all right."

Such I give as the substance of the facts in this case, which I trust may be interesting to the Society. William Tudor.

Mrs. W. Tudor writes : —

AUBURNDALEiyw/y 2()tk, 189O.

My nephew's accident occurred on Monday night. Being out of town I heard of it on Tuesday afternoon. I immediately went to Boston and returned the same evening about nine o'clock, feeling greatly distressed. I wrote a letter to my husband after my return describing the accident, and retired to bed rather late and passed a restless night. The telegram received from my husband rather surprised me, as he is not usually anxious when away from home. I believe this is all I know connected with this incident.

Elizabeth Tudor.

425 A. When a prediction affecting the percipient only is fulfilled, it is obviously unnecessary to ascribe the information that has been received to any external intelligence. Apart from the possibility that the fulfilment of the prediction may be due simply to self-suggestion (on the efficacy of which see sections 409 and 410), even when the crisis predicted is death itself, we may in some cases suppose that the subliminal self has but drawn an inference from its perception of a disease likely to be soon fatal. Thus in the following case (quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 428) heart-disease may have been far advanced, unknown to Mr. Pratt's waking self.

425 A] TO CHAPTER IV 401

The following paragraph was sent to Dr. Hodgson from some unknown newspaper : —

Valparaiso, l^n., January \Tfh [1894].

Thomas Pratt, an old resident of this city, was found dead in his bed this morning. He was born in 1S23 at Cleveland, Ohio, and was a veteran of the civil war.

Pratt's store on College Hill has long been the meeting place of a halfdozen friends and old-time comrades of the proprietor. Last night when his friends came in, Mr. Pratt told a dream he had had the night previous. He had dreamed that he was dead, yet he possessed the peculiar power of one in a trance — to see all that went on about him, though he was unable to move or speak. He had noted the preparations for his burial, and he even named the half-dozen friends who served as pallbearers. He also told of the funeral services being held in the Memorial Hall, and of his ride to the cemetery and the lowering of his coffin into the grave. And when the first dirt was thrown upon the box he awoke from the trance and called to his comrades, and they drew him from the grave. The pallbearers of the dream will be the pallbearers at his burial, Monday, which will be from the new Memorial Hall.

[Dr. Hodgson applied to the postmaster at Valparaiso and received the following reply : — ]

Valparaiso, Ian., January 26th, 1894. Mr. Pratt told his dream the day after it occurred and the day before he died, to John C. Flint, George Herrington, W. S. Flint, and Albert Amos and others. They would give you truthful statements in regard to it.

Mark L. Dickover, Assistant Postmaster.

[In a subsequent letter Mr. Dickover says that a doctor, arriving shortly after Mr. Pratt's death, ascribed it to heart-disease.

Further inquiries elicited the two letters which follow : — ]

Valparaiso, Ind., February ^tk, 1894.

Richard Hodgson, — My dear Sir,— Your communication of the 29th ult, asking information of the dream which Thomas Pratt had concerning his death, has been received.

On the night previous to the night on which he died, he said he dreamed that he died at twelve o'clock.

During the dream he selected the pallbearers, and seemed to be conscious of all proceedings of his funeral, until dirt was thrown on the coffin, which suddenly aroused him. William S. Flint.

Valparaiso, Ind., February 2nd, 1894. Dear Sir, — Yours of the 29th received. As regards Mr. Thomas Pratt's dream of January nth : Mr. Pratt was a merchant here. I went in the store in the morning of the 12th January. He related to me the circumstance of his dream. He said that he died last night. I said, " Well, you are alive yet." Then he told me about his dream. He said that he dreamt that he died and chose his pallbearers, and was taken to the grave, and then lowered down. When they began to put the dirt on the coffin he woke up. When I went VOL. I. 2 C

down the next morning he was dead. He died 3 a.m., on the 13th of January. The same pallbearers officiated him to the grave.

I was the first one that he related his dream to. He laughed at it the same day that he died, and said that he was good for forty years longer. When he died he was 71 years old. George Herrington.

Compare the case of Christopher Brooks, quoted by Mrs. Sidgwick, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 291. The doctor there could find nothing amiss ; yet must we not suppose that some heart-disease already existed when the premonition came ? At any rate the death of a healthy and contented young man, at a predetermined day and hour, merely on account of an impression received in a dream, — this would be a result going far beyond any efficacy with which mere unsupported suggestion has hitherto been credited.

425 B. In the next case (taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 509), the precognition does not refer to a danger threatening the percipient himself; there is, moreover, an element of collectivity in it. The account was addressed to Professor James.

Forney, Tex., February \st, 1S94.

Prof. William James, — Dear Sir, — Replying to your request, I find it hard for me to present to you the " premonition " as it impressed me.

In the first place I will state that I am, or have been, in perfect health. I am not in the least superstitious and am not subject to hallucinations, and have never taken but little interest in the investigation of such phenomena. Three years ago last December my son, then eighteen years of age, left home to accept a position in a drug-house in an adjoining county. I was perfectly willing for him to go, and never felt a moment's uneasiness about him. Last summer I took an extended trip east and was gone some time. During my absence I never once felt the least apprehension about my son or any member of my family. I am naturally of a buoyant disposition. Some time last fall, in a vague and indescribable way, I became dissatisfied about my son. I can't say I was uneasy — only dissatisfied — though I cannot tell why. I wrote him several letters — more than I had written him the entire three years of his absence. Early in November he came home on a visit, and after he left, I seemed to get more troubled and dissatisfied about him ; it was not uneasiness or apprehension as to any danger, simply I was dissatisfied and troubled about him. I cannot explain my feelings. As near as I can remember, I felt just as I did after my father's death, when I was quite a small hoy. It seemed that the light had suddenly gone out of my life and there was nothing left for me to live for. A weight like a mill-stone seemed crushing out my life. I remarked often to my friends that living seemed to have lost its attraction for me. As December wore along this feeling became intensified, and in some way my son seemed to be the centre of it all. Often I would awake in the night thinking about him, and so impressed with the emptiness and hollowness of life that I could not sleep. On the morning of the 19th [17th] of December I awoke some time before day. It seemed that I had reached a crisis. I got up and kindled a fire without disturbing any member of my family. In all my life I do not remember ever doing such a thing before. I sat down by the fire to think. I cannot explain the awful weight that oppressed me. I did not know what it was, nor

425 B] TO CHAPTER IV 403

what was the matter with me, yet in no way did I anticipate trouble or danger to my son. About 7 a.m. my wife awoke, and sitting in the bed, told me a dream that was strangely impressing her, — in fact, it caused her to awake.

" I thought," she said, "that you were in a strange place, and among people I had never seen before. It was a large family of people, with several small children who were going to school and a grown-up daughter. I came to the place in a wagon, but you were there already. I thought you were very intimate with the family. The large girl sat in your lap and put her arms round your neck and kissed you repeatedly. While I was wondering where you had met these people to become so intimate with them, you suddenly dropped over and died. And I awoke."

I replied to her that I felt wretched enough to wish the dream a reality ; that I was so troubled about Walter that life had become a burden. After breakfast I got my writing material, and called my daughter and told her to write Walter a letter at once and tell him to come home. To be sure and get her letter off by the first mail train. I then rode out to one of my farms for recreation. About 12 M. I received a despatch to the effect that my son was badly hurt and was unconscious. I boarded a freight train and hurried at once to the scene, with the understanding that my wife and daughter come later on the passenger. Now, right here comes in a remarkable feature in that strange matter. Through some misunderstanding they failed to catch the train and had to get private conveyance and come directly across the country. By their changing horses at each little town, they were enabled to reach my son by 11 o'clock at night. The accident had happened near the residence of a most excellent farmer, whose daughter my son had been long visiting. To the house of this gentleman he was taken, as it was not only near by, but was the house of his best friends. He had a large family of children who were all deeply attached to my son. Of a truth, I could not say that we suffered more than did those people because of my son's death. When my wife entered the room where our boy lay unconscious, this girl I speak of was standing at the head of his bed weeping. She gave a glance around, and then whispered in my ear, " This is my dream ! This is the room I saw you in — these are the people I dreamed of." Even her trip there in a wagon was a verification of her dream, and the family were just such people as she described to me — "very plain, but most excellent country people." The very nature of the country through which she travelled was in perfect fulfilment of her dream, as was also the scenery surrounding the house.

In conclusion I will say that the heaviness of feeling that so oppressed me has all disappeared. I have never felt that peculiar, that indescribable weight that was crushing out my very life, since Sunday morning, the 17th of December. Of course, I feel sad because of my loss, but it is altogether a different feeling.

T. F. IVEY.

Mrs. Ivey adds the following corroboration : —

February i^th, 1894. Prof. James, — It was after daylight on the morning of 17th December 1893, that I had the dream. I thought that I was at a strange place. I had gone there in a wagon. I had no recollection of my husband going with me, but he was there and seemed to be a particular friend of the family. It was a large family, and I was very much struck with their manner and dress and general appearance. I observed the house closely and the scantiness of its furniture and the shpshod way it seemed to be kept. The children were get-

ting lessons, and would go to my husband for assistance. The largest one of the children, a girl about budding into womanhood, sat on my husband's lap and was very affectionate. I was not the least jealous of this girl, only I wondered how in the world came my husband so intimate with those people whom I had never seen or even heard of before. They did not seem to pay any attention to me, but to devote themselves entirely to my husband, who seemed to be the centre of attraction. Suddenly my husband dropped over and died, — and then I seemed to be at home, and awoke.

About 12 M. the same day, we got a telegram from Copeville, Tex., that our son was fatally injured, and to come at once. My husband went immediately on a freight train. Through some misunderstanding I had to go in a private conveyance across the country. As soon as I entered the house I thought of my dream, for it was all just as I had dreamt, even the house and its surroundings. The peculiar dress and manner of the people, their scantiness of furniture and negligent housekeeping, even to the children getting their lessons, and the larger girl who wept over our son like her heart would break — all were just as I had dreamed that very morning. No one could have told that the dead boy was not their son instead of ours. We learned that he was indeed an intimate and most particular friend of the family; that he spent more of his time there than anywhere else ; that all the children looked on him as a brother and that the larger girl loved him more than a brother. With the single exception of putting m}'^ husband in place of my son, the dream was a real and vivid anticipation of the actual. A. L. Ivey.

Even this great inaccuracy — the substitution of the husband for the son — does not, I think, destroy the impression of a true relation between the actual and the visionary scene.

In a subsequent letter Mr. Ivey gives some further particulars : —

Forney, Texas, April loth, 1895.

Mr. Richard Hodgson, — Dear Sir, — Replying to yours of the 12th inst., I will say : —

1st. My son was hurt about 11.30 a.m. Sunday, December 17th, 1893.

2nd. I awoke about 3 a.m. the same morning, but not being able to go back to sleep from some undefinable cause, I got up about 4 o'clock and kindled a fire and remained up.

3rd. He was returning from church with two other young men in a buggy when the horses took fright, and, running away, came in contact with a tree which, striking my son, produced the fatal injuries from which he died.

4th. The blow produced concussion of the brain, from which he was unconscious the greater part of the time. He died about i a.m., Tuesday 19th.

After more than a year I know of nothing I can add to the letter I wrote Prof. James. I believe it contained as near the truth as it was possible for me to write. As near as I can remember, for six weeks or more before the accident I was to a great extent two different distinct persons. During the day, I was my normal self — satisfied — interested in my business and going along as usual. But at night I was altogether another person. I would generally take a short nap and then awake with the most awful feeling of weight and depression that it is possible to conceive of. I could seldom sleep all night (though I am usually a sound sleeper), I would lie and toss vainly trying to sleep — feeling all the time that there was nothing more to live for — that all that was worth living for had

425 B] TO CHAPTER IV 405

gone out of my life — that I had lived too long— and that my life was nothing henceforth but a burden. When I would awake after a short nap, I felt like I imagine a person must feel who was to have been hanged that day and realised the dreadful fact immediately after awakening. This expresses it better than anything I can think of. I once called the attention of a friend to my singular condition — it was something unusual in my life — I couldn't understand it — I remarked to him that I was so low-spirited as soon as I went to bed that I could not rest, and that I could see no sense in it, as my business was in good condition. I thought possibly that I was going to be sick, as I was only troubled at night and was as cheerful and full of life during the day as I usually am. I don't know, for some time, that this state of mind was in any way associated with my son, but gradually he became the centre, as it were, around which the awfulness seemed to crystaUise. On Sunday morning, December 17th, I awoke about 3 o'clock, and the feeling was so heavy that I could not stand it and got up and made me a fire. As soon as breakfast was over I got pen and paper and ordered my daughter to write to Walter to come ho77te at once.

I remember well walking the floor after breakfast ; and, turning to a friend who was at my house, I remarked to him, " Jo, I am troubled to death about Walter — I see ahead of him — and there is ruin.'''' I then called my daughter, and, getting material and placing it on the table before her, ordered her to write to Walter then to come home at once.

Understand though, I never dreamed of any accident happening to him that day — I never thought of his getting hurt, or I would have telegraphed to him. I was simply troubled to death about him and couldn't tell why. It never once crossed my mind that he was in any danger at all. I had no premonition of any evil happening to him. I was simply troubled to death, and he seemed to be the centre of it. I am a farmer. Buckle says that farmers and sailors are the most superstitious of people. Possibly this may be true, but I don't think I am the least so. I never had anything in the way of a premonition in my life before, though I once had a remarkable experience in connection with my first child who died at nine years of age ; still it was in no sense a premonition. In the whole range of human experience I know of no class of phenomena so inexplicable as premonitions. Even if Spiritualism be true, I cannot see how spirit intercourse can explain it. T. F. Ivey.

This case seems to tell against the view that the father's transcendental foresight discerned the accident long beforehand. It suggests rather that some intelligence to which the impending accident was long previously known may have endeavoured to inform the father, but only when the accident was just about to occur was able to impress the father still more strongly, and also to inform the mother of the event, though with much symbolic confusion.

Can we suppose that the boy's own spirit was thus aware beforehand of his own impending death, and was able to transmit the knowledge to J the father, although not to the boy's own supraliminal consciousness — [with the desire, perhaps, that the father should avert the accident by [summoning the boy home? Far-fetched though this sounds, we have a [few cases of so-called "banshees" where the fact that all the family except [ the dying man himself are roused by the alarming sounds, looks as though those premonitory sounds were somehow caused by the spirit which is

4o6 APPENDICES [425 C

about to quit the flesh (see Proceediiigs S.P.R., vol. v. p. 307). But the evidence for " banshees " and " doubles " is too scanty to justify insistence on this view, and we shall presently find that the agency of disembodied spirits is more often suggested.

425 C. In some cases the premonitory dream, although it may have made a vivid impression, and perhaps have even been narrated to others, is then apparently clean forgotten until the moment of its fulfilment.

Mrs. Sidgwick has justly urged (of a similar case) that this looks rather as though we were dealing with a pseudo-memory, created by the very circumstance which seems merely to revive \t} There may, however, be another explanation. We know that when a suggestion is given to a good subject in the hypnotic trance to the effect that he will (say) open the window half-an-hour after awaking, he passes that halfhour in unconsciousness of the order, which order nevertheless he fulfils at the right minute. Well, while he is thus fulfilling it, or just before he fulfils it, he lapses into a state more akin to the hypnotic state in which he received the order than to the waking state in which he has since remained. The memory of what he has to do comes to him only just in time, and derives its efficacy from a partial recrudescence of the condition in which he was when he accepted the order. Even thus, perhaps, we might by analogy consider the condition of the dreamer of a precognitive dream as a secondary state, the recollection of which has a tendency to fade from the waking mind, but which is partially revived when the prefigured incident — which belongs in a sense to the secondary state — suddenly presents itself in the waking day.

The following case, from a lady known to me, is interesting in this connection ; since a dream is at first remembered so impressively as to affect action, is then apparently forgotten, and finally revives in memory just in time to enable the dreamer to avert its complete fulfilment. I quote the case from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 497.

On the second occasion my warning in dream did probably prevent a rather serious accident. We were living in about 188 — , in Hertford Street, Mayfair. One day I determined that on the morrow I would drive to Woolwich in our brougham, taking my little child and nurse, to spend the day with a relation. During the night I had a painfully clear dream in vision of the brougham turning up one of the streets north of Piccadilly; and then of myself standing on the pavement and holding my child, our old coachman falling on his head on the road, — his hat smashed in. This so much discomposed me that when in the morning I sent for the coachman to give him his orders, I almost hoped that some obstacle to the drive might arise, so that I might have an excuse for going by train. The coachman was an old and valued servant. I asked him if he would have the carriage ready to drive to Woolwich at ten. He was not given to making difficulties ; but he hesitated, and when I suggested eleven instead, he said that he would prefer that hour. He gave no reason for his

1 See her article, " On the Evidence for Premonitions," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 317-

425 C] TO CHAPTER IV 407

hesitation, and said that the horse was quite well. I told him almost eagerly that I could quite well go by train ; but he said that all was right.

We went to Woolwich and spent the day. All went well until we reached Piccadilly on the return journey. Then I saw that other coachmen were looking at us ; and looking through the glass front of the brougham I saw that the coachman was leaning back in his seat, as though the horse were pulling violently, of which, however, I felt no sign. We turned up Down Street. He retained his attitude. My dream flashed back upon me. I called to him to stop, jumped out, caught hold of my child, and called to a policeman to catch the coachman. Just as he did so the coachman swayed and fell off the box. If I had been in the least less prompt, he would have fallen just as I saw him in my dream. I found afterwards that the poor man had been suffering from a serious attack of diarrhoea on the previous day, and had gradually fainted from exhaustion during the drive home. He was absolutely sober; and his only mistake had been in thinking that he was strong enough to undertake the long drive. In this case my premonitory dream differed from the reality in two points. In my dream we approached Down Street from the west; in reality we came from the east. In my dream the coachman actually fell on his head; the crushing of his hat on the road being the most vivid point of the dream. In reality this was just averted by the prompt action which my anxious memory of the dream inspired. Signed [Lady Z.]

The aversion of the fulfilment, by reasonable precaution, is here an important feature. Another dream of the same lady's presents us with a fatal fulfilment occurring in spite of the dreamer's aroused anxiety. But in that case no precautions were taken, — nor indeed could they have been easily taken, — to avert the calamity.

I am not usually a great dreamer ; but on two occasions, and two occasions only in my life, I have acted on dreams or impressions, and in each case there seems to have been some meaning in the impression which I received.

In or about the year 1866, Lord Z. and I were inhabiting a house in Charles Street, Mayfair. We had built out a bedroom into the small court behind. This bedroom was separated only by a narrow passage or strip of court from our neighbour Mrs. L.'s kitchen, which was built out into the court in the same fashion, and was of one storey only.

In the middle of a very cold night I was suddenly awakened by a heavy fall into this passage outside our bedroom wall, as if some heavy body had fallen into it from the roof of Mrs. L.'s kitchen. I listened, much alarmed, and heard groans from the passage. I thought that some burglar had slipped from the kitchen roof down on to the pavement and was lying there injured. I begged Lord Z. to get up and look; but he could hear nothing, and told me that I had been dreaming. I went to sleep again at length ; but was again awakened by a similar thud in the passage. I now begged Lord Z. so earnestly to look that he got up and partially dressed and opened a door on the ground floor which led into this passage. The moon was shining brightly, and there was no trace whatever of anything unusual. Much perplexed, I again went to sleep. After I had left the bedroom in the morning, a servant came to ask me whether he might get ready a bedroom to receive a workman who had come to work on the roof of Mrs. L.'s kitchen, and had fallen into the

passage from the kitchen-roof, just as I had thought that I heard a man fall some few hours previously.

The premonition, if such it was, was here of no special use. It seemed as though I had received an intimation of a coming fact which only concerned me by its mere physical nearness. Signed [Lady Z.]

Lord Z. is no longer living, so that his corroboration of this incident could not be obtained,

425 D. Here again is a case where a somewhat complex scene, involving the action of several persons, is dreamt and narrated beforehand. It is quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 491, the account being given by Mr. Haggard, of the British Consulate, Trieste, Austria.

September i\st, 1893.

A few months ago I had an extraordinarily vivid dream, and waking up repeated it to my wife at once. All I dreamt actually occurred about six weeks afterwards, the details of my dream falling out exactly as dreamt.

There seems to have been no purpose whatsoever in the dream ; and one cannot help thinking, what was the good of it.?

I dreamt that I was asked to dinner by the German Consul-General, and accepting, was ushered into a large room with trophies of East African arms on shields against the walls. {N.B. — I have myself been a great deal in East Africa.)

After dinner I went to inspect the arms, and amongst them saw a beautifully gold-mounted sword which I pointed out to the French Vice-Consul — who at that moment joined me — as having probably been a present from the Sultan of Zanzibar to my host the German Consul-General.

At that moment the Russian Consul came up too. He pointed out how small was the hilt of the sword and how impossible in consequence it would be for a European to use the weapon, and whilst talking he waved his arm in an excited manner over his head as if he was wielding the sword, and to illustrate what he was saying.

At that moment I woke up and marvelled so at the vividness of the dream that I woke my wife up too and told it to her.

About six weeks afterwards my wife and myself were asked to dine with the German Consul-General ; but the dream had long been forgotten by us both.

We were shown into a large withdrawing room which I had never been in before, but which somehow seemed familiar to me. Against the walls were some beautiful trophies of East African arms, amongst which was a gold-hilted sword, a gift to my host from the Sultan of Zanzibar.

To make a long story short, everything happened exactly as I had dreamt — but I never remembered the dream until the Russian Consul began to wave his arm over his head, when it came back to me like a flash.

Without saying a word to the Russian Consul and French Vice-Consul (whom I left standing before the trophy), I walked quickly across to my wife, who was standing at the entrance of a boudoir opening out of the withdrawing room, and said to her: "Do you remember my dream about the Zanzibar arms?" She remembered everything perfectly, and was a witness

425 D] TO CHAPTER IV 409

to its realisation. On the spot we informed all the persons concerned of the dream, which naturally much interested them.

Mrs. Haggard's corroboration of her husband's dream and its fulfilment runs as follows : —

Trieste, October 20th, 1893.

I remember being awoke one night by my husband to hear a curiously vivid dream he had just had. It is now some months ago, and possibly some of the more minute details of his relation may have escaped my memory, but what I remember of his dream is the following. He dreamed that we were dining with the German Consul-General, whose drawingroom, a remarkably handsome apartment, was ornamented with trophies of arms from the East Coast of Africa. Having been in those regions himself, he felt some interest in them, and went nearer to examine them more closely. While he was doing so, the Russian Consul came up, and in his usual rather excitable fashion began flourishing his arm, as he dilated upon the extraordinary smallness of the native hand for which the hilt of a certain sword must have been designed. That is what I recollect of the dream. Its fulfilment took place a few weeks later when the circumstance of the dream had almost passed from our thoughts.

We dined one evening with the German Consul-General, the Russian Consul being also present, among others. After dinner my husband went to examine one of the trophies of East African arms, with which the room — as in his dream, — was hung. While he was doing so, the Russian Consul went up to speak to him upon the subject, and the dramatic flourish of his arm, with which he emphasised his conversation, at once recalled the dream, in which it had taken place, so vividly to my husband's mind, that he immediately crossed the room to me, and asked me if I did not remember it also, which of course I did, though, as I was talking to some one else at the time, and only knew the room previously by my husband's description of his dream, the coincidence might not have occurred to me had he not called my attention to it. Directly he did so, however, by asking me if I did not remember his dream, I recollected quite well all the details I have previously mentioned. Agnes M. Haggard.

Below are given a letter from Mr. Kolemine, Russian Consul, and a statement from Herr Michabelles, German Consul-General at Trieste, both of whom were witnesses of the fulfilment of Mr. Haggard's dream, and of the great impression which it made upon him at the time.

Monsieur Haggard, mon coll&gue d'Angleterre, en a eu un tres remarquable au point de vue psychologique. . , . Veuillez accepter tout ce que Monsieur Haggard vous a ecrit comme €tant parfaitement la verite et I'asserter de mon nom si vous le jugez ndcessaire.

Agrdez, cher Monsieur, I'assurance de ma consideration tres distingude.

A. DE Kolemine.

Berlin, November lotk, 1893. Whilst I was German Consul-General at Trieste, I had one evening, in February or March of this year, the pleasure of Mr. and Mrs. Haggard's company at dinner ; among others the Russian Consul was present. It was

4IO APPENDICES [425 E

the first time that Mr. Haggard came into my private house : before, we had always met in my office. After dinner I was busy in entertaining my part}', when suddenly Mr. Haggard joined me and told me that a few weeks before he had seen, in a very vivid dream, my drawing-room with the trophies of East African arms on shields against the walls, and Mr. Kolemine, the Russian Consul, standing before one trophy had explained something to him in his usual excited manner, waving his arms over his head in order to illustrate what he said. All this had happened just at the moment with all particulars seen in the dream. I was extremely astonished at the strange occurrence, and observed that the realisation of his dream had produced a strong effect on Mr. Haggard's mind. J. Michabelles,

Counsellor of Legation in the Foreign Office.

426 E. I shall conclude this group with a case (quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 577) where there is again a suggestion of personal guardianship and care. But the facts prefigured do not fall within the life-history of the decedent; so that if we suppose that it was his spirit which foresaw and informed his niece of the future, we must suppose also that he foresaw what would happen to his body after his death. The percipient, whom I have called Lady Q., has given me orally a slightly fuller account. An unauthorised version of the main points here to be detailed was compiled shortly after the event.

December zznd, 1892.

I have been asked to give an account of an experience which was certainly the most remarkable in my life : a dream which came to me three times at long intervals, and which was at last fulfilled.

My father died when I was a child; my mother married again, and I went to live with an uncle, who became like a father to me. In the spring of 1882 I dreamt that my sister and I were sitting in my uncle's drawing-room. In my dream it was a brilliant spring day, and from the window we saw quantities of flowers in the garden, many more than were in fact to be seen from that window. But over the garden there lay a thin covering of snow. I knew in my dream that my uncle had been found dead by the side of a certain bridle-path about three miles from the house — a field-road where I had often ridden with him, and along which he often rode when going to fish in a neighbouring lake. I knew that his horse was standing by him, and that he was wearing a dark homespun suit of cloth made from the wool of a herd of black sheep which he kept. I knew that his body was being brought home in a waggon with two horses, with hay in the bottom, and that we were waiting for his body to arrive. Then in my dream the waggon came to the door ; and two men well known to me — one a gardener, the other the kennel huntsman — helped to carry the body up the stairs, which were rather narrow. My uncle was a very tall and heavy man, and in my dream I saw the men carrying him with difficulty, and his left hand hanging down and striking against the banisters as the men mounted the stairs. This detail gave me in my dream an unreasonable horror. I could not help painfully thinking, " Oh, why did they not prevent his hand from being bruised in this way? "

In the sadness and horror of this sight I awoke, and I slept no more that night. I had determined not to tell my uncle of the dream ; but in the morning

425E] TO CHAPTER IV 411

I looked so changed and ill that I could not escape his affectionate questioning ; and at last I told him of my vision of him lying dead in that field-road. I had no anxiety about his health. He was a robust man of sixty-six, accustomed to hunt his own pack of hounds and to take much exercise. He listened to me very kindly, and although he was not himself at all alarmed by my dream, he offered me to do anything I liked which might calm my mind. I begged him to promise me never to go alone by that particular road. He promised me that he would always make an excuse to have a groom or some one with him ; I remember my compunction at the thought of giving him this trouble — and yet I could not help asking for his promise.

