To the anagrams cited above two others should be added, which Mr. A. obtained at about the same time. These were ieb iov ogf wle (I go, vow belief), and neb 16 vbliyev 86 e earf ee (Believe by fear even ! 1866). This last was an answer to the question, "How shall I believe?" and seems quite to negative the hypothesis that the anagrams were mere chance combinations of letters, which happened to be susceptible of arrangement in sentences. It should be mentioned, however, that there was an i too much in one of the anagrams previously cited.

832 A. From the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iv. pp. 216-24.

This is a case typical at least in its main features, and specially suitable for record on account of the care with which the phenomena were noted down as they occurred. The case was sent to us by Mr. F. C. S. Schiller, now Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and I have myself been present at one of the experiments where Mr. F. C. S. Schiller and his brother, Mr. F. N. Schiller, of St. John's College, Cambridge, obtained some of the old French writing. Some experiments in telepathy and clairvoyance were also tried, but with no great success, and the description of these is omitted here.

In the following account it must not be supposed that in speaking of the "spirits" of planchette under their soi-disant names, I intend to endorse the Spiritualist explanation, any more than I consider the reproductions of the "mediums'" latent knowledge to be conclusive in favour of any form of "unconscious-self " theory.

The experiments in question were conducted during a great part of the Long Vacation, with my brother, whom I will call F., and my sister L., as "mediums," writing conjointly at first, but afterwards separately. Of course, there could thus be no doubt as to the good faith of the " mediums," even if the course of the experiments had not afforded convincing proof that the phenomena were independent of their conscious mind. There appeared at different times no less than nine "spirits," of whom four wrote exclusively with F. and one mainly;

832A] TO CHAPTER VIII 419

another freely with either or both but chiefly with L., and three exclusively with L. or with F. and L. conjointly. They all wrote with a more or less distinctive style of their own, and, as far as I could judge, there was not any marked difference of style when the same spirit wrote with different mediums. Nor, on the other hand, was there sufficient evidence to justify the assertion that the style was so- unmistakably similar that it must have proceeded from the same intelligence. But although the evidence was not conclusive in establishing the identity of the various " spirit " personages, there could be no doubt of their complete independence of the mediums' conscious will. Both F. and L. were at first entirely ignorant of what planchette was writing, and F. remained so to the end, nor did the occupations of his conscious self appear in the least to affect the progress of the writing. I have seen planchette write in the same slow and deliberate way both while he was telling an amusing anecdote in. an animated way and while he was absorbed in an interesting novel ; and frequently whole series of questions would be asked and answered without his knowing what had been written or thinking that anything else than unmeaning scrawls had been produced.

In L.'s case it is true that after some time she came to know what letters were being formed and was able to interpret the movements of her hand. This, of course, made it difficult to avoid, at times, a certain half-conscious influence on the writing, and makes it necessary to allow for the personal equation. But it is clear that this influence must tend to harmonise the answers of planchette with the opinions and will of the medium, and as a matter of fact I observed frequent cases, especially with L., of a conflict between her will and opinions and those of planchette. . . .

The spirit of a " careless rhymer," after writing verses in English, French, and German, professed its ability to do so in the classical languages. And as F. said he had never read the Iliad, we asked the rhymer for a quotation. This he was at first unable to do, but, some hours after, he, unasked, produced the following : " Eratimoi kekaloseiai " and " Kouridion potheoumenos posin." These extraordinary tags were found to be derived from the fifth book of the Iliad (421, 4!4)> and to represent rj pd ri poi Ke^oXcoo-eut and KovpiSiov TroOeova-a TTCKTIV. F. then remembered that he had read this very book, and this alone, a long time ago. This was certainly the incident pointing most directly at unconscious cerebration, and may, perhaps, help to explain the occurrence of an entirely unknown language, namely Hindustani. A " spirit " gave his name as " Lokenadrath," and wrote in an extraordinary Oriental style, rather resembling some of Marion Crawford's rhapsodies. On introducing the words " Allah il Allah," he was asked whether he was a Mohammedan. " Hindi apkahai." I have since been informed 1 that [" apkahai " means] " I am yours," " At your service," and that " Lokenadrath " should be " Lokendranath," and means ""lord of princes " ; and one or two other fragments of Hindustani were similarly inaccurate.2 Now, as F. left India as a baby of eight months, and has never since, to the best of my belief, heard any Hindustani spoken, this is surely a most curious case of unconscious memory, if such it was. . . .

1 On the authority of (i) an Anglo-Indian lady ; (2) aBalliol Brahmin of Bombay. [The whole phrase means " A Hindu is at your service." The Oriental rhapsodies were found to be mainly centoes of Mr, Isaacs, worked together so as to make sense.]

2 I have now found out (December 1886) that Lokenadrath's description of his nationality is not as totally unintelligible as I had hitherto thought it. He called himself a " Jude poerano," and I have been told that " poerano " is Romany for gipsy.

Of the nine " spirits," six wrote only in English, and several of them failed ignominiously with all other languages. The Hindustani of " Lokenadrath " I have already mentioned. " Irktomar," the French Positivist, gave us specimens of English, French, and Latin. Lastly, the poet " Closcar " rhymed in English, French and German, Latin and Greek, and even sometimes wrote the last of these with Greek letters. But with this exception, planchette never wrote any German, though both the mediums are perfectly familiar with it, and in their childhood probably knew it far better than English. If, then, these phenomena are a dream-like recrudescence of long-forgotten thoughts, this absence of German seems to require some explanation.1 As regards the mode of writing, we were unable to distinguish any differences of handwriting between the various " spirits," except that one of F.'s wrote from right to left, mirror-writing, whether or no the left hand was used. . . .

(Signed) F. C. S. SCHILLER.

BALLIOL COLLEGE, OXFORD, 26^ October, 1886.

APPENDIX.

Since writing the preceding paper the experiments have been continued with F., and I will give a short sketch of the results subsequently obtained. The first thing to be noted is that F.'s power of writing seems to have diminished sensibly, so that whereas he would formerly write on three out of every four occasions he can now only do so about once out of every three. . . . An interesting experiment was tried of writing with two planchettes, F. having one hand on each. I suggested this in order to elucidate the connection between left-hand writing and " mirror-writing," and fully expected that the two hands would write the same communications. To my astonishment, however, the communications, though written simultaneously, were different and proceeded from different " spirits." I regard this as conclusive proof that the phenomena have nothing to do with the medium's consciousness, for, as every one can easily experience for himself, it is quite impossible, at least without long practice, to write two different words at the same time.

Whenever F. wrote with two planchettes, the left hand wrote mirror-writing, which was often very hard to decipher, but we did not observe anything like a fixed rule in this respect on other occasions. For though planchette generally wrote in the ordinary way even when the left hand was used, it sometimes produced mirror-writing with the right hand also. We have also had some instructive experiments in what I may call conjoint writing. I must begin by saying that ordinarily I am quite unable to make planchette move at all. But one night I put my hand also on, after F. had failed, as on several preceding days, to make it write. Planchette soon began to move and to write intelligibly. I repeatedly took my hand off and the writing stopped at once. Similarly, whenever F. took his hand off, the writing also ceased, except that on one occasion, when he did so without my knowledge, it appears to have written two or three letters before stopping. I am inclined, therefore, to regard the phenomenon of conjoint writing, whatever may be its explanation, as genuine, i.e. that the second operator really contributes to the result.

Passing from the method to the matter of the communications, I should note that " Heliod " has shown a knowledge of German and alluded to Goethe's

1 Since this was written " Heliod " has shown a knowledge of German and Latin.

832 A]

TO CHAPTER VIII

Eivig Weibliche, but that the bulk of the communications were in French and produced by " Irktomar."

In addition to some dialectical variations which appear to be Provencal (e.g. Irktomar n'a pas lou terns, Pour vous faire des coumplimens), he produced an extraordinary jargon which he called "Romaunce " and ascribed to the time of " Roland " and of " Charlemagne."

Afterwards it was found to be old Norman French, and mostly quoted from the Chanson de Roland of the twelfth century, as will appear from the following comparison : —

"CHANSON DE ROLAND."

1. Carles li reis, nostre emperere magnes.

Set anz tuz pleins ad estet en Espaigne. (C. de R. 1-2.)

2. Ne reverrunt lor meres ne lor femmes.

Ne eels de France ki as porz les atendent. (C. de R. 1402-3.) *

3. Jo vus ai mult servit. (C. de R. 3492.)

4. Passet li jurz si turnet a la vespre'e. (C. de R. 3560.)

PLANCHETTE.

(isttime.) Car[l]es li reis magnes empere [re] set anz ut plein estet en Espaigne.

(2nd time.) Carles li reis magnes empere [re] set anz lutans estet en Espaigne.

2. Ne reverrunt ne peres no. parenz ne Charlemagne, ki as porz les atent.

3. Jo vous ai mult bien servit.

4. Sfenfuit li jourz de bleneut la

vespre'e.

F. does not know old French at all, and cannot remember to have ever read or heard any, but, being strongly inclined towards the unconscious self theory, suggests that the passages produced may have been quoted in some magazine article, and thus met his eye.2 In any case, however, these quotations throw an interesting light on the mode of thinking of the intelligence that dictated them. It will be seen that they are evidently quoted from memory, and by no means accurate. And in No. i the first version was nearer the original than the second ; but, as quoted, the words " ut plein " made no sense, and hence " lutans," a word which does not, I believe, occur in the Roland, was substituted for them to complete the sense. That is to say, the second version is no mere reproduction of an impression in the memory, but has been subjected to a process of emendation which by us would be held to imply the action of conscious thought. Yet during this time F.'s conscious mind was entirely void of any knowledge of the dialect, and a fortiori could not possibly have corrected what appeared to him quite meaningless. . . .

Lastly, planchette volunteered the information that " Carles fu carles il caux " (Charles was Charles the Bald), which is certainly wrong, and as certainly could not be derived from the Roland or any similar poem, while it is nevertheless linguistically correct. It must, therefore, I think, be admitted that the intelligence which produced it must have possessed a considerable

1 Two lines have since been found which are almost identical with the planchette writing, viz. : — " Ne reverrunt lor peres ne lor parenz, Ne Charle Magne ki as porz les atent." (C. de R. 1420-21.)

2 Neither had Mr. F. C. S. Schiller read any old French.

amount of what we should call conscious knowledge of old French, and such as F. certainly does not possess.

To sum up then I will only say that the matter of the various communications (i.e. excluding the card and alphabet experiments, &c.) does not seem to me to afford absolute proof that the knowledge displayed could not possibly have been latent in the writer's mind, while at the same time this is extremely improbable in a large number of cases. Moreover, both the matter and the manner of the communications display powers beyond any at present recognised as normal. (Signed) F. C. S. SCHILLER. January 22nd ', 1887.

832 B. Other cases of imaginary personalities are to be found in the accounts of possession which have come down to us from the " Ages of Faith." I take as an example the autobiography of Soeur Jeanne des Anges.1 Soeur Jeanne was the Superior of the Ursulines of Loudun, about 1630-1665, and was one of the most ardent admirers, afterwards one of the fiercest enemies, of the unfortunate Urbain Grandier, who was burnt alive in 1634, on the charge of having bewitched the Ursuline nuns. Her manuscript autobiography has fallen into the hands of editors of a type which she can hardly have foreseen, Drs. Gabriel Legue and Gilles de la Tourette. These physicians have carefully analysed the symptoms which she narrates, and have shown that her affliction may be classed as a well-developed case of hysteroepilepsy, of the kind now so often described by the Salpetriere school.

Our present interest lies in the personalities which she gives to the demons whom she supposes to possess her, — who are in reality mere objectifications of different series of hysterical attacks.

Just as the automatic writer has a group of soi-disant guides or " controls," who take it in turns to direct his hand, and each of whom maintains a specific character of his own, — even so does Soeur Jeanne describe Asmodeus, Leviathan, Behemoth, Isacaaron, Balaam, Gresil, and Aman, whose diverse presence she apparently recognised mainly by the special train of undesirable emotion which each inspired, but partly also by their words and writings. A facsimile of a letter of Asmodeus is given by the learned editors, but the writing does not perceptibly differ from Soeur Jeanne's own script.

And Dr. Gilles de la Tourette informs me that there are letters, also in Soeur Jeanne's own handwriting, which profess to come from the other demons too — such letters being habitually written by the Sister during the process of exorcism, which usually brought on a hystero-epileptic attack. The substance of the letters reflected, no doubt, the foulness and malignity of the Sister's own mind ; but, nevertheless, the modern hysteriologists who have discussed the whole affair do not suppose that the Sister consciously simulated the writing or speech of devils through herself. Her

1 BibliothZque Diabolique (Collection Bourneville). Paris : Aux Bureaux du Progrts Midical, 1886.

843A] TO CHAPTER VIII 423

diabolic script and utterance were probably (though not certainly) purely automatic.1

It must be remembered that Soeur Jeanne was perfectly sane during these years of possession, sane at least in the sense that she governed her community, plotted savagely against her enemies, and made religious capital out of her real or fictitious stigmata ; but that, nevertheless, there is no doubt whatever that she believed in these possessing demons, who, as I say, were in reality the incarnations of hystero-epileptic attacks.

Now, I certainly do not mean to trace any moral analogy between these distressing products of Soeur Jeanne's imagination and the " guides " of the planchette-writer — which, as I have said, so far as I have seen, are almost always harmless, generally even sermonising entities. So far as my experience goes I do not see that planchette-writing has any connection with disease of mind or body, or any tendency to evil of any kind, except in a few cases of great credulity on the writer's part, a credulity which — it is to be hoped — is now becoming somewhat less common. Rather is Sceur Jeanne's case parallel in another way; as showing the tendency of the individuality to split itself up into various co-ordinate and alternating trains of personality, each of which may seem for a time to be dominant and obsessing, while yet the habitual sense of the ordinary self may persist through all these invasions.

843 A. Some early experiments in thought-transference through tabletilting were published by Professor Richet in the Revue Philosophique for December 1884. A critical discussion of these by Gurney appeared in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. pp. 239-64, and a briefer report in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. pp. 72-81. I quote from the latter a description of the method used : —

The place of a planchette was taken by a table, and M. Richet prefaces his account by a succinct statement of the orthodox view as to " table-turning." Rejecting altogether the three theories which attribute the phenomena to wholesale fraud, to spirits, and to an unknown force, he regards the gyrations and oscillations of stance-tables as due wholly to the unconscious muscular contractions of the sitters. It thus occurred to him to employ a table as an indicator of the movements that might be produced by "mental suggestion." The plan of the experiments was as follows. Three persons (C, D, and E), took their seats in a semi-circle, at a little table on which their hands rested. One of these three was always a " medium " — a term used by M. Richet to denote a person liable to exhibit intelligent movements in which consciousness and will apparently take no part. Attached to the table was a simple electrical apparatus, the effect of which was to ring a bell whenever the current was broken by the tilting of the table. Behind the backs of the sitters at the table was another table, on which was a large alphabet, completely screened from the view of C, D, and E, even had they turned round and endeavoured to see it. In front of this alphabet sat A, whose duty was to follow the letters slowly and steadily with a pen, returning at once to the beginning as soon as he

1 See Dr. Legue's Urbain Grandier et les Possedecs de Loudun. Paris : Baschet.

arrived at the end. At A's side sat B, with a note-book ; his duty was to wri down the letter at which A's pen happened to be pointing whenever the bell rang. This happened whenever one of the sitters at the table made the simple movement necessary to tilt it. Under these conditions, A and B are apparently mere automata. C, D, and E are little more, being unconscious of tilting the table, which appears to them to tilt itself; but even if they tilted it consciously, and with a conscious desire to dictate words, they have no means of ascertaining at what letter A's pen is pointing at any particular moment; and they might tilt for ever without producing more than an endless series of incoherent letters. Things being arranged thus, a sixth operator, F, stationed himself apart both from the tilting table and from the alphabet, and concentrated his thought on some word of his own choosing, which he had not communicated to the others. The three sitters at the first table engaged in conversation, sang, or told stories; but at intervals the table tilted, the bell rang, and B wrote down the letter which A's pen was opposite to at that moment. Now, to the astonishment of all concerned, these letters, when arranged in a series, turned out to produce a more or less close approximation to the word of which F was thinking.

The general result — of which full details are given in the original articles referred to — was that the amount of coincidence between the letters of the words chosen by F and those tilted out by the table was considerably greater than would most probably have been produced by chance. Gurney continues : —

[These experiments] seem to exhibit telepathic production of movements by what is at most an idea, and not a volition, on the agent's part. This, indeed, is a hypothesis which seems justified even by M. Ri chefs less exceptional results. For we must remember that in a sense A is throughout more immediately the agent than F; it is what A's mind contributes, not what F's mind contributes, that produces the tilts at the right moments.1 But this is of course through no will of A's; he is ignorant of the required word, and has absolutely no opportunity of bringing his volition into play. His " agency " is of a wholly passive sort; and his mind, as it follows the course of his pen, is a mere conduit-pipe, whereby knowledge of a certain kind obtains access to the "unconscious intelligence " which evokes the tilts. If, then, the knowledge manifests itself as impulse, can we avoid the conclusion that in this particular mode of access — in "mental suggestion" or telepathy as such — a certain impulsive quality is involved ? . . .

But of course the relation between F and the "medium" "plays also a necessary part in the result; the impulse to tilt when a particular letter is reached only takes effect when it falls (so to speak) on ground prepared by

1 When A, in pointing, began at the beginning of the alphabet, the sense of time might conceivably have led to an unconscious judgment as to the point arrived at. This idea had occurred to M. Richet. It seems, however, an unnecessary multiplication of hypotheses ; for we learn from him that in some trials A began at uncertain places, and that under these conditions coherent words were obtained. The fact that so often the approximate letter was given, instead of the exact one, might seem at first sight to favour the hypothesis of unconscious reckoning ; but it will be observed that exactly the same approximations took place in our own experiment (Phantasms, vol. i. pp. 77-8), where the alphabet was in the " medium's " sight.

843B] TO CHAPTER VIII 425

"mental suggestion" from F — on a mind in which the word imagined by him has obtained an unconscious lodgment. The unconscious part of the percipient's mind would thus be the scene of confluence of two separate telepathic streams, which proceed to combine there in an intelligent way — one proceeding from F's mind, which produces unconscious knowledge of the word, and the other proceeding from A's mind, which produces an unconscious image of the successive letters. Another possible supposition would be that F's thought affects, not the " medium," but A ; or conversely, that A's thought affects, not the " medium," but F ; — that A obtains unconscious knowledge of the word, or that F obtains unconscious knowledge of the letter, and so is enabled to communicate an impulse to the " medium " at the right moment. And we should then have to suppose a secret understanding between two parts of A's or F's mind, the part which takes account of the letters of the alphabet, and the part which takes account of the letters of the word — the former being conscious and the latter unconscious, or vice versa, according as A or F is the party affected.

843 B. A somewhat similar but less complex set of experiments by Mr. G. M. Smith was given in the Journal S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 318—20,

as follows : —

CUSTOM HOUSE, AMBLE, NORTHUMBERLAND, October itfh, 1892.

I have for many years been familiar with the usual modus operandi and results in table-tilting, but I have no sympathy with so-called Spiritualists as such. Recently, when reading Phantasms of the Living, I was struck with the experiment in table-tilting recorded there, vol. i. pp. 77-Si,1 and I made arrangements with a few friends to meet in my house to experiment in tabletilting (a thing which none of them had ever seen) with the view of adding some of the novel features of the case referred to in Phantasms of the Living.

On September Qth last Mrs. Smith (my wife), three young men, and myself sat down with the palms of our hands on a small deal table in my house. In a few minutes the table commenced to tilt. What follows is copied from a note written immediately after the experiment and read over to all present at the sitting. I asked the questions, and in doing so, merely for convenience, used the language and phraseology peculiar among Spiritualists on such occasions.

Q. Will the influence which is controlling this table please tilt it once when " No " is meant and twice when "Yes" is meant? A. Yes (two tilts or raps). Q. Is it a spirit that is controlling this table? A. Yes. Q. Is it the spirit of a friend of any one at the table ? A. Yes.

After a few more such questions and answers — Q. Will you please rap (tiU) the table when the letters of the alphabet are pointed to which spell out your name ? A. Yes.

I then asked Mrs. Smith to withdraw from the table and sit in a corner of the room about six feet from the table, and to take a small book with the alphabet in it, and commencing to point at "A" to move slowly towards the end and back to "A" again, and so on, observing at what letters the table tilted. Although she was visible to all at the table, yet she was so placed that no one could form any idea of what letters were being pointed to. These preparations, which only took about a minute, being finished, we then continued.

1 The reference is to the experiments by Professor Richet, just quoted.

Almost at once the table commenced to tilt at irregular short intervals, and when it had tilted seven or eight times, I, being anxious to know whether anything coherent was being spelled out, asked Mrs. Smith what were the results, and she answered that the table had tilted at the letters H-o-w-e-y J-a. The name of a young man a few years deceased, and known by name at any rate to all at the table, was at once recognised, his name being James Howey. I then asked: Q. Is it the spirit of James Howey? A. Yes. Q. Have you met your mother since she passed out ? A. Yes. Q. Is she with you now ? A. Yes. Q. Does she wish to communicate? A. Yes. Q. With any one at the table ? A. No. Q. With any of her family ? A. Yes. Q. With Miss Howey ? A. Yes. Q. Will she rap (tilt) the table when the letters of the alphabet are pointed to which spell out her communication ? A. Yes. The table commenced to tilt again as before, but it was not interrupted, and when it had stopped I asked what had been spelled out, and Mrs. Smith replied : " Good and faithful " had been spelled. Q. Do you mean that Miss Howey is good and faithful? A. No. Q. Do you mean it as an injunction to her to be good and faithful ? A. Yes. Q. Do you wish to communicate further ? A. Yes. Proceeding as before, the table at once commenced tilting, and when it had ceased Mrs. Smith said it had spelled out : " Mind father, and be sure of that." The experiment here ended, and the striking aptness of the latter communications was much spoken of by the sitters.

I should not have thought this worth writing out, but for the fact that Mrs. Smith, while pointing out the letters, sat away from the table and in such a position that no one at the table could form the faintest idea of what letters were being pointed to. These circumstances remove the case from the ordinary run of table-tilting experiments.

Of course I was aware of the imperfection of the arrangements, but they could not be improved at the time, and I at once arranged for a further and more testing experiment for the evening of September I3th. For this occasion I secured the assistance of two more young men, one of whom I intended should write down the letters rapped or tilted out, and the other to witness that such was done correctly. I also arranged for the sitters at the table to be in the room, and those with the alphabet just outside the door (which was almost shut) of such room. But I regret to say that, though the table tilted quite briskly, and though we made several changes of persons from the table to the alphabet, and tried for about an hour, yet there could not be found the least trace of coherence or intelligibility in the series of letters taken down as rapped out, although we tried them by inversion, anagram matically, and by substituting neighbouring letters, as is done in the case referred to in Phantasms of the Living. I have not further experimented in this way.

GEORGE MAIN SMITH.

849 A. I quote below part of Mr. Newnham's account of his experiments in thought-transference through automatic writing, the whole of which is given in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. pp. 8—23. EXTRACTS FROM MR. NEWNHAM'S DIARY.

It was in January 1871 that I was first led to think of making an attempt to investigate the alleged phenomena of planchette-writing. Having procured an instrument, I consulted carefully with my wife, as to forming a code of conditions which we would agree to bind ourselves rigidly to observe, in case she was. found capable of writing.

849A] TO CHAPTER VIII 427

I copy from my note-book the following preliminary statement and conditions agreed upon, which were put down in writing before any experiment had been made : —

" Being desirous of investigating accurately the phenomena of planchette, myself and my wife have agreed to carry out a series of systematic experiments in order to ascertain the conditions under which the instrument is able to work. To this end the following rules are strictly observed : —

1. The question to be asked is written down before the planchette is set

in motion. This question, as a rule, is never known to the operator.

2. Whenever an evasive or other answer is returned, necessitating one or

more new questions to be put before a clear answer can be obtained, the operator is not to be made aware of any of these questions, or even of the general subject to which they allude, until the final answer has been obtained.

3. In all cases where the operator has asked the question, or is aware of its

terms or general tenor, the question will be distinguished by prefixing an asterisk, and leaving a space between it and the marginal line. [None of these questions are quoted here.]

4. Where no operator is mentioned, my wife is always meant.

5. Where no questioner is mentioned, myself is always meant." Although not provided for in writing (as our mutual bona fides was, of

course, taken for granted), I may add that my wife always sat at a small low table, in a low chair, leaning backwards. I sat about eight feet distant, at a rather high table, and with my back towards her while writing down the questions. It was absolutely impossible that any gesture, or play of features, on my part, could have been visible or intelligible to her. As a rule, she kept her eyes shut; but never became in the slightest degree hypnotic, or even naturally drowsy.

Under these conditions we carried on experiments for about eight months, and I have 309 questions and answers recorded in my note-book, spread over this time.1 But the experiments were found very exhaustive of nerve-power, and as my wife's health was delicate, and the fact of thought-transmission had been abundantly proved, we thought it best to abandon the pursuit.

I now proceed to give a sample of some of these questions and answers. The numbers prefixed are those in my note-book.

I may mention that the planchette began to move instantly with my wife. The answer was often half written before I had completed the question.

On first finding that it would write easily, I asked three simple questions which were known to the operator ; then three others, unknown to her, relating to my own private concerns. All six having been instantly answered in a manner to show complete intelligence, I proceeded to ask —

7. Write down the lowest temperature here this winter. A. 8.

Now, this reply at once arrested my interest. The actual lowest temperature had been 7.6° so that 8 was the nearest whole degree ; but my wife said at once that, if she had been asked the question, she would have written 7, and not 8 ; as she had forgotten the decimal, but remembered my having said that the temperature had been down to 7 something.

I simply quote this, as a good instance, at the very outset, of perfect trans-

1 The remainder of the 385 questions and answers in this book belong to a different series, where the question was known to the operator.

mission of thought, coupled with a perfectly independent reply ; the answer being correct in itself, but different from the impression on the conscious intelligence of both parties.

Naturally our first desire was to see if we could obtain any information concerning the nature of the intelligence which was operating through the planchette, and of the method by which it produced the written results. We repeated questions on this subject again and again ; and I will copy down the principal questions and answers in the connection.

January zqth. 13. Is it the operator's brain, or some external force, that moves the planchette ? Answer " brain " or ** force." A. Will.

14. Is it the will of a living person, or of an immaterial spirit, distinct from that person ? Answer " person " or " spirit." A. Wife.

15. Give first the wife's Christian name; then my favourite name for her. (This was accurately done.)

27. WThat is your own name ? A. Only you.

28. We are not quite sure of the meaning of the answer. Explain. A. Wife.

Failing to get more than this, at the outset, we returned to the same thought after question 114; when, having been closely pressed on another subject, we received the curt reply—" Told all I know."

February \%th, 117. Who are you that writes, and has told all you know ? A. Wife.

1 1 8. But does no one tell wife what to write ? If so, who? A. Spirit.

119. Whose spirit? A. Wife's brain.

1 20. But how does wife's brain know [Masonic] secrets ? A. Wife's spirit unconsciously guides.

121. But how does wife's spirit know things it has never been told ? A. No external influence.

122. But by what internal influence does it know [Masonic] secrets ? A. You cannot know.

March \$th. 132. Who, then, makes the impressions upon her? A. Many strange things.

133. What sort of strange things ? A. Things beyond your knowledge.

134. Do, then, things beyond our knowledge make impressions upon wife? A. Influences which no man understands or knows.

136. Are these influences which we cannot understand external to wife ? A. External — invisible.

137. Does a spirit, or do spirits, exercise those influences ? A. No, never (written very large and emphatically).

138. Then from whom, or from whence, do the external influences come ? A. Yes ; you will never know.

139. What do you mean by writing " yes " in the last answer ? A. That I really meant never.

March iqth. 142. By what means are [Masonic] secrets conveyed to wife's brain ? A. What you call mesmeric influence.

144. What do you mean by " what you call " ? What do you call it? A. Electro-biology.

145. By whom, or by what, is the electro-biologic force set in motion? A. I told you you could not know more than you did.

146. Can wife answer a question the reply to which I do not know ? A. Why do you try to make me say what I won't ?

849 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 429

147. Simply because I desire knowledge. Why will not you tell ? A. Wife could tell if some one else, with a very strong will, in the room knew. March -2.6th. 179. Can you foresee the future ? A. No, April loth. 190. Why are you not always .... influenced by what I think ? A. Wife knows sometimes what you think.

191. How does wife know it? A. When her brain is excited and has not been much tried before.

192. But by what means are my thoughts conveyed to her brain? A. Electro-biology.

193. What is electro-biology ? A. No one knows.

194. But do not you know? A. No. Wife does not know.

195. What makes you always call her "wife"? A. You always think of wife.

196. But I never <r#//her " wife." Why do you ? A. I am nothing without wife.

200. That is no answer. Why do you call her so? A. Because she is all a wife.

My object in quoting this large number of questions and replies has not been merely to show the instantaneous and unfailing transmission of thought from questioner to operator ; but, more especially, to call attention to a remarkable characteristic of the answers given. These answers, consistent and invariable in their tenor from first to last, did not correspond with the opinions or expectations of either myself or my wife. . . . For such answers as those numbered 14, 27, 137, 144, 192, and 194, we were both of us totally unprepared ; and I may add that, so far as we were prepossessed by any opinions whatever, these replies were distinctly opposed to such opinions. In a word, it is simply impossible that these replies should have been either suggested or composed by the conscious intelligence of either of us.

One isolated but very interesting experiment deserves to be recorded here. I had a young man reading with me as a private pupil at this time. On February I2th he returned from his vacation ; and, on being told of our experiments, expressed his incredulity very strongly. I offered any proof that he liked to insist upon, only stipulating that I should see the question asked. Accordingly, Mrs. Newnham took her accustomed chair in my study, while we went out into the hall, and shut the door behind us. He then wrote down on a piece of paper : 87. What is the Christian name of my eldest sister?

We at once returned to the study, and found the answer already waiting for us: A. Mina.

(This name was the family abbreviation of Wilhelmina: and I should add that it was unknown to myself.) . . .

We soon found that my wife was perfectly unable to follow the motions of the planchette. Often she only touched it with a single finger; but even with all her fingers resting on the board she never had the slightest idea of what words were being traced out. This is important to remember, in view of the fact that five or six questions were often asked consecutively without her being told of the subject that was being pursued. (Rule 2.)

It struck me that it would be a good thing to take advantage of this peculiarity on her part, to ask questions upon subjects that it was impossible for her to know anything about. ... I had taken a deep interest in Masonic archaeology, and I now questioned planchette on some subjects connected therewith.

February itfh. 92. What is the English of the Great Word of the R.A. ? (After an interruption, of which I shall speak hereafter, one great word of the Degree, but not the one I meant, was written, very slowly and clearly.)

97. Is the word truly genuine, or is it a made-up one ? A. Tried to tell : can't.

98. By whom was the word first used ? A. Too hard work for wife. February i8M. 112. What is the translation of the Great Triple Word?

A. (The first syllable of the word in question was written correctly, and then it proceeded.) The end unknown. Three languages. Greece. Egypt. Syriac.

113. What part of the word is Greek? A. Meaning unknown.

1 14. When was the word first invented ? A. Told all I know.

115. Who are you that know? (Answer scrawled and illegible.)

116. Please repeat same answer legibly? A. Manifestation triune person.

(Here follow questions 117-22, as above.)

March i$th. 125, 126. What are the three languages of which the Great R.A. Word is composed ? A. Answered all I could before.

127. You said one part of the word was Greek. Which is it? A. Greek, I think.

128. Which syllable do you think is Greek ? A. The last.

129. What is the English translation of it ? A. Can't explain it.

130. If the last syllable be Greek, which is Egyptian, as you said? A. I cannot tell you more than you know.

131. But why, then, do you say that that syllable is Greek which 7 think Egyptian ? A. Wife can't always receive impressions.

(Here follow 132-39, as above.)

March 2.6th. 166. Of what language is the first syllable of the Great Triple R.A. Word ? A. Don't know.

167. Yes, you do. What are the three languages of which the word is composed? A. Greek, Egypt, Syriac first syllable (correctly given), rest unknown.

168. Write the syllable which is Syriac. A. (First syllable correctly written.)

169. Write the syllable which is Egyptian. A. Second.

170. Can you not write the syllable itself? A. Third Greek.

174. Write down the word itself. A. (First three and last two letters were written correctly, but four incorrect letters, partly borrowed from another word of the same degree, came in the middle.)

1 76. Why do you write a word of which I know nothing ? A. Wife tried hard to tell the word, but could not quite catch it.

177. Catch it from whom ? A. Not quite sure.

178. Not quite sure of what ? A. I know nothing. Wife doesn't quite know. 182. Write out the prayer used at the advancement of a Mark Master Mason.

A. Almighty Ruler of the Universe and Architect of all worlds, we beseech Thee to accept this, our brother, whom we have this day received into our most honourable Company of Mark Master Masons. Grant him to be a worthy member of our brotherhood ; and may he be in his own person a perfect mirror of all Masonic virtues. Grant that all our doings may be to Thy honour and glory, and to the welfare of all mankind.

This prayer was written off instantaneously and very rapidly. It is a very remarkable production indeed. For the benefit of those who are not members of the craft, I may say that no prayer in the slightest degree resembling it is made use of in the Ritual of any Masonic degree ; and yet it contains more

850A] TO CHAPTER VIII 431

than one strictly accurate technicality connected with the degree of Mark Mason. My wife has never seen any Masonic prayers, whether in " Carlile," or any other real or spurious Ritual of the Masonic Order.

Here, then, assuredly, was a formula composed by some intelligence totally distinct from the conscious intelligence of either of the persons engaged in the experiment.

I proceeded to inquire as follows : —

183. I do not know this prayer. Where is it to be found ? A. Old American Ritual.

184. Where can I get one ? A. Most likely none in England.

185. Can you not write the prayer that I make use of in my own Lodge? A. No, I don't know it.

In these last answers we see a new moral element introduced. There is evasion, or subterfuge, of a more or less ingenious kind ; and totally foreign to the whole character and natural disposition of the operator. A similar attempt at deliberate invention, rather than plead guilty to total ignorance* is contained in the following answers: —

May Jth. 255. In what Masonic degree was the Triple Word first used ? A. Wife does not know.

256. Cannot you tell her ? A. How can wife know what no one else does ?

257. Does no one, then, know the answer to this ? A. No one knows now.

258. What do you mean by "now"? Did any one once know? A. The last one who knew died at least twenty years ago.

259. What was his name? A. In America ; don't know name.

And again, May 2ist. 280. Can you write the Triple R.A. Word to-night? A. Abracadabra.

281. Wrong word. Try again. A. Wife can't write secret words.

282. Then why did you profess to write it the other day ? A. I only wrote what wife knew.

283. But if she knows it why do you not write it to-night ? A. You told her.

284. What did I tell her? A. One day when your influence over her was very strong.

(N.B. The answer to 284 is a case of "arrested" reply; i.e. it is a continuation of the reply to 283, without reference to question 284 at all.)

285. Then why does she not write it now ? A. Wife can't understand.

286. Is it my question, or the answer to it, that she can't understand? A. Don't know.

287. What is the matter with you to-night ? A. You are tired and so is wife. I will conclude with a very pretty instance of a mistake instantly corrected.

t was on the same evening, May loth ; I had to preach on the following Whit-Monday, on the occasion of laying a foundation stone with Masonic ceremonial, sc I asked : —

275. Give me a text for Whit-Monday's sermon. A. If I go not away, the Comforter will not come to you.

The selection of a subject suitable for Whitsuntide is plainly the first idea caught by the intelligence ; so I proceeded :—

276. That will not do for my subject. I want a text for the Monday's sermon. A. Let brotherly love continue.

850 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. (1893), pp. 61-64.

I had often urged that attempts should be made to imitate Mr. and

Mrs. Newnham's series of experiments in the transference of an unseen question through an automatist's subliminal self to his pencil ; and I was at length fortunate enough to find a friend — Mr. R. H. Buttemer, of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, a graduate in honours in Natural Sciencewilling to make a serious endeavour of this kind. Some perseverance was required ; but a friend of Mr. Buttemer's, Mr. H. T. Green, having first been several times lightly hypnotised by Mr. Buttemer, showed during some months unmistakable power as a percipient. I was cognisant of the experiments throughout ; although on the only occasion on which I was myself present Mr. Green's mind was distracted by a theological examination which he was to pass next day, and his pencil would write little but names of kings of Israel and Judah. The conditions were throughout good ; the question being written down out of Mr. Green's sight, and indications carefully avoided. In the last sitting Mr. Green had his back to all the other persons present — which is, of course, the right plan ; — and that sitting was, as will be seen, the best of all. But considering the nature of the questions asked, there was, I think, little opportunity for unconscious indications, even when some of the persons who knew the question were within sight of Mr. Green. There was never any contact. The selection of questions and answers given below is a nearly average sample ; — those which are omitted being mainly questions on private affairs, where the answers were necessarily less definite than numbers or letters, and where their degree of correctness would need cumbrous explanation. The best answer is certainly the spelling out of John Bou — from the unseen card.

The answers here classed as " irrelevant " were sometimes a reproduction of thoughts likely to be in the operator's mind (persons like Jeroboam and Omri frequently turning up) ; and sometimes, I think, represented imperfect efforts of the subliminal self to get at the unseen question. In this and other points these experiments resemble the much more completely successful Newnham series. There was no apparent reason for the cessation of Mr. Green's power. He was a healthy man, but had one or two trifling ailments during the experiments, which seemed to check the faculty for the time. Mr. Green, Mr. W., and Mr. S. are known to me ; and all, I think, have pursued the inquiry in a scientific spirit. The frivolous and roundabout style of the replies is very characteristic of automatic messages in their earlier stages. I now give Mr. Buttemer's account.

AUTOMATIC WRITING EXPERIMENTS WITH PLANCHETTE.

The following series of experiments were conducted at Cambridge, the operator being Mr. Green, of Emmanuel College. The agents (present during all the experiments described) were Mr. W. and Mr. Buttemer. The series of experiments commenced on November I2th, 1892 : prior to this Mr. Green had made one or two more or less successful attempts at automatic writing, but the obvious difficulty of avoiding the chance of conscious interference where the questions put were asked aloud had prevented the following up of these till the suggestion was made that the questions should be written down and concealed

850A] TO CHAPTER VIII 433

from the operator. Under these conditions a trial was made on the above date, time 2 P.M., the questions being known only to the two agents. No one else was present.

Q. What is number on machine ? (an automatic dice-box, none of the three having seen the numbers on it). A. Give another.

Q. Who is ill on this staircase ? A. Ke pike pike. (A man of that name, Pike, was ill, as all were aware ; but Mr. Green had not seen the question.) All then (Mr. Green included) looked at the dice-box, and saw the number — seven — on it.

Q. Why would you not answer first question ? A. Seven.

Another question was then correctly answered.

Q. What is the matter with H. T. Green ? Answer referred to previous question.

Question was put again, still without Mr. Green seeing it. A. A bad cold. (Correct.)

Q. Why cannot (Mr. W.) write with planchette ? A. W , you mean.

There is nothing in good health. Liver is not in good condition.

Q. Whose liver is not right ? A. i. (Irrelevant.) ii. Nobody particularly.

Q. (By Mr. Buttemer.) Where am I going this afternoon ? After waiting some time the answer was written rapidly. A. Away, away, away.

Mr. Green knew where I was going, but did not write a more definite answer automatically.

Eight questions were put in all, of which four were answered immediately and correctly, and two after a sentence referring to the previous question had been written. The first and third were not answered, the answer to the first being unknown to the agents, while at the third Mr. Green's subliminal consciousness appeared to seize the opportunity of showing its just-acquired knowledge of the first. [When two answers are given, the operator was simply told to write again, after the first irrelevant answer, without being shown the question ; except where otherwise stated.]

At the next sitting, on the I4th November, Messrs. W., S., and Buttemer were present, while Mr. Green operated planchette, as before. Six questions [the answers to which were known to the agents] were put in the same way, two being answered directly and unmistakably, while one was answered after some irrelevant writing, two incorrectly, and the last was not answered, the operator appearing tired.

November ?.Qth. Agents and percipient as before. 4 P.M.

The questions were put in the same way.

Q. Who is J. O. F. M. ? (The initials being given in the question, we wished the name to be written.) A. i. Man. Dean. (Rather illegible.) ii. Murray. (Right. Dean of Emmanuel.)

Q. Who is G. R. S. ? (Only S. knew who was meant.) A. Not S .

(Here S. told the other agents the name— Smith.) Mr. Green wrote " Sleep," and became drowsy. He was spoken to, to rouse him, and the question was written.

Q. Why did you become drowsy and write fi Sleep " ? A. H. T. Green (pause) cannot help himself.

Q. Why? A. He is tired, he is tired, he is tired. (Written very fast.)

January 31 j/, 1893. 4 P.M. Agents as before, with the addition of Mrs. H. and Miss B.

VOL. IT. 2 E

Q. How many cups of tea did Miss B. have ? A. i. Cannot be ascertained, ii. It was in all two — 2 2 2. (Correct.)

(When a second answer was waited for, care was taken that the writer should glean no idea of the question in the interval.)

Q. What engraving is on the wall over the piano? (It was one of the Queen soon after her marriage.) A. i. You may perceive it was so. (Apparently referring to previous question.) ii. It is a girl, the daughter of a man.

Q. Who was playing the piano when the ladies came in ? A. i. The clock hath stricken five. (The clock struck just as Mr. Green began to write.) ii. Mr. S. (This was correct.)

Q. What was it ? A. i. The one that was asked first, ii. Something, iii. Explain yourself more clearly.

Q. What was S. playing when we came in ? A. i. The original one of all. ii. All I can say is " La Cigale." (Correct.)

Two more questions were answered correctly, and then the writer began writing on a subject in his mind at the time, and four more questions that were put received no direct answers.

February \%th. 8 P.M. Mrs. H., Miss B., Mr. and Miss M. present, in addition to Mr. Green, and Messrs. S., W., and Buttemer.

Mr. Green, as usual, operated planchette, and on this occasion sat with his back to all the other persons present.

Q. (from Mr. M.) What was I doing this afternoon? A. i. the sun

(all else illegible), ii. Enjoying the fresh air of heaven.

Q. What was Mr. Rogers doing in Cambridge? A. i. (Irrelevant, or possibly connected vaguely with the question.) ii. Ask another, but Mr. Rogers came up on important business connected with the Lodge. (Correct.)

Q. Where has Mrs. M. gone ? A. i. (Irrelevant.) ii. Far, far away, but more next time. iii. Her mother has gone to — oh, what a happy place is London ! iv. All change here for Bletchley. (Mrs. M. had possibly passed this station on her journey.)

Q. Who has won the Association Match to-day? A. i. (Illegible.) ii. Oh, ye simple ones, how long will ye love simplicity? Why, Oxford, of course. [This fact was known to some persons in the room, but not to Mr. Green.]

One of the company then suggested the attempt to get the name on a visiting card transmitted, and the question was written, " Write name on card." Mr. Green did not know that this experiment was about to be tried, and the card was picked from a pile at random. The name was John B. Bourne. A sentence was written by Mr. Green, which proved to be, " Think of one letter at a time and then see what will happen." We did so. A. i. J for Jerusalem, 0 for Omri, H for Honey, and N for Nothing, ii. B for Benjamin, O for Olive, U for Unicorn. (The remaining letters were given incorrectly.)

Q. How many of the Society's books are here ? (There were two volumes of Proceedings on the table.) A. i. (Irrelevant.) ii. The answer is 100-98.

Q. What is 2 X 3 ? Two irrelevant answers were given, possibly owing to a slight disturbance in the room. The third answer was—" When that noise has ceased and S. has finished knocking the lamp over I say 6."

A trial shortly after this, February iQth, gave no results, and the power of automatic writing appears to have entirely left Mr. Green for the present.

851 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 44~48-

The following account, dated Thoraes House, Wakefield, January

851 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 435

30th, 1893, is signed by Lady Mabel Howard; her husband, Mr. Henry Howard, of Greystoke Castle, Westmoreland, attesting the facts which lie within his cognisance. Some corroborations, and some comments of my own, are added in brackets.

i. I began to write automatically every now and then when a young girl, as some relations of mine were in the habit of doing so. I do not, however, remember any of the messages until I was eighteen, when one day a girl friend asked me as a joke, " Who wished to marry her ? " My pencil wrote two initials which had no meaning for me. The girl was very angry, as though the writing implied that she was fated to marry this man. She told me nothing; but some years afterwards a man with these initials told me that he had wished to marry this lady at just that time. [The transference of an idea latent in the agent's mind — to the exclusion of the idea which he wishes to have transferred — is, of course, a frequent phenomenon in these experiments.]

2. Some time after my marriage (1885) there was a burglary at Netherby Hall, in Cumberland, a few valuable jewels being stolen. The robbers were caught three or four days later, but the jewels were not found. Next Sunday [apparently November ist, 1885, see below], I was asked by some friends to write where the jewels were. I wrote, " In the river, under the bridge at Tebay." This was very unlikely, and had never been suggested, so far as I know, by any one. Every one laughed at this ; but the jewels were found there. [The Hon. Mrs. C. J. Cropper, of Tolson Hall, Kendal, corroborates as follows, in February 1893: "We were staying at Greystoke just after the capture of the Netherby burglars, and some questions about the burglary were answered by Lady Mabel's pencil. I am absolutely certain that in answer to the question ' Where are the jewels ? ' the pencil wrote ' In the river.' I think that in answer to a further question it added ' Under the bridge,' but I am not so certain of this. I am perfectly certain that it went on to say that the fourth man, who never was caught, was then 'in Carlisle,' and that it also gave his name. (The fourth man was some time after suspected to have been a local man. — M. H.) My husband, who was also present, is quite sure about the words ' under the bridge.' — EDITH E. CROPPER."]

[From the Carlisle Express and Examiner, October 3ist, 1885, it appears that two of the burglars were captured at Tebay Station. The guard saw them conceal themselves in a truck, and telegraphed in advance for assistance. The third man escaped, but seems to have crept back to the train, for he was subsequently caught at Lancaster, as he was quickly making for a London train. It was not in the least known where the jewels were (a fourth man having got away), and the finding of the first jewel near Tebay Station, close to the water side (reported in same paper November 7th), was accidental. This discovery, of course, caused search to be made in the river, where the jewels were found "near the railway bridge," more than a month later. (Same paper, December I9th.) There can, I think, be no doubt that the writing was on November ist. Lady Mabel Howard, writing from Lyulph's Tower, Penrith, May 5th, 1893, is quite certain of this : " It was immediately after the men were caught, and before any jewel at all was found. This all will assert — the Bullers, Croppers, my brother and husband — for all five of us were local people, and looking out for every fresh detail about it, and only the capture had taken place when the pencil wrote."]

3. On the same night I wrote that my sister would be engaged to be married in September 1887. At the end of September 1887 she became engaged to a gentleman of whom there had been no idea at the time. [It is, of course, conceivable that the prediction, known to this lady, may have influenced the date of the event.]

4. At nearly the same date some connections of mine who had let a house, the lease of which was expiring, were expecting to hear whether any damage had been done, but did not speak of any particular possibility. I wrote that nothing was injured except a particular table in a particular spot. Next day they heard that this particular table, and this alone, had been injured.

[Miss Buller corroborates and expands this statement as follows: —

36 GREEN STREET, PARK LANE, W., April 26th, 1893.

The following incident happened when I was staying at Greystoke more than a dozen years ago [discrepancy as to date], but I have often told the story since, and to the best of my recollection the facts were these : —

On being asked what damage our tenants had done, Lady Mabel Howard's pencil replied: "They have broken the table and a chair," and added, "the table has been mended." On reaching our house and asking the same question of our housemaid, she replied that a table in the drawing-room (the only one of its kind) had been broken, but had been mended, and one of the kitchen chairs had been broken. Nothing else in the way of furniture had been injured. HENRIETTA J. BULLER.]

5. Shortly afterwards I went for some winter months to St. Moritz. For some reason or other the answers were particularly good there. One day a lady living in quite a different part of the huge hotel, and on the fourth floor, while we were on the first floor, missed a valuable object which she had bought as a prize for tobogganing. I knew nothing of the circumstances, but my hand wrote that the object had been taken by a light-haired young waiter called Richard. I knew of no such waiter, as he had nothing to do with our part of the hotel. But on mentioning this answer to the lady in question she said that there was in fact a young light-haired waiter called Richard who waited on her floor; and that she had suspected him. My hand had written where the object was hidden; but the lady would not have search made.

6. A Mr. Huth, who was staying at our hotel, was leaving the next day for Paris, and had arranged to dine the day after with a friend, a young doctor attached to the Embassy in Paris, from whom he had just received an invitation. He asked me to predict something about his journey. My hand wrote words to this effect: "You will have an accident on your journey; and you will not see your friend, and you cannot see him." He derided this, as the arrangement with the friend had just been made. As he went to Chur next day by sleigh his sleigh was overturned, and his journey was thus delayed for a day. When he got to Paris he found that his friend was dead.

[Mr. Huth independently corroborates and adds to this account as follows : —

OAKFIELD LODGE, HUDDERSFIELD, April \6th, 1893.

In March 1889 I was staying at St. Moritz (Engadine), where I met with a very serious accident tobogganing. Although still crippled, I decided to return home, and on the morning of my departure the weather was brilliantly fine. I asked Lady Mabel Howard's pencil, more in joke than anything else,

851 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 437

what sort of a journey I should have. The pencil promptly replied that I should have an awful journey and meet with an accident. I then asked whether I should meet and dine with any friend in Paris. I asked this question because I had arranged to dine with a friend of mine, a Dr. Davies, who was living there, to talk over some theatricals he was to get up at the British Embassy. The pencil at once replied that I should neither meet nor dine with any one I knew. Knowing of my arrangement and incredulous as to this reply, I repeated my question, with the same result. I then asked what day I should get back to England, having decided in my own mind to return on the Friday. The pencil at once answered " On Thursday."

On the summit of the Julier Pass the weather suddenly changed from bright sunshine to a perfect hurricane of wind, snow, and sleet, which completely blinded us, and the snow was so thick we could not see ten yards in front of us. Our driver missed the track, the sleigh upset, and we were all thrown out on to the snow, and it was three hours before we were in comparative safety. On my arrival in Paris I found no word from my friend Dr. Davies, and on inquiry at his rooms I learnt that he had died from typhoid fever ten days previously. I neither dined with nor met any one I knew whilst in Paris, and I returned to England a day sooner than I had intended in consequence of my friend's death, and it was only upon my arrival in London that I remembered it was Thursday, the day foretold by the pencil.

HARRY HUTH.]

7. In 1888 another girl friend of mine asked when she was to be engaged to be married. My hand wrote : " In March 1890." She became engaged in that month to a man of whom there had been no idea at the time. [The lady in question, Mrs. Lawson, writing from Greystoke Castle, February 1893, confirms and enlarges this statement as follows : " I was at Greystoke in February 1888, and Lady Mabel Howard was writing with her pencil, which said that I should be engaged to be married in March 1890, and it also said that I should not be married until the following year. I was engaged to be married on March 27th, 1890, and it was all settled that I should be married within six weeks ; but most unforeseen circumstances arose, and my marriage did not take place until April 1891. — CAMILLA LAWSON."]

8. I have never tried experiments in thought-transference, such as those recorded in the S.P.R. Proceedings. But I have no doubt that words and ideas do pass without speech from my husband's mind into mine. I have specially remarked this a propos of bye-elections, when I feel certain that I have never consciously known the names of the candidates. Many times my hand has written those names (when known to him) truly, and sometimes it has predicted results of elections with an accuracy which seemed to both of us not to be the result of chance. In one case, where a gentleman named Nanney was standing, of whom I was quite sure that I had never heard, my hand kept writing " Goat, Goat." In this case my husband was not present, but some one else who was present knew the name.

MABEL HOWARD. " Correct, as far as I am concerned. — HENRY HOWARD."

[These last instances must, according to our canons of evidence, be reckoned merely as revivals of subliminal memory. Names which have been printed in newspapers which have been lying about must be taken as having possibly

fallen within the field of at least unconscious vision. The emergence of an unconsciously observed name Nanney in the grotesque form Goat would thus be parallel to the emergence of the unconsciously observed word Bouillon in the grotesque form Verbascum Thapsus, mentioned in Proceedings, vol. viii. P- 455-]

Writing later, from P Park, April iSth, 1893, Lady Mabel adds :—

9. The H. girls asked what entertainment they should go to directly on arriving in London. The pencil answered, " Lady C." This puzzled us all, as no one knew of an entertainment to be given next week. At last, as it continued writing " Lady C.," we gave it up, thinking it must mean dining at home, Lady C. meaning [their mother]. That very evening, eight hours after, a letter arrived from [Lady W. G.] saying Lady Carrington wished to know if the H.'s could dance the minuet at her house on the 27th. They will arrive in London on the 25th. [From a later letter it appears that the Ladies H. knew that this engagement impended, but believed that it would be much later in the season, "and were much surprised themselves at receiving the letter."]

ro. I have myself [F. W.H.M.] succeeded in getting two correct answers to questions absolutely beyond Lady Mabel's knowledge. From Thornes House I was asked to luncheon at the house of a gentleman whom I knew only by correspondence, and of whose home and entourage the rest of the party knew absolutely nothing. On my return I asked, " How many people sat down to luncheon ? " The answer was " Six," which was right. " What was the name of the gentleman, not my host, with whom I sat and talked after luncheon ? " The pencil wrote MO, and then began to scrawl. The name was Moultrie. It was impossible that Lady Mabel should have had any kind of notion that a gentleman of that name would have been present in a group of which she knew nothing whatever. But here the impulse to write seemed spent, and a few further questions were answered by erroneous words or mere scrawls.

II. The following statement, dated Downes, Crediton, Devonshire, April 8th, 1893, is signed by Sir Redvers Buller, K.C.B., and by Miss Dorothy Howard (daughter of Lady Audrey Buller) : —

" Lady Mabel Howard was stopping with us this week. She was writing with her pencil just after arriving. Some one asked : • Where is Don ? ' The pencil immediately answered, * He is dead.' Lady Mabel then asked who Don was, and was told that he was a dog. No one in the room knew that he was dead ; but on inquiry the next day, it was found that it was so. One of the party then asked how many fish would be caught in the river the next day. The pencil at once wrote three, which was the number obtained the next day.

" A little girl in the house, who attends a school in London, asked who was her greatest friend at this school. The pencil answered Mary, which was again a fact absolutely unknown to Lady Mabel.

" DOROTHY E. HOWARD. "REDVERS BULLER."

The following is another case which I quote from the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 395. Lady Vane writes : —

HUTTON-IN-THE-FOREST, April 8tA, 1894.

About a month ago I lost a book, a manuscript one, relating to this house. I thought I had left it in my writing-table in my sitting-room, and intended to add a note about some alterations just completed — but next day the book

851A] TO CHAPTER VIII 439

had vanished. I looked through every drawer and cupboard in my room and then asked Sir Henry to do the same, which he did twice. I also made the head housemaid turn everything out of them and helped her to do so — so that four thorough searches were made ; but in vain. We also looked in the gallery and library (the only other rooms to which the book had been taken) and could not find it. On March 28th I asked Lady Mabel Howard to write about it. She wrote, "It is in the locked cupboard in the bookcase — hidden behind the books."

I said, " Then it must be in the library, because the bookcases are locked," and Lady Mabel wrote, "Not in the library." I said, "Then it must be in the ante-room in the cupboard," and asked if / should find it. Lady Mabel wrote, "No, send Sir Henry." I asked, "Will he find it? "and she wrote, " Of course."

Still thinking it could only be the ante-room or the library — on account of the locked cupboard and bookcase, I asked, " Which end of the room ? "

Lady Mabel wrote, "The tapestry end." I asked, "Is it on the window side of the room or on the other ? " and she wrote, " The other." A friend staying in the house looked in the bookcases in the library at the tapestry end, and in the cupboard in the ante-room (I had met with an accident and could not go myself) and could not find the book, so we gave it up.

On April 5th Sir Henry was in my sitting-room and suddenly said, " I have an idea ! Lady Mabel meant this room. There is the bookcase and the locked cupboard in it — and the wall outside the door is covered with tapestry." I said, "You have looked in that cupboard twice, and so have I and the housemaid, and the book is not there — but look again if you like." Sir Henry unlocked the door of the cupboard and took out all the books (there were not more than half-a-dozen) and put them on the floor. The last he put back into the cupboard was a scrap-book for newspaper cuttings, and as it was rather dark at 6.30 P.M. he could not see the name on the back and therefore opened it to see what it was, and the lost manuscript book fell out.

Having searched this very small cupboard four times previously, either of us would have been ready to swear that this book was not in it.

(Signed) MARGARET VANE.

HENRY VANE.

Writing to me about this case on April loth, from Greystoke Castle, Penrith, Lady Mabel Howard says : —

The day I got your letter I got a special letter sent over from Hutton to say my pencil had found a valuable book that Lady Vane had lost. We therefore walked over there on Sunday and I asked her to write it out. It is so very curious, quite the best thing I think the pencil ever has done — as it said, " in the cupboard in the bookcase," and they couldn't think where it meant— a cupboard in a bookcase— and this little cupboard is a cupboard in the middle let into glass bookcases on either side. I had no idea of the cupboards or tapestries there, and the pencil wrote all this in the sandwich paper at luncheon on the Point-to-Point racecourse.

So curious, too, the pencil said, "Send Sir Henry," twice. It was the merest chance finding it, as it fell out of this scrap-book, and was hidden behind the other books.

In another letter, dated April i4th, Lady Mabel Howard writes :—

I saw Lady Vane on February 24th, when the book had not been lost. I did not see her again till Easter Monday. The moment I got upstairs she exclaimed, "I want you to find a book for me that is lost." No pencil nor paper was forthcoming, so she said, " Never mind, write when you get home," but I forgot, and it was two days after at the Point- to-Point race that she asked me again, and we wrote it in the paper the sandwiches had been in.

I was abroad all this March and it was then that there were repairs being done in the house, and Lady Vane took the book down from where she kept it (I don't know where) and having entered the repairs into it, put it down, and from that moment it was never seen again. I must have been at Florence when the book was lost. MABEL HOWARD.

Are we to describe this as a knowledge of past, of present, or of future ? Or may we say that a telaesthetic perception of this kind is not strictly conditioned by time, but includes some retrogressive knowledge as to how things reached their present condition, and also some pregressive inference as to their coming development? The element of forecast in the present case, — the indication that it would be Sir Henry Vane who would find the book, — is in itself very slight; but it cannot be ignored when we compare other messages of Lady Mabel Howard's. See, for instance, the messages to Mr. Huth, where the element of precognition was strongly marked. In this present case, the whereabouts of the book can hardly have been supraliminally known to any human being ; since the workman or servant whose hands may have slipped it into the larger book was probably unaware of what it was, or even of his own unthinking action itself. If, however, it were Sir Henry or Lady Vane who unthinkingly placed the small book in the larger one — and this does not seem quite impossible — Lady Mabel's knowledge might have been drawn telepathically from their subliminal memory.

852 A. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 15-16.

The following incident seems to have been carefully watched and recorded, and was published, with names of guarantors, immediately after the event. It is extracted from a pamphlet, entitled Spiritualisms : Faits Curieux, par Paul Auguez (Dentu, Paris, 1858) : —

On December loth, 1857, we addressed the following letter to M. Morin, vice-president of the Societd du Mesme'risme, asking him to keep the letter sealed until the complete fulfilment of the sad event of which we related the prediction. The said prediction was as clearly expressed as it was wonderful in the extraordinary method of production. We retained a copy of this letter word for word. The original, stamped with the postmark, has been returned to us, after the verification of its date and contents, under the following circumstances : —

852 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 441

PARIS, December loth, 1857.

" SIR> — About a year ago, after a fruitless experiment in hydromancy,1 a young lady, who was with us making these experiments, suddenly saw a very strange scene reflected on the polished surface of a glass into which she had been looking a few minutes before. . . .

" She saw, she said, a room containing two beds. In one of these she saw quite distinctly a sick person, whose distorted features betokened the approach of death.

" Around this bed were standing several people, amongst whom she could distinguish a young woman and two children, all three dressed in black.

" Being much astonished at this vision, and not knowing with what to connect it, we asked the experimenter if these persons were known to her. She replied at once that the dying man seemed to her to be a friend of ours, M. X., an employe* in a government office, and that the three persons dressed in black must be his wife and his two sons.

" Although this appeared very strange, we did not attach much importance to the matter, for M. X. had a strong constitution, and at that time was in good health.

" However, about three months ago — that is to say, about nine months after the vision of which we have given an account — M. X. was suddenly attacked by acute bronchitis and congestion of the lungs ; but although his illness was pronounced by the doctor to be rather serious, it did not cause any great uneasiness.

" Then the fatal prediction came into our minds, and we were very anxious about the condition of our friend, which became more and more distressing.

" A few weeks ago the disease assumed a more serious character, and as the arrangement of the apartments in which he was living made it impossible to nurse him efficiently, he determined to take advantage of the privilege attached to his position as government official, and was moved to Val-de-Grace.

" At the time of writing this letter, the invalid, finding himself somewhat better, has just been taken to the house of a relation, where he hopes to stay during his convalescence.

" At the same time, the disease has not diminished in severity, although it is stationary. This is how matters stand to-day, December loth, 1857.

" As far as we are concerned, however, the prediction is in some measure fulfilled. Indeed, who would ever have thought that a young man, in full strength, would, in such a short time, be in such a state as he is to-day? Who would have supposed that any one who lived in such comfortable circumstances as our unfortunate friend would be obliged by the force of circumstances to have himself taken to a hospital ? Who could have foreseen that his family, who had been seen dressed in black, should happen just at that time to be in mourning for a relation who had died a short time previously ?

" We must add further that since M. X. was moved to the house of his relation, after attempts to obtain communications by means of a table, for several evenings, a message, giving the name of M. X., appeared spontaneously. Among other things said, in reply to questions asked, were the words : 1 Death warning! . . .'

1 Divination by means of pictures, which are delineated in the water before the eyes of the seer [i.e. a species of crystal-gazing].

" We heard later on that at the time when these manifestations occurred, M. X. was lying in a state of lethargic stupor, in consequence of the doses of opium given him to induce sleep."

M. X. died a month after this letter was sent. It was read by us in the presence of MM. le Baron du Potet, Petit d'Ormoy, and Morin, who, after having considered all the circumstances, and having verified the date of the postmark, December nth, certified that the details therein contained were absolutely accurate.

852 B. The following are extracts from a translation l of a paper on " Telepathic Perceptions by Means of Automatic Writing," by M. Bonatti, which appeared in the Rivista di Studi Psichici, July 1895.

I began to write automatically with the hand of a medium resting on mine, but soon I was able to write alone. The communications were at first of a spiritualistic character, and the writing was a fair imitation of that of the defunct who appeared to be present, and whom I had known in life. However, I was acquainted with their writing. I was generally advised to work and study much ; my counsellor was interested in my moral life, and was a more attentive friend than any I have found in flesh and blood. Soon after I was obsessed by a lying and frivolous, but not wicked, personality, who displayed a great passion for art. This personality was only useful to me on that point, giving me advice, and, by means of automatic drawing, greatly developing my memory of drawing and powers of conception. I did not write for several months, in order to free myself of this obsession. Meanwhile I enlarged my knowledge of psychical matters ; and when I began to write again I succeeded in convincing the communicating personality that it might be an emanation from my own subconscious self. After this it called itself my Secondo.

I examined this Secondo to see if it possessed any supernormal powers, and discovered some. It continued to give me useful advice, and strengthened my love of art.

When I write automatically I do not know what the communication will be; sometimes I guess after a few words, but I often guess wrongly, and write something altogether unlike my guess.

I enjoy perfectly good health, and am able to endure constant outdoor exercise without fatigue. As far as I know, I am psychically normal. I retain all my normal faculties when writing automatically.

The following are cases of telepathy from persons sleeping or dreaming at a greater or less distance, their impressions being revealed to me by automatic writing. The first of these cases was a great surprise to me, as I had never heard of similar ones. Up to February i/th, 1893, I have had very few failures, and these took place when I eagerly desired the phenomenon ; whilst the successes happened spontaneously. Every time that I tried to receive a telepathic communication, it was false. The following are cases of the communication of dreams, and it must not be forgotten that dreams are sometimes not remembered at all, and often remembered only in part.

October ^th, 1892, 11 P.M.— I wrote automatically, "Go Ang —

Goodbye." " The man who has been my murderer will not fare well." next day " Go Ang " told me that during the past night she had

1 The greater part of this translation appeared in full in the Proceedings S.P.R-. vol. xi. pp. 477-481.

852B] TO CHAPTER VIII 443

dreamt of me and of a man who had, in truth, been for her a very murderer.

In her dream she intended to revenge herself on him. Ang Go lived

about three kilometres from where I was writing.

October 8M, 9.30 P.M. — I wrote, " Hugo, I am speaking with you." And then a dream not worth reporting. " I also am speaking— I am Guido. I am

speaking with my grandmother." And then another dream. " Go Ang ,

I am speaking to G . I am telling him that I wish him to pay me ; but I

don't ask for money, but for clothes."

Hugo and Guido are my two nephews, who live in a village five kilometres from me. The first is ten and the other twelve years old. When asked the next day, with the greatest care not to suggest anything to them, of what they had dreamt the previous night, the first answered that he had dreamt that •people were trying to kill me, and that he remembered nothing else ; the other told me that he had dreamt of me, but remembered nothing more of his dream. Both had gone to bed at 8.15.

Go Ang , when questioned with great caution, told me that on the

night of the 8th she had dreamt of G . She remembered quite well that he

was talking to her about a new suit of his which was barely begun, but did not remember if she had been paid by him.

On the same evening on which I had written down the dreams of my two nephews, I made automatically a very childish drawing, and in a moment perceived that it represented them and their brothers, who were in the country. But I observed that one of them was missing, because there are four of them, and in my drawing there were only three. I did not know the reason of this. The next morning I had an explanation, discovering in my house, where he had passed the night, that very nephew who was missing in my picture. He had come up on the evening of the 8th, a few hours before I received the telepathic message, and after I had gone from my house to my studio, where I am accustomed to pass the evening. His arrival had not been pre-arranged, and I could not have seen him arrive, even unconsciously, as the street I went through to go to my studio was in a totally different direction from the street he traversed to get to my house.

The following is copied from my journal : —

October zist, 7.30 P.M. — I write, " M. O. is now mentioning your name to Signa R." Two hours after I meet M. O., who says he spoke of me to SigQ R. about 7.30, a propos of a letter which he had received that evening, and which contained a reference to me. I had not seen him all the day, knew nothing of the letter, nor that he was with Signa R. when I was writing.

February 26th, i P.M. — I write, " I am poisoning myself. Think of me." The writing begins with a name I cannot decipher, but which I guess.

March igth. — To-day a friend of the person whose name I guessed told me spontaneously that that person had attempted to poison herself several days ago. On the 26th, when I had the communication, she was at Bologna, and made the attempt later at Rovigo. I do not know if it was the first attempt, nor, if it was so, whether she had decided to do it when I wrote. I had no reason to suppose that A. G. would wish to take her own life. Unfortunately I have had no more communications from her which might have given me more details.

March ijth. — I write, "Run to the Club. Go." I have not been to the Club for more than a month, and intended to go to bed at once. My friend, A. L., who rarely goes to the Club, had this evening assisted at a conference

on Guido Bonatti. Association of ideas made him think of me, and he went to the Club believing he would find me there. I obeyed the telepathic order, and thus discovered what had caused it.

May %th. Morning. — A communication partly illegible. " You will receive . . . Ang Go to-day, which will tell you about M., because she

has been talking to him."

Ang Go is at Venice. Many days ago I had charged her to say

certain things to M. if she met him. He lives at Venice. On this evening

(the 8th) I received a card from Ang Go , relating her conversation

with M., whom she had met by chance. After the " You will receive to-day " in the automatic writing, there are several attempts at a word. Now I know all about it, I can see that the word is meant for "postcard."

[The postcard was kept and reads : —

"VENICE, May -jth, 1893." (Postmark, VENICE, May 8//&.)

u I found M. and told him what you charged me to say. He told me he had written to you before leaving, and that he would write again and send you his portrait.— Yours, ANGELINA."]

February $th, 1894. Venice.— (I lived at Padua while receiving the previous communications.) The automatic writing informs me that my mother at Padua has had something the matter with her hand. [About twenty days later I verified this. No one had told me of it.]

Unfortunately I have not kept all the original writings before January 1893, I have preserved only those which were verified. This is due to my then inexperience, for I thought it useless to preserve unverifiable communications. I remember that till January 1893 false communications were rare, and the unverifiable ones were numerous.

From the beginning of 1893 till February 5th, 1894, against twenty-seven communications verified, I have recorded eight false ones, eighteen which I could not verify, five which were wholly or partly correct, but where I am not certain that the information may not have reached me in some normal but unnoticed manner, and two which were correct but not exact.

I reckon that from October 1892 till January 1893 there may have been five false announcements. Thus there may have been altogether thirteen false communications.

I conclude from my personal experiences that the principal cause of failure is the intervention of the normal consciousness, which occurs most easily when the writing is slow and illegible, or when the communication is desired. I do not remember ever having received a truthful message when I wished for it. The true telepathic cases were always spontaneous, and improved by the exercise of the faculty. A true message was nearly always followed by other true ones; then came a false one, which caused discouragement, and initiated an annoying series of falsehoods, till another success restored confidence.

I have observed that confidence is the best condition for obtaining psychical phenomena.

[Signer Bonatti is a friend of Dr. Ermacora, who has been sometimes present when he was writing automatically; on one or two occasions when the writing was of telepathic origin. Signor Bonatti cannot obtain much confirmation, partly on account of the lapse of time, and partly because the supposed agents are persons whom he has lost sight of.]

857A] TO CHAPTER VIII 445

857 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 67-8. Professor H. writes to Dr. Hodgson in 1889 : —

I write you the details of another matter told me by a friend, Hon. Z., of

C . He is one of the leading members of the Bar, has represented

his State several times in the National Congress, and has a very clear, discriminating, and vigorous intellect. He does not believe in Spiritualism, but regards its phenomena as illusions or hallucinations. In his youth, in 1854,

he had taught a winter's term in his native town of P , and in the spring

returned to Q to complete his fit for college in the Academy in that

place. One evening after his return to Q , a party of young people to the

number of eight were gathered about a table to witness the trance-writing of one of their number, a Miss A., a very beautiful girl of eighteen years of age, and the music teacher of the Academy. She wrote the name of Mr.

Z.'s father, , who had died in 1845, and whom no one in the room

save his son could have known. I may add that none of the party save

my friend knew anything about P or its inhabitants. Mr. Z. declared

that he did not believe his father had anything to do with the writing. At this Miss A., who sat on the opposite side of the table from Mr. Z., arose, came about to his side, drew her pencil several times rapidly across the two middle fingers of his left hand, returned to her seat, and wrote quickly, " Does this convince you ? " Mr. Z. said that those two fingers were gone from his father's left hand, having been cut off in his boyhood. Mr. Z. was startled, but still expressed his disbelief. Miss A. then wrote H. T. Y.'s

name, and continued : " Killed on day of , sliding down M

Hill, running off embankment, broke his neck ; Rev. Mr. W. attended

funeral; text: book , chap. , verse ." Both date and text

were given with particularity. Mr. W. was a Congregationalist clergyman

of P , and Mr. Y.'s family were active and leading members of his

church. Mr. Y. had been one of Mr. Z.'s pupils that winter in P , and with

the other boys had coursed M Hill, a very steep hill near the schoolhouse, and covered with glare ice from summit to foot. Near the foot was an embankment wharfed up to sustain the road-bed, and that was a very dangerous place to slide by. Mr. Z. had repeatedly warned the boys of the danger, but had not deemed it best to forbid their sliding. He had worried over the matter a great deal, and was exceedingly relieved when school closed without any accident having happened. Mr. Z. looked up the text and found it entirely inappropriate to a funeral occasion. H. T. Y. is living

to-day, and is the head of the K School of Technology. This fact made

Mr. Z. scout the whole affair as unworthy of his notice ; but to me it seems to indicate a telepathic explanation of both occurrences. I asked Mr. Z. if either his father or Mr. Y. were in his mind at the time. He replied, " No," they came into his mind with a shock of surprise when their names were written. We must so suppose the telepathic communication to be without consciousness on the part of the agent.

The Hon. Z. of this case writes as follows : —

This statement by Professor H. is correct, and I cannot improve it, or make it more correct by re-writing. Now you may use these facts, but I earnestly desire you not to make use of any names or places.

858 A. My next case comes from Dr. Ermacora, of Padua. I quote it from Proceedings S.P.R.. vol. ix. pp. 68-70.

«#£ lytti, 1892.

. . . Signora Maria Manzini, residing here in Padua, has been for a few months experimenting with automatic writing, and is habitually controlled by a personality which announces itself under the name of Elvira.

On April 2ist, 1892, Signora Maria Manzini received a letter from Venice informing her that her cousin, Maria Alzetta, was seriously ill with phthisis. It was long since Signora Manzini had heard news of this cousin, and she only knew that, having been left a childless widow, she had remarried and had two children by her second husband. On the evening of the same day Signora M. was writing in my presence, under the control of Elvira, and asked questions as follows : —

Q. Can you tell me if my cousin's illness is really serious ? After a pause of about a minute and a half the answer came. A. She has a very short time to live, and she leaves three lovely children.

Q. Did you first know this when I received news of the illness ? A. No, I have known it for many days, but did not mention it for fear of paining Maria [the medium].

Q. Why, then, were you so slow just now in answering my question? A. I went to see how she was, so as to be able to tell you precisely.

Next day Signora M. wrote to Venice offering to go and see the invalid. On the 24th she received an answer expressing a desire for her arrival, and stating that the invalid was at the hospital. She wrote again to ask on what days it was allowed to visit the hospital patients. Before an answer arrived Signora M. wrote in my presence (April 28th) under Elvira's control, and we put the following questions : —

Q. How is the invalid at Venice ? Do you know why the answer to my letter has not arrived ? and do you know on what day it is allowed to visit the hospital? A. The invalid's condition is the same. There is little hope. She has undergone a serious operation ; there is danger. To-morrow morning Maria will receive a letter. Visitors such as she are received every day at the hospital.

Q. Do you mean because Maria is a relation of the invalid's ? A. No, but because she comes from a distance.

Failing to see what connection there could be between pulmonary disease and a surgical operation, we asked : —

Q. If the patient is in a consumption, what operation can she have undergone ? A. She is in a consumption ; but the operation was necessitated by the birth of her last little girl.

Next morning Signora M. received a postcard from Venice containing these words : " Amalia inquired at the hospital and was told that you and your mother would be received on any day, as strangers from another city, if you will come when it suits you."

The date of the letter's arrival and the news contained in it thus corresponded with the prediction. But an embarrassing circumstance remained. When the postman delivered this letter he said that he had in fact brought it to the house on the previous evening, but finding no one at home he had taken it away with him again till the following morning. Thus the messages from Elvira had been received after the postman had endeavoured to deliver

859A] TO CHAPTER VIII 447

the letter. Had, then, the fact that the letter was already in Padua determined the communication which announced its approaching delivery and part of its content ?

