In the earlier part of this book I have naturally dwelt rather on the evidence for supernormal acquisition of knowledge than on the methods of such acquisition, and my present discussion must needs be restricted to a certain extent in the same way. We must, however, attempt some provisional scheme of classification, though recognising that the difficulties of interpretation which I pointed out in Chapter IV. (section 419), when endeavouring to distinguish between telepathy and telaesthesia, meet us again in dealing with possession and ecstasy. We may not, that is, be able to say, as regards a particular manifestation, whether it is an instance of incipient possession, or incipient ecstasy, or even whether the organism is being " controlled " directly by some extraneous spirit or by its own incarnate spirit. It is from the extreme cases that we form our categories. But now that we have reached some conception of what is involved in ecstasy and possession, we can interpret some earlier cases in this new light. Such experiences, for instance, as those of Mr. Mamtchitch (714), Miss Conley (721), Madame X. (833), and Miss A. (859 A), suggest a close kinship to the more developed cases of Mr. Moses and Mrs. Piper.

929. In other cases it may be clear that no control of any discarnate spirit is involved, but there seems to be something like incipient possession by the subliminal self or incarnate spirit. From this point of view the following incident — recorded, it will be observed, on the day of its occurrence — is of undoubted psychological interest. If it is not a case of thought-transference from Miss C. to Mrs. Luther (possibly between their subliminal selves during sleep), we must assume that a very remarkable recrudescence of latent memory occurred to the latter independently, at the same time that a similar though less remarkable revival of memory occurred to the former. But I introduce the case here simply as suggestive of the momentary domination of the subliminal over the supraliminal self. The account is quoted from \\iQjournal S.P.R., vol. v. p. 253. Professor Luther writes : —

HARTFORD, CONN., March 2nd, 1892.

. . . Miss C. is often in my study and consults my books freely, so that her dream was not remarkable. The dream of Mrs. L. (my wife) was also

930] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 211

ordinary in character. The coincidence in time of the dreams may have been merely a coincidence. But that after these occurrences Mrs. L. should suddenly, without the least premeditation and without hesitation, take the right book and open it at the right page with the certainty of a somnambulist, seems to me strange. . . .

These events took place yesterday, last night, and this morning.

F. S. LUTHER (Prof. Math., Trinity College).

Mrs. L. and Miss C. live at the same hotel and meet daily. Miss C. is engaged in writing an essay upon Emerson, and expresses to Mrs. L. her wish to obtain some particulars as to Emerson's private life. Mrs. L. regrets that she has no book treating of the subject. During the night following this conversation Mrs. L. dreams of handing Miss C. a book containing an article such as is desired, and Miss C. dreams of telling Mrs. L. that she had procured just the information which she had been looking for. Each lady relates to the other her dream when they meet at breakfast the next morning. Mrs. L. returns to her room, and, while certainly not consciously thinking of Emerson, suddenly finds in her mind the thought, "There is the book which Miss C. needs." She goes directly to a bookcase, takes down vol. xvii. of the Century Magazine, and opens immediately at the article, " The Homes and Haunts of Emerson." Mrs. L. had undoubtedly read this article in 1879, but she had never studied Emerson or his works, nor had she made any special effort to assist Miss C. in her search, though feeling a friend's interest in the proposed essay.

After receiving the book and hearing how it was selected, Miss C. relates her dream more fully, it appearing that she had seemed to be standing in front of Mrs. L.'s shelves with a large, illustrated book in her hands, and that in the book was something about Emerson.

Still later it is found that Miss C. had actually noticed the article in question while actually in the position reproduced in her dream. This, however, had happened about a month previous to the events just narrated, and before she had thought of looking up authorities as to Emerson, so that she had entirely forgotten the occurrence and the article. Neither did she, at that time, call Mrs. L.'s attention to the article, or mention Emerson.

According to the best information attainable, Miss C. was not thinking of her essay at the time when Mrs. L. felt the sudden impulse to take down a certain book. And perhaps it should be added that the volume is one of a complete set of the Century variously disposed upon Mrs. L.'s shelves.

[This account is signed by Professor Luther, Mrs. L., and Miss C.]

930. Of special interest are a few cases where the actual mechanism of some brief communication from the spiritual world seems to suggest and lead up to the mechanism which we shall afterwards describe either as ecstasy or as possession.

I give first a case which suggests such knowledge as may be learnt in ecstasy ; — as though a message had been communicated to a sleeper during some brief excursion into the spiritual world, — which message was remembered for a few moments, in symbolic form, and then rapidly forgotten, as the sleeper returned fully into the normal waking state. What is to be

noted is that the personality of sleep to which I attribute the spiritual excursion, seems at first to have been " controlling " the awakened organism. In other words, Professor Thoulet was partially entranced or possessed by his own spirit or subliminal self.

I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 503-5, a translation of the original account of the case in the Annales des Sciences Psychiques (September— October 1891).

Professor Thoulet writes to Professor Richet as follows : —

April i;M, 1891.

. . . During the summer of 1867, I was officially the assistant, but in reality the friend, in spite of difference in age, of M. F., a former officer in the navy, who had gone into business. We were trying to set on foot again the exploitation of an old sulphur mine at Rivanazzaro, near Voghera, in Piedmont, which had been long abandoned on account of a falling in.

We occupied the same rooms, and our relations were those of father and son, or of elder and younger brother. . . .

I knew that Madame F., who lived at Toulon, and with whom I was slightly acquainted, would soon be confined. I cannot say I was indifferent about this fact, for it concerned M. F. ; but it certainly caused me no profound emotion ; it was a second child, all was going well, and M. F. was not anxious. I myself was well and calm. It is true that a few days before, in Burgundy, my mother had fallen out of a carriage ; but the fall had no bad consequences, and the letter which informed me of it also told me there was no harm done.

M. F. and I slept in adjoining rooms, and as it was hot we left the door between them open. One morning I sprang suddenly out of bed, crossed my room, entered that of M. F., and awakened him by crying out, " You have just got a little girl; the telegram says . . ." Upon this I began to read the telegram. M. F. sat up and listened ; but all at once I understood that I had been asleep, and that consequently my telegram was only a dream, not to be believed ; and then, at the same time, this telegram which was somehow in my hand and of which I had read about three lines aloud, word for word, seemed to withdraw from my eyes as if some one were carrying it off open ; the words disappeared, though their image still remained ; those which I had pronounced remained in my memory, while the rest of the telegram was only zform.

I stammered something; M. F. got up and led me into the dining-room, and made me write down the words I had pronounced ; when I came to the lines which, though they had disappeared from my memory, still remained pictured in my eye, I replaced them by dots, making a sort of drawing of them. Remark that the telegram was not written in common terms; there were about six lines of it, and I had read more than two of them. Then, becoming aware of our rather incorrect costume, M. F. and I began to laugh, and went back to our beds.

Two or three days after I left for Tore'e ; I tried in vain to remember the rest of the telegram ; I went on to Turin, and eight or ten days after my dream I received the following telegram from M. F., " Come directly, you were right."

I returned to Rivanazzaro and M. F. showed me a telegram which he had received the evening before ; I recognised it as the one I had seen in my dream ; the beginning was exactly what I had written, and the end, which was exactly like my drawing, enabled me to read again the words which I saw again.

931] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 213

Please remark that the confinement had taken place the evening before, and therefore the fact was not that I, being in Italy, had seen a telegram which already existed in France — this I might with some difficulty have understood — but that I had seen it ten days before it existed or could have existed ; since the event it announced had not yet taken place. I have turned this phenomenon over in my memory and reasoned about it many times, trying to explain it, to connect it with something, with a previous conversation, with some mental tension, with an analogy, a wish, — and all in vain. M. F. is dead, and the paper I wrote has disappeared. If I were called before a court of justice about it, I could not furnish the shadow of a material proof, and again the two personalities which exist in me, the animal and the savant, have disputed on this subject so often that sometimes I doubt it myself. However, the animal, obstinate as an animal usually is, repeats incessantly that I have seen, and I have read, and it is useless for me to tell myself that if any one else told me such a story I should not believe it. I am obliged to admit that it happened.

J. THOULET, Professor at the Faculte des Sciences at Nancy,

Professor Richet adds : —

M. Thoulet has lately confirmed all the details contained in his letter. He has no longer any written trace of this old story, but the recollection of it is perfectly clear. He assured me that he had seen and read the telegram like a real object. . . .

931. Next I quote a case where a kind of conversation is indicated between the sleeper and some communicating spirit ; — recalling the scraps of conversation sometimes overheard (as it were) between Mrs. Piper and some "control" when she is in the act of awaking from trance. These moments " between two worlds " are often, as will be seen, of high significance. In the case here cited we seem to see Mr. Goodall at first misapprehending a message, and himself automatically uttering the misapprehension, and then receiving the needed correction from his invisible interlocutor.

From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 453-5. The following narrative was communicated by Mr. Edward A. Goodall, of the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours, London : —

May 1888.

At Midsummer, 1869, 1 left London for Naples. The heat being excessive, people were leaving for Ischia, and I thought it best to go there myself.

Crossing by steamer, I slept one night at Casamicciola, on the coast, and walked next morning into the town of Ischia.

Liking the hotel there better than my quarters of the previous night, I fetched my small amount of luggage by help of a man, who returned with me on foot beside an animal which I rode — one of the fine, sure-footed, big donkeys of the country. Arrived at the hotel, and while sitting perfectly still in my saddle talking to the landlady, the donkey went down upon his knees as if he had been shot or struck by lightning, throwing me over his head upon the lava pavement. In endeavouring to save myself my right hand was badly injured. It soon became much swollen and very painful. A Neapolitan

doctor on the spot said no bones were broken, but perfect rest would be needful, with my arm in a sling. Sketching, of course, was impossible, and with neither books, newspapers, nor letters I felt my inactivity keenly.

It must have been on my third or fourth night, and about the middle of it, when I awoke, as it seemed at the sound of my own voice, saying, " I know I have lost my dearest little May." Another voice, which I in no way recognised, answered, " No, not May, but your youngest boy."

The distinctness and solemnity of the voice made such a distressing impression upon me that I slept no more. I got up at daybreak, and went out, noticing for the first time telegraph-poles and wires.

Without delay I communicated with the postmaster at Naples, and by next boat received two letters from home. I opened them according to dates outside. The first told me that my youngest boy was taken suddenly ill; the second, that he was dead.

Neither on his account nor on that of any of my family had I any cause for uneasiness. All were quite well on my taking leave of them so lately. My impression ever since has been that the time of the death coincided as nearly as we could judge with the time of my accident.1

In writing to Mrs. Goodall, I called the incident of the voice a dream, as less likely perhaps to disturb her than the details which I gave on reaching home, and which I have now repeated.

My letters happen to have been preserved.

I have never had any hallucination of any kind, nor am I in the habit of talking in my sleep. I do remember once waking with some words of mere nonsense upon my lips, but the experience of the voice speaking to me was absolutely unique. EDWARD A. GOODALL.

Extracts from letters to Mrs. E. A. Goodall from Ischia : —

Wednesday, August nth, 1869.

The postman brought me two letters containing sad news indeed. Poor little Percy. I dreamt some nights since the poor little fellow was taken from us. ...

August 1 4t/t.

I did not tell you, dear, the particulars of my dream about poor little Percy.

I had been for several days very fidgety and wretched at getting no letters from home, and had gone to bed in worse spirits than usual, and in my dream I fancied I said : " I have lost my dearest little May." A strange voice seemed to say: "No, not May, but your youngest boy," not mentioning his name. . . .

Mr. Goodall gave me verbally a concordant account of the affair, and several members of his family, who were present at our interview, recollected the strong impression made on him and them at the time.

932. The next case is precisely a miniature case of possession. (Compare Mr. Cameron Grant's experience, in 736 B.)

From they^Tvm/S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 278-280.

"The following account" (writes Dr. Hodgson) "was sent to me by Mr. John E. Wilkie at the suggestion of one of our American members

1 Mr. Goodall thinks that the mule's sudden fall, otherwise unexplainable, may have been due to terror at some apparition of the dying child.

932] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 215

who is well known to me, and who speaks in the highest terms of Mr. VVilkie as a witness : " —

WASHINGTON, D.C., April nth, 1898.

In October 1895, while living in London, England, I was attacked by bronchitis in rather a severe form, and on the advice of my physician, Dr. Oscar C. De Wolf, went to his residence in 6 Grenville Place, Cromwell Road, •where I could be under his immediate care. For two days I was confined to my bed, and about five o'clock in the afternoon of the third day, feeling somewhat better, I partially dressed myself, slipped on a heavy bath robe, and went down to the sitting-room on the main floor, where my friend, the doctor, usually spent a part of the afternoon in reading. A steamer chair was placed before the fire by one of the servants, and I was made comfortable with pillows. The doctor was present, and sat immediately behind me reading. I dropped off into a light doze, and slept for perhaps thirty minutes. Suddenly I became conscious of the fact that I was about to awaken ; I was in a condition where I was neither awake nor asleep. I realised fully that I had been asleep, and I was equally conscious of the fact that I was not wide awake. While in this peculiar mental condition I suddenly said to myself : " Wait a minute. Here is a message for the doctor." At the moment I fancied that I had upon my lap a pad of paper, and I thought I wrote upon this pad with a pencil the following words : —

" DEAR DOCTOR, — Do you remember Katy McGuire, who used to live with you in Chester? She died in 1872. She hopes you are having a good time in London."

Instantly thereafter I found myself wide awake, felt no surprise at not finding the pad of paper on my knee, because I then realised that that was but the hallucination of a dream, but impressed with that feature of my thought which related to the message, I partly turned my head, and, speaking over my shoulder to the doctor, said : " Doctor, I have a message for you."

The doctor looked up from the British Medical Journal which he was reading, and said: "What's that?"

" I have a message for you," I repeated. " It is this : ' Dear Doctor : Do you remember Katy McGuire, who used to live with you in Chester ? She died in 1872. She hopes you are having a good time in London.' "

The doctor looked at me with amazement written all over his face, and said : " Why, what the devil do you mean ? "

" I don't know anything about it except that just before I woke up I was impelled to receive this message which I have just delivered to you."

" Did you ever hear of Katy McGuire ? " asked the doctor.

" Never in my life."

" Well," said the doctor, " that's one of the most remarkable things I ever heard of. My father for a great many years lived at Chester, Mass. There was a neighbouring family named McGuire, and Katy McGuire, a daughter of this neighbour, frequently came over to our house, as the younger people in a country village will visit their neighbours, and used to assist my mother in the lighter duties about the house. I was absent from Chester from about 1869 to about 1873. I had known Katy, however, as a daughter of our neighbour and knew that she used to visit the house. She died some time during the absence I speak of, but as to the exact date of her death I am not informed."

That closed the incident, and although the doctor told me that he would

write to his old home to ascertain the exact date of Katy's death, I have never heard from him further in the matter. I questioned him at the time as to whether he had recently thought of Katy McGuire, and he told me that her name had not occurred to him for twenty years, and that he might never have recalled it had it not been for the rather curious incident which had occurred. In my own mind I could only explain the occurrence as a rather unusual coincidence. I was personally aware of the fact that the doctor's old home had been in Chester, Mass., and had frequently talked with him of his earlier experiences in life when he began practice in that city, but never at any time during these conversations had the name of this neighbour's daughter been mentioned, nor had the name of the neighbour been mentioned, our conversation relating entirely to the immediate members of the family, particularly the doctor's father, who was a noted practitioner in that district.

JOHN E. WILKIE.

Dr. De Wolf, in reply to Dr. Hodgson's first inquiry, wrote : —

6 GRENVILLE PLACE, CROMWELL ROAD, S.W., April ztyh, 1898.

DEAR SIR, — In reply to your letter of the 27th inst, I regret that I cannot recall with any definite recollection the incident to which Mr. Wilkie refers.

I do remember that he told me one morning he had had a remarkable dream — or conference with some one who knew me when a young lad.— Very truly yours, OSCAR C. DE WOLF.

Dr. Hodgson then sent Mr. Wilkie's account to Dr. De Wolf, with further inquiries, to which Dr. De Wolf replied as follows : —

6 GRENVILLE PLACE, CROMWELL ROAD, S.W., May tfh, 1898.

DEAR SIR, — Mr. Wilkie's statement is correct except as to unimportant detail. My father practised his profession of medicine, in Chester, Mass., for sixty years — dying in 1890. I was born in Chester and lived there until 1857, when I was in Paris studying medicine for four years. In 1861 I :returned to America and immediately entered the army as surgeon and served until the close of the war in 1865. In 1866 I located in Northampton, Mass., where I practised my profession until 1873, when I removed to Chicago.

Chester is a hill town in Western Mass., and Northampton is seventeen miles distant. While in Northampton I was often at my father's house — probably every week — and during some of the years from 1866 to 1873 I knevr Katy McGuire as a servant assisting my mother.

She was an obliging and pleasant girl and always glad to see me. She had no family in Chester (as Mr. Wilkie says) and I do not know where she came from. Neither do I know where or when she died— but I know she is dead. There is nothing left of my family in Chester. The old homestead still remains with me, and I visit it every year.

The strange feature (to me) of this incident is the fact that I had not thought of this girl for many years, and Mr. Wilkie was never within 500 miles of Chester.

We had been warm friends since soon after my location in Chicago, where he was connected with a department of the Chicago Tribune. I came to London in 1892 and Mr. Wilkie followed the next year as the manager of Low's-

934] TRANCE, POSSESSION, t ECSTASY 217

American Exchange, 3 Northumberland Avenue. His family did not join him until 1895, which explains his being in my house when ill.

Mr. Wilkie is a very straightforward man and not given to illusions of any kind. He is now the chief of the Secret Service Department of the U.S. Government, Washington, D.C.

Neither of us were believers in spiritual manifestations of this character, and this event so impressed us that we did not like to talk about it, and it has been very seldom referred to when we met. — Very truly yours,

OSCAR C. DE WOLF.

933. These cases, then, may serve as illustrations both of the incipient stages of a trance which may develop into ecstasy on the one hand or possession on the other, and of the different aspects of possession according as it is regarded as a more developed form of motor automatism or as a special intensification of telepathic action. We have first, in Mrs. Luther's case, a partial and temporary control by the subliminal self, exhibiting probably telepathic influence, but with no indications of any psychical excursion or invasion ; in Professor Thoulet's case we find a fuller control by the subliminal self, with a manifestation of knowledge suggesting some spiritual excursion ; in Mr. Goodall's case there seems to be a telepathic conversation between his subliminal self controlling his utterance and some perhaps discarnate spirit ; and finally, in Mr. Wilkie's case, there is the definite superposition, as it were, of a discarnate spirit's message upon the automatist in such a way that we are led to wonder whether it was the mind or the brain of the automatist that received the message. The first step apparently is the abeyance of the supraliminal self and the dominance of the subliminal self, which may lead in rare cases to a form of trance (or of what we have hitherto called secondary personality) where the whole body of the automatist is controlled by his own subliminal self, or incarnate spirit, but where there is no indication of any relation with discarnate spirits. The next form of trance is where the incarnate spirit, whether or not maintaining control of the whole body, makes excursions into or holds telepathic intercourse with the spiritual world. And, lastly, there is the trance of possession by another, a discarnate spirit. We cannot, of course, always distinguish between these three main types of trance — which, as we shall see later, themselves admit of different degrees and varieties.

934. The most striking case known to me of the first form of trance — possession by the subliminal self — is that of the Rev. C. B. Sanders, whose trance-personality has always called itself by the name of " X + Y = Z," and of whom I give an account in 934 A. The life of the normal Mr. Sanders has apparently been passed in the environment of a special form of Presbyterian doctrine, and there seems to have been a fear on the part of Mr. Sanders himself lest the trance manifestations of which he was the subject should conflict with the theological position which he held as a minister; and indeed for

2i8 CHAPTER IX [935

several years of his early suffering " he was inclined to regard his peculiar case of affliction as the result of Satanic agency." On the part of some of his friends also there seems to be a special desire to show that " X + Y = Z " was not heterodox. Under these circumstances it is perhaps not surprising that we find so much reticence in "X + Y = Z" concerning his own relations to the normal Mr. Sanders. What little explanation is offered seems to be in singular harmony with one of the main tenets advanced in this book, since the claim made by " X+ Y = Z " is obviously that he represents the incarnate spirit of Mr. Sanders exercising the higher faculties which naturally pertain to it, but which can be manifested to the full only when it is freed from its fleshly barriers. This frequently occurs, he says, in dying persons, who describe scenes in the spiritual world, and in his own experience when " his casket " is similarly affected, and the bodily obstructions to spiritual vision are removed.

The suggestion which I made in the case of Anna Winsor (see vol. i., 237 and 237 A) — that the intelligence controlling her sane right arm was her own subliminal self — may now perhaps appear less strange than it did at the outset of our inquiry ; but whereas in that case the supraliminal self was only partially in abeyance, the supraliminal self of Mr. Sanders seems to become completely dormant during his trances.

935. In this case then the subliminal self seems to take complete control of the organism, exercising its own powers of telepathy and telsesthesia, but showing no evidence of direct communication with discarnate spirits. We must now pass on to the most notable recent case where such communication has been claimed, — that of Swedenborg, — to whose exceptional trance-history and attempt to give some scientific system to his experiences of ecstasy I referred in Chapter I. (section 105).

And here I meet with a kind of difficulty which is sure to present itself sooner or later to all persons who endeavour to present to the world what they regard as novel and important truths. There is sure to be some embarrassing likeness or travesty of that truth in the world already. There are sure to be sects or persons, past or present, holding something like the same beliefs on different grounds ; — on grounds which one may find it equally difficult to endorse and to disavow.

I have indeed already been able to admit without reluctance that the " humble thinkers " of the Stone Age, the believers in Witchcraft, in Shamanism, have been my true precursors in many of the ideas upheld in this book. But these spiritual ancestors are remote and unobtrusive ; and it may be easier to admit that one is descended from an ape than that one is own brother to a madman. Swedenborg is, in fact, a madman in most men's view, and this judgment has much to support it. The great bulk of his teaching, — almost the whole content of Arcana Ccdestia, — has undergone a singularly unfortunate downfall. A seer, a mystic, cannot often be disproved ; — his visions may fall out of favour, but they still record one man's subjective outlook on the universe. Swedenborg's

936] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 219

wildnesses, on the other hand, were based upon a definite foundation which has definitely crumbled away. No one now regards the Old Testament as a homogeneous and verbally inspired whole ; — and unless it be so, the spiritual meaning which Swedenborg draws from its every word by his doctrine of Correspondences is not only a futile fancy, but a tissue of gross and demonstrable errors. And yet, on the face of it, was not all this error more amply accredited than any of the utterances of possession or the recollections of ecstasy which I shall be able to cite from modern sensitives? Swedenborg was one of the leading savants of Europe ; it would be absurd to place any of our sensitives on the same intellectual level. If his celestial revelations turn out to have been nonsense, what are Mrs. Piper's likely to be ?

936. I might, of course, save myself from this dilemma by repudiating Swedenborg's seership altogether. The evidential matter which he has left behind him is singularly scanty in comparison with his pretensions to a communion of many years with so many spirits of the departed. I do not, however, accept this means of escape from the difficulty. I think that the half-dozen " evidential cases " scattered through the memoirs of Swedenborg are stamped with the impress of truth, — and I think, also, that without some true experience of the spiritual world Swedenborg could not have entered into that atmosphere of truth in which even his worst errors are held in solution. Swedenborg's writings on the world of spirits fall in the main into two classes, — albeit classes not easily divided. There are experiential writings and there are dogmatic writings. The first of these classes contains accounts of what he saw and felt in that world, and of such inferences with regard to its laws as his actual experience suggested. Now, speaking broadly, all this mass of matter, covering some hundreds of propositions, is in substantial accord with what has been given through the most trustworthy sensitives since Swedenborg's time. It is indeed usual to suppose that they have all been influenced by Swedenborg ; and although I feel sure that this was not so in any direct manner in the case of the sensitives best known to myself, it is probable that Swedenborg's alleged experiences have affected modern thought more deeply than most modern thinkers know.

On the other hand, the second or purely dogmatic class of Swedenborg's writings, — the records of instruction alleged to have been given to him by spirits on the inner meaning of the Scriptures, &c., — these have more and more appeared to be mere arbitrary fancies ; — mere projections and repercussions of his own preconceived ideas.

On the whole, then, — with some stretching, yet no contravention, of inclusions independently reached, — I may say that Swedenborg's story, —one of the strangest lives yet lived by mortal men, — is corroborative rather than destructive of the slowly rising fabric of knowledge of which :ie was the uniquely gifted, but uniquely dangerous, precursor.

It seemed desirable here to refer thus briefly to the doctrinal teachings of Swedenborg, but I shall deal later with the general question how much or how little of the statements of " sensitives " about the spiritual world — whether based on their own visions or on the allegations of their "controlling spirits" — are worthy of credence. In the case of Swedenborg there was at least some evidence, of the kind to which we can here appeal, of his actual communication with discarnate spirits (see 936 A) ; but in most other cases of alleged ecstacy there is little or nothing to show that the supposed revelations are not purely subjective. (See, e.g., the revelations of Alphonse Cahagnet's sensitives, described in his Arcanes de la vie future devoilees and those of the " Seeress of Prevorst," mentioned in 936 B.) At most, these visions must be regarded as a kind of symbolical representation of the unseen world. (See, e.g., 936 C.)

937. Among Cahagnet's subjects, however, there was one young woman, Adele Maginot, who not only saw heavenly visions of the usual post-Swedenborgian kind, but also obtained evidential communications — not unlike those of Mrs. Piper — purporting to come from discarnate spirits. Fortunately these were recorded with unusual care and thoroughness by Cahagnet, and the case thus becomes one of considerable importance for our inquiries. A general account of Cahagnet's work has recently been given in the Proceedings S.P.R. by Mr. Podmore (see 937 A) who, though finding it " almost impossible to doubt that Adele's success was due to some kind of supernormal faculty," thinks it might be accounted for by telepathy from living persons. It appears that in all her trances Adele — like Mr. Sanders — was controlled by her own subliminal self — that is to say, her supraliminal self became dormant, under " magnetism" by Cahagnet, while her subliminal self in tranceutterance manifested a knowledge which was, as I incline to think from its analogies with more developed cases, obtained from the spiritual world. That this knowledge should be mixed with much that was erroneous or unverifiable is not surprising.

It is also interesting to note the occurrence in this case of circumstances which in their general character have become so habitual in trances of " mediumistic " type that they are not only found in genuine subjects, but are continually being simulated by the fraudulent. I refer to the socalled " taking on of the death conditions " of a communicating spirit, who, as Adele stated, died of suffocation. " Adele chokes as this man choked, and coughed as he did. ... I was obliged to release h< by passes; she suffered terribly."

I need scarcely say that this suggests incipient possession. There were occasional analogous instances in the early trances of Mrs. Piper, when Phinuit was the controlling influence (see Proceedings S.P.R. , vol. viii. p. 98, Professor Barrett Wendell's account ; and vol. xiii. p. 384). Other points of similarity between the accounts of the entranced Adele and the utterances of Phinuit will be apparent to the student of the recon

939] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 221

938. The next case to be considered, and so far one of the most important, is that of D. D. Home. It may seem a strange descent from the celestial visions of Swedenborg to the table-tiltings and fragmentary trance-utterances of modern mediums, but for our present purpose of finding an empirical basis upon which to establish the existence of a spiritual world, these later humble manifestations are more potent than all the pages of the Arcana Ccelestia.

But, although I attribute much value to what evidence exists in the case of Home, it cannot but be deplored that the inestimable chance for experiment and record which this case afforded was almost entirely thrown away by the scientific world. Unfortunately the record is especially inadequate in reference to Home's trances and the evidence for the personal identity of the communicating spirits. His name is known to the world chiefly in connection with the telekinetic phenomena which are said to have occurred in his presence, and the best accounts of which we owe to Sir William Crookes. It is not my intention, as I have already explained, to deal with these, but it must be understood that they form an integral part of the manifestations in this case, as in the case of Stainton Moses. For detailed accounts of them the reader should consult the history of Home's life and experiences, as given in the works enumerated in 938 A.

In Home's case it is especially important to consider the question of fraud, since various charges of fraud have been brought against him — some, however, without any evidence at all, and others on secondhand statements only, while the most serious one — that connected with the famous Lyon case — related rather to his character than to the real nature of his powers. A detailed discussion, by Professor Barrett and myself, of the question of fraud, was printed in the Journal S.P.R. This article also includes references to the telekinetic phenomena, and a brief summary (with, in some cases, additional evidence) of the most important cases suggesting personal communications from deceased friends of the sitters with Home, and I give an abridgment of it in 938 B. Such cases as received even the share of scattered and scanty record which Madame Home's books indicate, are probably but a small portion of the evidential communications actually given through Home.

939. As to the nature of Home's trances, there is not a little obscurity. Many of the phenomena described as occurring in his presence took place when he was not in trance at all. Sometimes his body was apparently possessed by deceased friends of the sitters or other discarnate spirits, and at other times it was apparently controlled by his own spirit or subliminal self. According to the account of Viscount Adare, now Lord Dunraven (see Experiences in Spiritualism with Mr. D. D. Home. By Viscount Adare), it was unusual for extraneous physical phenomena, such as raps and movements and levitation of objects, to occur while Home was entranced.

On the other hand, Sir William Crookes states (Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 341) : "Certainly the two most striking things I ever saw with him, the fire test and visible forms, were to be observed while he was entranced, but it was not always easy to tell when he was in that state, for he spoke and moved about almost as if he were in his normal condition; the chief differences being that his actions were more deliberate, and his manner and expressions more solemn, and he always spoke of himself in the third person, as l Dan.' " (Compare 934 A, the case of "X + Y = Z," who always spoke of his supraliminal self as " my casket.")

The late Lord Dunraven says, in his introduction (p. ix.) to the book by Viscount Adare, that the communications at the stances described in the book came " through the alphabet" (that is, through raps or other telekinetic signals such as touches), or through "the medium in a trance," and he remarks : " When Mr. Home speaks in a trance there is no certainty whether his utterances are those of a spirit alone, or how far they may be mixed up with his own ideas or principles. Sometimes the communications are striking, at other times vague, sometimes trivial. Messages through the alphabet, on the other hand, carry at least a strong probability that they convey the thoughts of a spirit ; although even they too in some cases exhibit indications of being affected by the medium, and are therefore not quite reliable."

The impression produced seems to have been very different from this in some cases, especially when Home was — as we may suppose — directly possessed by a discarnate spirit. See, for example, the case of the control by Adah Menken (loc. tit., pp. 35-37), where Viscount Adare says : " I was, to all intents and purposes, actually conversing with the dead ; listening, talking, answering, and receiving answers from Menken. Home's individuality was quite gone; he spoke as Menken, and we both spoke of him as a third person at a distance from us."

940. In brief, the study of such records as are available of Home's psychical phenomena leaves me with the conviction that, — apart altogether from the telekinetic phenomena with which they were associated, — his trance-utterances belong to the same natural order as those, for instance, of Mr. Moses and Mrs. Piper. There are, however, important differences between these cases, — differences which should be of special instruction to us in endeavouring to comprehend the possession that completely excludes the subliminal self, and to appreciate the difficulty of obtaining this complete possession.

Thus in Home's case the subliminal self seems, throughout the longest series of seances of which we have a record, to have been the spirit chiefly controlling him during the trance and acting as intermediary for other spirits, who occasionally, however, took complete possession.

In Mrs. Piper's case, as we shall see, the subliminal self is very little in direct evidence ; its manifestations form a fleeting interlude between her

942] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 223

waking state and her possession by a discarnate spirit. In Mr. Moses' case, the subliminal self was rarely in direct evidence at all when he was entranced ; but we infer from these other cases that it was probably dominant at some stage of his trance, even if at other times it was excluded or became completely dormant.

And if, in Home's case, as there seems reason to suppose, the subliminal self may have participated with discarnate spirits in the production of telekinetic phenomena, as well as in the communication of tests of personal identity, it is not improbable that the subliminal self of Mr. Moses may also have been actively concerned in both these classes of phenomena.

941. To the history of William Stain ton Moses I now turn. In his case, as in that of Home, the telekinetic phenomena formed an integral part of the general manifestations, being so interwoven with them as to necessitate in my view acceptance or rejection of the whole ; but the evidence for the telekinetic phenomena in the case of Mr. Moses is comparatively slight, since they occurred almost exclusively in the presence of a small group of intimate personal friends, and were never scrutinised and examined by outside witnesses as were Home's manifestations. On the other hand, we have detailed records of Mr. Moses' whole series of experiences, while in the case of Home, as I have said, the record is very imperfect. As to the telekinetic phenomena, Mr. Moses himself regarded them as a mere means to an end, in accordance with the view urged on him by his "controls," — that they were intended as proofs of the power and authority of these latter, while the real message lay in the religious teaching imparted to him.

942. It was on May pth, 1874, that Edmund Gurney and I met Stainton Moses for the first time, through the kindness of Mrs. Cowper-Temple (afterwards Lady Mount-Temple), who knew that we had become interested in " psychical " problems, and wished to introduce us to a man of honour who had recently experienced phenomena, due wholly to some gift of his own, which had profoundly changed his conception of life. *

That evening was epoch-making in Gurney's life and mine. Standing as we were in the attitude natural at the commencement of such inquiries, under such conditions as were then attainable, — an attitude of curiosity tempered by a vivid perception of difficulty and drawback, — we now met a man of University education, of manifest sanity and probity, who vouched to us for a series of phenomena, — occurring to himself, and with no doubtful or venal aid, — which seemed at least to prove, in confusedly intermingled form, three main theses unknown to Science. These were (i) the existence in the human spirit of hidden powers of insight and of communication; (2) the personal survival and near presence of the departed; and (3) interference, due to unknown agencies, with the ponderable world. He spoke frankly and fully; he showed his note-

books ; he referred us to his friends ; he inspired a belief which was at once sufficient, and which is still sufficient, to prompt to action.

The experiences which Stainton Moses had undergone had changed his views, but not his character. He was already set in the mould of the hard-working, conscientious, dogmatic clergyman, with a strong desire to do good, and a strong belief in preaching as the best way to do it. For himself the essential part of what I have called his " message " lay in the actual words automatically uttered or written, — not in the accompanying phenomena which really gave their uniqueness and importance to the automatic processes. In a book called Spirit Teachings he collected what he regarded as the real fruits of those years of mysterious listening in the vestibule of a world unknown.

And much as we may regret this too exclusive ethical preoccupation in a region where the establishment of actual fact is still the one thing needful, it must be admitted that at that time the scientific importance of these phenomena had hardly dawned on any mind. Among all the witnesses of Home's marvels Sir William Crookes was almost the only man who made any attempt to treat them as reasonable men treat all the facts of nature. Most of the witnesses, though fully believing in the genuineness of the wonders, appear to have regarded them as a kind of uncanny diversion. The more serious sought for assurance that their beloved dead were still near them, and straitly charged Home to tell no man of the proofs which they said had brought to themselves unspeakable joy. An attempt made, in 1875, by Serjeant Cox and a few others (among whom were Stainton Moses and myself) to get these phenomena more seriously discussed in a " Psychological Society," languished for want of suitable coadjutors, and on the death of Serjeant Cox (in 1879) the Society was dissolved. During these important years, therefore, while his experiences were fresh in Stainton Moses' mind, and while they were to some extent still recurring, he had little encouragement to deal with them from a scientific point of view.

943. When, however, in 1882, Professor Barrett consulted him as to the possibility of founding a new society, under better auspices, he warmly welcomed the plan. Edmund Gurney and I were asked to join, but made it a condition that the consent of Professor Sidgwick (with whom we had already been working) to act as our President should first be obtained. Under his guidance the Society for Psychical Research assumed a more cautious and critical attitude than was congenial to Stainton Moses' warm heart, strong convictions, and impulsive temper, and in 1886 he left the Society, in consequence of the publication in the Proceedings of certain comments on phenomena occurring through the agency of the so-called " medium " Eglinton.

From this time he frankly confessed himself disgusted with our attempts at scientific method, and as main contributor to Light, and afterwards editor until his death, he practically reverted to " Spiritualism

944] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 225

as a religion," — as opposed to psychical research as a scientific duty. And assuredly the religious implications of all these phenomena are worthy of any man's most serious thought. But those who most feel the importance of the ethical superstructure are at the same time most plainly bound to treat the establishment of the facts at the foundation as no mere personal search for a faith, to be dropped when private conviction has been attained, but as a serious, a continuous, a public duty. And the more convinced they are that their faith is sound, the more ready should they be to face distrust and aversion, — to lay their account for a long struggle with the vis inertia of the human spirit.

Stainton Moses was ill-fitted for this patient, uphill toil. In the first place he lacked, — and he readily and repeatedly admitted to me that he lacked, — all vestige of scientific, or even of legal instinct. The very words " first-hand evidence," " contemporary record," " corroborative testimony," were to him as a weariness to the flesh. His attitude was that of the preacher who is already so thoroughly persuaded in his own mind that he treats any alleged fact which falls in with his views as the uncriticised text for fresh exhortation. And in the second place, — though this was a minor matter, — his natural sensitiveness was sometimes exaggerated by gout and other wearing ailments into an irritability which he scarcely felt compelled to conceal in a journal circulating mainly among attached disciples.

The reason for noticing these defects is that they constitute the only ground on which Stainton Moses' trustworthiness as a witness to his own phenomena could possibly be impugned. I mention them in order that I may say that, having read, I think, all that he has printed, and having watched his conduct at critical moments, I see much ground for impugning his judgment, but no ground whatever for doubting that he has narrated with absolute good faith the story of his own experience. He allowed me, before he left the Society, to examine almost the whole series of his automatic writings, — those especially which contain the evidence on which Spirit Identity is based ; and in no instance did I find that the printed statement of any case went beyond the warrant of the manuscript.

My original impressions were strengthened by the opportunity which I had of examining the unpublished MSS. of Mr. Moses after his death on September 5th, 1892. These consist of thirty-one note-books — twenty-four of automatic script, four of records of physical phenomena, and three of retrospect and summary. In addition to these, the material available for a knowledge of Mr. Moses' experiences consists of his own printed works, and the written and printed statements of witnesses to his phenomena.

Of this available material a more detailed account will be found in ,943 A, together with a brief record of Mr. Moses' life.

944. With the even tenor of this straightforward and reputable life was inwoven a chain of mysteries which, as I think, in what way soever they be explained, make that life one of the most extraordinary which VOL. ii. P

our century has seen. For its true history lies in that series of physical manifestations which began in 1872 and lasted for some eight years, and that series of automatic writings and trance-utterances which began in 1873, received a record for some ten years, and did not, as is believed, cease altogether until the earthly end was near.

These two series were intimately connected ; the physical phenomena being avowedly designed to give authority to the speeches and writings which professed to emanate from the same source. There is no ground for separating the two groups, except the obvious one that the automatic phenomena are less difficult of credence than the physical ; but, for reasons already stated, it has seemed to me desirable to exclude the latter from detailed treatment in this work. References to accounts of them will, however, be found in 943 A. They included the apparent production of such phenomena as intelligent raps, movements of objects untouched, levitation, disappearance and reappearance of objects, passage of matter through matter, direct writing, sounds supernormally made on instruments, direct sounds, scents, lights, objects materialised, hands materialised (touched or seen). Mr. Moses was sometimes, but not always, entranced while these physical phenomena were occurring. Sometimes he was entranced and the trance-utterance purported to be that of a discarnate spirit. At other times, especially when alone, he wrote automatically, retaining his own ordinary consciousness meanwhile, and carrying on lengthy discussions with the " spirit influence " controlling his hand and answering his questions, &c. As a general rule the same alleged spirits both manifested themselves by raps, &c., at Mr. Moses' sittings with his friends, and also wrote through his hand when he was alone. In this, as in other respects, Mr. Moses' two series of writings — when alone and in company — were concordant, and, so to say, complementary ; — explanations being given by the writing of what had happened at the stances. When "direct writing" was given at the stances the handwriting of each alleged spirit was the same as that which the same spirit was in the habit of employing in the automatic script. The claim to individuality was thus in all cases decisively made.

945. Now the personages thus claiming to appear may be divided roughly into three classes : —

A. — First and most important are a group of persons recently deceased, and sometimes, as will be seen, manifesting themselves at the stances before their decease was known through any ordinary channel to any of the persons present. These spirits in many instances give tests of identity, mentioning facts connected with their earth-lives which are afterwards found to be correct.

B. — Next comes a group of personages belonging to generations more remote, and generally of some distinction in their day. Grocyn, the friend of Erasmus, may be taken as a type of these. Many of these also contribute facts as a proof of identity, which facts are sometimes more correct

945] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 227

than the conscious or admitted knowledge of any of the sitters could supply. In such cases, however, the difficulty of proving identity is increased by the fact that most of the correct statements are readily accessible in print, and may conceivably have either been read and forgotten by Mr. Moses, or have become known to him by some kind of clairvoyance.

C. — A third group consists of spirits who give such names as Rector, Doctor, Theophilus, and, above all, Imperator. These from time to time reveal the names which they assert to have been theirs in earth-life. These concealed names are for the most part both more illustrious, and more remote, than the names in Class B, — and were withheld by Mr. Moses himself, who justly felt that the assumption of great names is likely to diminish rather than to increase the weight of the communication. He felt this in his own person ; and for a long while one of his main stumbling-blocks lay in these lofty and unprovable claims. Ultimately he came to believe even in these identities, on the general ground that teachers who had given him so many proofs both of their power and of their serious interest in his welfare were not likely to have deceived him on such a point. But he did not count upon a similar belief in others, and he expressly wished to avoid seeming to claim special authority for the teachings on the ground of their alleged authorship. It must be added also that some of these teachings themselves asserted that when the name of some spirit long removed from earth was given, the recipient must sometimes take this to imply a stream of influence emanating from 'that spirit, rather than his own presence in person.

As to the relation of the spirits to the telekinetic phenomena, it must be remembered that these phenomena, strange and grotesque as they often seem, cannot be called meaningless. The alleged operators are at pains throughout to describe what they regarded as the end, and what merely is the means to that end. Their constantly avowed object was the promulgation through Mr. Moses of certain religious and philosophical dews; and the physical manifestations are throughout described as lesigned merely as a proof of power, and a basis for the authority claimed or the serious teachings.1

That they were not produced fraudulently by Dr. Speer or other itters I regard as proved both by moral considerations and by the fact Hat they are constantly reported as occurring when Mr. Moses was lone. That Mr. Moses should have himself fraudulently produced them regard as both morally and physically incredible. That he should have •repared and produced them in a state of trance I regard both as physially incredible and also as entirely inconsistent with the tenor both of his wn reports and of those of his friends. I therefore regard the reported "henomena as having actually occurred in a genuinely supernormal manner.

1 Spirit Teachings, which includes many of these communications, has been reublished with a Life by Mr. Charlton Speer, and most of the remaining communicaons have been published in Light by Mrs. Speer since Mr. Moses' death.

946. I now pass on to consider briefly the nature of the evidence that the alleged spirits were what they purported to be, as described, in the first place, in Mr. Moses' books of automatic writing. The contents of these books consist partly of messages tending to prove the identity of communicating spirits ; partly of discussions or explanations of the physical phenomena ; and partly of religious and moral disquisitions.

These automatic messages were almost wholly written by Mr. Moses' own hand, while he was in a normal waking state. The exceptions are of two kinds, (i) There is one long passage, alleged by Mr. Moses to have been written by himself while in a state of trance. (2) There are, here and there, a few words alleged to be in "direct writing"; — written, that is to say, by invisible hands, but in Mr. Moses' presence ; as several times described in the notes of se'ances where other persons were present.

Putting these exceptional instances aside, we find that the writings generally take the form of a dialogue, Mr. Moses proposing a question in his ordinary thick, black handwriting. An answer is then generally, though not always, given ; written also by Mr. Moses, and with the same pen, but in some one of various scripts which differ more or less widely from his own. Mr. Moses' own description of the process, as given in the preface to Spirit Teachings, may be studied with advantage. I quote this in 946 A.

A prolonged study of the MS. books has revealed nothing inconsistent with this description. I have myself, of course, searched them carefully for any sign of confusion or alteration, but without finding any ; and I have shown parts of them to various friends, who have seen no points of suspicion. It seems plain, moreover, that the various entries were made at or about the dates to which they are ascribed. They contain constant references to the se'ances which went on concurrently, and whose dates are independently known; and in the later books, records of some of these se'ances are interspersed in their due places amongst other matter. The MSS. contain also a number of allusions to other contemporaneous facts, many of which are independently known to myself.

I think, moreover, that no one who had studied these entries throughout would doubt the originally private and intimate character of many of them. The tone of the spirits towards Mr. Moses himself is habitually courteous and respectful. But occasionally they have some criticism which pierces to the quick, and which goes far to explain to me Mr. | Moses' unwillingness to have the books fully inspected during his lifetime, i He did, no doubt, contemplate their being at least read by friends after his death ; and there are indications that there may have been a still more private book, now doubtless destroyed, to which messages of an intimate character were sometimes consigned.

947. The questions at issue, in short, as to these messages, refer not so much to their genuineness as to their authenticity, in the proper sense of

947] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 229

those words. That they were written down in good faith by Mr. Moses as proceeding from the personages whose names are signed to them, there can be little doubt. But as to whether they did really proceed from those personages or no there may in many cases be very great doubt ; — a doubt which I, at least, shall be quite unable to remove. By the very conditions of the communication they cannot show commanding intellect, or teach entirely new truths, since their manifestations are ex hypothesi limited by the capacity — not by the previous knowledge, but by the previous capacity — of the medium. And if they give facts not consciously known to the medium — facts however elaborate — it may, of course, be suggested that these facts have been subliminally acquired by the medium through some unconscious passage of the eye over a printed page, or else that they are clairvoyantly learnt, without the agency of any but the medium's own mind, though acting in a supernormal fashion.

This is no merely fanciful hypothesis ; nor is it a hypothesis derogatory to Mr. Moses' own probity. On the contrary, as will be presently seen, he himself prominently puts forth the circumstance (Rector's copying from a closed book, an account of which I give in 947 A), which tells most strongly for the view that the alleged remote identities may not really be concerned at all. Nay, the guides themselves expressly state — apropos of some brief accounts of musicians said to be interested in Mr. Charlton Speer — that spirits can refer to books, e. g. their own biographies, and refresh their memory thereby. This admission of course leaves us with nothing more than the word of Imperator to prove that, say, Robert of Gloucester, or Geoffrey of Monmouth (who merely give facts about their own writings), were in reality present. Such guarantee — sometimes only indirectly implied — was enough for Mr. Moses at the time ; especially since these remoter spirits came in intermixture with nearer spirits, whose identity he believed could be better proved. But in a serious talk with me on the matter in 1 886 he withdrew much of this certainty ; — saying that in the case of some of the musical spirits especially he had had no inward sensation of a spirit's presence, — such as he had in some other cases of " nearer " spirits. He repudiated, however, the idea of subconscious memory on his part of words actually seen by himself; feeling sure that some of the facts automatically written had never been beneath his eyes. This may very well be the case ; as he had not, I think, more than a mere schoolmaster's acquaintance with English literature and history ; not, indeed, so much as would nowadays be expected from an English master in a school as good as that where he held a post. I judge this largely from the " Notes by the Way," which he contributed to Light for many years, and in which he was certainly not minimising his actual store of knowledge. But be this as it may, I cannot find in these historical communications any provable fact which might not have been drawn from some fairly accessible printed source. There were certain stanzas from Lydgate, written by the alleged Zachary Gray [or Grey], which Mr.

Percival verified in the British Museum. But these are to be found in Warton's English Poetry / from which they reproduce (as Professor Skeat has kindly pointed out to me) a philological error of Warton's own. The power of reading closed books was expressly attributed to Zachary Grey ; and if he really possessed it he probably exercised it here ; giving thereby, of course, no particular proof that he was Zachary Grey rather than any other spirit.

948. The evidence for identity obtained by Mr. Moses in the case of spirits recently departed seems at first sight more satisfactory. Some cases of this class are given in 948 A, and many others are to be found in the records of his experiences. In these cases, however, as in the historical ones, it is often difficult to make sure that the facts stated were not within the subliminal knowledge of the automatist. Sometimes it seems that they may have been gathered from obituary notices, casually observed in glancing over newspapers without the cognisance of the supraliminal consciousness (e.g. in the cases of Emily C. and Rosamira Lancaster) ; or similarly from tomb-stones (e.g. in the cases of Emily C. and Cecilia Fielden) ; or names and facts relating to persons known to the sitters, but not to Mr. Moses (e.g. A. P. Kirkland, Dr. Speer's sister, Cecilia Fielden and Marian Timmins), may perhaps have been mentioned in his hearing and subliminally remembered. " Fanny Westoby," again, reminded him of forgotten facts that had occurred during his own childhood. Numerous details relating to Thomas Wilson, Bishop of Sodor and Man at the beginning of the eighteenth century, were given (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi., pp. 74-5 and 88), but are to be found in his published " Life," which Mr. Moses may possibly have met with during his curacy in the Isle of Man.1 The case of Helene Smith (834-842) has shown us how far-reaching may be the faculties of hyperaesthesia and hypermnesia in the subliminal self; but in view of the then general ignorance of the scientific world on this subject, it is not surprising that both Mr. Moses and his friends absolutely rejected this explanation of his phenomena, and that the evidence appeared to them more conclusive than it possibly can to us. Whether or not the alleged spirits were concerned, — as may sometimes, of course, have been the case, — we can hardly avoid thinking that the subliminal self of the medium played at least a considerable part in the communications.

949. In two cases the announcement of a death was made to Mr. Moses, when the news was apparently not known to him by any normal means. One of these (the case of President Garfield) is given in 948 B. The other, which I now proceed to recount (from my article in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 96 et seq.) is in some ways the most remarkable of all, from the series of chances which have been needful in order to establish its veracity. The spirit in question is that of a lady

1 The evidential weaknesses of these cases have been analysed by Mr. Podmore, in his Studies in Psychical Research, pp. 125-133.

949] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 231

known to me, whom Mr. Moses had met, I believe, once only, and whom I shall call Blanche Abercromby. The publication of the true name was forbidden by the spirit herself, for a reason which was at once obvious to me when I read the case, but which was not, so far as I can tell, fully known to Mr. Moses. The lady's son, whom I have since consulted, supports the prohibition; and I have consequently changed the name and omitted the dates.

This lady died on a Sunday afternoon, about twenty-five years ago, at a country house about 200 miles from London. Her death, which was regarded as an event of public interest, was at once telegraphed to London, and appeared in Monday's Times ; but, of course, on Sunday evening no one in London, save the Press and perhaps the immediate family, was cognisant of the fact. It will be seen that on that evening, near midnight, a communication, purporting to come from her, was made to Mr. Moses at his secluded lodgings in the north of London. The identity was some days later corroborated by a few lines purporting to come directly from her, and to be in her handwriting. There is no reason to suppose that Mr. Moses had ever seen this handwriting. His one known meeting with this lady and her husband had been at a seance — not, of course, of his own— where he had been offended by the strongly expressed disbelief of the husband in the possibility of any such phenomena.

On receiving these messages Mr. Moses seems to have mentioned them to no one, and simply gummed down the pages in his MS. book, marking the book outside "Private Matter." The book when placed in my hands was still thus gummed down, although Mrs. Speer was cognisant of the communication. I opened the pages (as instructed by the executors), and was surprised to find a brief letter which, though containing no definite facts, was entirely characteristic of the Blanche Abercromby whom I had known. But although I had received letters from her in life, I had no recollection of her handwriting. I happened to know a son of hers sufficiently well to be able to ask his aid, — aid which, I may add, he would have been most unlikely to afford to a stranger. He lent me a letter for comparison. The strong resemblance was at once obvious, but the A. of the surname was made in the letter in a way quite different from that adopted in the automatic script. The son then allowed me to study a long series of letters, reaching down till almost the date of her death. From these it appeared that during the last year of her life she had taken to writing the A (as her husband had always done) in the way in which it was written in the automatic script.

The resemblance of handwriting appeared both to the son and to myself to be incontestable ; but as we desired an experienced opinion he allowed me to submit the note-book and two letters to Dr. Hodgson. Readers of the Proceedings S.P.R. (vol. iii. pp. 201-401), may remember that Dr. Hodgson succeeded in tracing the authorship of the " Koot Hoomi " letters to Madame Blavatsky and to Damodar, by evidence

based on a minute analysis of handwriting. As regards the present matter, Dr. Hodgson reported as follows : —

5 BOYLSTON PLACE, BOSTON, September \\tht 1893.

I have compared the writing numbered 123 in the note-book of Mr. Stainton Moses, with epistles of January 4th, 18— , and September i9th, 18— , written by B. A. The note-book writing bears many minor resemblances to that of the epistles, and there are also several minor differences in the formations of some of the letters, judging at least from the two epistles submitted to me ; but the resemblances are more characteristic than the differences. In addition, there are several striking peculiarities common to the epistles and the note-book writing, which appear to be especially emphasised in the latter. The note-book writing suggests that its author was attempting to reproduce the B. A. writing by recalling to memory its chief peculiarities, and not by copying from specimens of the B. A. writing. The signature especially in the note-book writing is characteristically like an imitation from memory of B. A.'s signature. I have no doubt whatever that the person who wrote the note-book writing intended to reproduce the writing of B. A. RICHARD HODGSON.

The chances necessary to secure a verification of this case were more complex than can here be fully explained. This lady, who was quite alien to these researches, had been dead about twenty years when her posthumous letter was discovered in Mr. Moses' private note-book by one of the very few surviving persons who had both known her well enough to recognise the characteristic quality of the message, and were also sufficiently interested in spirit identity to get the handwritings compared and the case recorded.

The entries in the MS. books will now be quoted. The communications began with some obscure drawings, apparently representing the flight of a bird.

A. " It is spirit who has but just quitted the body. Blanche Abercromby in the flesh. I have brought her. No more. M."

Q. Do you mean ?

No reply. Sunday night about midnight. The information is unknown to me.

Monday morning.

Q. I wish for information about last night. Is that true? Was it Mentor ?

A. "Yes, good friend, it was Mentor, who took pity on a spirit that was desirous to reverse former errors. She desires us to say so. She was ever an enquiring spirit, and was called suddenly from your earth. She will rest anon. One more proof has been now given of continuity of existence. Be thankful and meditate with prayer. Seek not more now, but cease. We do not wish you to ask any questions now."

"t I : S : D. x Rector." [A week later.]

Q. Can you write for me now ?

A. "Yes, the chief is here."

949] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 233

Q. How was it that spirit [Blanche Abercromby's] came to me ?

A. "The mind was directed to the subject, and being active, it projected itself to you. Moreover, we were glad to be able to afford you another proof of our desire to do what is in our power to bring home to you evidence of the truth of what we say."

Q. Is it correct to say that the direction of thought causes the spirit to be present ?

A. " In some cases it is so. Great activity of spirit, coupled with anxiety to discover truth and to seek into the hidden causes of things, continue to make it possible for a spirit to manifest. Moreover, direction of thought gives what you would call direction or locality to the thought. By that we mean that the instinctive tendency of the desire or thought causes a possibility of objective manifestation. Then by the help of those who, like ourselves, are skilled in managing the elements, manifestation becomes possible. This would not have been possible in this case, only that we took advantage of what would have passed unnoticed in order to work out another proof of the reality of our mission. It is necessary that there should be a combination of circumstances before such a manifestation can be possible. And that combination is rare. Hence the infrequency of such events, and the difficulty we have in arranging them: especially when anxiety enters into the matter, as in the case of a friend whose presence is earnestly desired. It might well be that so ready a proof as this might not occur again."

Q. Then a combination of favourable circumstances aided you. Will the spirit rest, or does it not require it ?

A. " We do not know the destiny of that spirit. It will pass out of our control. Circumstances enabled us to use its presence : but that presence will not be maintained."

Q. If direction of thought causes motion, I should have thought it would be so with our friends and that they would therefore be more likely to come-

A. " It is not that alone. Nor is it so with all. All cannot come to earth. And not in all cases does volition or thought cause union of souls. Many other adjuncts are necessary before such can be. Material obstacles may prevent, and the guardians may oppose. We are not able to pursue the subject now, seeing that we write with difficulty. At another time we may resume. Cease for the present and do not seek further."

t" I : S : D. Rector."

A few days later, Mr. Moses says : —

Q. The spirit B. A. began by drawing. Was it herself ?

A. "With assistance. She could not write. One day if she is able to return again, she will be more able to express her thoughts."

Q. I remember that poor man who was killed by the steam-roller drew.1

A. " Do not dwell on him lest you be vexed. He was not able to express himself. And even as the undeveloped human mind betakes itself to symbols to supplement defect of language : so do spirits seek to illustrate that which they cannot utter. So the Holy Maid [of Kent] drew when she appeared. She has now progressed, and is progressing, having cast aside the weight that hindered her."

i See 948 A.

Q. I am glad. Will she come back ? A. "It may be, but not now."

[ A few days later.]

A. " A spirit who has before communicated will write for you herself. She will then leave you, having given the evidence that is required."

" I should much like to speak more with you, but it is not permitted. You have sacred truth. I know but little yet. I have much, much to learn.

"BLANCHE ABERCROMBY.

" It is like my writing as evidence to you."

950. The leading personage in the third and most remote group of spirits is the one known as " Imperator."

This spirit claims responsibility for the whole series of manifestations, and should therefore be mentioned here, although there is no proof of his identity with the historical personage whom he asserts himself to be. His character, however, claimed and obtained Mr. Moses' entire confidence. He answers for the identity and veracity of spirits introduced ; he explains the phenomena, so far as they are explained ; and he throughout impresses on Mr. Moses his own teaching.

If such high and sweeping claims were made by any ordinary writer, we should expect to find much in the course of his writings which would prove their extravagance. If we ask ourselves how to disprove Imperator's claims we shall find no very definite answer. In the teachings themselves, however, it is over and over again emphasised that there must be distortion of the messages owing to their passage through the mediumistic channel, and if, as is possible, there may have been thus an increase of accuracy in some cases where Mr. Moses had some definite subliminal knowledge, there may also have been many causes of error due to his theological and other dogmatic preconceptions. With regard to the other remote communicators, these, according to the explanations given by Imperator, are high spirits, aiming at the advance of knowledge, and especially of religion, who have been able to discern Mr. Moses' gifts, and have to some extent themselves trained him for the purpose required. They have modified his early life : for instance, by prompting him to his period of retirement on Mount Athos, and by keeping him from wishing to marry. Some of these spirits, however, stand in very distant relation to Mr. Moses, and their indications of presence or collaboration are of a purely arbitrary kind.

There are a group of spirits, it is said, belonging to various ages and countries, who are united by their desire to inform mankind of their destiny and duties. Each member of this group desires to show approval when an attempt is made at such communication. They cannot all take an active share, but, while some work actively, others express sympathy by choosing either a signature, or some special physical manifestation, to be associated with their names, even if not actually produced by them-

951] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 235

selves. This form of communication is of course not meant to be in itself evidential; it depends on the confidence reposed in the " control " in charge of the manifestations; — much as when letters of encouragement are read at a public meeting, their genuineness is taken on trust from the chairman. Even when the handwriting produced (either automatically through the medium, or directly, without the intervention of human hands), resembles that of the deceased person, this, as elsewhere explained, does |not in itself prove identity. Well-known signatures especially may be copied by other spirits.

As soon, however, as it is understood that such messages are not intended to be evidential, it seems not unnatural that they should be given thus. It needs no derogation from the dignity of even the highest spirit to express his sanction of any scheme designed to convey to " men of goodwill," in fashion however humble and unassuming, some message of their eternal fate.

But where identity is absolutely unprovable, as in the case of this group of " men of old time," it would be futile to discuss the probabilities on either side. I cannot blame Mr. Moses for his injunction to leave these spirits — eminent but not Divine — under the mask of the symbolic titles which they chose to assume. His reverence for Imperator was of a filial type which led him to desire that although there must be discussion about the doctrines, there should be none about the actual personality of the teacher to whom he felt that he owed all that was best in his own inner life.

951. We must now briefly go through the points which make such messages as were received by Mr. Moses prima facie evidential, which indicate, that is to say, that they actually do come in some way from their alleged source. A brief recapitulation of the main stages of evidential quality in messages given by automatic writing or by trance-utterances is all that will be needed here.

1 i ) Evidentially lowest comes the class of messages which is by far the most common ; messages, namely, in which, although some special identity may be claimed, all the facts given have been consciously known to the automatist. Here we may well suppose that his own personality alone is concerned, and that the messages have a subliminal, but not an external source.

(2) Next above these come messages containing facts likely to be known to the alleged spirit, and not consciously known to the automatist ; but which facts may nevertheless have some time been noted by the automatist, even unwittingly, and may have thus obtained lodgment in his subliminal memory.

(3) Next come facts which can be proved,— with such varying degrees of certainty as such negative proof allows, — never to have been in any way known to the automatist ; but which nevertheless are easily to be found in books ; so that they may have been learnt clairvoyantly by the automa-

tist himself, or learnt and communicated to him by some mind other than that of the alleged spirit.

(4) Next come facts which can be proved, with similar varying degrees of certainty according to the circumstances, never to have been known to the automatist, or recorded in print; but which were known to the alleged spirit and can be verified by the memories of living persons.

(5) Above this again would come that class of experimental messages, or posthumous letters, of which we have as yet very few good examples (see 876) ; where the departed person has before death arranged some special test — some fact or sentence known only to himself, which he is to transmit after death, if possible, as a token of his return.

952. (6) Thus much for the various kinds of verbal messages, which can be kept and analysed at leisure. We must now turn to evidence of a different and not precisely comparable kind. In point of fact it is not these inferences from written matter which have commonly been most efficacious in compelling the survivor's belief in the reality of the friend's return. Whether logically or no, it is not so much the written message that he trusts, but some phantom of face and voice that he knew so well. It is this familiar convincing presence, — CIKTO Se fle'cnceAov dvrw, — on which the percipient has always insisted, since Achilles strove in vain to embrace Patroclus' shade.

How far such a phantasm is in fact a proof of any real action on the part of the spirit thus recognised is a problem which has been dealt with already in Chapter VII. The upshot of our evidence to my mind is that although the apparition of a departed person cannot per se rank as evidence of his presence, yet this is not a shape which purely hallucinatory phantasms seem often to assume ; and if there be any corroborative evidence, as, for instance, writing which claims to come from the same person, the chance that he is really operative is considerable. In Mr. Moses' case almost all the figures which he saw brought with them some corroboration by writing, trance-utterance, gesture-messages (as where a figure makes signs of assent or dissent), or raps.

(7) And this brings us to a class of cases largely represented in Mr. Moses' series, where writings professing to come from a certain spirit are supported by physical phenomena of which that spirit claims also to be the author. Whether such a line of proof can ever be made logically complete or no, one can imagine many cases where it would be practically convincing to almost all minds. Materialisations of hands, or direct writing in the script of the departed, have much of actual cogency; and these methods, with others like them, are employed by Mr. Moses' " controls " in their efforts to establish their own identities. Physical phenomena in themselves, however, carry no proof of an intelligence outside that of the sensitive himself, and, as I have said, may in many cases be a mere extension of his own ordinary muscular powers, and not due to any external agency at all.

954] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 237

953. If we confine ourselves to the verbal messages, we find that the cases most fully represented in the records of Mr. Moses are limited to the first three classes mentioned above, and those which come under the fourth class — verifiable facts of which there is no printed record and which it is practically certain that the medium could never have known — are comparatively few. This may partly be accounted for by the small number of sitters with Mr. Moses and the fact that they were his personal friends. The records of Mrs. Piper, on the other hand, to which we now turn, are especially rich in incidents that fall under the fourth heading, and the evidential value of the verbal messages in this case is, therefore, much greater than in the case of Mr. Moses. Whereas for Mr. Moses the identity of many of his communicators rested largely upon their being guaranteed by Imperator and his group of helpers, — in the case of Mrs. Piper the spirits of some recently-departed friends who have given much evidence of their identity appear to maintain the independent reality and guiding control over Mrs. Piper of these same intelligences — Imperator, Rector, Doctor, and others — that Mr. Moses claimed as ruling in his own experience. We shall then in the case of Mrs. Piper again return to the question of the supervision of such alleged spirits.

954. The case of Mrs. Piper differs in two important respects from that of W. Stainton Moses or D. D. Home. In the first place no telekinetic phenomena have occurred in connection with her trancemanifestations ; and in the second place her supraliminal self shows no traces of any supernormal faculty whatsoever. She presents an instance of automatism of the extreme type where the " possession " is not merely local or partial, but affects, so to say, the whole psychical area, — where the supraliminal self is for a time completely displaced, and the whole personality appears to suffer intermittent change. In other words, she passes into a trance, during which her organs of speech or writing are " controlled " by other personalities than the normal waking one. Occasionally either just before or just after the trance, the subliminal self appears to take some control of the organism for a brief interval ; but with this exception the personalities that speak or write during her trance claim to be discarnate spirits.

Mrs. Piper's trances may be divided into three stages : (i) Where the dominant controlling personality was known as " Dr. Phinuit " and used the vocal organs almost exclusively, communicating by trance-utterance,

(2) Where the communications were made chiefly by automatic writing in the trance under the supervision more particularly of the control known as "George Pelham," or " G. P.," although "Dr. Phinuit" usually communicated also by speech during this period, 1892-96.

(3) Where supervision is alleged to be exercised by Imperator, Doctor, Rector, and others already mentioned in connection with the experiences of Mr. Moses, and where the communications have been mainly by writing,

but occasionally also by speech. This last stage, which began early in 1897, still continues, and the final outcome remains to be seen.

955. I proceed now to indicate in further detail the nature of the evidence and the character of the manifestations themselves, and begin by quoting from Dr. Hodgson (Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 367-68) a brief statement of some of the historical facts of the case.

Mrs. Piper has been giving sittings for a period extending over thirteen [now, 1901, seventeen] years. Very early in her trance history she came under the attention of Professor James, who sent many persons to her as strangers, in most cases making the appointments himself, and in no case giving their names. She came to some extent under my own supervision in 1887, and I also sent many persons to her, in many cases accompanying them and recording the statements made at their sittings, and taking all the care that I could to prevent Mrs. Piper's obtaining any knowledge beforehand of who the sitters were to be. In 1889-90 Mrs. Piper gave a series of sittings in England under the supervision of Dr. Walter Leaf and Mr. Myers and Professor Lodge, where also the most careful precautions possible were taken to ensure that the sitters went as strangers to Mrs. Piper. Further sittings were supervised by myself in 1890-91 after Mrs. Piper's return to America. Many persons who had sittings in the course of these earlier investigations were convinced that they were actually receiving communications from their " deceased " friends through Mrs. Piper's trance, but although the special investigators were satisfied, from their study of the trance-phenomena themselves and a careful analysis of the detailed records of the sittings, that some supernormal power was involved, there was no definite agreement as to their precise significance. And to myself it seemed that any hypothesis that was offered presented formidable difficulties in the way of its acceptance. In the course of these earlier investigations the communications were given almost entirely through the speech-utterance of the trance-personality known as Phinuit, and even the best of them were apt to include much matter that was irrelevant and unlike the alleged communicators, while there were many indications that Phinuit himself was far from being the kind of person in whom we should be disposed to place implicit credence.

During the years 1892-96 inclusive, I exercised a yet closer supervision of Mrs. Piper's trances than I had done in previous years, continuing to take all the precautions that I could as regards the introduction of persons as strangers. This period was marked by a notable evolution in the quality of the trance results, beginning early in 1892. The character of the manifestations changed with the development of automatic writing in the trance, and with what was alleged to be the continual rendering of active assistance by the communicator whom I have called G. P. [George Pelham]. As a result of this it appeared that communicators were able to express their thoughts directly through the writing by Mrs. Piper's hand, instead of conveying them more dimly and partially through Phinuit as intermediary; and the advice and guidance which they, apparently , received from G. P. enabled them to avoid much of the confusion and irrelevancy so characteristic of the earlier manifestations.

956. I do not propose here to discuss the hypothesis of fraud in this case, since it has been fully discussed in the articles referred to in

957] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 239

my Appendices and elsewhere, e.g. by Dr. Hodgson, Professor William James, Professor Newbold of Pennsylvania University, Dr. Walter Leaf, and Sir Oliver Lodge. I merely quote, as a summary of the argument, a few words of Professor James, from The Psychological Review, July, 1898, pp. 421-22 :—

Dr. Hodgson considers that the hypothesis of fraud cannot be seriously maintained. I agree with him absolutely. The medium has been under observation, much of the time under close observation, as to most of the conditions of her life, by a large number of persons, eager, many of them, to pounce upon any suspicious circumstance for [nearly] fifteen years. During that time, not only has there not been one single suspicious circumstance remarked, but not one suggestion has ever been made from any quarter which might tend positively to explain how the medium, living the apparent life she leads, could possibly collect information about so many sitters by natural means. The scientist who is confident of "fraud" here, must remember that in science as much as in common life a hypothesis must receive some positive specification and determination before it can be profitably discussed, and a fraud which is no assigned kind of fraud, but simply "fraud" at large, fraud in abstracto, can hardly be regarded as a specially scientific explanation of concrete facts.

I give some further statements and references on this point in 956 A and B.

957. Nor shall I discuss at any length the character of the Phinuit personality. An excellent analysis of this, which I quote in 957 A, was given by Sir Oliver Lodge. According to my own experience, during Mrs. Piper's visit to England in 1889-90, different trances, and different parts of the same trance, varied greatly in quality. There were some interviews throughout which Phinuit hardly asked any question, and hardly stated anything which was not true. There were others throughout which his utterances showed not one glimmer of real knowledge, but consisted wholly of fishing questions and random assertions. The trances could not always be induced at pleasure. A state of quiet expectancy would usually bring one on ; but sometimes the attempt altogether failed. The trance when induced usually lasted about an hour, and there was often a marked difference between the first few minutes of a trance and the remaining time. On such occasions almost all that was of value would be told in the first few minutes ; and the remaining talk would consist of vague generalities or mere repetitions of what had already been given. Phinuit always professed himself to be a spirit communicating with spirits ; and he used to say that he remembered their messages for a few minutes after " entering into the medium," and then became confused. He was not, however, apparently able to depart when his budget of facts was empty. There seemed to be some irresponsible letting-off of energy which must continue until the original impulse was lost in incoherence. My own general conclusion at that time was that Phinuit's utterances

must be judged as but one item in the long roll of automatic messages of many kinds which were only then beginning to be collected and analysed. I regarded it as proved that these phenomena afforded evidence of large extensions — telepathic or clairvoyant — of the normal powers of the human spirit, and thought it possible that Phinuit's knowledge was thus derived from a telepathic or clairvoyant faculty, latent in Mrs. Piper, and manifesting itself in ways with which previous experiment had not made us familiar. On the other hand, the automatic messages which we had already studied included phenomena of very various types, some of which certainly pointed primd facie to the intervention — perhaps the very indirect intervention — of the surviving personalities of the dead, and I held that if such instances of communication from extra-terrene minds should ultimately find acceptance with science, then Phinuit's messages, with all their drawbacks and all their inconsistency, would have fair claim to be added to the number.

