HUMAN PERSONALITY AND ITS SURVIVAL OF BODILY DEATH

by Frederic W. H. Myers (1843-1901)

Basis: Clean reading edition of Frederic W. H. Myers's Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death, complete in two volumes as first published (London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1903; Internet Archive humanpersonality01myer and humanpersonality02myeruoft); spelling and wording original; running headers, page numbers and scanner noise removed; the Index is not reproduced in this reading edition.

Reader note: A one-volume abridgement of this work appeared in 1907 (Internet Archive humanpersonality00myer). This edition is not that abridgement: it is the complete two-volume 1903 text, syllabuses, glossary and the full appendix case reports included, as Myers's editors issued it after his death.

Rare & Obscure Books series


* * *

HUMAN PERSONALITY AND ITS SURVIVAL OF BODILY DEATH

BY FREDERIC W. H. MYERS

In Two Volumes

London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 39 Paternoster Row; New York and Bombay

First Edition, February, 1903



Volume One



Preface

The book which is now at last given to the world is but a partial presentation of an ever-growing subject which I have long hoped to become able to treat in more adequate fashion. But as knowledge increases life rolls by, and I have thought it well to bring out while I can even this most imperfect text-book to a branch of research whose novelty and strangeness call urgently for some provisional systematisation, which, by suggesting fresh inquiries, further accumulation of evidence may tend as speedily as possible to its own supersession. Few critics of this book can, I think, be more fully conscious than its author of its defects and its lacunae ; but also few critics, I think, have yet realised the importance of the new facts which in some fashion the book does actually present.

Many of these facts have already appeared in Phantasms of the Living ; many more in the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research ; but they are far indeed from having yet entered into the scientific consciousness of the age. In future years the wonder, I think, will be that their announcement was so largely left to a writer with leisure so scanty, and with scientific equipment so incomplete.

Whatever value this book may possess is in great measure due to other minds than its actual author's. Its very existence, in the first place, probably depends upon the existence of the two beloved friends and invaluable coadjutors to whose memory I dedicate it now.

The help derived from these departed colleagues, Henry Sidgwick and Edmund Gurney, although of a kind and quantity absolutely essential to the existence of this work, is not easy to define in all its fulness under the changed circumstances of to-day. There was indeed much which is measurable ; — much of revision of previous work of my own, of collaborative experiments, of original thought and discovery. Large quotations purposely introduced from Edmund Gurney indicate, although imperfectly, how closely interwoven our work on all these subjects continued to be until his death. But the benefit which I drew from the association went deeper still. The conditions under which this inquiry was undertaken were such as to emphasise the need of some intimate moral support. A recluse, perhaps, or an eccentric, — or a man living mainly with his intellectual inferiors, may find it easy to work steadily and confidently at a task which he knows that the bulk of educated men will ignore or despise. But this is more difficult for a man who feels manifold links with his kind, a man whose desire it is to live among minds equal or superior to his own. It is hard, I say, for such a man to disregard altogether the expressed or implied disapproval of those groups of weighty personages to whom in other matters he is accustomed to look up.

I need not say that the attitude of the scientific world — of all the intellectual world — then was very much more marked than now. Even now I write in full consciousness of the low value commonly attached to inquiries of the kind which I pursue. Even now a book on such a subject must still expect to evoke, not only legitimate criticism of many kinds, but also much of that disgust and resentment which novelty and heterodoxy naturally excite. But I have no wish to exalt into a deed of daring an enterprise which to the next generation must ecem the most obvious thing in the world. Nihil ajist nisi vana contemnere will certainly be the highest compliment which what seemed to us our bold independence of men

will receive. Yet gratitude bids me to say that however I might in the privacy of my own bosom have ' dared to contemn things contemptible,' I should never have ventured my amateurish acquirements on a publication of this scale were it not for that slow growth of confidence which my respect for the judgment of these two friends inspired. Their countenance and fellowship, which at once transformed my own share in the work into a delight, has made its presentation to the world appear as a duty.

My thanks are due also to another colleague who has passed away, my brother, Dr. A. T. Myers, F.R.C.P., who helped me for many years in all medical points arising in the work.

To the original furnishers of the evidence my obligations are great and manifest, and to the Council of the S.P.R. I also owe thanks for permission to use that evidence freely. But I must leave it to the book itself to indicate in fuller detail how much is owing to how many men and women : — how widely diffused are the work and the interest which have found in this book their temporary outcome and exposition.

The book, indeed, is an exposition rather than a proof. I cannot summarise within my modest limits the mass of evidence already gathered together in the sixteen volumes of Proceedings and the nine volumes of the Journal oiih^ S.P.R. , in Phantasms of the Living and other books hereafter referred to, and in MS. collections. The attempt indeed would be quite out of place. This branch of knowledge, like others, must be studied carefully and in detail by those who care to understand or to advance it.

What I have tried to do here is to render that knowledge more assimilable by co-ordinating it in a form as clear and intelligible as my own limited skill and the nature of the facts themselves have permitted. I have tried to give, in text and in Appendices, enough of actual evidence to illustrate each step in my argument: — and I have constantly referred the reader to places where further evidence will be found.

X PREFACE

In minor matters I have aimed above all things at clearness and readiness in reference. The division of the book into sections, with Appendices bearing the same numbers, will, it is hoped, facilitate the use both of syllabus and of references in general. I have even risked the appearance of pedantry in adding a glossary. Where many unfamiliar facts and ideas have to be dealt with, time is saved in the end if the writer explains precisely what his terms mean.

F. W. H. MYERS.



Editorial Note

This unfinished preface consists of several passages written at different times by the author, who died on January 17th, 1901, In 1896, he arranged that the completion of his book should be in the hands of Dr. Richard Hodgson in case of his death before its publication. In the meantime he had entrusted the general supervision of the press work and much of the detail in marshaUing the Appendices to Miss Alice Johnson of Newnham College, Cambridge, who has therefore been associated with Dr. Hodgson also in the editorial work needed for the completion of the book, and much the greater part of the labour involved has fallen to her share. At the time of the author's death, Chapters I. -VI., part of Chapter VII., and the whole of Chapter VIII. were in the first proof, the rest of Chapter VII. and Chapter X. were ready for printing. Most of the Appendices were in type, but required much revision and re-arrangement. The substance of nearly all Chapter IX. had been written, in one form or another, but had to be pieced together. The asterisks on p. 209 (Vol. II.) mark the end of the part which had been consecutively composed by the author. Some of the questions involved in that chapter would doubtless have been treated much more fully by him had he lived to complete it. Mr. Myers left on record his wish to express gratitude to Mr. F. N. Hales, of Trinity College, Cambridge, for help in the preparation of some Appendices, especially in Chapters II. and V.

Richard Hodgson. Alice Johnson.



Contents

Volume One: Preface; Editorial Note; Glossary; Explanation of Plan of Arrangement and System of References; Syllabuses; Chapter I. Introduction (p. 1); Chapter II. Disintegrations of Personality (p. 34); Chapter III. Genius (p. 70); Chapter IV. Sleep (p. 121); Chapter V. Hypnotism (p. 153); Chapter VI. Sensory Automatism (p. 220); Appendices to Chapter II (p. 298); Appendices to Chapter IV (p. 369); Appendices to Chapter V (p. 437); Appendices to Chapter VI (p. 565).

Volume Two: Syllabuses; Chapter VII. Phantasms of the Dead (p. 1); Chapter VIII. Motor Automatism (p. 81); Chapter IX. Trance, Possession, and Ecstasy (p. 189); Chapter X. Epilogue (p. 278); Appendix A. The Function of a Society for Psychical Research; Appendix B. The Decline of Dogmatism; Appendix C. Prayer and Supplication; Appendices to Chapter VII (p. 315); Appendices to Chapter VIII (p. 400); Appendices to Chapter IX (p. 500); Index. [The Index is not reproduced in this reading edition; see NOTES.md. Page references are those of the 1903 printing.]



Glossary

[Note. — The words and phrases here included fall under three main heads : —

( 1 ) Words in common philosophical or medical use, to which no new shade of meaning is given in this inquiry, e.g. ecmnesia. Introducing a few of these words for the ordinary reader's convenience, I have generally taken the definition from Hack Tuke's Dictionary of Psychological Medicine (London: Churchill, 1892), which is the most authoritative — almost the only — English work of its kind.

(2) Words or phrases in themselves not new, but used in psychical research with some special significance ; — as, for instance, " systematised anaesthesia," " negative hallucination." These two phrases are constantly used by writers on hypnotism : but mere familiarity with the words themselves would not explain their meaning in that context to a reader fresh to hypnotic discussions.

(3) A few words, distinguished by an asterisk, for which I am myself responsible. I must leave it to my readers to judge how far these words are likely to be useful. But I would suggest that when a subject so novel as ours is made the subject of discussion in many countries, there is a convenience in using words of Greek or Latin derivation, which can be adapted to all languages, and can be made to bear a clearly defined signification.]

Aboulia. — Loss of power of willing. I have used the word hyperboulia to express that increased power over the organism, resembling the power which we call will when it is exercised over the voluntary muscles, which is seen in the bodily changes effected by self-suggestion.

After-image. — The picture of an object seen after removing the gaze from the object. It is czS\.&di positive when it reproduces, negative when it reverses the true illumination or colours of the actual object. After-images are regarded as retinal or entoptic, belonging to the interior of the eye. After-images must be distinguished from jnemory-images, which may appear spontaneously, or may be summoned by an effort of will, long after the original sight of the object.

Agent. — The person on whose condition a telepathic impression seems to be dependent ; who seems to initiate the telepathic transmission.

Agraphia. — See Aphasia.

Alexia. — See Aphasia.

Alternation of personality. — See Disintegration of personality .

Anaesthesia, or the loss of sensation generally, must be distinguished from analgesia, or the loss of the sense of pain alone. Many hypnotic subjects are

analgesic but not anaesthetic. Systematised ancesthesia or negative hallucination signifies the condition of an entranced subject who has been told (for instance) that Mr. A. is not in the room, while he is in reality present. The subject may thus be said to have a negative hallucination, or to have been deprived of a certain group or system of perceptions, in that he fails to see Mr. A. Other words descriptive of the general sensory condition are dyscssthesia, impaired or painful sensation ; parcBsthesia, erroneous or morbid sensation ; hypercEsthesia, unusually keen sensation, which may or may not be a morbid symptom. Hyperaesthesia may be peripheral, when it affects nerve-endings near the surface of the body, or central, when the excessive sensitiveness belongs to the central settsoriuni j — such parts, namely, of the brain as are concerned in receiving or generating sensory images and impressions. Hemi-a?icEsthesia means anaesthesia of half the body, the median line (down the middle of the body) separating normal sensation from absence of sensation. Anaesthetic zones or patches (formerly deemed characteristic of witches) are common in hysteria. CcB?iesthesia means that consensus or agreement of many organic sensations which is a fundamental element in our conception of personal identity. Finally, I have suggested the word * pancesthesia to express the undifferentiated sensory capacity of the supposed primal germ.

Analgesia. — Insensibility to pain.

Aphasia. — Incapacity of coherent utterance, not caused by structural impairment of the vocal organs, but by lesion of the cerebral centres for speech. Distinguished from congenital or acquired aphonia, due to paralysis or imperfect approximation of the vocal cords, and also from hysterical mutism, when the patient is obstinately and involuntarily silent, although the vocal organs are uninjured and the cerebral centres of speech are only functionally affected, with no visible lesion. All the four forms of verbalisation are subject to separate disorders of the type of aphasia. Lack of power to write words is called agraphia or agraphy j lack of power to understand words written, alexia or word-blifidfiess J lack of power to understand words uttered, word-deafness. In each case the trouble may lie in the brain and not in the organ of sense or other organs. For instance, a man's sight even for printed musical notes may be unimpaired, while yet he is unable to understand printed words.

Aphonia. — Incapacity of uttering sounds.

Attaque de sommeil. — This French term is more correct than the word " trance," to express those spontaneous lapses into prolonged and profound sleep which sometimes occur in hysterical subjects.

Automatis7n. — The word?, autoi?tatism3.ndi automatic are used in somewhat different senses by physiologists and psychologists. Thus Sir M. Foster says (Foster's Physiology, 5th edition, p. 920), " We speak of an action of an organ or of a living body as being spontaneous or automatic when it appears to be not immediately due to any changes in the circumstances in which the organ or body is placed, but to be the result of changes arising in the organ or body itself and determined by causes other than the influences of the circumstances of the moment. The most striking automatic actions of the living body [are] those which we attribute to the working of the will and which we call voluntary or volitional." That is to say, to the physiologist an action is "self-moved" when it is determined, not by the environment, but by the organism itself. The word thus becomes hardly more than a synonym for spontaneous. The psychologist, on the other hand, regards an action as " self-moved " when it is deter-

GLOSSARY XV

mined in an organism apart from the central will or control of that organism. Thus when an act at first needing voluntary guidance, by practice comes to need such guidance no longer, it is called " secondarily automatic." I have used the word in a wider sense, as expressing such images as arise, as well as such movements as are made, without the initiation, and generally without the concurrence, of conscious thought and will. Sensory automatism will thus include visual and auditory hallucinations ; motor automatism will include messages written without intention (automatic script) or words uttered without intention (as in "speaking with tongues," trance-utterances, &c.). I ascribe these processes to the action of submerged or subliminal elements in the man's being. Such phrases as " reflex cerebral action," or " unconscious cerebration," give therefore, in my view, a very imperfect conception of the facts.

Automnesia. — Spontaneous revival of memories of an earlier condition of life.

Autoscope. — Any instrument which reveals a subliminal motor impulse or sensory impression ; e.g. a divining rod, a tilting table, or a planchette reveals by its visible motion the imperceptible, involuntary, and unconscious muscular action of the person holding or touching it ; a crystal or other speculum externalises the subliminal impressions of the person who sees visions in it.

Bilocation. — The sensation of being in two different places at once, namely, where one's organism is, and a place distant from it, involving some degree of perception (whether veridical or falsidical) of the distant scene.

Catalepsy. — " An intermittent neurosis, characterised by the patient's inability to change the position of a limb, while another person can place the muscles in a state of flexion or contraction as he will." — (Tuke's Diet.) Catalepsy may also be induced as a stage of hypnotism ; although Charcot's view, which erected catalepsy, lethargy, somnambulism (their relative positions sometimes varied) into three typical or necessary stages in a hypnotic trance, is now commonly considered to have been a too hasty generalisation from the habits — largely imitative — of the group of hypnotic patients at the Salpetriere (a hospital in Paris).

Census of Hallucinatio7is. — An inquiry undertaken to determine the frequency of hallucinations in sane and healthy persons ; described in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. (^See 612 A.)

Centre of Consciousness. — The place where a percipient imagines himself to be. The point from which he seems to himself to be surveying some phantasmal scene.

Chromatism. — See Secondary Sensations.

Clairatidience. — See Clairvoyance.

Clairvoyance {Lucidite). — The faculty or act of perceiving, as though visually, with some coincidental truth, some distant scene; used sometimes, but hardly properly, for transcendental vision., or the perception of beings regarded as on another plane of existence. Clairaudience is generally used of the sensation of hearing an internal (but in some way veridical) voice. I have preferred to use the term *telcssthesia for distant perception. For the faculty has seldom any close analogy with an extension of sight j the perception of distant scenes being often more or less symbolical and in other ways out of accord with what actual sight would show in the locality of the vision. On the other hand, telcesthesia merges into telepathy., since we cannot say how far the perception of a distant scene may in essential be the perception of the content of a distant mind. VOL. I. b

Canesthesia. — See AncEsthesia.

Coincidental. — This word is used when there is some degree of coincidence in time of occurrence between a supernormal incident and an event at a distance, which makes it seem probable that some causal connection exists between the two. An apparition, for instance, seen at or about the time when the person whose phantasm is seen dies, is a coincidental apparition.

Collective. — Applied to cases where two or more persons together perceive a hallucination or phantasm.

Cojttrol. — This word is used of the intelligence which purports to communicate messages which are written or uttered by the automatist, sensitive, or mediuni. The word is used for convenience' sake, but should not imply that the source of the messages need be other than the automatist's own subliminal intelligence.

*Cosmopathic. — Open to the access of supernormal knowledge or emotion, apparently from the transcendental world, but whose precise source we have no means of defining.

Cryptomnesia. — Submerged or subliminal memory of events forgotten by the supraliminal self.

Crystal-gazing. — The act of looking into a crystal, glass ball, or other specuhim, or reflecting surface, with the object of inducing hallucinatory pictures. The person doing this is called a seer or scryer. The pictures, of course, exist in the mind and not in the crystal. See Shell-hearing.

Delusion and Delusive. — Applied generally to all cases whether of hallucination or illusion, when there is no corresponding reality whatever ; — i.e. when the case is not coincidental or in any other way veridical.

Dextro-cerebral (opposed to Sinistro-cerebral)\ of left-handed persons, as employing preferentially the right hemisphere of the brain.

Diathesis. — Habit, capacity, or disposition. (In Medicifte, a permanent condition of the body which renders it liable to certain special diseases or affections ; a constitutional predisposition or tendency.) See PsychorrJiagic diathesis.

Dimorphism. — In crystals, the property of assuming two incompatible forms ; in plants and animals, difference of form between members of the same species. Used of a condition of alternating personalities ; a kind oi psychical dimorphism in which memory, character, faculty, &c., present themselves at different times in different forms in the same person. Similarly, polymorphism is the property of assuming many forms.

Discariiate. — Disembodied, opposed to incarnate. Used of that part of man which still subsists after bodily death.

Disintegration of personality. — Used of any condition where the sense of personality is not unitary and continuous; especially when secondary and transitory personalities intervene; as, for instance, when a hysterical subject calls herself at one time Rose, at another Adrienne, &c., with separate chains of memory for each condition.

Dissolutive.—0'pi)05td to Evolutive ; of changes which tend not towards progress but towards decay.

Dy7iamogeny. — The increase of nervous energy by appropriate stimuli ; often opposed to inhibition.

Dysccsthcsia. — See A nastJicsia.

Ecmncsia. — A gap in memory : " a form of amnesia [forgetfulness] in whicli there is a normal memory of occurrences prior to a given date, with loss of

memory of what happened for a certain time after that date." — (Tuke's Diet.). It should be added that the gap of memory may include some period of time previous to the shock or accident which caused it.

Ecstasy. — A trance during which the spirit of the automatist partially quits his body, entering into a state in which the spiritual world is more or less open to its perception, and in which it so far ceases to occupy its organism as to leave room for an invading spirit to use it in somewhat the same fashion as its owner is accustomed to use it. See Possessiott.

* E7itencephalic. — On the analogy of entoptic ; of sensations, &c., which have their origin within the brain, not in the external world.

Eugenics. — The science of improving the race.

Externalise. — This word is used to represent the process by which an idea or impression on the percipient's mind is transformed into a phantasm apparently outside him.

Falsidical. — See Hallucination.

Glossolaly. — " Speaking with tongues," i.e. automatic utterance of words not belonging to any real language.

Hallucination. — Any supposed sensory perception which has no objective counterpart within the field of vision, hearing, &c., is termed a hallucination. Hallucinations may be delusive ox falsidical., when there is nothing whatever to which they correspond ; or veridical., when they correspond (as those of which we treat generally correspond) to real events happening elsewhere. A pseudohallucination is a quasi-percept not sufficiently externalised to rank as a "fullblown" hallucination. Contrast with illusion and delusion.

Hemi-ancesthesia. — See A ncBsthesia.

HetercEsthesia. — A form of sensibility decidedly different from any of those which can be referred to the action of the known senses — e.g. the perception of a magnetic field, specific sensibilities to running water, crystals, metals (see Metallcesthesid), &c.

Hyperboulia. — See Aboulia.

HypercEsthesia. — See Ancesthesia.

Hypermnesia. — ^Defined in Tuke's Diet, as " over-activity of the memory, a condition in which past acts, feelings, or ideas are brought vividly to the mind, which, in its natural condition, has wholly lost the remembrance of them." In my view the subliminal memory retains these remembrances throughout, and their supraliminal evocation implies an increased grasp of natural faculty. *Panmnesia would imply a potential recollection of all impressions.

*Hyperpromethia. — Supernormal power of foresight ; attributed to the subliminal self as a hypothesis by which to explain premonitions without assuming either that the future scene is shown to the percipient by any mind external to his own, or that circumstances which we regard as future are in any sense already existent.

Hypnagogic. — Illusions hypnagogiques (Maury) are the vivid illusions of sight or sound — " faces in the dark," &c. — which sometimes accompany the oncoming of sleep. To similar illusions accompanying the departure of sleep, as when a dream-figure persists for a few moments into waking life, I have given the name *hypnopoinpic.

Hypnogenous. — See Hysterogenous.

*Hypnopompie. — See Hypnagogic.

Hypnotism. — See Mesmerism.

Hysteria. — " A disordered condition of the nervous system, the anatomical seat and nature of which are unknown to medical science, but of which the symptoms consist in well-marked and very varied disturbances of nervefunction " {Ency. Brit.). For further definition and discussion, see below, Chapter II.

Hysterical blindness, contractures, mutism, oedema, paralysis, &c., signify affections not dependent on any discoverable lesion, but on the defects of nervous co-ordination characteristic of hysteria. Such affections, even when of long standing, may quite suddenly disappear.

Hysterogenous zottes. — Points or tracts on the skin of a hysterical person pressure on which will induce a hysterical attack. Hypnogenous zones are regions by pressure on which hypnosis is induced in a hysterical person, by a similar process of self-suggestion.

Ideational. — Used of impressions which convey some distinct notion, but not of sensory nature.

Idiognomonic. — -Not symptomatic of any other condition ; indicative only of itself.

Idiopathic. — Symptomatic of some special morbid state or condition, which exhibits no other symptom — e.g. idiopathic somnambulism is sleep-walking not associated with any other disease.

Illusion. —The misinterpretation of some object actually present to sight, hearing, &c., as when a hanging coat is taken for a man, a ringing in the ears for the sound of a bell, &c.

Imaginal. — A word used of characteristics belonging to the perfect insect or imago J — and thus opposed to larval; — metaphorically applied to transcendental faculties shown in rudiment in ordinary life.

Induced. — Of phantasms, &c., intentionally pi^oduced.

Levitation. — A raising of objects from the ground by supposed supernormal means: especially of living persons; asserted in the case of St. Joseph of Copertino, and many other saints; of D. D. Home, and of W. Stainton Moses.

Medium. — A person through whom communication is deemed to be carried on between living men and spirits of the departed. As commonly used in spiritist literature, this word is liable to the objection that it assumes a particular theory for phenomena which admit of explanation in various ways. It is often better replaced by automatist or sensitive.

Mesmerism. — This is the oldest widely-recognised word for a large group of phenomena discussed below in Chapter V. The name need imply nothing more than the fact that Mesmer was the conspicuous introducer of many of the phenomena to the European public. But it is also specially used to imply something of his theory of their production, by a vital effluence from the mesmeriser, conveyed partly by mesmeric passes, ox wavings of the hands. Tlie term Anitnal Magnetism implies a somewhat different theory. The term Hypnotism., when first started by Braid, was again meant to imply a theory of the genesis of these phenomena, but it is now generally used with no theoretical implication.

Message. — Used for any communication, not necessarily verbal, from one to another stratum of the automatist's personality, or from an external intelligence to one or other stratum of the automatist. Thus any automatic script may be called a message, even if incoherent

MetallcBSthesia. — A form of sensibility alleged to exist which enables some hypnotised or hysterical subjects to discriminate between the contacts of various metals by sensations not derived from their ordinary properties of weight, &c.

Metastasis. — Change of the seat of a bodily function from one place {e.g. a brain-centre) to another.

*Metetherial. — That which appears to lie after or beyond the ether; the metetherial environment denotes the spiritual or transcendental world in which the soul exists.

*Methectic. — Of communications between one stratum of a man's intelligence and another; as when he writes messages whose origin is in his own subliminal self. Some word is needed to express this novel conception; and Plato's use of the word fiede^is, participation (Farm. 132 D), suggests methectic as the most appropriate term of Greek origin.

Mirror-writing {ecriture renversee, Spiegel-schriff) . Writing so inverted, or, more exactly, perverted^ as to resemble writing reflected in a mirror, or blotted off on to a sheet of blotting paper. This form of writing is natural to some left-handed persons. It also frequently appears in automatic script.

Mnemonic chain. — A continuous series of memories, especially when the continuity persists after an interruption. See Disintegration of personality.

Monition. — A message involving counsel or warning, when that counsel is based upon facts already in existence, but not normally known to the person who receives the monition.

Motor. — Used of an impulse to action not carrying with it any definite idea or sensory impression.

Negative hallucination. — See Ancesthesia.

Number for 7ns. — See Secondary Sensations.

Objectify. — To externalise a phantom in three dimensions; to see it as a soHd object fitted into the waking world,

*P ancesthesia. — See Anesthesia.

*Panmnesia . — See Hyperm nesia .

ParcEsthesia. — See A ticesthesia.

Paramnesia. — See Promnesia.

Paraphasia. — The erroneous and involuntary use of one word for another, or of one syllable for another. Cf. Aphasia.

Percipient. — The correlative term to Agent ; the person on whose mind the telepathic impact falls; or more generally, the person who perceives any motor or sensory impression.

Phantas7n and Phatttom. — Phantasm and phantom are, of course, mere variants of the same word ; but since phantom has become generally restricted to visual hallucinations, it is convenient to take phantasm to cover a wider range, and to signify any hallucinatory sensory impression, whatever sense — whether sight, hearing, touch, smell, taste, or diffused sensibility — may happen to be affected.

Phantasmogettetic centre. — A point in space so modified by the presence of a spirit that it becomes perceptible to persons materially present near it. The conception of psychical excursion or invasion implies that some movement bearing some relation to space as we know it is accomplished; that the invading spirit modifies a certain portion of space, not materially nor

XX GLOSSARY

optically, but in such a manner that specially susceptible persons may perceive it. Cf. Psychorrhagy.

Phobies {\.QXva. adopted from the French). — Irrational restricting or disabling pre-occupations or fears; morbid aversions for certain things or actions,.^. agoraphobia^ fear of open spaces ; mysophobia^ fear of uncleanliness.

Photism. — See Secondary Sensations.

Point de repere. — Guiding mark. Used of some (generally inconspicuous) real object which a hallucinated subject sometimes sees along with his hallucination, and whose behaviour under magnification, &c., suggests to him similar changes in the hallucinatory figure.

Polymorphism. — See Dimorphistn.

Polyzoisjn. — The property, in a complex organism, of being composed of minor and quasi-independent organisms (like the polyzoa or "sea-mats"). This is sometimes called " colonial constitution," from animal colonies j but the metaphor implied is not always suitable. The -viord. polypsychism is sometimes used to express the psychical aspect of polyzoism.

Possession. — A developed form of motor automatism, in which the automatist's own personality disappears for the time, while there is a more or less complete substitution of personality, writing or speech being given by another spirit through the entranced organism.

Post-hypnotic. — Used of a suggestion given during the hypnotic trance, but intended to operate after that trance has ceased.

Precognition. — A knowledge of impending events supernormally acquired.

Premofiition. — A supernormal indication of any kind of event still in the future.

*Preversion. — A tendency to characteristics assumed to lie at a further point of the evolutionary progress of a species than has yet been reached; opposed to reversion.

Proleptic. — Anticipatory; assuming a knowledge of a fact not yet communicated. A dream is called proleptic when it assumes some fact which is only made known to the dreamer later in the dream. For instance, a person in one's dream may ask one a riddle, and not tell one the answer for some time ; yet a knowledge of that answer must have existed in one's mind all the time, since one did in fact ask the riddle oneself.

*Promnesia. — The paradoxical sensation of recollecting a scene which is only now occurring for the first time; the sense of the dejii vu. The term paramnesia, which is sometimes given to this sensation, should, I think, cover all forms of erroneous memory, and cannot without confusion be used to express specifically this one anomalous sensation. P seudo-halhccination. — See Hallucination.

* Psychorrhagy. — A special idiosyncrasy which tends to make the phantasm of a person easily perceptible; the breaking loose of a psychical element, definable mainly by its power of producing a phantasm, perceptible by one or more persons, in some portion of space. Cf. Phantasfuogetietic centre.

*Psychorrhagic diathesis. — A habit or capacity of detaching some psychical element, involuntarily and vvithout purpose, in such a manner as to produce a phantasm.

Psycho-therapeutics. — " Treatment of disease by the influence of the mind on the body " (Tuke's Diet.). All suggestion of course comes under this head.

Quasi-percept. — The more or less objectified phantasm, which the percipient does, in a certain sense, perceive.

Reciprocal. — Used of cases where there is both agency and percipience at each end of the telepathic chain, so that (in a complete or developed case) A perceives P, and P perceives A also.

*Retrocog7iitio7i. — Knowledge of the Past, supernormally acquired.

Secondary Personality. — It sometimes happens, as the result of shock, disease, or unknown causes, that a man or a woman experiences an alteration of memory and character, amounting to a change of personality, which generally seems to have come on during sleep. The new personahty is in that case termed secondary. It generally disappears after a time, or alternates with the original, or primary, personality.

Secondary Sensations (^Secunddrempfindungen audition coloree, sound-seeing, syncesthesicB, dr'c.). — With some persons every sensation of one type is accompanied by a sensation of another type ; as, for instance, a special sound may be accompanied by a special sensation of colour or light {chromatisms or photisms). This phenomenon is analogous to that of number-forr/is, a kind of diagrammatic mental pictures which accompany the conception of a progression of numbers. See Galton's Inquiries into Human Faculty.

Shell-hearing. — The induction of hallucinatory voices, &c., by listening to a shell. Analogous to crystal-gazing.

Spectrtim of consciousness. — A comparison of man's range of consciousness or faculty to the solor spectrum, as seen by us after passing through a prism or as examined in a spectroscope.

Spiritualism or Spiritism. — A religion, philosophy, or mode of thinking, based on the belief that the spirits of the dead communicate with living men. Since the words spiritualistne and spiritualiste have long been used in France for a school of philosophy opposed to materialism, there is some advantage in choosing the word Spiritism for the belief in spirit intercourse.

Stigtnatisation. — The production of blisters or other cutaneous changes on the hands, feet, or elsewhere, by self-suggestion or meditation. These marks were said to have been produced on St. Francis of Assisi, on Louise Lateau, &c., by meditation on the sufferings of Christ. Similar marks are producible by suggestion in some hypnotic subjects, and even vesication (the formation of blisters) seems to have been thus induced.

Subliminal. — Of thoughts, feelings, &c., lying beneath the ordinary threshold (Jimen) of consciousness, as opposed to stipraliminal, lying above the threshold. Excitations are termed subliminal when they are too weak to rise into direct notice ; and I have extended the application of the term to feeling, thought, or faculty, which is kept thus submerged, not by its own weakness, but by the constitution of man's personality. The threshold {Schwelle') must be regarded as a level above which waves may rise, — like a aiab washed by the sea, — rather than as an entrance into a chamber.

Suggestion. — The process of effectively impressing upon the subliminal intelligence the wishes of the man's own supraliminal self or of some other person. The mechanism of this process is obscure, nor is it known why some persons are much more suggestible than others. Self-suggestion (sometimes called atito-suggestion by a barbarism easily avoidable in English) means a suggestion conveyed by the subject himself from one stratum of his personality to another, without external intervention.

*Supernormal. — Of a faculty or phenomenon which goes beyond the level of ordinary experience, in the direction of evolution, or as pertaining to a transcendental world. The word supernatural is open to grave objections ; it assumes that there is something outside nature, and it has become associated with arbitrary interference with law. Now there is no reason to suppose that the psychical phenomena with which we deal are less a part of nature, or less subject to fixed and definite law, than any other phenomena. Some of them appear to indicate a higher evolutionary level than the mass of men have yet attained, and some of them appear to be governed by laws of such a kind that they may hold good in a transcendental world as fully as in the world of sense. In either case they are above the norm of man rather than outside his nature.

Supralijninal. — S ee Sublimitial.

SyncEsthesia. — See Secotidary Sensations.

Synergy. — A number of actions correlated together, or combined into a group.

Telekinesis. — Used of alleged supernormal movements of objects, not due to any known force.

Telepathy and *telcesthesia. — It has become possible, I think, to discriminate between these two words somewhat more sharply than when I first suggested them in 1882. Telepathy may still be defined as "the communication of impressions of any kind from one mind to another, independently of the recognised channels of sense." The distance between agent and percipient which the derivation of the word — " feeling at a distance " — implies, need, in fact; only be such as to prevent the operation of whatever known modes of perception are not excluded by the other conditions of the case. Telepathy may thus exist between two men in the same room as truly as between one man in England and another in Australia, or between one man still living on earth and another man long since departed. TelcBsthesia — perception at a distance — may conveniently be interpreted in a similar way, as implying any direct sensation or perception of objects or conditions independently of the recognised channels of sense, and also under such circumstances that no known mind external to the percipient's can be suggested as the source of the knowledge thus gained.

*Telergv- — The force exercised by the mind of an agent in impressing a percipient, — involving a direct influence of the extraneous spirit on the brain or organism of the percipient.

Veridical. — See Hallucination .



Explanation of Plan of Arrangement and System of References

AND SYSTEM OF REFERENCES

In each volume of the book the argument runs on continuously through the Chapters placed at the beginning of the volume. A few illustrative cases are included in these Chapters, but the great mass of cases, together with detailed discussions of individual points, are placed in the Appendices corresponding to the Chapters, at the end of each volume (in vol. i. from p. 298 onwards), in order not to interrupt the argument.

The Appendices are divided according to the Chapters to which they belong, as " Appendices to Chapter II.," " Appendices to Chapter IV.," &c. (Chapters I. and III. having no Appendices) ; see page-headings in last part of volume.

The Chapters are divided into numbered sections. In these numbers, the hundreds correspond to the number of the Chapter ; thus, in Chapter I. the sections are numbered from 100 onwards ; in Chapter II. they are numbered from 200 onwards, and so on. The result of this is that the numbers of sections run on continuously through each Chapter, with a break in the series at the end of each chapter ; e.g. the last section of Chapter I. (p. 33) is 128, and the first section of Chapter II. (p. 34) is 200.

To facilitate reference to the sections, their numbering is repeated in the inner corners of the page-headings.

The Appendices are also numbered, to correspond with the sections which they are intended to illustrate ; the numbers of the Appendices being distinguished from the numbers of the sections by letters being added to the former. Thus the first Appendix is numbered 207 A (see p. 298), this being an illustration of section 207.

Some of the sections have more than one illustrative Appendix ; in that case, the same number is repeated with a different letter. Thus section 223 (p. 60) has ^two Appendices, which are numbered 223 A and 223 B (pp. 305 and 306) . On the other hand, many sections have no Appendices corresponding to them. The result is that the numbering of the Appendices is not continuous, but has many gaps in it. The numbering of the Appendices — like that of the sections — is repeated in the inner corners of the page-headings.

Whenever, therefore, a reference occurs to a number alone, this is to be found among the sections ; but when a reference is to a number with a letter, it is to be found among the Appendices.

In the Syllabuses which immediately follow, the references to the Appendices are given in connection with the sections to which they belong.



Syllabuses



Chapter I

100. Man has never yet applied the method of science to the problem of his own survival of death.

101. There has been much belief in survival, — both definite belief and vague belief, — but nevertheless no attempt to test that belief by observation and experiment.

102. In fact, the very importance of the belief has barred methodical inquiry; men have adopted it as -a. faith and have then been reluctant to analyse it. The Christian Church has absorbed the question into theology, and has treated theology as based on tradition and intuition, not on fresh experiment.

103. From time to time various significant phenomena have occurred, which recall traditional marvels, but are now gradually being brought into line with the results of modern science ; e.g. Witchcraft has been greatly elucidated by modern investigations into hysteria.

104. Mesmerisfn foreshadowed hypnotic suggestion and psycho-therapeutics.

105. Swedenborg originated the notion of science in the spiritual world, and must be regarded as a true and early precursor of our enquiry into the nature of trance manifestations.

106. Sir W. Crookes was the first who seriously endeavoured to apply scientific tests to the alleged supernormal influence of the spiritual on the material world. On these alleged facts, a scheme of belief known as Modern Spiritualism has been founded.

107. Next a group of Cambridge friends became convinced that the questions at issue could only be decided through experiment and observation of contemporary phenomena. On this basis the S.P.R. was founded. The first definite and important point towards which all the evidence converged was the thesis of Telepathy, the evidence for which was set forth in Pha7itas7>is of the Living.

108. Telepathy, rendered probable, leads on to evidence of man's survival of death ; but we need first a searching review of the capacities of his incarnate personality.

109. Contrasted views of Personality from which we start. Reid: the old-fashioned view of a single unitary personality.

110. Ribot: the modern view that the self is a co-ordination-

CHAPTER I XXV

m. The new evidence adduced in this book, while supporting the conception of the composite structure of the Ego, does also bring the strongest proof of its abiding unity^ by showing that it withstands the shock of death.

112. The words supraliminal and subliminal may be used to express the mental life which goes on above and below the ordinary threshold of consciousness. The subliminal (or ultra-marginal) mental life is sufficiently complex and continuous to justify us in speaking of a subliminal Self.

113. This view may be attacked, on the one hand, as being too elaborate for the facts ; on the other hand, as ascribing to some part of our own personality perceptions and impulses which are really due to extraneous and perhaps discarnate minds.

114. The theory of the subliminal self need not, however, be pushed so far as altogether to negative spirit-intervention ; in fact, the two views support each other.

115. The study of these subliminal workings is the more necessary now that we realise the slow and complex evolution of man, with the probable lapse from consciousness of much that was once vividly present.

116. The difference between old and new conceptions of consciousness is like the difference between the old simple conception of sunlight and our present conception of the ray fanned out into a spectrum, and barred with lines of varying darkness.

117. Just as the solar spectrum has been prolonged by artifice beyond both red and violet ends, so may the spectrum of conscious human faculty be artificially prolonged beyond both the lower end (where consciousness merges into mere organic operation) and the higher end (where consciousness merges into reverie or ecstasy).

118. Sketch of the general line of inquiry to be pursued in this book — an advance from the analysis of normal to the evidence for supernormal faculty, ending with a discussion of the nature of the proof acquired as to the persistence of human personality after bodily death.

119. Of the chapters following on this first or introductory one, the second will contain a discussion of the ways in which human personality disintegrates and decays.

120. The third, utilising the insight thus gained, will discuss the line of evolution which enables man to maintain and intensify his true normality.

121. The fourth will discuss man's normal alternating phase of personality — sleep, and introduces us to certain supernormal phenomena, which sometimes occur in that state.

122. The fifth chapter will deal with hypnotism, considered as an empirical development of sleep. Hypnotic suggestion intensifies the physical recuperation of sleep, and aids the emergence of those supernormal phenomena which ordinary sleep and spontaneous somnambulism sometimes afford.

123. From hypnotism we pass on in the sixth chapter to a range of experiment and observation of still wider scope, namely, to the consideration of all the sensory messages which the subliminal sends upwards to the supraliminal self ; phantasmal externalisations of internal vision and audition. Many of these messages are telepathic — involve, that is to say, direct transmission of thought from one living person to another.

124. Nor does such transmission cease with the bodily death of the trans-

mitting agent. The seventh chapter shows that veridical messages may be given phantasmally to mortal men by spirits after bodily death.

125. The eighth chapter introduces another class of subliminal messages — those unwilled writings and utterances which may be styled motor automatisms. Automatic writing, especially, furnishes the opportunity for experiments more prolonged and continuous than the phantasms or pictures of sensory automatisms can often give.

126. These motor automatisms, moreover, as the ninth chapter shows, are apt to become more complete, more controlling, than sensory automatisms. They culminate in the possession of the sensitive by some extraneous spirit, who writes and talks through the temporarily vacated organism, giving proof of his own surviving identity.

127. The conceptions thus gained will be seen to have bearings on the fundamental problems of the relation of spiritual phenomena to Space, to Time, and to the material world.

128. Finally, we shall resume in a tenth chapter, or Epilogue, some of the reflections, philosophical or religious, to which these new facts inevitably give rise.



Chapter II

200. Each man is at once profoundly unitary and almost infinitely composite.

201. I believe that the unifying principle of his personality is an indwelling soul, and that souls have actually been observed in operation apart from the organisms which they possess, both while those organisms are still living and after they have decayed.

202. Our aim must be to draw from a study of the disintegrations of human personality some hints which may tend towards its more complete integration.

203. We shall have to discuss consciousness in various ways, and we shall find it convenient to use the word conscious as equivalent to potentially memorable. That will be in our view a conscious act which we imagine as capable of forming under any conceivable circumstances (not necessarily on this planet) a link in a mnemonic chain. We must, therefore, feel no prepossession against any given arrangement or division of the total mass of consciousness which exists within us.

204. As to the mode of original integration of consciousness up to the human level science can tell us nothing ; we must wait for the discovery of laws affecting the spiritual world.

205. We have, therefore, no right to assume that all our psychical operations will fall at the same time, or at any time, into the same central current of perception. More probably natural selection has determined what elements shall rise above the conscious threshold. In processes of disintegration these needed elements sink below the threshold again.

206. The series of these degenerations seems to pass thro'igh a certain

critical point where the demarcation between the phases of personality is sufficiently marked to involve a trance-state in passing from one to the other. We begin with minor and partial disaggregations — insistent ideas and the like.

207. These fixed ideas show themselves amenable to psychological rather than to physiological treatment, and are best described as small displacements of the normal level of voluntary control. 207 A. Janet's cases of forgotten terrors giving rise to hysterical attacks.

208. They thus lead up to hysteria, which consists essentially in an undue " permeability of the psychical diaphragm," or confused interchange of elements which should lie above and elements which should lie below the threshold of waking consciousness.

209. In hysteria the field of consciousness is narrowed, so that hysterical anaesthesia is not a real loss of sensibility, but a mere distraction of attention from the affected part.

210. Anaesthetic patches are determined not by anatomical demarcations, but by caprices of the hypnotic stratum — dream-like self-suggestions emanating from partially intelligent subliminal centres.

211. The fragments of perceptive power over which the hysteric has lost control still exist below the threshold, and are capable of being again raised by suggestion into waking consciousness.

212. Example from the recovery by hysterics of their normal field of vision on the presentation of an exciting object.

213. Examples of the partial regression of specific senses in the hysteric to the vagueness of primitive irritability.

214. Similar dissociation of the sense of personality from purposive movements.

215. But a hysteric who squeezes the dynamometer like a weak child can exert great muscular force under the influence of emotion.

216. Hysteria, however, does not necessarily show initial weakness of mind. It may result from the shock of painful circumstances upon natures originally intelligent and refined.

217. Case of Miss Lucy R., as given by Drs. Breuer and Freud.

218. Case of Fraulein Anna O., by the same physicians.

219. Gradual transformation of hysterical malady in this case into a secondary personality.

220. The subhminal convictions or fixed ideas which become morbid when they are encysted in the mind may become sources of power and influence when they are worked in with the products of supraliminal reason, as in martyrs, reformers, &c.

221. From these cases of isolation of certain emotional groups from the psychical complex I pass on to more profound cleavages ; — our best starting point for the study of these lies among the phenomena of dreams — especially in their dramatic character. 221 A. R. L. Stevenson's dream of possessing a double personality.

222. In some cases the new personality seems a dramatisation of some dominant morbid emotion. 222 A. Janet's case of " demoniacal possession."

223. Somnambulisms, developing from accesses of sleep-waking, may merge into dimorphic personalities. 223 A. Dyce's case, 223 B. Mesnet's case.

224. Somewhat similar are post-epileptic alternations of personality. 224 A. Case of Sorgel.

225. Other alternations — though possibly post-epileptic in origin — seem dimorphic or allotropic rather than degenerative. 225 A. Case of Ansel Bourne in which the memory of the secondary state was recovered through hypnotism.

226. Two similar cases, in which the secondary state was perhaps to be referred to a form of hysteria. 226 A. Proust's case. 226 B. Boeteau's case.

227. Case reported by Sidis in which an accident was followed by amnesia and the development of two personalities.

228. A case of the " ambulatory " type, apparently associated with a definite physical lesion. 228 A. Drewry's case.

229. In some cases the alternating state seems due to lack of sufficient vitality to maintain the normal personality without intermission. 229 A. Skae's case.

230. Allied with these degenerative alternations are the factitious alternations which are developed in hysterical persons by hypnotic suggestion or selfsuggestion. Janet's cases : 230 A. Leonie ; 230 B. Lucie. 230 C. Jules Janet's case : Marceline R.

231. In other cases the secondary state is in some ways an improvement on the primary. 231 A. Case of Felida X. 231 B. Barrett's case.

232. In the case of Mary Reynolds, the second state showed a childish gaiety and msouciance, and the two states gradually coalesced into a third phase superior to both. 232 A. Details of the case.

233. An extreme example of dissociations dependent on time-relations ; complex ecmnesia with subjacent hypermnesia. 233 A. Case of Louis Viv^.

234. Example of a subliminal self showing a grotesque hostility to the ordinary self. 234 A. Morton Prince's case of " Sally Beauchamp."

235. Osgood Mason's case of Alma Z., in whom the recurring secondary personality was always associated with immediate and marked improvement in the physical condition.

236. In the case of Mollie Fancher, there were several secondary personalities with a childish character fitted to each ; and her case shows indications of supernormal faculty. 236 A. Newbold's review of the case.

237. The case of Anna Winsor presents a contrast and conflict between positive insanity on the part of the organism generally with wise and watchful sanity on the part of a single limb — the right arm — which appeared to become the permanent possession of the sane secondary personalit3^ 237 A. Barrows' report on the case.

238. The " Watseka Wonder " must be regarded as a pseudo-possession determined by suggestion in a hysterical child. 238 A. Details of the case.

239. This series illustrates the complex and separable nature of the elements of human personality. Plysteria the most delicate form of psychical dissection.

240. Hysteria exhibits acquisitions as well as losses of faculty-

241. If the elements of emergence increase, and the elements of submergence diminish, the permeability of the psychical diaphragm may mean genius instead of hysteria.

242. And the sleeping phase may develop into sleep-waking conditions with manifestations of submerged faculty, which hypnotism can fix and utilise-

243. As the hysteric stands in relation to ordinary men, so do we ordinary men stand in relation to a not impossible ideal of sanity and integration.

244. We may be as unable to conceive of the ideal beyond us as the hysteric is unable to conceive, except by fitful flashes, our normal sanity.

245. We have, at any rate, learnt the lesson of our profound modifiability ; and we have seen that it is by appeals to the subHminal self that we have the best chance of being modified in the directions that we desire.



Chapter III

300. Our study, in the last chapter, of the disintegrations of personality will teach us to seek our type of normal manhood in some example of strongly centralised control over as many elements of the personality as possible.

301. It has been suggested that the nervous development of our race tends rather to degeneracy ; and Professor Lombroso, for instance, regards " the man of genius " as an aberrant and almost a morbid type.

302. I hold, on the other hand, that Genius may be best defined as a capacity of utilising powers which lie too deep for the ordinary man's control ; so that an inspiration of genius is in truth a subliminal uprush of helpful faculty .

303. But before proceeding further we must clearly realise that by no means all that is subliminal in us is potentially " inspiration " ; but that what lies beneath the threshold is at least as mixed in quality as what lies above.

304. The descriptive metaphor of highest-level, middle-level, and lowestlevel centres, useful in distinguishing great classes of nervous activities, may be extended to different forms of automatic or subliminal manifestation.

305. I explain these inequalities by the assumption of a sotd which exercises an imperfect and fluctuating control over the organism, along two main channels, only partly coincident ; and I claim the title of genius for states in which some rivulet is drawn into supraliminal life from the undercurrent stream. And as psychologists we are bound to define genius by the mode of its operation ; — not by the pleasure-giving properties of the result achieved ; — by the source, not the quality, of the output.

306. Now as to normality, I urge that in a constantly evolving species the norm is best represented by the farthest evolutionary stage yet reached.

307. Comparison of genius to an intensification of the glow of a banded spectrum.

308. The form of genius, or of subliminal uprush, most easily measurable is the gift of the " calculating boy." This gift is usually first observed in childhood, and often disappears in a few years.

309. Table of principal Arithmetical Prodigies.

310. These " prodigies " — who are not " degenerates " — are generally unable to explain their own methods, which remain purely subliminal. Case of Mr. Blyth. Details of some other cases.

XXX SYLLABUSES

311. Further cases of similar definiteness of subliminal co-operation. Experiences of Mr. W. Higton.

312. Sir John Herschel's " Geometrical Spectres," which he regarded as " evidence of an intelligence distinct from that of our ordinary personality."

313. Vaguer impressions of subliminal mentation. Case quoted from Dr. Paul Chabaneix.

314. Co-ordination of the sleeping and waking phases of existence. R. L. Stevenson's elaboration of stories in his dreams.

315. On the other hand, Lombroso's collection of anecdotes of the degeneracy of men of genius is on several grounds very weak evidentially.

316. Nervous diseases are no doubt relatively more prominent in modern life, mainly on account of the diminution of diseases due to hunger, filth, and exposure.

317. Rapid nervous development also inducts pertttrbation tvhich masks evolution, as more advanced forms of faculty come into play.

318. Tht planetary scheme of man's evolution regards as mere by-products such joys and powers as are not due to that survival of the fittest which adapts man for success in the material world.

319. But, in fact, the history of life on earth has been a history not merely of adaptation to an environment known once for all, but of gradual discovery of the environment. The dawn of new faculty has again and again manifested a wider Cosmos to which life must react.

320. And thus the higher gifts of genius are no by-products, but are fresh perceptions of truth, and lie in the main stream of human evolution.

321. Yet since the output of genius is largely subliminal, and thus nearer to the extra-terrene source of life, it may sometimes be out of harmony with terrene existence ; just as imaginal characteristics in the larva may be out of harmony with larval existence.

322. Thus, for example, subliminal mentation, while capable, with great poets, of using words much after the manner of music, does not, on the other hand, seem to be so closely and inevitably linked with speech as is mental action above the conscious threshold.

323. Speech and writing are summarisations of certain forms of complex gesture, inevitably inadequate to symboHse our whole psychical being.

324. Certain other forms of symbolism, — as observation and experiment seem to show, — are often more natural than speech for subliminal selfexpression.

325. In this fact, indeed, one may roughly say, lies the need and the genesis of Art, which abandons logical definiteness of statement for the sake of a nearer approach to truth hidden in the ideal world.

326. The internal audition which externalises itself in poetry or music; — the internal visualisation which externalises itself as plastic art ; — these represent for us something truer and more permanent than the products of supraliminal thought.

327. We are here in danger of transcending our definition of genius as the crystallisation by subliminal uprushes of the content of supraliminal thought. But genius is inevitably linked both with trance and with automatism.

328. The flash of genius is a brief automatism, and certain prolonged efforts of genius remind us of the complexity of cerebral re-growth, — the "substitution of function " which takes place beneath the conscious level.

329. The talent of improvisation also, as with George Sand, may reach a point almost indistinguishable from automatism.

330. In some cases, as with M. de Curel, the act of invention merges into a quasi-hallucinatory perception of the imagined personages.

331. We may then naturally ask what is the relation of the man of genius to the sensitive ? Do his inspirations bring with them any supernormal knowledo-e ? He may get true impressions, although not definite impressions, of a supersensory world.

332. For evidence on this point we must consult the utterances of philosophers or poets.

333. In Wordsworth's Prelude we find an honest and deliberate attempt to answer this very question.

334. The subliminal uprush may bring to the poet a vague but genuine consciousness of the spiritual environment.

335. And similarly to the lover it may bring a consciousness of that universal link of spirit with spirit which is the generalisation of telepathy. The controversy as to the planetary or cosmical scope of the passion of Love is, in fact, central to our whole subject.

336. The planetary view, eloquently illustrated by Professor Pierre Janet, regards the sexual instinct as the nucleus of reality around which baseless fancies gather.

337. On the other hand, the Platonic view (as expressed in the Symposium and elsewhere) regards earthly passion as the initiation and introduction into cosmic sanctity and joy.

338. Platonic Love represents in effect what would now be rather termed Religion ; an attitude of devotion and worship towards an Eternal Goodness and Beauty.

339. The psychical type to which we have applied the name of genius may thus be recognised in every region of thought and emotion, and appears essential to the evolution of the race.

340. But whence comes this wisdom of the subliminal Self ? Within what limits can these favourable " sports " occur ?

341. My own argument, while not insisting on Platonic reminiscences, yet assumes a Soul in man and in the Universe an answering Spirit. These are familiar religious postulates, but we must extend the idea of indrawal from the spiritual world to the whole range of our psychical phenomena.

342. That process of indrawal appears healthy and joyous; it is to the child, not to the madman, that genius is near akin.

343. And men of genius, among whom we must reckon the group of saints, have made a palmary experiment on the development of our race, — a sane and fruitful effort to absorb strength and grace from an accessible and inexhaustible source.



Chapter IV

400. In the two preceding chapters I have reviewed the main disturbances and alternations of man's personality, and have then considered the

norm of the waking phase of that personality. The sleeping phase must now be discussed ; — what its characteristics are, how its special faculties can be developed, and what light the study of its manifestations may throw upon the constitution of man.

401. A physiological definition of sleep has never yet been achieved, and is rendered increasingly difficult by what we now know of hypnotic sleep ; — induced in apparent independence of the supposed physiological requisites of slumber.

402. On the psychological side, sleep is the suspension of waking consciousness. But this is only a negative definition. We must seek its positive characteristics, regarding it as a secondary personality. The abeyance of the supraliminal life may be the liberation of the subliminal.

403. To begin with, the mere break of waking consciousness is somehow associated with a potent physiological change — of a kind whose induction lies beyond the spectrum of our ordinary consciousness.

404. And when we pass on within the limits of powers consciously exercised in waking hours, we find that sleep, although it habitually suspends, yet does occasionally enhance those powers. Thus muscular control is enhanced in somnambulism.

405. And the power of visualisation is heightened in illusions hypnago-£[iques, — inward vision on the verge of sleep.

406. And also in hypnopojnpic pictures, — or the prolongation of dreamimages into waking life.

407. Sometimes sensory imagination, inward vision, inward audition, and the like, — seem to be heightened and intensified in dream. 407 A. Case of Dr. Hodgson.

408. R. L. Stevenson utilised this sleep-faculty by self-suggestion to secure visual and dramatic interest for imagined scenes.

409. And similarly, as though by an unwilled self-suggestion, a dream may leave permanent nervous injury, or nervous benefit. 409 A. Faure's case. 409 B. Case of Dr. Holbrook.

410. Even stigmata may apparently be caused by self-suggestion in sleep : Kraff t-Ebing's case.

411. Dream-memory and hypnotic memory seem to be connected ; — suggesting some subliminal continuity of memory through all phases of personality.

412. And in fact we find that, where the memories of several states can be compared, it is the memory furthest from waking life whose span is generally the widest.

413. And dream-memory does at least sometimes include ecmnesic periods, as a case of Charcot's shows.

414. Dream-memory may include facts once known but now forgotten ; and also facts which have indeed fallen within the sensory field, but which waking attention has never observed.

415. Example from Delboeuf of the recovery in dream of a forgotten memory. Cases of: 415 A. Mrs. Bickford-Smith. 415 B. Col. A. v. S.

416. Example of the recovery through dream of an object whose position seemed beyond the range of waking myopic vision : Case of Mr. Lewis.

417. Examples of dreams which reason as well as remember. 417 A.

Davey's case. 417 B. Case of Professor Lamberton. 417 C. Case of Professor Hilprecht.

418. Analogy between the achievements of. dream and the achievements of genius. Possibility that sleep may stand in closer relation than vigilance to a spiritual environment. Ancient universality of this belief.

419. Both telcesthesia and telepathy^ — terms between which we may roughly divide our first groups of supernormal faculty, — meet us indistinguishably in the phenomena of dream. Other groups, as premonitions, present further difficulties for any logical scheme of classification.

420. Nor can the distinction between excursive dreams and receptive dreams serve as a definite mark of division. A fuller scheme will be discussed in Chapter VI. For the present we shall take first those phenomena most nearly allied to our ordinary perceptions of the material world, and shall proceed to those which suggest relations to a spiritual world.

421. Visions of objects during sleep, no longer explicable as revivals of facts which had once fallen, though unnoticed, within the field of vision, but suggesting supernormal perception or excursion by the dreamer. Cases of :

421 A. Mr. Squires. 421 B. Mr. Watts. 421 C. Mrs. Wilkie. 421 D. Judge Howe. 421 E. Mr. Brighten. 421 P. Captain Scott. 421 G. Miss Luke. 421 H. Sir L. Jones. 421 J. Mr. Nascimento.

422. Cases where there is an apparently telepathic link between the dreamer and the scene discerned: — Case of Canon Warburton. Cases of:

422 A. Mrs. West. 422 B. Sir J. Drummond Hay.

423. Case of Mr. Boyle : vision of a death-scene.

424. Case of Sir E. Hamilton : dream of injury to brother's arm. Cases of: 424 A. Mr. Crewdson. 424B. Mrs. Richardson. 424 C. Mr. William Tudor.

425. Precognitive dreams. Indeterminate whether due to the subliminal self of the dreamer or to other spirits incarnate or discarnate. Case of Duchess of Hamilton. Cases of : 425 A. Mr. Pratt. 425 B. Mr. Ivey. 425 C. Lady Z. 425 D. Mr. Haggard. 425 E. Lady Q.

426. Prolonged vision of a scene of death : 426 A. Case of Dr. Bruce.

427. Case of Mrs. Storie. Symbolical presentation of a scene of death.

428. Illustrations of the theory of " psychical invasion " by the spirits of living persons : case of Mrs. T. Cases of : 428 A. Mr. Pike. 428 B. Mrs. Manning. 428 C. Mr. Newnham. 428 D. Mr. W. 428 E. Mrs. Shagren. 428 P. Mrs. Venter.

429. Sometimes this invasion appears to come from departed spirits. Casesof : 429 A. Mrs. Menneer. 429 B. Mrs. Lightfoot. 429 C. Mr. Wingfield. 429 D. Mrs. Green. 429 E. Mr. Dignowity. 429 P. Professor Dolbear.

430. Summary of the lines of inquiry dealt with in the preceding sections, and the conclusion suggested that the self of sleep is a spirit freed from ordinary material limitations.

431. This conclusion accords with the hypothesis that we are living a life in two worlds. The waking personality is adapted to the needs of earthly life ; the personahty of sleep maintains the fundamental connection between the organism and the spiritual world by supplying it with spiritual energy during sleep, and itself develops by the exercise of its own spiritual faculties.

432. This conclusion will be further justified in later chapters, and especially in those dealing with states analogous to sleep ; somnambulistic and hypnotic trance — possession and ecstasy.



Chapter V

500. Preliminary survey of the chapter. I first show that hypnotism is an experimental development of the sleeping phase of personality. Then, reviewing the various accredited modes of inducing hypnotic effects, I show that these resolve themselves into suggestion and self-suggestion ; and, further, that suggestion from hypnotisers resolves itself, in its turn, into self-suggestion; and I define suggestion as a successful appeal to the subliminal self.

Analysing, in the next place, the main achievements of hypnotism, I find that these seem all of them to imply an increased subliminal viialisatioji of the organism ; and, again, that self-suggestion is exercised most effectively when it is supported by strong faith in some external vitalising or succouring power. I conclude that man's spirit does actually draw in energy from some spiritual environment; and that "by Grace we are saved through Faith."

501. Our study of sleep in the last chapter, even more than our study of genius in the chapter preceding, has suggested the desirability of reproducing and consolidating by experiment some part of that sporadic and spontaneous faculty which has come to the surface especially in vision and sleep-waking states.

502. Yet at the same time, if it were not for the knowledge which hypnotism has almost accidentally brought to us, we should find it hard to devise any appropriate scheme of experiment. Important lesson conveyed by the fact that a phenomenon so easily produced and so impressive as the hypnotic trance should have remained virtually unknown until so recent a period.

503. Hypnotism has now, in fact, been discovered, and has opened an easy road of exploration. Yet we should realise beforehand that we are only likely to reach experimentally such portions of our subliminal being as hysteria and somnambulism have affected in their spontaneous and sporadic way. We shall probably reach, so to say, only " middle-level centres " of the subliminal self.

504. These reflections, at any rate, show that hypnotism is no disconnected or extraneous insertion into experimental psychology, but rather a summary name for a group of necessary, although empirical and isolated, attempts to bring under control that range of submerged faculty which has already from time to time risen into our observation.

505. Mesmer showed broadly that a profound nervous change, often therapeutic, would often follow upon an obscure stimulus which he regarded as a specific efiluence passing from hypnotiser to subject.

506. De Puys^gur developed this nervous change into its most important phase, namely, induced somnambulism, and in this phase obtained indications of supernormal faculty.

507. EUiotson and Esdaile, using mesmeric passes, effected remarkable cures, with deep anaesthesia under surgical operations.

508. Braid and Fahnestock showed that hypnotic results could be produced without passes by suggestion and self-suggestion.

509. Charcot, l:)y strongly defending a definite, but mistaken, conception of

CHAPTER V XXXV

hypnotism, gave a fresh impulse to its study. 509 A. Bramwell's criticism of Charcot.

510. Lidbeault, Bernheim, and other hypnotists representing what was at first identified with " the Nancy School," but is now the generally accepted view, insisted that hypnotic phenomena are wholly due to suggestion and selfsuggestion, but left these terms unexplained.

511. On a closer analysis it is seen that " suggestibility " means nothing more than increased internal responsiveness of the organism, which is the result which we wish to effect, not the means by which we effect it.

512. This plasticity, or readier response of the organism to our desire for its modification, is, in fact, aimed at by the use of various nervous stimuli, massive or speciahsed. Drugs afford a form of massive stimulus which is sometimes effective. 512 A. Chloroform may sometimes act simply as a suggestion (Herrero's cases). 512 B. Voisin's view of chloroform as facilitating attention. 512 C. Influence of opium in adding force to self-suggestion: Case of Dr. Parsons.

513. Sudden shock has also been tried, but the resultant " cataplexy" is not identical with hypnotic trance. 513 A. Bramwell on hypnosis in animals. 513 B. Mesmerisation of animals regarded as a test of existence of mesmeric effluence. 513 C. Liebeault on hypnotisation of infants.

514. Hypnotic trance is induced in some hysterical persons by pressure on certain patches of skin called hyp7iogenous zones. This method, however, seems to be merely a form of hysterical self-suggestion.

515. Monotonous stitmilation (as used by Voisin, Braid, &c.), has some predisposing effect, but its apparent effect may often be more truly referred to suggestion.

516. And mesmeric passes involve too little monotonous stimulation to be thus explicable. Their effect must be due either to suggestion or to some influence or effluence akin to telepathy.

517. All forms of nervous stimulation, resulting in increased plasticity, tend thus to resolve themselves into the unexplained efficacy of " suggestion," while, on the other hand, unless there exist some influence or effluence of unknown type, suggestion by hypnotisers can mean little more than self-suggestion.

518. Self-suggestion is itself capricious and unintelligible ; although it is in practice observed to work more readily along certain main lines. 518 A. Fahnestock and Delbceuf on self-suggestion. 518 B. Bramwell and the elder Despine on the same. 518 C. Forel's experience. 518 D. Wingfield's experiments in self-suggestion.

519. I define suggestion as " successful appeal to the subliminal self " ; and thus, in the first place, I present the puzzle of the capriciousness of successful suggestion as part and parcel of the larger problem of the relationships of the supraliminal and the subliminal self.

520. This conception should throw light on the phenomena of hypnotism. In the first place, since the subliminal self is specially concerned with the sleeping phase of personality, we may expect that hypnotism will involve some developed form of sleep.

521. The hypnotic trance is not identical with ordinary sleep. The subliminal self comes to the front in reply to our appeal, and displaces just so much of the supraliminal self as may be needful for its purposes.

522. The stages of hypnotism do not follow any fixed physiological law, — as

Charcot, for instance, supposed. 522 A. Jules Janet's case, 522 B. Gurney on hypnotic stages.

523. Rather, as Gurney has shown, they resemble alternating personalities, of shallow type. 523 A. Gurney on stages of memory in hypnosis. 523 B. Mrs. Sidgwick on the same.

524. Beneath and between the alert states lies the profound hypnotic trance, which resembles a scientific rearrangement of sleep ; — at once more stable and more responsive than ordinary sleep.

525. This generalised conception of hypnotism needs a survey, wider than has been usually attempted, of hypnotic results. The impracticability of framing a physiological scheme of these results teaches us to fall back on psychological considerations. Inhibition and dynamogeny form a convenient contrast of conceptions ; both factors entering into all processes of education.

526. It is possible that the influence of suggestion begins before birth. At any rate, we may regard hypnotic suggestion as a summarised education, and may discuss the role of inhibition and dynamogeny from the nursery onwards. 526 A. Liebeault's case of suggested birth-mark. 526 B. Galton's case of suggested connate idiosyncrasy. 526 C. Maston's case.

527. Inhibition of childish tricks (acquired morbid synergies) by hypnotic suggestion. 527 A. Berillon's cases of cures of childish tricks, &c. 527 B. Vlavianos' cure of similar tricks in an adult.

528. Inhibition of kleptomania and of violence. 528 A. Cases and references 7'e kleptomania. 528 B. Janet's cases.

529. Inhibition of organic proclivities — dipsomania, nicotinism. 529 A. Cases and references re dipsomania. 529 B. Bramwell on dipsomania. 529 C. Cure of nicotinism.

530. Inhibition of morphinomania. 530 A. Marot's cure of a case.

531. Inhibition of aberrant sexual impulse and imagination.

532. Inhibition of morbid memory and attention, — of idees fixes. 532 A. References to cures of phobies professionnelles. 532 B. Vlavianos' cure of agoraphobia. 532 C. Mavroukakis' cure of the same. 532 D. Bramwell's cures of obsessions.

533. Inhibition of inconvenient elements of normal memory: — cure of shyness, &c. Hypnosis not a state of mono-ideism. 533 A. Bramwell shows it to be rather one of poly-ideism,

534. Inhibition of pain; — the most forcible control of attention, 534 A. Delboeuf s experiment of the two burns, 534 B, References to some cases of hypnotic analgesia. 534 C, Delboeuf 's cure of neuralgia. 534 D, A cure of sycosis menti. 534 E. Hypnotic analgesia in accoticheftietits.

535. Is this inhibited pain altogether abrogated, or translated to some other plane of consciousness? 535 A. Green's cases, 535 B, Bramwell's cases.

536. In any case suggestion has the power of dissociating vital phenomena hitherto conjoined, and thus allowing a man to retain in consciousness only such selection of faculties as may suit his immediate purpose.

537. Turning now to the dyna7nogenic results of suggestion, we find that even the results already classed as inhibitivc are in the last resort dynamogenie; since although external acts may be inhibited, there must be a dynamogenie reinforcement of the ideas which check the acts. The more obviously dynamogenic results may now be arranged in an order resembling that which

we try to follow in education; — proceeding from external senses to internal sensory and other central operation ; and thence again to attention and will, and so to character, which is a kind of resultant of all these.

538. Sensory dynamogeny; correction and reinforcement of defective end-organs by suggestion. 538 A. Lidbeault on cases of Aubry and Loue. 538 B. Bramwell's subject, as examined by Hewetson. 538 C. CuUerre's case of suggestion by motor images. 538 D. Connection of hypnotic suggestion with Restitution of Function.

539. Hyperassthesice of sight and hearing produced by suggestion. 539 A. Bergson's case of cornea-reading.

540. Hyperaesthesias of the less defined sense-organs merge into what we may term hetercesihesice, or new varieties of sensibility. 540 A. Kropotkin on primitive sense-organs.

541. Difficulties in the investigation of these; different types of heterassthesias. 541 A. Sensibility to inorganic objects ; e.g. running water. 541 B. Barrett on "dowsing." 541 C. Metallssthesia. 541 D. Sensibility to magnets. 541 B. Sensibility to dead or living organisms ; or to mesmerised objects. 541 F. Medical clairvoyance. 541 G. Richet's experiments. 541 H. Richet's case of clairvoyant diagnosis accompanied by some prevision. 541 J. Suggestive dynamogeny thus leads up to supernormal faculty. 541 K. Braid on medicamentous substances, &c.

542. Dynamogenic effects of suggestion continued. Effects of suggestion on the vaso-motor system. 542 A. De Jong's cure of haemorrhage. 542 B. Various cases of vaso-motor effects. 542 C. Bramwell's cure of hyperhydrosis.

543. Stigmatisation. 543 A. Case of Louise Lateau. 543 B. Biggs' cases. 543 C. Coomes' case. 543 D. Krafft-Ebing's case. 543 E. Cases by Janet, Backman, &c. 543 F. Charcot's production of oedema by suggestion. 543 G. Artigalas' cure of haemorrhage. 543 H. Schrenck-Notzing's experiments.

544. Dynamogeny of the central sensorium ; visual and auditory hallucinations.

545. Certain points peculiar to hypnotic hallucinations. Their capability of deferment.

546. So-called "negative hallucinations," or "systematised ansesthesiae," imply a watchful adaptation of the hallucination to circumstances unpredictable when the suggestion was first given. 546 A. Mrs. Sidgwick's experiments.

547. Organic effects of hypnotic hallucinations may be profounder than in spontaneous cases.

548. Possibility of utilising this vividness and durability of hallucinatory sensation in such a manner as to extend human faculty.

549. The so-called "transposition of senses" is perhaps a hallucinatory self-suggestion in " explanation of a real emergence of telaesthetic capacity. 549 A. Experiments of Pe'tdtin, Fahnestock, &c. 549 B. Fontan's experiments.

550. Dynamogenic efficacy of suggestion on attention, will, and character.

551. Suggestions d echeance, and post-hypnotic calculation of timeintervals, &c. Experiments of: 551 A. Gurney; 551 B. Delboeuf ; 551 C. Bramwell.

552. Vivification of memory, reinforcement of histrionic capacity, &c. 552 A. Dufay's case. 552 B. Bramwell on memory in hypnosis. 552 C. Memory of secondary states recovered by hypnosis.

553. Capacity for attention strengthened and waste of intelligence checked by suggestion. 553 A. Forel's warders. 553 B. Bramwell's subject, &c.

554. Reinforcement of will-power. Backman's experiment. Control over involuntary muscles.

555. Supposed danger of loss of independence ; how avoidable. 555 A. Lidgeois, Liebeault, &c., on subject's will-power and "suggested crimes." 555 B. Bramwell on the same.

556. Influence of suggestion on character. 556 B. Voisin and Dufour on moral reforms.

557. Types of faults and relative probability of hypnotic amelioration. 557 A. Bourdon's cure of morbid jealousy.

558. Faults from which the erring person does not desire to be free.

559. Merging of hypnotic suggestibility into susceptibility to religious influences.

560. We have thus reviewed that branch of hypnotic results which develop the capacity of the subliminal self for organic recuperation in the sleeping phase of personality. We must turn to the results which develop its capacity for self-liberation in the same phase: — as shown by the emergence of supernormal powers.

561. Before expanding this theme I must introduce another subject whose consideration has thus far been postponed, namely, spontaneous somnambulisms.

562. These sleep-waking states form a development of dream, and show the middle-level elements of the subliminal self operating unchecked, with supernormal faculties, for the most part aimlessly and incoherently employed.

563. Sleep-waking parallels to genius. 563 A. Case of Rachel Baker.

564. Sleep-waking sagacity and organic prevision. 564 A. Teste's case and references to others.

565. Telaesthesia and telepathy in spontaneous sleep-waking. 565 A. Dufay's case. References to cases of Elizabeth Squirrell, Jane Rider, &c.

566. Transition from spontaneous sleep-waking to the trance of " possession."

567. This evidence shows us that the supernormal powers which we have traced in each of the preceding chapters in turn present themselves in much the same fashion in spontaneous sleep-waking states also. We must now return to hypnotism, and ask whether these powers are also manifest in sleepwaking states experimentally induced.

568. And first, as to the supernormal induction of hypnotic states. Can hypnosis be telepathically produced from a distance ? Experiments of : 568 A. Janet and Gibert. 568 B. H^ricourt. 568C. Dusart. 568D. Dufay. 568 E. Other cases.

569. If, then, a supernormal influence is exercised from a distance, it may presumably be exercised from close at hand, and we may thus be better able to analyse its true nature. Experiments in the telepathic production of local organic effects and in siletit willittg in proximity. 569 A. Experiments in the production of local anaesthesia by Gurney. 569 B. The same, by Mrs. Sidgwick. 569 C. Experiments in silent willing by Barrett, H. S. Thompson, &c.

570. Possible physical effluence as a hypnotic agent in proximity, perhaps indicated by the occasional sensations accompanying mesmeric passes.

571. Supernormal response of the hypnotised subject. Rapport, and community of sensation with hypnotiser. 571 A. Bramwell on rapport. 571 B. Experiments in community of sensation by Gurney. 571 C. The same, by Guthrie.

572. Perception of past sensation or action; retrocognitive telaesthesia. 572 A. Bobbie's cases. 572 B. Case of Ellen Dawson.

573. Perception of existing facts out of sensory range ; telepathy and travelling clairvoyance, &c., with occasional elements of precognition. 573 A. Professor and Mrs. Sidgwick's experiments. 573 B. Case of "Jane." 573 C. Backman's experiments. 573 D. Fahnestock's experiments. 573 E. Major Buckley's experiments. 573 F. Case of prediction of result of operation.

574. We have now traced out the second line in which hypnotism is a development of the sleeping phase of personality ; — the supernormal phenomena, as contrasted with the therapeutic. The chapter might here conclude ; save that it is felt that, if hypnotism be thus generalised as an appeal to the subliminal self, that appeal should not be the mere appanage of medical practice, but should be based for mankind at large upon some deep-seated instinct or faith,

575. Such faiths or instincts form what I have called "schemes of selfsuggestion " ; — which do, in fact, shape themselves for man at each stage in turn of human progress. 575 A. Cases of efficacy of charms.

576. Transition from fetichistic to polytheistic conceptions of cure, and from polytheism to monotheism; the so-called " miracles of Lourdes."

577. Transition from monotheism to metaphysical abstraction ; faith-healing ; Christian science; mind-healing. Reasons for not here treating these faiths in detail. They are crude attempts at a practical realisation of the profound conception of the superior reality of mind over matter.

578. The " miracles of Lourdes," on the other hand, depend on a complex resuscitation of antique methods of self-suggestion. No evidence for the agency of the Virgin Mary, or that the cures belong to a different category from hypnotic cures. 578 A. The Lourdes legend.

579. The Lourdes legend must needs be fully discussed, since it is important to clear away all that we can of superstition and delusion from the essential truth that it is possible by a right disposition of our own minds to draw energy from an environing world of spiritual life. The practical result of hypnotic artifice has been to strengthen in us that inteUigent central force which guides organic metabolism to useful ends.

580. I can conceive that force in no other way than by saying that man is a spirit, controlling an organism irregularly and variably, and controlling more intimately those deeper strata which hypnotic suggestion reaches.

581. Thus in hypnotic or trance states the spirit can more easily either modify the organism, with self-sanative results, or partially quit the organism, with telcesthetic results.

582. The life of the organism depends on a perpetual and varying indraft from the cosmic energy, and there will be effective therapeutical or ethical selfsuggestion whenever by any artifice subliminal attention to a bodily function or to a moral purpose is carried to some unknown pitch of intensity which draws fresh energy from the metetherial world.

583. We cannot at present define the form of faith which may be most effective in this illation of spiritual strength and grace. Yet we may at once

realise that our most comprehensive duty, in this or other worlds, is intensity of spiritual life ; — nay, that our own spirits are part and parcel of the ultimate vitalising Power.



Chapter VI

600. Summary of preceding chapters. While various kinds of manifestations of the Subliminal Self are disintegrative or morbid in character, we find in each class indications of higher faculties and of an evolutive potency. The converging lines of evidence lead to the conception of the Subliminal Self as the principal, deepest, and most permanent element of the Self ; although much that is incoherent or outworn is also subliminal.

601. The distinctive subliminal faculty of Telepathy or Telaesthesia is emancipated from the ordinary limitations of organic life, and also persists after organic death; thus showing a relation between the subliminal and the surviving self. All subliminal action may be called Atito7natism and regarded under the form of messages conveying information from the subliminal to the supraliminal self, in either a sensory or a motor form.

602. Supraliminal life is here regarded as a special or privileged case of the whole personality, and consequently each ordinary faculty or sense will appear as a special case of some more general power, towards which its evolution may be tending. Each sense is generally supposed to obtain fresh information only through its own end-organ, but it will appear that new and true perceptions are also generated in the brain.

603. Vestiges of the primitive undifferentiated sensitivity persist in the form of synesthesia^ e.g. when the hearing of an external sound carries with it, by some arbitrary association of ideas, the seeing of some form or colour. These phenomena are apparently entencephalic. 603 A. Flournoy's case. 603 B. Gruber's case.

604. The successive stages leading from these entencephalic percepts towards ordinary vision are : Entoptic impressions due to mechanical stimuli of the optic nerve or eye.

605. After-images : the retinal sequelae of ordinary vision.

606. Ordinary external vision.

