uttered. Whether all sub-conscious selves are peculiarly susceptible to a certain stratum of the Zeitgeist, and get their inspiration from it, I know not." See the account of automatic and impressional script, by Mr. Sidney Dean, which Professor James goes on to quote, and which is closely parallel to (for instance) Miss A.'s case, to be given below, although the one series of messages comes from the hand of a late member of Congress, " all his life a robust and active journalist, author, and man of affairs," and the other from a young lady with so different a history and entourage.

829] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 121

Q. " Where did you live ? " A. " Wem." This name was quite unknown to any of us. I am sure it was to myself, and as sure of the word of the others as of that of any one I know.

Q. " Is it decided who is to be Archbishop of Canterbury ? " A. " Yes."

Q. "Who?" A. " Durham." As none of us remembered his name, we asked.

" What is his name ? " A. " Lightfoot." Of course, how far the main statement is correct, I don't know. The curiosity at the time rested in the fact that the name was given which none of us could recall, but was found to be right.

Now, this is just one of the cases which a less wary observer might have brought forward as evidence of spirit agency. An identity, it would be said, manifested itself, and gave an address which none present had ever heard. But I venture to say that there cannot be any real proof that an educated person has never heard of Wem. A permanent recorded fact, like the name of a town which is to be found (for instance) in Bradshaw's Guide, may at any moment have been presented to Mr. Smith's eye, and have found a lodgment in his subliminal memory.

Similarly in the answers " Durham " and " Lightfoot " we are reminded of cases where in a dream we ask a question with vivid curiosity, and are astonished at the reply; which nevertheless proceeds from ourselves as undoubtedly as does the inquiry. The prediction in this case was wrong.

In the next case, although it is possible that the lady's mental action may have contributed, as Mr. Smith supposes, to the very result which she so little desired, the word written may have emanated from the subliminal self of the writer alone.

April 2jtk, 1883.

Present— H. A. Smith (A), R. A. H. Bickford-Smith (B), another gentleman (C), and two ladies (D and E).

R. A. H. B.-S. having, on previous occasions, exhibited considerable aptitude for automatic writing with a Planchette, it was designed to apply this instrument as a means of testing the transference of thoughts. No exact record having been made at the time of the whole of the results obtained, it would be of little service now to record isolated instances of success. Sometimes names thought of were correctly reproduced, sometimes not; but the proportion of successes to failures cannot now be accurately stated. The following incident, however, very much struck us at the time, and seems worthy of record.

Our method of procedure at the time was as follows: — C, sitting at one end of the room, wrote down a name of an author, showing it to no one in the room; B had his hands on the Planchette, no one else being in contact with him or it. C fixed his attention on the written name, and our design was to see whether that name would be written through the medium of the Planchette. The ladies were meanwhile sewing in silence, and taking no part in the experiments. It happened that one of the ladies had at the time, owing to some painful family circumstances, the name of a gentleman (not

present) painfully impressed on her mind. The name was not a common one, and though all present knew something of the circumstances, they had not been mentioned during the evening, and no one had mentioned the name in question, which we will call " Bolton." C then wrote " Dickens " on his paper, and was " willing " B with all his might to write this, when, to the surprise of every one, Planchette rapidly wrote " Bolton." This was not only surprising to us, but painful; and no comments were made at the time, the subject being changed as rapidly as possible. It would appear from this that the effect of C's volitional concentration was overmatched by the intensity of the lady's thought, though not directed to the same object.

H. ARTHUR SMITH.

830. I quote in 830 A a more complex case ("Clelia") furnished by a gentleman whom I there call Mr. A. It is a very good instance of the capricious half-nonsense which has often been referred to the agency of spirits. The indisputable evidence for complex subliminal mentation which this case seems to me to furnish lies in the fact that here Mr. A.'s pen wrote not only unintelligible abbreviations, but absolute anagrams of sentences ; anagrams, indeed, of the crudest kind, consisting- of mere transpositions of letters, but still puzzles which the writer had to set himself to decipher ab extra. The chances against drawing a group of letters at random which will form several definite words and leave no letters over are, of course, very great.

831. I add another case, precisely parallel with " Clelia," with which the late Professor Sidgwick furnished me, from his own experience with an intimate friend. The account was written in 1885.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 25.)

The experiences which I mentioned to you as similar to those described in your paper — so far as the mere effects of unconscious cerebration are concerned— occurred about twenty years ago. An intimate friend of mine who had interested himself somewhat in Spiritualism, and had read Kardec's book, discovered almost by accident that his hand could write, without any conscious volition On his part, words conveying an intelligible meaning — in fact, what purported to be communications of departed spirits. He asked me to come and stay with him, in order to investigate the phenomenon ; he had been rather struck by some things in Kardec's book, and was quite disposed to entertain the hypothesis that the writing might be due to something more than unconscious cerebration, if it should turn out that it could give accurate information on facts unknown to him. The experiments, however, that we made in order to test this always failed to show anything in the statements written down that might not have been due to the working of his own brain ; and at the end of my visit we were both agreed that there was no ground for attributing the phenomenon to any Other cause but unconscious cerebration. At the same time we were continually surprised by evidences of the extent to which his unconscious self was able to puzzle his conscious mind. As a rule, he knew what he was writing, though he wrote involuntarily; but from time to time he used to form words or conjunctions of letters which we were unable to make out at first, though they had a meaning which we ultimately discovered.

831] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 123

Thus one evening, just as we were about to break up, the capital letters KHAIRETE were written; their meaning will not be obscure to you, but it so happened that it did not at first occur to us that K H represented the Greek x, so that we had no idea what the letters meant, and tried various solutions till the true signification (" Farewell ") suddenly flashed upon my mind. On another occasion I asked a question of the supposed communicating intelligence, and requested that the answer might be given in German, a language which my friend was unable to read or write, though he had learnt to speak one or two words while travelling in the country. His hand proceeded to write what was apparently one long word, which seemed to him absolutely without meaning; but when I came to read it I could see that it was composed of a number of German words, though put together without proper grammatical terminations ; and that these words suggested— though they could hardly be said to convey — what would have been a proper and significant answer to my question. The words were all common words, such as he might have heard in conversation ; and when I had separated them, and told him their meaning, he seemed faintly to recognise some of them.

Sometimes, again, when we tried to get correct information as to facts unknown to either of us, the result was curious as showing an apparently elaborate attempt on the part of my friend's unconscious self to deceive his conscious self. I remember (e.g.) that one night we got written down what purported to be the first sentence in a leading article of the Times that had just been written and would appear next morning. The sentence was in the familiar style of Printing House Square ; but I need not say that when we came down to breakfast next morning we did not find it in the printed columns. My friend immediately placed his hand on a piece of paper ; and there came, involuntarily written in the usual way, a long rigmarole of explanation to the effect that the article originally written, containing the sentence that we had got the night before, had been cancelled at the last moment by the editor in consequence of some unexpected political exigency, and another article hastily substituted. And similarly in other cases when statements involuntarily written were ascertained to be false, explanations were written exhibiting the kind of ingenuity which a fairly inventive hoaxer might show when driven into a corner.

If I had not had absolute reliance on my friend's bona fides, I might have supposed that he was mystifying me ; but I could not doubt that his curiosity as to the result of the experiments was greater than mine, and that he had no conscious desire to make me believe that the phenomenon was anything more than the result of unconscious cerebration.

I am sorry that the notes I took at the time have been destroyed ; but I have no doubt that what I have just written is accurately remembered.

I have said that the writer usually knew what he was writing. This was not the case in his first trials, when the writing came in an abrupt, jerky, and irregular way, and he rarely knew what he had written till he looked at it. But after the first few trials, the flow of unconscious action became even and steady, like that of ordinary conscious handwriting ; and then he generally — though not always — knew just before each word was written what it would be ; so that when the statements made were entirely contrary to our expectation — as was often the case — his surprise used to come just before the word was actually written. H. SIDGWICK.

832. The cases of automatic writing thus far given have shown us an independent activity of the subliminal self holding colloquies with the supraliminal ; but they have shown us nothing more. Yet we shall find, if we go on accumulating instances of the same general type, that traces of telsesthesia and telepathy begin insensibly to show themselves ; not at first with a distinctness or a persistence sufficient for actual proof, but just in the same gradual way in which indications of supernormal faculty stole in amid the disintegration of split personalities ; or in which indications of some clairvoyant outlook stole in amid the incoherence of dream. Many of these faint indications, valueless, as I have said, for purely evidential purposes, are nevertheless of much theoretical interest, as showing how near is the subliminal self to that region of supernormal knowledge which for the supraliminal is so definitely closed.

Mr. Schiller's case, given in 832 A, is a good example of these obscure transitions between normal and supernormal, and introduces us to several phenomena which we shall afterwards find recurring again and again in independent quarters. Dramatisation of fictitious personalities, for instance, which forms so marked a feature in Professor Flournoy's celebrated case (to be cited later, 834-842) begins in this series of experiments, conducted throughout with a purely scientific aim, and with no sort of belief in the imaginary "Irktomar" and the rest. It seems as though this "objectivation of types" were part of a romance which some inscrutable but childish humorist was bent on making up. The " cryptomnesia" shown in this case through the reproduction of scraps of old French with which the automatist had no conscious acquaintance, reached a point at which (as again in Professor Flournoy's case) one is almost driven to suspect that it was aided by some slight clairvoyance on the part of the subliminal self.

I subjoin in 832 B a mediaeval case where the fictitious personalities— though rampant as alleged devils, in that rougher age — have no more reality than the milder " Heliod " or " Irktomar."

833. The next case which I shall quote combines various motor automatisms in a very unusual way. I give it at length in the text, partly on account of its strangeness and partly in deference to the high scientific authority on which I received it.

The account is taken from an article by Dr. A. T. Myers and myself (already referred to, see 577) in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 182.

The writer of the following narrative is a physician occupying an important scientific post on the Continent of Europe. He is known to us by correspondence and through a common friend — himself a savant of European reputation — who has talked the case over with Dr. X. and his wife, and has read the statement which we now translate and abbreviate. We are bound to conceal Dr. X.'s identity, and even his country ; nor is this unreasonable, since the bizarrerie of the incidents to be recorded would be felt as greatly out of place in his actual scientific surroundings.

833] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 125

The Dr. Z. who here appears in the somewhat dubious character of a mesmerising spirit, was also, as it happens, a savant of European repute, and a personal friend of Dr. X.'s.

Mme. X. is a lady healthy in body and mind, well-balanced, of sound judgment, strong common sense, and a calm and firm character ; she is charitable without excess ; is not susceptible to flattery, nor given to enthusiasm ; she detests falsehood and duplicity and abhors injustice. She has never had any one of those serious maladies, such as meningitis, typhoid fever, &c., which are apt to leave traces on the nervous system. Nor has she suffered from any nervous complaint. She is the very opposite of what would be termed a nervous or hysterical subject. She is sensibly affected by accounts of human woes, especially among children ; but such sensibility by no means explains the accesses of violent laughter which I have remarked in her since the commencement of the series of events to be now related. These accesses, which have nothing in common with the hysterical crises which they superficially resemble, are always caused by some extraordinary communication emanating from an occult intelligence.

In September 1890, while we were staying in the country, Mme. X. sprained her right foot on a very dark night. A fortnight after our return to

M the foot was almost well; but shortly afterwards I fell ill, and Mme. X.

underwent much fatigue in nursing me. The injured foot then became inflamed and painful; and the left foot also became painful. For all that winter Mme. X. was obliged to lie up, the foot being kept from all movement by plaster or silicate dressings. This treatment was ultimately abandoned ; the foot was simply bound up and crutches used. There was inflammation of the tissues of several of the joints of the right foot, and we were seriously alarmed.

At this point certain friends talked to Mme. X. about the alleged facts of Spiritism, of which until that date she had had a very vague notion. They praised the beneficent intervention of spirits in disease ; but had much difficulty in inducing her to admit the mere possibility of facts of this nature. I can affirm, therefore, that it was only with great difficulty that these friends succeeded in vanquishing Mme. X.'s scepticism — which was moreover supported by my own objections to Spiritism — and at last persuaded her to submit herself to the action of the invisibles. The spirit-guide of a group of which one of our friends was a member advised the intervention of the (spirit)-doctor Z. A day was arranged when Dr. Z. was to visit Mme. X., and she was informed of the date. Owing to other preoccupations we completely forgot this rendezvous. On the day named — it was in April 1891 — Dr. Z. announced himself by raps in the table. Only then did we recollect the rendezvous agreed upon. I asked Dr. Z. his opinion on the nature of the injury to Mme. X.'s foot. By tilts of the table, through Mme. X.'s mediumship, he gave the word " tuberculosis." He meant that there was tuberculosis of the joints, and of this there had been some indications. Had Mme. X. been predisposed to tubercle I doubt not that this would have supervened. Personally, I much feared this complication, and Dr. Z.'s answer (as I at once thought) might well be the mere reflection of my fears. It left me no more anxious than before. We now know that there was in fact no tuberculosis. In any case, Dr. Z. ordered a merely soothing remedy, sulphur ointment. Some days later, at our request, Dr. Z. reappeared and promised to undertake the cure of Mme. X.'s feet ; warning us, however, that

there would never be a " restitutio ad integrum," but that the patient would be unequal to long walks, and would suffer more or less from her feet in damp weather — which has proved to be the case.

I come now to the phenomena, mainly subjective, which Mme. X.'s case began to present. On August I7th, 1891, the patient felt for the first time a •unique sensation, accompanied by formication and sense of weight in the lower limbs, especially in the feet. This sensation gradually spread over the rest of the body, and when it reached the arms, the hands and forearms began to rotate. These phenomena recurred after dinner every evening, as soon as the patient was quiet in her arm-chair. At this point the X. family went into the

country to R , and at that place the manifestations took place twice daily

for some 15 or 20 minutes. Usually the patient placed her two hands on a table. The feeling of "magnetisation " then began in the feet, which began to rotate, and the upper parts of the body gradually shared in the same movement. At a certain point, the hands automatically detached themselves from the table by small, gradual shocks, and at the same time the arms assumed a tetanic rigidity somewhat resembling catalepsy. On one occasion when these sensations had been strongly marked, and the patient had felt the whole of the upper part of her body stiffened, she went to bed and saw in the dark an intense light which lasted for several minutes and then gradually disappeared.

Three weeks after the family's return to M the phenomena changed

in character, and gained in interest. The patient had begun to be able to walk without much difficulty ; but all forced and voluntary movement of the foot was still painful, although when the movement was initiated by the occult agency no pain whatever was felt. One evening, after the usual stance, the patient felt her head move against her will. An intelligent intercourse was thus set up between the patient and the unseen agent or agents. The head nodded once for "Yes," twice for " No," three times for a strong affirmation. These movements were sometimes sudden and violent enough to cause something like pain. Words and phrases could, of course, be spelt out in this way. This form of correspondence has never wholly ceased ; although the intensity of the phenomenon has now much diminished. The occult agent now impresses one or other of Mme. X.'s hands with movements which trace in the air the form of letters of the alphabet ; — a plan which works well and quickly.

Mme. X. is also a writing medium; and this power first showed itself in a strange way during the stay in the country of which I have already spoken. She was writing a letter one day, with no thought of these unseen agencies, when suddenly she felt her hand checked. Warned by a special sensation, she still held the pen. Her hand placed itself on a sheet of paper and began rapidly to write alarming predictions. The writings retained this tone only for a few hours ; and soon the communications became trivial in character, and, save in some exceptional instances, have since remained so.

Another phenomenon followed shortly afterwards. One day Mme. X. felt herself lifted with force from her arm-chair and compelled to stand upright. Her feet and her whole body then executed a systematic calisthenic exercise, in which all the movements were regulated and made rhythmic with finished art. This was renewed on following days, and towards the end of each performance — sometimes of an hour's or two hours' duration — the movements acquired extreme energy. Mme. X. has never had the smallest notion of chamber-gymnastics, Swedish or otherwise, and these movements would have been very painful and fatiguing had she attempted them of her own will. Yet at the end

833] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 127

of each performance she was neither fatigued nor out of breath. All was going well, and Dr. Z. had announced that henceforth his attentions would not be needed, when next day a singular accident threw everything back. Mme. X. had mounted with great precaution upon a low chair with four legs and a large base of support to take an object from a wardrobe. Just as she was about to descend, the chair was violently snatched from under her feet and pushed to a distance. Mme. X. fell on the diseased foot, and the cure had to begin again. [In a subsequent letter Dr. X. explains that by Mme. X.'s account this movement was distinctly due to an invisible force j no natural slipping of the chair.]

Mme. X. was accustomed to bandage her own foot every morning. One day she was astonished to feel her hands seized and guided by an occult force. From that day onwards the bandaging was done according to all the rules of the art, and with a perfection which would have done credit to the most skilful surgeon of either hemisphere. Although very adroit with her hands, Mme. X. had never had occasion to practise nursing or to study minor surgery, yet the bandages thus automatically applied were irreproachable, and were admired by every one. When Mme. X. wished to renew the bandages, she placed the strips all rolled up upon a table within reach of her hand, and her hand then automatically took the bandage which best suited the occult operation.

Mme. X. is accustomed to arrange her own hair. One morning she said laughingly, " I wish that a Court hairdresser would do my hair for me ; my arms are tired." At once she felt her hands acting automatically, and with no fatigue for her arms, which seemed to be held up ; and the result was a complicated coiffure, which in no way resembled her usual simple mode of arrangement.

The oddest of all these automatic phenomena consisted in extremely graceful gestures which Mme. X. was caused to execute with her arms — gestures as though of evocation or adoration of some imaginary divinity, or gestures of benediction. When the occult agent placed her before the portrait of her son whom she lost five years ago the scene became really affecting, and moved Mme. X. herself to tears. The few persons who witnessed this spectacle are agreed that it was worthy of the powers of the greatest actress. Of such a gift Mme. X. has nothing ; her nature is simple and frank, but cold rather than demonstrative.

At the Paris Exhibition of 1889 Mme. X. once saw the "Javanese dance," consisting of rhythmic motions of the body with contortions of the arms. The occult agents caused her to repeat this dance several times with perfect execution.

[Disliking these phenomena,] Mme. X. has tried very hard to free herself from this control, and has to a great extent succeeded, by the use of cold water, by strongly resisting all communications, and by " passes of disengagement " executed by a hypnotiser. [This has reduced the phenomena almost entirely to automatic writing, which, though vague or fantastic when dealing with ordinary topics, is precise and intelligent on medical questions.]

Thus far the phenomena recorded have been purely subjective ; in those which follow there is something objective also. When one has the honour to be treated by a physician of Dr. Z.'s celebrity (!) ordinary kindness bids one sometimes think of benefiting one's neighbour. One of the officials of my department had suffered for many years from pleurodynia, which occasionally laid him up altogether, and also from frequent attacks of sick headache. Dr. Z. was consulted and prescribed an internal treatment which, to my great surprise, consisted mainly of " dosimetric granules " ; [which this great official surgeon had

not in his lifetime employed]. He also caused Mme. X. to perform " passes of disengagement " for ten or fifteen minutes at a time. It was noticeable that while these passes were made with extreme violence, Mme. X.'s hands were arrested at the distance of a millimetre at most from the patient's face, without ever touching him in the least. Mme. X. could never of herself have given to her movements such a degree of precision. For two years now the patient has felt no more of his pleurodynia, and his migraine is, if not altogether cured, at least greatly reduced.

One day — I suppose by way of a joke — Dr. Z., after one of these seances, pursued the patient with his influence as he walked home, and made him execute with his hands various gestures and contortions which drew the attention of passers-by.

Another time our servant A., whose husband was ill in hospital, came crying to Mme. X. and told her that she had lost all hope of ever seeing him cured, &c. Mme. X. asked Dr. Z. to take him in hand. He promised to do so, and said that he would make him feel his presence. Next morning A. went to the hospital and found her husband in despair. " Look here," he said, " besides what I had already, I am falling into a nervous malady. I have been shaken about all night — my arms and legs have executed movements which I could not control." A. began to laugh, and told her husband that Dr. Z. had taken him in hand, and that he would soon get well. The patient is going about as usual to-day, and is as well as an incurable pulmonary affection allows him to be.

Under other circumstances I have myself consulted Dr. Z. as to patients under my professional care. On each occasion he has given a precise diagnosis and has indicated a treatment, consisting mainly of dosimetric granules, sometimes associated with other treatment. These facts have been repeated many times, and I owe great gratitude to Dr. Z. for the advice which he has given me. His prescriptions were always rational ; and when I showed fears as to certain doses which appeared to me too large, he took pains to reassure me, but stuck to his prescriptions. I have never had to repent having followed the advice of my eminent colleague in the other world ; and I am bound to state distinctly that every time that a medical question has been submitted to him the replies and advice of Dr. Z. have been of an astonishing clearness and precision. I cannot say the same of communications obtained on other subjects, in which he seemed to take a malicious pleasure in leading us wrong. He — or some one else — has often announced to us, with minute and intimate detail, the deaths of persons known to us ; who were found on inquiry to be alive and well. Lastly, I give a detail which tends to prove the reality of this occult magnetisation. Mme. X. has often seen two luminous rays projected upon her feet during the stances of which I have spoken above. The rays were invisible in full light, and in complete darkness, but were seen in partial obscurity, and resembled rays of the sun passing through small openings into a dark room. If this was a hallucination, it was shared on two occasions by the hypnotiser of whom I have already spoken. I myself never saw the rays, which may be compared with those said to have been seen by somnambulists and other sensitives as emanating under certain circumstances from the human frame.

In reply to inquiries Dr. X. adds the following remarks : —

It is not impossible that Mme. X. should have at some time heard myself or others pronounce the names of the medicaments prescribed. But when she

833] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 129

gave me an exact diagnosis, and formulated in detail a rational treatment, I am sure that this did not come from her own mind. She has never studied any branch of medicine— neither the therapeutic art itself, nor the minor art of composing formulae. Nor could I have been acting suggestively, since my own ideas were often quite different from those which the occult agent dictated ; unless, indeed, my unconscious self acted upon Mme. X.'s consciousness, which seems to me a somewhat too elaborate view.

The dosimetric granules are a convenient mode of administering alkaloids, glycosides, and other toxic principles, and I have often been alarmed at the doses which Dr. Z. prescribed. I confess that I was astonished to find that an occult agent who thus claimed to be a bygone Professor should have selected a form of medication on which the Faculty look with no approving eye.

As to Mme. X.'s foot, I have 2ifirm conviction that it was healed by the rhythmical movements imposed, and by the "magnetisation" of the occult agent.

You ask me whether I consider these agents as belonging to the human type. Provisionally, Yes; unless we admit that there exists, superposed upon our world, another world of beings distinct from humanity, but knowing it and studying it as we study the other regions of nature, and assuming for the sake of amusement or for some other motive the rdle of our departed friends.

Dr. X. concludes with warnings against the dangers of such influence or possession ; dangers which he thinks that Mme. X. avoided by her calmness of temperament and resolute maintenance of self-control.

The savant already mentioned as introducing us to this case sends us (May, 1893) the following corroborative statement. He is, it may be observed, himself a physician.

I have frequently seen Mme. X. For the last year or two she has had no more phenomena ; but about two years ago she presented some curious symptoms. In the first place, when she conversed with the late Dr. Z., her so-called magnetiser, his replies were made by movements of her head. She would seat herself in an arm-chair, and according as Dr. Z. wished to say yes or no, there were either two or three backward movements of her head. Her head threw itself backwards with force, and gave a vigorous blow to the chairback. This movement was sometimes so violent that the shock was painful,

, so that Mme. X. cried out at the sharpness of the blows. Long sentences could thus be given, for when the alphabet was spelt out there were movements and blows given with the head, just as in ordinary Spiritistic conversations there are tilts of the table. Often, also, while one was talking with Mme. X., there were movements of her head, indicating that the so-called Dr. Z. was taking

- part in the discussion, and approving or disapproving such and such a phrase. More rarely, Mme. X. would unconsciously articulate a few words with her lips, and these words were professedly dictated by Dr. Z. As to the other pheno-

, mena, I have twice been present at the ample, semi-ecstatic movements of salutation and prayer which Mme. X. made against her will. It was a curious scene ; for Mme. X. preserved her consciousness all the time and continued to talk to us while executing this strange and complicated mimicry. It is to be observed that Mme. X. is a person of calm nature, and rather apathetic than VOL. n. I

nervous. She has strong common-sense, is healthy, and reasonable in character. It seems that she never had any previous hallucination. She is an excellent mother of a family, and deservedly enjoys general confidence and esteem.

Dr. X. sent us two of the prescriptions written by Mme. X.'s hand. We compared them with British Pharmacopoeal prescriptions, by the ;aid of Burggraeve's Guide de Medecine Dosimetrique (Paris, 1872). Both prescriptions are in fair accord with English practice ; the doses of arsenic in the one case, of strychnia in the other, being rather stronger than usually given. Each prescription contains several ingredients, in what seems reasonable proportion.

Finally, we learn that Dr. Z. in life was gay and fond of practical jokes.

834. These last cases have become increasingly complex. One wonders to what extent this strange manufacture of inward romances can be carried. There is, I may say, a great deal more of it in the world than is commonly suspected. I have myself received so many cases of these dramatised utterances — as though a number of different spirits were writing in turn through some automatist's hand — that I have come to recognise the operation of some law of dreams, so to call it, as yet but obscurely understood. The alleged personalities are for the most part not only unidentified, but purposely unidentifiable ; they give themselves romantic or ludicrous names, and they are produced and disappear as lightly as puppets on a mimic stage. The main curiosity of such cases lies in their very persistence and complexity ; it would be a waste of space to quote any of the longer ones in such a way as to do them justice. And, fortunately, there is no need for me to give any of my own cases ; since a specially good case has been specially well observed and reported in a book with which many of my readers are probably already acquainted, — Professor Flournoy's Des Indes a la planete Mars : Etude sur un cas de Somnambulisme avec Glossolalie (Paris and Geneva, 1900). I shall here make some comments on that striking record, which all students of these subjects ought to study in detail.

835. It happens, no doubt, to any group which pursues for many years a somewhat unfamiliar line of inquiry that those of their points which are first assailed get gradually admitted, so that as they become interested in new points they may scarcely observe what change has taken place in the reception of the old. The reader of early volumes of the Proceedings S.P.R. will often observe this kind of progress of opinion. And now Professor Flournoy's book indicates in a remarkable way how things have moved in the psychology of the last twenty years. The book — a model of fairness throughout — is indeed, for the most part, critically destructive in its treatment of the quasi-supernormal phenomena with which it deals. But what a mass of conceptions a competent psychologist now takes for granted in this realm, which the official science of twenty years ago would scarcely stomach our hinting at !

835] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 131

One important point may be noticed at once as decisively corroborating a contention of my own made long ago, and at a time when it probably seemed fantastic to many readers. Arguing for the potential continuity of subliminal mentation (as against those who urged that there were only occasional flashes of submerged thought, like scattered dreams), I said that it would soon be found needful to press this notion of a continuous subliminal self to the utmost, if we were not prepared to admit a continuous spiritual guidance or possession. Now, in fact, with Professor Flournoy's subject the whole discussion turns on this very point. There is unquestionably a continuous and complex series of thoughts and feelings going on beneath the threshold of consciousness of M1Ie " Helene Smith." Is this submerged mentation due in any degree or in any manner to the operation of spirits other than Mlle Smith's own? That is the broad question ; but it is complicated here by a subsidiary question : whether, namely, any previous incarnations of MIle Smith's — other phases of her own spiritual history, now involving complex relationship with the past — have any part in the crowd of personalities which seem struggling to express themselves through her quite healthy organism.

Mlle Smith, I should at once say, is not,1 and never has been, a paid medium. At the date of M. Flournoy's book, she occupied a leading post on the staff of a large maison de commerce at Geneva, and gave stances to her friends simply because she enjoyed the exercise of her mediumistic faculties, and was herself interested in their explanation.

Her organism, I repeat, is regarded, both by herself and by others, as a quite healthy one. Mlle Smith, says Professor Flournoy, declares distinctly that she is perfectly sound in body and mind, — in no way lacking in equilibrium, — and indignantly repudiates the idea that there is any hurtful anomaly or the slightest danger in mediumship as she practises it.

" I am so far from being abnormal," she writes, " that I have never been so clear-sighted, so lucid, so capable of judging rapidly on all points, as since I have been developed as a medium." No one appears to dispute this estimate, which the facts of Mlle Smith's progress in her line of business distinctly confirm.

" It is in fact incontestable " (continues Professor Flournoy, p. 41), " that Helene has a head extremely well organised ; and that from a business point of view she manages admirably the very important and complicated department of which she is at the head in this large shop where she is employed ; so that to accuse her of being morbid simply because she is a medium is to say the least an inadmissible petitio principii so long as the very nature of mediumship remains a thing so obscure and open to discussion as is still the case. . . .

" It is clear that there exist amid the ranks of the learned faculty certain spirits narrow and limited, strong in their own specialities, but

1 For Mlle Smith's later history, see Professor Flournoy's Nouvelles Observations sur tineas de Somnambulistne, Geneva, 1902. — EDITORS.

ready to cast their anathemas at whatever does not fit in with their preconceived ideas, and to treat as morbid, pathological, insane, everything which differs from the normal type of human nature, such as they have conceived it on the model of their own small personalities. . . .

" But in the first place the essential criterion in judging of a human being's value is not the question whether he is in good or bad health, like or unlike other people, but whether he fulfils adequately his special task — how he acquits himself of the functions incumbent on him, and what may be expected or hoped from him. I am not aware that Miss Smith's psychical faculties have ever interfered with her accomplishment of any of her duties ; rather they have helped her therein ; for her normal and conscious activity has often found an unexpected assistance — which nonmediums lack ! — in her subliminal inspirations and her automatisms, which effect a useful end.

"In the second place, it is far from being demonstrated that mediumship is a pathological phenomenon. It is abnormal, no doubt, in the sense of being rare, exceptional ; but rarity is not morbidity. The few years during which these phenomena have been seriously and scientifically studied have not been enough to allow us to pronounce on their true nature. It is interesting to note that in the countries where these studies have been pushed the furthest, in England and America, the dominant view among the savants who have gone deepest into the matter is not at all unfavourable to mediumship; and that, far from regarding it as a special case of hysteria, they see in it a faculty superior, advantageous, healthy, of which hysteria is a form of degenerescence, a pathological parody, a morbid caricature."

The phenomena which this sensitive presents (Helene Smith is Professor Flournoy's pseudonym for her) cover a range which looks at first very wide, although a clearer analysis shows that these varieties are more apparent than real, and that self- suggestion will perhaps account for all of them.

There is, to begin with, every kind of automatic irruption of subliminal into supraliminal life. As Professor Flournoy says (p. 45) : " Phenomena of hypermnesia, divinations, mysterious findings of lost objects, happy inspirations, exact presentiments, just intuitions, teleological (purposive or helpful) automatisms, in short, of every kind; she possesses in a high degree this small change of genius — which constitutes a more than sufficient compensation for the inconvenience resulting from those distractions and moments of absence of mind which accompany her visions; and which, moreover, generally pass unobserved."

At stances — where the deeper change has no inconveniences — Helene undergoes a sort of self-hypnotisation which produces various lethargic and somnambulistic states. And when she is alone and safe from interruption she has spontaneous visions, during which there may be some approach to ecstasy. At the stances she experiences positive

835] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 133

hallucinations, and also negative hallucinations, or systematised ansesthesiae, so that, for instance, she will cease to see some person present, especially one who is to be the recipient of messages in the course of the stance. "It seems as though a dream-like incoherence presided over this preliminary work of disaggregation, in which the normal perceptions are arbitrarily split up or absorbed by the subconscious personality — eager for materials with which to compose the hallucinations which it is preparing." Then, when the stance begins, the main actor is H£lene's guide Leopold (a pseudonym for Cagliostro) who speaks and writes through her, and is, in- fact, either her leading spirit- control or (much more probably) her most developed form of secondary personality.

Hdene, indeed, has sometimes the impression of becoming Leopold for a moment (p. 117). Professor Flournoy compares this sensation with the experience of Mr. Hill Tout {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 309), who feels himself becoming his own father, who is manifesting through him. It should be added that, although somewhat pompous, Leopold always appears both sensible and dignified. " Leopold," says Professor Flournoy (p. 134) "certainly manifests a very honourable and amiable side of Mlle Smith's character, and in taking him as her * guide ' she has followed inspirations which are doubtless among the highest in her nature."

The high moral quality of these automatic communications, on which Professor Flournoy thus insists, is a phenomenon worth consideration. I do not mean that it is specially strange in the case of MIle Smith. She appears to be (if the phrase is thought permissible in describing a medium) a person of remarkably well-regulated mind. One is not surprised that her subliminal self should be as blameless a? her supraliminal. But in reality the remark here made by Professor Flournoy has a much wider application. The almost universally high moral tone of genuinely automatic utterances — whether claimed as spirit communications or proceeding obviously from the automatist himself — has not, I think, been sufficiently noticed, or adequately explained. I will mention two points which have struck me as specially noticeable. In the first place I have read many pulpit and other attacks on " spiritualism," under which name all automatic utterance is commonly included, and I cannot remember any instance in which such an attack has been made effective by the quotation of passages of immoral tendency — base, cruel, or impure. The attack, so far as I know, has always been of a kind which, in the eye of the philosopher, is rather complimentary to the writings attacked. For it seems (and this is the second point to which I wished to call attention here) that no one of the various conflicting Churches has been able to claim the general drift of automatic messages as making for its special tenets. The various controversialists, where they have been candid, have admitted moral elevation, but, — from their various opposing points of view, — have agreed in deploring theological laxity.

I must indeed confess myself unable to explain why it is that beneath

the frequent incoherence, frequent commonplaceness, frequent pomposity of these messages there should almost always be a substratum of better sense, of truer catholicity, than is usually to be heard except from the leading minds of the generation. It is possible that in some hidden way the Zeit-Geist affects the subliminal strata even of persons superficially narrow and bigoted by an influence urging them all in somewhat the same direction ; — so that the best available thought of the age is inspiring the age more profoundly than we know. And it is possible also that these utterances may bear in reality some obscure relation to truths profounder than we have as yet normally acquired. What is omitted, indeed, from current beliefs is as significant as what is added thereto, and the general product looks more like a very poor account of something which in itself is great and new, but dimly apprehended, than like a compromise between conflicting dogmas, or a selection from familiar hortatory themes.

836. Thus much I think it was fair to say ; — or I may speak more strongly and maintain that thus much it was a positive duty to insist upon. It is only right that this mass of communications, taken as a whole, should be defended from the random accusations of journalist or pulpiteer.

But, in view of what is to follow, I may here define the limited extent to which my support of the content of automatic messages goes.

I think, then, that in evidential messages — where there is real reason to believe that an identified spirit is communicating — there is a marked and independent consensus on such matters as these spirits profess themselves able to discuss. And, again, in non-evidential messages — in communications which probably proceed from the automatist's subliminal self — I hold that there is a remarkable and undesigned concordance in high moral tone, and also in avoidance of certain prevalent tenets, which many of the automatists do supraliminally hold as true. But I also insist that these subliminal messages, even when not incoherent, are generally dream-like, and often involve tenets which (though never in my experience base or immoral) are unsupported by evidence, and are probably to be referred to mere self-suggestion.

Prominent among such tenets is one which forms a large part of Mlle Smith's communications; namely, the doctrine of reincarnation, or of successive lives spent by each soul upon this planet.

The simple fact that such was probably the opinion both of Plato and of Virgil shows that there is nothing here which is alien to the best reason or to the highest instincts of men. Nor, indeed, is it easy to realise any theory of the direct creation of spirits at such different stages of advancement as those which enter upon the earth in the guise of mortal man. There must, one feels, be some kind of continuity — some form of spiritual Past. Yet for reincarnation there is at present no valid evidence ; and it must be my duty to show how its assertion in any given instance— Mllc Smith's included — constitutes in itself a strong argument in favour

836] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 135

of self-suggestion rather than extraneous inspiration as the source of the messages in which it appears.

Whenever civilised men have received what they have regarded as a revelation (which has generally been somewhat fragmentary in its first delivery) they have naturally endeavoured to complete and systematise it as well as they could. In so doing they have mostly aimed at three objects : (i) to understand as much as possible of the secrets of the universe; (2) to justify as far as possible Heaven's dealings with men; and (3) to appropriate as far as possible the favour or benefit which the revelation may show as possibly accruing to believers. For all these purposes the doctrine of reincarnation has proved useful in many countries and times. But in no case could it seem more appropriate than in this last revelation (so to term it) through automatic messages and the like. And as a matter of history, a certain vigorous preacher of the new faith, known under the name of Allan Kardec, took up reincarnationist tenets, enforced them (as there is reason to believe) by strong suggestion upon the minds of various automatic writers, and set them forth in dogmatic works which have had much influence, especially among Latin nations, from their clarity, symmetry, and intrinsic reasonableness. Yet the data thus collected were absolutely insufficient, and the Livre des Esprits must simply rank as the premature formulation of a new religion — the premature systematisation of a nascent science.

I follow Professor Flournoy in believing that the teaching of that work must have directly or indirectly influenced the mind of Mlle Smith, and is therefore responsible for her claim to these incarnations previous to that which she now undergoes or enjoys.

On the general scheme here followed, each incarnation, if the last has been used aright, ought to represent some advance in the scale of being. If one earth-life has been misused, the next earth-life ought to afford opportunity for expiation — or for further practice in the special virtue which has been imperfectly acquired. Thus M1Ie Smith's present life in a humble position may be thought to atone for her overmuch pride in her last incarnation — as Marie Antoinette.

But the mention of Marie Antoinette suggests the risk which this theory fosters — of assuming that one is the issue of a distinguished line of spiritual progenitors ; insomuch that, with whatever temporary setsback, one is sure in the end to find oneself in a leading position.

Pythagoras, indeed, was content with the secondary hero Euphorbus as his bygone self. But in our days Dr. Anna Kingsford and Mr. Edward Maitland must needs have been the Virgin Mary and St. John the Divine. And Victor Hugo, who was naturally well to the front in these self-multiplications, took possession of most of the leading personages of antiquity whom he could manage to string together in chronological sequence. It is obvious that any number of re-born souls can play at this game ; but where no one adduces any evidence it seems hardly worth while to go on.

Even Pythagoras does not appear to have adduced any evidence beyond his ipse dixit for his assertion that the alleged shield of Euphorbus had in reality been borne by that mythical hero. Meantime the question as to reincarnation has actually been put to a very few spirits who have given some real evidence of their identity. So far as I know, no one of these has claimed to know anything personally of such an incident ; although all have united in saying that their knowledge was too limited to allow them to generalise on the matter.

Helene's controls and previous incarnations — to return to our subject — do perhaps suffer from the general fault of aiming too high. She has to her credit a control from the planet Mars ; one pre-incarnation as an Indian Princess ; and a second (as I have said) as Marie Antoinette.

837. In each case there are certain impressive features in the impersonation ; but in each case also careful analysis negatives the idea that we can be dealing with a personality really revived from a former epoch, or from a distant planet ; — and leaves us inclined to explain everything by " cryptomnesia " (as Professor Flournoy calls submerged memory), and that subliminal inventiveness of which we already know so much.

The Martian control was naturally the most striking at first sight. Its reality was supported by a Martian language, written in a Martian alphabet, spoken with fluency, and sufficiently interpreted into French to show that such part of it, at any rate, as could be committed to writing was actually a grammatical and coherent form of speech.

And here I reach an appropriate point at which to remark that this book of Professor Flournoy's is not the first account which has been published of MUe H61ene. Professor Lemaitre, of Geneva, printed two papers about her in the Annales des Sciences Psychiques : first, a long article in the number for March-April, 1897 — then a reply to M. Lefebure in the number for May-June, 1897. In these papers he distinctly claims supernormal powers for MUe Helene, implying a belief in her genuine possession by spirits, and even in her previous incarnations, and in the extra-terrene or ostensibly Martian language. I read these papers at the time, but put them aside as inconclusive, mainly because that very language, on which M. Lemaitre seemed most to rely, appeared to me so obviously factitious as to throw doubt on all the evidence presented by an observer who could believe -that denizens of another planet talked to each other in a language corresponding in every particular with simple French idioms, and including such words as quisa for quel, quise for quelle, veteche for voir, veche for vu ; — the fantastic locutions of the nursery. M. Lemaitre remarks, as a proof of the consistency and reality of the extra-terrene tongue, " L'un des premiers mots que nous ayons eus, metiche, signifiant monsieur, se retrouve plus tard avec le sens de homme" *That is to say, having transmogrified monsieur into m'etiche, Helene further transmutes les messieurs into cee metiche ; — in naive imitation of ordinary French usage. And this tongue is supposed to have sprung up indepen-

837] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 137

dently of all the influences which have shaped terrene grammar in general or the French idiom in particular ! And even after Professor Flournoy's analysis of this absurdity I see newspapers speaking of this Martian language as an impressive phenomenon ! They seem willing to believe that the evolution of another planet, if it has culminated in conscious life at all, can have culminated in a conscious life into which we could all of us enter affably, with a suitable Ollendorff's phrase-book under our arms ; — " eni cee metich'e one qude" — " ici les hommes (messieurs) sont bons," — " here the men are good ; " — and the rest of it.

To the student of automatisms, of course, all this irresistibly suggests the automatist's own subliminal handiwork. It is a case of " glossolaly," or " speaking with tongues" ; and we have no modern case — no case later than the half-mythical Miracles of the Cevennes — where such utterance has proved to be other than gibberish. I have had various automatic hieroglyphics shown to me, with the suggestion that they may be cursive* Japanese, or perhaps an old dialect of Northern China ; but I confess that I have grown tired of showing these fragments to the irresponsive expert, who suggests that they may also be vague reminiscences of the scrolls in an Oriental tea-tray.

It seems indeed to be a most difficult thing to get telepathically into any brain even fragments of a language which it has not learnt. A few simple Italian, and even Hawaiian, words occur in Mrs. Piper's utterances, coming apparently from departed spirits, (see 960 A and 961), but these, with some Kaffir and Chinese words given through Miss Browne (871 A), form, I think, almost the only instances which I know. And, speaking generally, whatever is elaborate, finished, pretentious, is likely to be of subliminal facture ; while only things scrappy, perplexed, and tentative have floated to us veritably from afar.

Analysis of the so-called Martian language proves it to be no exception to this rule. It is, in fact, a childish, though elaborate, imitation of French ; — whose true parallel lies in those languages of the nursery which little brothers and sisters sometimes invent — as a tongue not understanded of their elders. The outbursts of this Martian speech are noticeable as a parallel to the " deific verbiage," which used to throng through the lips of Mr. le Baron {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. p. 277), and for a long time impressed itself upon him as having some reality in it somewhere.

The most interesting peculiarity, indeed, in the Martian tongue is its exclusively French formation ; which would seem to argue its elaboration in a mind familiar with French alone. Now Mlle Smith — who, by the way, is no linguist * — had some German lessons in her girlhood, and one is thus led to the curious supposition that the Martian tongue was invented by some element in her personality which preceded the German lessons.

1 Her father, however, was acquainted with some half-dozen European languages and had besides some knowledge of Latin and Greek. (SeeDes Indes, p. 15.)

I may perhaps recall here, a trivial experience of my own illustrative of this ingenious hypothesis of Professor Flournoy's. I once dreamt that I saw an epitaph in Greek hexameters inscribed on a wall, of which on waking I remembered only one line —

Avrap 6 jotev Kara yfjv 6a\epbv KVCTC SctKi/o^ei/ov irvp.

I could not construe this line, which is, in fact, nonsense; — till I remembered in a sudden flash a certain sense of shame felt by me as a small boy at having thought that /cara meant under — as though /caret yfjv were y^s Karoo.

The line, then, had a meaning : " But he, indeed, beneath the earth, embraced the strong consuming flame ; " — not a well-chosen sentiment for an epitaph, perhaps, but yet up to the ordinary level of one's dreaming self. There must, then, have been some fragment of me yet surviving from innocent boyhood, and blundering subliminally in the same old style. 838. "This fact of the primitive nature of Mlle Smith's various

-^hypnoidal elucubrations, and the different ages of her life to which they belong, seems to me (says Professor Flournoy, p. 415) to constitute one of the most interesting psychological points in her mediumship. It tends to show that her secondary personalities are probably in their origin, as has sometimes been suggested, phenomena partly of reversion to the ordinary personality — survivals or momentary returns of inferior phases, overpassed for a longer or shorter time, and which should normally have been absorbed in the development of the individual instead of appearing

v externally in strange proliferations. Just as teratology illustrates embryology, which in return explains teratology, and as both of these unite in throwing light on anatomy, — similarly one may hope that the study of the facts of mediumship may some day help to furnish us with some just and fruitful view of normal psychogenesis, — which in return will enable us better to comprehend the appearance of these singular phenomena ; so that psychology in general may thence acquire a better and exacter conception of human personality."

The faculty here touched upon — the strong reviviscence of long-past emotional states — seems to me eminently characteristic, at any rate, of artistic and poetical genius.

The artist must needs desire to have his whole life to draw upon. He must often wish to live in the past more vividly than in the present, and to feel again what he has felt, even more than to see again what he has seen. Visual and auditory memories, pushed to absolute vividness, become hallucinations of vision or audition ; and this point of absolute hallucination few artists are able or even desire to reach. But emotional or affective memory may for some gifted natures be pushed on into all its old actual vividness with pure gain to art ; nay, if the man himself has grown more capable of feeling, then the revived emotion (like certain optical memoryimages) may even go beyond the original.

839] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 139

Thus Sully Prudhomme says, in speaking of a hidden insurgent memory of this type : " C'est meme cette reViviscence qui seule me permettrait de retoucher les vers que cette petite aventure, si ancienne, m'a fait commettre, et de faire be"ne"ficier de Pexpe"rience que j'ai acquise dans mon art 1'expression de mes sentiments d'autrefois." And he asks whether every memory of feeling does not assume a certain character of hallucination. Wordsworth (as Aubrey de Vere has told us, and as the sonnet " surprised by joy," shows) had very much the same experience. And Littre (Revue Positive, 1877, p. 660) describes what he calls the "affective automnesia " — or spontaneously arising flow of emotion — with which quite suddenly, and late in life, he remembered losing a young sister when he was ten years old : " Ce meme eVenement s'est reproduit avec une peine non moindre, certes, que celle que j'e"prouvais au moment meme, et qui alia jusqu'a mouiller mes yeux de larmes." *

This train of reflections, I think, well illustrates that kinship between the working of what is admitted as genius and the dreamlike subliminal mentation with which we are here dealing, of which I have often spoken, and to which I must again presently recur.

Turning now to the Hindoo pre-incarnation, we observe that it offers a linguistic problem of a rather different kind. Certain Sanscrit letters are written, and certain Sanscrit words are uttered — mixed, it is true, with much quasi- Sanscrit gibberish, and not exceeding what a quick eye and memory might pick up in a few hours from a Sanscrit grammar. Helene, however — whose complete good faith is vouched for on all sides and who herself undoubtedly believes with her whole heart in the spirithypothesis — denies that she ever consulted or even to her knowledge saw, a Sanscrit grammar. Again, M. Flournoy's careful researches have shown that incidents of the Indian history, or pseudo-history, on which the narrative of this incarnation turns, are undoubtedly derived from a particular passage in a rare and antiquated history of India by de Maries — which MUe Smith asserts that she never saw, and which it seems very improbable that she should have seen.2 This knowledge is worked up in a way indicating considerable familiarity with the East, and quasi-Indian tunes and gestures are employed with great verisimilitude.

I need not here go into the details of the more modern and accessible characterisation of Marie Antoinette.

839. In the facts which I have already given, we have got this

1 See Ribot, Psychologic des Sentiments, p. 152.

2 See, however, Nouvelles Observations (pp. 212-213), from which it appears that a gentleman in whose house Mlle Smith used to give seances possessed a Sanscrit grammar, and kept it in the room where the seances were held. In the same book (pp. 206-216), Professor Flournoy points out several other sources besides Maries' history (itself to be found in the two principal libraries of Geneva) from which her knowledge of India might have been derived ; and he shows (pp. 203-206) that the Hindoo romance presented internal contradictions which made it inconsistent with any hypothesis of reincarnation.— EDITORS.

problem reduced to its narrowest form ; and I shall set forth, as barely possible, a theory which Professor Flournoy has not invoked. I agree with him that the notion of the truth of the Indian romance must be quite dismissed. But I do not therefore think it certain that Mlle Smith must have unconsciously seen de Maries' history and a Sanscrit grammar, since it seems to me just possible that the knowledge of de Maries and of Sanscrit may have been clairvoyantly acquired by her subliminal self.

Further, it has sometimes been alleged that discarnate spirits may be concerned in the composition of such romances, on the hypothesis that if they do act upon human minds, they probably so act sometimes to amuse themselves, as well as to please or inform us. I know of no evidence, indeed, of their having any power to injure us, but it is thought by some that there is a good deal of evidence of tricky, playful interference, and that a kind of literary impulse to write or act out romances, through the intermediacy of some human being, may be one form of this mystifying intervention. There is, however, no need to postulate the existence of tricky spirits when the phenomena can be adequately accounted for by the known tendencies of the subliminal self, as exemplified in such cases as the "Clelia" and Newnham writings (830 A and 849 A), and Sally Beauchamp (234 A).

840. I pass on from these reincarnational romances to certain minor, but interesting phenomena, which Professor Flournoy calls teleological automatisms. These are small acts of helpfulness — beneficent synergies, as we might term them, in contrast with the injurious synergies, or combined groups of hurtful actions, with which hysteria has made us familiar. We have already printed several incidents of this type in our Proceedings and Journal. (See, for instance, the trivial but instructive case of Mrs. Verrall and the envelopes, given in 818 A.)

"One day," says Professor Flournoy (p. 55), "Miss Smith, when desiring to lift down a large and heavy object which lay on a high shelf, was prevented from doing so because her raised arm remained for some seconds as though petrified in the air and incapable of movement. She took this as a warning, and gave up the attempt. At a subsequent seance Leopold stated that it was he who had thus fixed Helene's arm to prevent her from grasping this object, which was much too heavy for her, and would have caused her some accident.

" Another time, a shopman, who had been looking in vain for a certain pattern, asked H£lene if by chance she knew what had become of it. H£lene answered mechanically and without reflection — ' Yes, it has been sent to Mr. J.' (a client of the house) . At the same time she saw before her the number 18 in large black figures a few feet from the ground, and added instinctively, ' It was sent eighteen days ago.' [This was in the highest degree improbable, but was found to be absolutely correct.] Leopold had no recollection of this, and does not seem to have been the author of this cryptomnesic automatism."

841] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 141

A similar phenomenon has also been noted (p. 87) when warning is conveyed by an actual phantasmal figure.

MUe Smith has seen an apparition of Leopold, barring a particular road, under circumstances which make it probable that Mlle Smith would on that day have had cause to regret taking that route. (Compare the case of an apparition seen by a lady near an open lift, referred to at the end of 823 ; and the warning to Socrates to change his route, see 814.)

841. The next question is as to whether supernormal faculty of any kind is manifested in Helene's phenomena. There does appear to be some telepathy (see p. 363, &c.), and of telepathy Professor Flournoy speaks as follows : —

" One may almost say that, if telepathy did not exist, it would be necessary to invent it. I mean by this that a direct action between living beings, independently of the organs of sense, is a thing so in accord with all that we know of nature that it would be difficult not to assume its existence a priori, even were no sign of it perceptible. How could one believe, indeed, that centres of chemical phenomena so complex as the nervous centres could find themselves in activity without transmitting various undulations — X, Y, or Z rays — passing through the skull as the sun passes through glass, and going on to act, at any distance, on their homologues in other skulls ? It is a mere question of intensity. . . .

" If telepathy is considered strange, mystic, occult, supernormal, &c., it is because this character has been gratuitously conferred on it by making of this imponderable link between organisms a purely spiritual communication of soul to soul, independent of matter and of space. That such a metaphysical union does exist I am ready to believe, but it is to introduce a gratuitous confusion if one substitutes this problem of high speculation —which abandons the strictly scientific ground and sets aside the principle of psycho-physical parallelism — for the empirical problem of telepathy, which is perfectly concordant with that parallelism and in no way contradicts established science."

Now, of course, it has been obvious from the outset of our researches that it would be very desirable if we could trace some relation between telepathy and ether vibrations. There are doubtless endless vibrations waiting to be intelligibly appropriated ; — and telepathy is a phenomenon greatly in need of an explanation. The more complex any object is, moreover, the more strangely it will vibrate ; and the more sensitive any object is, the more strangely will it receive and respond to vibrations.

Nevertheless, when we have said this — as Sir W. Crookes has said it with great impressiveness (Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. pp. 348-352) — we have said nearly all that can be said for the vibration-theory of telepathy. In Chapter VI. (pp. 245-246), I have attempted to show the inadequacy of this theory to cover the facts, and have suggested that telepathic observations may in time teach us something of the relation of life to the organism.

842. Most instructive of all will it be if we can obtain telepathy from discarnate spirits, and especially if we can get any glimpse of a relation between their mode of being and the cosmic ether. On this point Professor Flournoy writes as follows (p. 394) :

" It is obvious that the hypothesis of spirits involves no a priori impossibility or absurdity. It does not even contradict, as is sometimes supposed, that fundamental law of physiological psychology — the psychophysical parallelism — which insists that every mental phenomenon must have a physical correlative. For in spite of our habit of considering the » molecular or atomic phenomena of the brain, the catabolism of the • neurones, as the true concomitant of the conscious processes, it is quite possible — it is even probable enough — that these molecular movements do not constitute the ultimate physical term immediately adjoining the mental world {cdtoyant le monde mental), but that the true physical or spatial correlatives of psychological or non-spatial phenomena ought to be sought in the vibrations of that imponderable matter, the ether, in which ponderable atoms and molecules are plunged somewhat after the fashion of grains of dust in the atmosphere."

I quote these words because, — obvious though their contention must seem to all thinking persons, — it is common enough to see phrases used as though our notions were still bounded by the molecular ; — as though we did not know, as certainly as we know anything, that the great mystery of existence is only just beginning, in that inconceivable world of ether, precisely where our utmost analysis fails us, and our mathematics are reduced to a jungle of infinities and of contradictions.

And now as to the question of possible telepathy from the dead in Helene's case. The instance with most in its favour is described by Professor Flournoy as follows (p. 406) : —

In a sitting at ray house (February I2th, 1899) Mlle Smith has a vision of a village on a height covered with vines ; she sees a small old man coming down thence by a stony road. He looks like a " demi-monsieur " ; — buckled shoes, large soft hat, shirt-collar unstarched, with points rising to his cheeks, &c. A peasant in a blouse whom he meets bows to him as to a personage of importance; they talk a patois which Helene cannot follow. She has an impression that she knows the village ; but she cannot identify it. Soon the landscape disappears, and the old man, now clothed in white and seen in a luminous space [implying that he is in the next world] seems to come nearer. At this moment, as she sits with her right arm resting on the table, Leopold dictates with the forefinger, Lower her arm. I obey ; He'lene's arm at first resists strongly ; then yields at once. She seizes a pencil, and during the usual struggle as to the way to hold it {i.e., whether in her own habitual fashion — between forefinger and middle finger — or in the ordinary way], " You are squeezing my hand too hard ! " she cries to the imagined little old man who, according to Leopold, wishes to write through her ; — " You hurt me ; don't press so hard; what can it matter to you whether it is a pencil or a pen?" Then she drops the pencil and takes a pen, and holding it between

842] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 143

thumb and forefinger writes slowly in an unknown handwriting, Chaumontet syndic. Then returns the vision of the village ; — we wish to know its name; and she ends by perceiving a guide-post on which she spells out Chessenaz — a name unknown to us. Finally having, at my desire, asked the old man the date when he was syndic, she hears him answer, 1839. Nothing more can be learnt ; the vision disappears and gives place to a possession by Leopold, who in his big Italian voice talks at length about various matters. I question him on the incident of the unknown village and syndic ; his answers, interrupted by long digressions, are to this effect : " I am looking— I turn my thoughts along that great mountain with a tunnel in it whose name I do not know [Leopold — the soi-disant Cagliostro — who returns from the eighteenth century, is naturally not well up in modern geographical names; but this is the hill of Fort de 1'Ecluse] ; I see the name of Chessenaz — a village on a height — a road leading up to it. Look in that village ; you will find the name [Chaumontet] : try to verify the signature ; you will get a proof that the signature is really that of this man."

I ask him whether he sees all this in Hdlene's memories — "AV; — or whether she has ever been at Chessenaz : — " Ask her ; she will know ; I have not followed her in all her excursions."

Helene, when awake, could give no information. But next day I found on the map a little village of Chessenaz in the department of Haute-Savoie, at twenty-six kilometres from Geneva. . . .

[A fortnight later Helen sees the vision of the other day reappear — the village, the little old man ; — but accompanied by a cure, who seems intimate with him, and whom he calls " my dear friend Bournier." Leopold promises that this cure will write his name for Helen.]

At the next sitting in my house, March ipth, I remind Leopold of this promise. . . . The cure at last takes her hand as the syndic had done and writes very slowly the words Burnier salut. . . .

I wrote to the Mairie at Chessenaz, and the Mayor, M. Saunier, was good enough to answer me at once. " During the years 1838 and 1839," he said, ;< the syndic of Chessenaz was Jean Chaumontet, whose signature I find in various documents of that date. We had also for cure M. Andrd Burnier, from November 1824 to February 1841, during which period all the actes des naissances, &c., bear his signature. But I have found in our archives a document with both signatures, which I send you."

[Reproductions are given (p. 409) of the actual signatures, and of the signatures given by Mlle Smith. The handwritings were markedly similar.]

Professor Flournoy's first idea naturally was that MIle Smith had seen at some time or other some acts or documents signed by the syndic or the cure of Chessenaz, and that these visual impressions had reappeared in her somnambulic state, and had served as internal models for the signatures which she traced in trance. She informed him, in fact, that she had relations in the neighbourhood, with whom she had stayed some dozen years earlier, but she had no recollection of having ever seen or heard of Chessenaz, or of the two names given in her trance. Both names are, however, not uncommon in that region, and it seems possible that during her visit her friends may have shown her some family document bearing

the signatures, which — we must assume — (for her probity is beyond question) had faded from her supraliminal memory.1

843. This case of Professor Flournoy's, then — this classical case, as it may already be fairly termed — may serve here as our culminant example of the free scope and dominant activity of the unassisted subliminal self. The telepathic element in this case, if it exists, is relatively small ; what we are watching in Mlle Helene Smith resembles, as I have said, a kind of exaggeration of the submerged constructive faculty, — a hypertrophy of genius — without the innate originality of mind which made even the dreams of R. L. Stevenson a source of pleasure to thousands of readers.

In reference to the main purpose of this work, such cases as these, however curious, can be only introductory to automatisms of deeper moment. In our attempt to trace an evolutive series of phenomena indicating ever higher human faculty, the smallest telepathic incident,— the most trivial proof, if proof it be, of communication received without sensory intermediation from either an incarnate or a discarnate mind, outweighs in importance the most complex ramifications and burgeonings of the automatist's own submerged intelligence.

I pass on, then, to evidence which points, through motor automatisms, to supernormal faculty ; and I shall begin by citing in 843 A and B certain experiments (due to Professor Richet and to Mr. G. M. Smith) in the simplest of all forms of motor automatism, viz., table-tilting, with results which only telepathy can explain. It will be seen that these experiments are closely parallel to our simplest sensory experiments in telepathy, as recorded in Chapter VI. And it may be remembered that the transferences of diagrams there described sometimes contained a motor as well as a visual element j — the percipient not only discerning a " mind's eye " picture of the diagram, but also feeling an impulse to draw it.

Experiments like these should be repeated as often as possible. Trivial though they seem, they may with a little care be made absolutely conclusive. Had Professor Richet' s friends, for example, been willing to prolong this series, we might have had a standing demonstration of telepathy, reproducible at will.

844. I pass on to some experiments with Planchette, in which an element of telepathy was shown. The account came from Mrs. Alfred Moberly, Tynwald, Hythe, Kent, and was corroborated, with some additional examples, by two other ladies present at the time.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. p. 235.)

May tyh, 1884.

The operators were placed out of sight of the rest of the company, who selected — in silence — a photograph, one of an albumful, and fixed their attention on it. We — the operators — were requested to keep our minds a blank as far as possible and follow the first involuntary motion of the

1 Further considerations supporting this view are given in Nouvelles Observations, pp. 232-237. — EDITORS.

845] MOTOR ATUOMATISM 145

Planchette. In three out of five cases it wrote the name or initial or some word descriptive of the selected portrait. We also obtained the signatures to letters selected in the same manner. We both knew perfectly well that ive were writing— not the spirits, as the rest of the company persist to this day in believing— but had only the slightest idea what the words might prove to be.

We have tried it since, and generally with some curious result. A crucial test was offered by two gentlemen in the form of a question to which we couldn't possibly guess the answer. " Where's Toosey ? " The answer came, " In Vauxhall Road." " Toosey," they explained, was a pet terrier who had disappeared; suspicion attaching to a plumber living in the road mentioned, who had been working at the house and whose departure coincided with Toosey's.

Of course, in the case- of the inquiry after the lost dog, we may suppose that the answer given came from the questioner's own mind. Mrs. Moberly and her friends seem to have been quite aware of this ; and were little likely to fall into the not uncommon error of asking Planchette, for instance, what horse will win the Derby, and staking, perhaps, some pecuniary consideration on the extremely illusory reply.

845. In the next case there is an apparent element of prophecy ; and I quote it in order to show how fallacious this appearance is, and how easily an ordinary mental anticipation of the future, if it in any way becomes externalised, may look like a revelation. Miss Summerbell is well known to me as a careful observer.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 2.)

I have used Planchette a great deal, but the result has generally been nonsense ; but I remembered two occasions when it correctly interpreted the thought of some one in the room, whose hands were not upon it. About a year ago, we were amusing ourselves by asking it what Christmas presents we should have. My hands were upon Planchette, and I believe Miss Lay's, but in any case it is quite certain that neither of the persons who were touching it could possibly know the answer to the question I asked. I said, " What will Miss T. have at Christmas ? " Miss T. was in the room, but not near the table. Planchette immediately wrote down a rather large sum of money. I asked, " Who

• is to give it? " It wrote "B. and one other." Some weeks afterwards I met Miss T., who asked me if I remembered what Planchette had written. I remembered it perfectly. She said, " I have received more than that sum, but I

"knew about it at the time, though not the exact sum, and I believe that must have been thought-reading, for I am certain that nobody in the room knew of

!it but myself." The money was given by a relative whose surname begins with B., and another person.

On another occasion, we asked a friend to dictate a question, the answer to which we did not know. She said, "Who is coming to breakfast to-

;morrow ? " Miss Lay and I placed our hands upon Planchette and asked the question. It wrote " Lucas." Our friend said that was the name of the gentleman who was coming to breakfast. Neither Miss Lay nor I had ever heard of him before. Our friend said, "Ask his Christian name." We asked; it wrote "William." "Is that right?" we asked our friend. "I don't know," VOL. n. K

she answered; "I never heard his Christian name." Then somebody else, who was not touching Planchette, remembered that there was a song by him somewhere among the music. We looked, and at length found the song by *• William Lucas " — of whom we had never heard before, nor have we heard of him since. L. D. SUMMERBELL.

I can thoroughly endorse these statements, and could multiply instances equally curious. — J. M. LAY.

The prophecy of the Christmas gift was doubtless a mere reflection of Miss T.'s anticipation — transferred telepathically to the writer's subliminal self, and as regards the Christian name " William," we may assume that (as in the case of the word Wem in a previous narrative) the name printed on the song, although no one consciously remembered it, had been vaguely noticed by Mr. Lucas' friend at some previous "time, and now reappeared from the stores of unconscious memory.

846. In another case, Mr. Allbright, of Mariemont, Birmingham, a chemical manufacturer (whose letter to me I abbreviate here), asked a young lady, of whose complete ignorance of the facts of his business he felt quite sure, for the name of a waste product occurring on a large scale in his manufactory. He meant the answer to be "gypsum," but " chloride of calcium " was written, and this was also true ; although, had he thought of this substance, he would have thought of it by its trade name of " muriate of lime." Again, he asked what was his firm's port of importation. He meant the answer to be " Gloucester," but " Wales " was written ; and this again was true at the time, as he was just then importing through Cardiff. These answers startled him so disagreeably that he refused to make further experiments. But I cite the case here for the express purpose of pointing out that no insuperable difficulty is presented by the fact that the answers, while substantially known to the inquirer, were not those on which his supraliminal mind was fixed.

847. In my next case an answer is given which is in fact true, although the questioner believed it at the time to be false. The account, which I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 5, came from Mr. W. Riddell of Dunster, Somerset.

July 1884.

The way I became acquainted with " Planchette " was as follows : — A friend of my wife's is staying with us, and one day she was talking about " Planchette," and saying that she had one at her home, in London, and had seen some remarkable answers given by it when a certain young lady had her hands on it. Both my wife and I laughed at the idea, saying nothing would make us believe in it. Miss B. (my wife's friend), to prove herself right, sent for her " Planchette." In the course of a day or two it arrived, and having put it together Miss B. and I tried it, but without any result beyond a few lines up and down the paper. Then my wife put her hands on it with Miss B., and in a very short time it began to move, and on being asked answered questions very freely, some rightly and some quite wrongly. Amongst those answered rightly were the following. (I may here observe that

849] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 147

not only did my wife and myself not believe in it, but we were antagonistic to it in feeling.) Our first question was asked by myself, my wife and Miss B. having their hands on it. I said, " How many shillings has Miss B. in her purse?" Ans. — "Four"; right. I then asked how many coins I had in mine. Ans. — " Five " ; right. I thought I had many more. I then took a playing card from a pack in a box, looked at it, put it face down on a table, and asked for its colour. Ans. — " Red " ; right. Number—" Seven " ; right. Name—" Hearts " ; right. This, I must confess, seemed to me very wonderful, as neither my wife nor Miss B. could possibly have known anything about the card. I then took a visiting card from the bottom of the basket, and having looked at it, placed it face downwards on the table, and asked " Planchette " for the name on it. This it seemed quite unable to give, but after a long time it wrote " clergyman," which was a wonderful answer, as

the card was that of a Rev. who was here two winters ago, helping our

rector. After this we did not get anything more satisfactory.

Now, here, as no complete list of the answers has been preserved, we cannot feel sure that the answer " five," as to the number of coins in Mr. Riddell's pocket, may not have been right by mere accident. But my point is that, even excluding the idea of mere chance coincidence, there is still nothing in the answer which obliges us to go beyond Mr. Riddell's own mind. His subliminal self may well have been aware of the number of coins in his pocket, although his supraliminal self was not.

848. These few cases may suffice to lead us up to the palmary case of the late Rev. P. H. Newnham, Vicar of Maker, Devonport, who was personally known to Edmund Gurney and myself, and was a man in all ways worthy of high respect. The long series of communications between Mr. Newnham and his wife, which date back to 1871, and whose contemporaneous written record is preserved in the archives of the S.P.R., must, I think, always retain their primacy as early and trustworthy examples of a telepathic transference where the percipient's automatic script answers questions penned by the agent in such a position that the percipient could not in any normal manner discern what those questions were. No part of our evidence seems to me more worthy of study than this. Mr. Newnham had for many years paid careful attention to psychical phenomena, and especially had been conscious of a frequent involuntary transmission of thought from himself to Mrs. Newnham. An instance of "psychical-invasion" in sleep when Mrs. Newnham discerned his presence is quoted in C. This occurred before their marriage.

849. Subsequently, Mr. Newnham made many attempts to transmit thought voluntarily to his wife, but succeeded only in the year 1871, during a period of about eight months.

During that period he made notes from day to day in a private diary, which diary he was good enough to place in my hands in 1884. There are 40 pages of MS. notes, containing 385 automatically-written replies to questions. Mr. Newnham made the experiments purely for his own satisfaction, and without any idea of submitting them to public inspection,

I48 CHAPTER VIII [850

and consequently the questions include many references to his domestic affairs at the time, to family jokes, and to other matters which, while illustrating the intimate and spontaneous character of the diary, are not suited for publication. Mr. Newnham, however, kindly made long extracts for me, some of which I print in 849 A. I carefully compared the extracts with the original diary, and consider that they give a quite fair impression of it. Mrs. Newnham independently corroborated her husband's account,1 and I also talked the matter over with both of them.

It must be distinctly understood that Mrs. Newnham did not see or hear the questions which Mr. Newnham wrote down. The fact, therefore, that her answers bore any relation to the questions shows that the sense of the questions was telepathically conveyed to her. This is the leading and important fact. The substance of the replies written is also interesting, and Mr. Newnham has some good comments thereon. But even had the replies contained no facts which Mrs. Newnham could not have known, this would not detract from the main value of the evidence, which consists in the fact that Mrs. Newnham's hand wrote replies clearly and repeatedly answering questions which she neither heard nor saw.

850. I give in 850 A a series of experiments on a smaller scale, but analogous to those of Mr. and Mrs. Newnham.

851. In the Newnham case we have the advantage of seeing before us the entire series of questions and answers, and thus of satisfying ourselves that the misses (which in that case are very few) are marked as well as the hits, and consequently that the coincidences between question and answer are at any rate not the result of chance. In several other cases which I have known, where the good faith of the informants has been equally above question, the possibility of an explanation by chance alone has been a more important element in the problem. All our evidence

1 Mr. Newnham procured for me two autograph letters from eye-witnesses of some of the experiments, who do not, however, wish their names to be published, on account of prejudices still existing in certain quarters against the experiments as involving questionable agency. One writer says : " You wrote the question on a slip of paper and put it under one of the ornaments of the chimney-piece — no one seeing what you had written. Mrs. Newnham sat apart at a small table. I recollect you kept a book of the questions asked and answers given, as you thought some new power might be discovered, and you read me from it some of the results. I remember particularly questions and answers relating to the selection of a curate for B. My wife and her sister saw experiments conducted in this manner. Mrs. Newnham and you were sitting at

different tables." Another eye-witness writes : " I and my sister were staying at ,

and were present at many of the Planchette experiments of Mr. and Mrs. Newnham. Mr. and Mrs. Newnham sat at different tables some distance apart, and in such a position that it was quite impossible Mrs. Newnham could see what question was written down. The subject of the questions was never mentioned even in a whisper. Mr. Newnham wrote them down in pencil and sometimes passed them to me and my sister to see, but not often. Mrs. Newnham immediately answered the questions. Though not always correct, they (the answers) always referred to the questions. Mr. Newnham copied out the pencil questions and answers verbatim each day into a diary."

852] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 149

has tended to show that the telepathic power itself is a variable thing ; that it shows itself in flashes, for the most part spontaneously, and seldom persists through a series of deliberate experiments. And if an automatist possessing power of this uncertain kind has exercised it at irregular moments and with no scientific aim ; — and has kept, moreover, no steady record of success and failure ; — then it becomes difficult to say that even some brilliant coincidences afford cogent proof of telepathic action. The case which is next cited (in 851 A) presents these drawbacks; but it presents also positive points of interest and corroborations of memory quite sufficient, I think, to justify me in laying it before my readers as an example of telepathy acting — not just in the way in which we should like it to act, but in the way in which it apparently does act ; — and with that strange intercurrence, moreover, which we so often find of something like clairvoyance and premonition mingling with the reflection of thoughts which pass through minds in rapport with the automatist's. But I quote the case as one where telepathy from the living seems to play at least a considerable part in supplying the contents of the messages.

852. I pass on to a case where an actual conversation goes on between the distant agent and the automatist, informing the automatist of matters which the agent — supraliminally or subliminally — wishes him to know. Evidentially it is not strong, for it depends upon a single memory, corroborated on one collateral point alone (although not invalidated upon any point) ; and the writer was not personally known to any of us. The date is also very remote. On the other hand, the reasons for the absence of corroboration seem satisfactory : and in my view at least the narrative offers internal evidence of honesty and care, while the incident is such as might stamp itself permanently on the mind.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 48.)

Mrs. Kirby wrote to me from Santa Cruz, California, August i3th, 1886, as follows : —

In 1850 I left New York for San Francisco. Spiritualism, in the sense in which that word is now used, had no existence. The facts and philosophy it covers were unknown, except partially to the very few readers of Swedenborg's cumbrous and involved theology.

Attention had been called to some rappings which had made themselves heard in a house in Rochester, N. Y., and there had been some violent demonstrations (breaking of windows, moving of furniture, and unlocking of locked drawers and doors) in the house of an orthodox clergyman somewhere in Connecticut.
