Reminded in a general way, but without detail, of the occurrence, Mr. D. writes (in a letter seen by me), April 2ist, 1892 : —

There was no conversation. She only said to me, " E., I have left dear John." I cannot remember whether it was wet or not ; but as to the moon, it was not at all like that light. It was more like an electric light ; — a subdued brilliancy. ..." How long did the spirit remain in conversation with me ? " Certainly not more than five minutes, if so long. ... I sent the account to my father, who probably handed it to [Mr.] B.

Further reminded of his contemporary account, Mr. D. writes, May ist, 1892 : — "I appear to have spoken, but have no distinct recollection of doing so. What she did say was entirely personal." It related to the removal of a painful misunderstanding with a friend. " So far as I know she had never seen, or even heard of, the friend alluded to." Mr. D. declines to give further detail ; but he still considers that the communication showed " a plenary knowledge " of facts personal to himself. His hesitation of memory seems to have been on the point whether the hope and consolation were conveyed by spoken words, or in some directer fashion. The confidence inspired by the message was, he tells us, justified by the result. The supposed conversation in this case may have been more dream-like than the percipient imagined. It may have taken place, so to say, in his own mind, without definite auditory externalisation.

716 C. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. v. p. 10. The four incid< which follow were written out for me in 1888 by a lady whom I will tei Mrs. V., who has had other experiences somewhat similar, which, fc private reasons, she does not wish to give. I am well acquainted wit Mrs. V., and with her husband, who has held an important position ir India.

I. In 1874 I was in India, at a hill station. On the yth June, between and three o'clock in the morning, I woke with the sensation that half my 11 had been taken from me (I can only describe the feeling in this vague way) I sat up and pressed my side in wonder at what was happening. I then sa most beautiful lights at the end of the room ; these lights gave place to a cloud, and after a few moments the face of a dear sister, then living (as I believed), appeared in the cloud, which remained a little while and then gradually faded; away. I became much alarmed and at once felt I should hear bad news of my sister, who was living in London and had been very ill, though the last accounts we had received had been better. I told my husband what had happened, and \ when a telegram was brought by a friend at eight o'clock that morning I knewj what its contents must be. The telegram contained the news of my sister's death during the previous night.

II. In 1885 I was present in church at the confirmation of my sister's! youngest boy. I was in the left-hand gallery of the church, the boy in the ! body of the church, on the right side. As I was kneeling, I looked towards • the opposite gallery, which was of dark wood. There I saw the half figure of my sister; the head and arms outstretched high above the boy, as if blessing ; him. For the moment I thought it was impossible, and closed my eyes for a few seconds. Opening them again I saw the same beautiful form, which | almost immediately vanished.

III. In India, in the winter of 1881, the husband of an acquaintance was lying dangerously ill at a hotel about five miles from us. Knowing this, I j went frequently to inquire after him. One particular evening I remained with his wife some time, as the doctor thought his condition most critical. When I returned home, about ten o'clock that night, I ordered beef essences and jellies to be made to send early the next morning.

The night was perfectly calm and sultry, not a leaf stirring. About twelve o'clock the Venetians in my bedroom suddenly began to shake and knockings were heard, which seemed to proceed from a box under my writing-table. The knocking and shaking of the Venetians went on for half-an-hour or more, off and on.

During this time I heard a name whispered, A B , of which the

Christian name was unknown to me, the surname being the maiden name of the sick man's wife. I felt so certain that I was wanted at the hotel that I wished to start at once, but I was advised not to do so at that hour of the night. Early the next morning a messenger arrived with a note begging me to go at once to the hotel, as my friend's husband had died at one o'clock. When I reached the hotel, she told me how she had wished to send for me during the night whilst his death was impending. I went at once to stay with her till after the funeral, and found that the Christian name I had heard whispered was the name of her brother who had died seven years previously.

IV. In 1884 we were staying in a villa in the south of France. One night,

•717 A] TO CHAPTER VII 333

soon after we arrived, I went from my room upstairs to fetch something in the drawing-room (which was on the ground floor), and saw a slight figure going down the stairs before me in a white garb with a blue sash and long golden hair. She glided on into a room near the hall door. This startled and impressed me so much that I afterwards went to the house-agent and asked if any one had lately died in that house with long golden hair. He replied that an American lady, young and slight, with golden hair, had died there a few months before — in the very room into which I had seen the figure gliding.

I talked over the cases with Mr. V., and noted his remarks.

In Case I. he remembers being told in the morning of Mrs. V.'s vision, though at this distance of time he cannot state whether the telegram announcing the death had arrived before he was told.

In Case II. he was told at once of the incident.

On Case III. he has made and signed the following remarks : —

This noise resembled the shaking of the lid of the tin box. I got up and went to the box, which continued making the noise, to see if there were rats, but there were none. There were no rats in the house, and there was nothing i in the box. A night-light was burning in the room. The rattling was continuous— not like what a rat could produce. It went on again after I had investigated it in vain. This incident was unique in my experience.

Mrs. V. added in conversation : " The Christian name whispered was Henry. This brother was not an Indian official, and I had never heard of him." Mrs. V.'s acquaintance with the lady whose husband was dying was not an intimate one.

In Case IV. Mr. V. again informs me that he was told at once of the incident. The name of the villa was La Baronne, of the house-agent, Mr. Taylor.

717 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 20. The following account was received from Miss Pearson, 15 Fitzroy Square, London, W.C.

April 1888.

The house, 19 St. James's Place, Green Park, had been taken on a very long lease by my grandfather, a solicitor, in large county practice, having his offices in Essex Street, Strand. There my father was born and his two sisters, Ann and Harriet. Aunt Ann died in 1858, leaving all she possessed to Aunt Harriet, who remained in the house. They had been devotedly attached to each other. In November 1864 I was summoned to Brighton. My Aunt Harriet was then very ill there. Mrs. Coppinger, the daughter of Mr. Thomas Pearson, my father's brother, was there, and her son, Mr. George James, by her first husband, came up and down. Eliza Quinton was nursing her. She only craved to go back to the old house where she was born, and I made arrangements with the railway company and took her home.

This was in the second week in December. She became worse and worse. Eliza continued to nurse her, and Mrs. Coppinger, Mrs. John Pearson, the wife of a nephew, and myself helped with the night work.

Miss Harriet Pearson slept in a large three-windowed bedroom over the drawing-room. The room behind was occupied by Mrs. Coppinger and myself,

though one of us was generally in the patient's room at night. On the night of December 22nd, 1864, Mrs. John Pearson was in the room, Mrs. Coppinger and myself in the back room ; the house lighted up on the landings and staircases, our door wide open.

About i or 2 A.M. on the morning of December 2$rd, both Mrs. Coppinger and myself started up in bed ; we were neither of us sleeping, as we were watching every sound from the next room.

We saw some one pass the door, short, wrapped up in an old shawl, a wig with three curls each side and an old black cap. Mrs. Coppinger called out, " Emma, get up, it is old Aunt Ann." I said, " So it is, then Aunt Harriet will die to-day." We jumped up, and Mrs. John Pearson came rushing out of the room and said, " That was old Aunt Ann. Where is she gone to? " I said to soothe her, " Perhaps it was Eliza come down to see how her mistress is." Mrs. Coppinger ran upstairs and found Eliza sleeping in the servants' room. She was very awe-struck but calm, dressed and came down. Every room was searched, no one was there, and from that day to this no explanation has ever been given of this appearance, except that it was old Aunt Ann come to call her sister, and she died at 6 P.M. that day. EMMA M. PEARSON.

The housekeeper, who is still with Miss Pearson, writes as follows :— -

April yd, 1888.

I was living with Miss Ann and Miss Harriet Pearson, in 19 St. James's Place. After the death of Miss Ann I remained with her sister, and when she became very ill and was ordered change of air, I went with her as nurse to Brighton. Mrs. Coppinger was there and Mr. George James now and then. Miss Emma Pearson was sent for and came down. She brought her aunt back to London. I continued to nurse her. I remember on the early morning of December 2$rd being called up by Mrs. Coppinger, who said that she, Miss Emma, and Mrs. John Pearson had seen some one come upstairs and pass into the patient's room. Was it I ? I said, no. Mrs. Coppinger said, " They said it was old Aunt Ann." We searched the house and could find no one. Miss Harriet died in the evening of that day, but before that told all of us that she had seen her sister and knew it was her, and she had come to call her.

ELIZA QUINTON.

In a separate letter of the same date Miss Pearson adds : —

I now remember my aunt saying " her sister had come for her, for she had seen her."

717 B. In the following case, a child, while apparently quite well, feels the impression of approaching death, and ascribes it to his dead brother's call. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 429.)

This case was first printed in the Religio- Philosophical Journal, May 5th, 1894. Mr. B. B. Kingsbury, who contributed it, states that the informant is a member of the Presbyterian Church, and her husband has confirmed her as to the statement of voices heard by the little boy calling him.. Mr. Kingsbury adds that both are worthy of the highest credit. The father is somewhat of a "sensitive" and the mother has had two or three

717 B] TO CHAPTER VII 335

clairvoyant experiences herself. The statement just as it was given by the mother runs as follows : —

Is there a life beyond the grave? Had I ever doubted that there is a life beyond (which I never for a moment did), my doubt would have been removed by what I call a vision. In 1883 I was the mother of two strong healthy boys. The eldest was a bright boy of two years and seven months. The other, a darling baby boy of eight months. August 6th, 1883, my baby died. Ray, my little son, was then in perfect health. Every day after baby's death (and I may safely say every hour in the day) he would say to me, " Mamma, baby calls Ray." He would often leave his play and come running to me, saying, "Mamma, baby calls Ray all the time." Every night he would waken me out of my sleep, and say, " Mamma, baby calls Ray all the time. He wants Ray to come where he is ; you must not cry when Ray goes, mamma, you must not cry, for baby wants Ray." One day I was sweeping the sitting-room floor, and he came running as fast as he could run, through the dining-room where stood the table with baby's high chair (which Ray now used) at the side. I never saw him so excited, and he grabbed my dress and pulled me to the dining-room door, jerked it open, saying, "Oh, mamma, mamma, come quick; baby is sitting in his high chair." As soon as he opened the door and looked at the chair he said, " Oh, mamma, why didn't you hurry ; now he's gone ; he laughed at Ray when he passed the chair; oh, he laughed at Ray so nice. Ray is going with baby, but you must not cry, mamma." Ray soon became very sick. Nursing and medicine were of no avail. He died October i3th, 1883, two months and seven days after baby's death. He was a child of high intelligence and matured far beyond his years. Whether it is possible for the dead to return, and whether my baby came back and was seen by his little brother or not, we leave for others to judge.

In reply to Dr. Hodgson's inquiries, Mrs. H. wrote : —

DEFIANCE, OHIO, December iifh, 1894.

In reply will say that Mr. Kingsbury's account in the Religio-Philosophical Journal for May 5th last of my little boy's clairvoyance shortly before his death is correct in every detail. When the child ran to me telling me the baby was sitting in his chair at the table, there was no one in the house but the servant girl, little Ray, and myself. I told the girl nothing about it and she did not hear the child; but as soon as my husband came to dinner I told him. After that we talked freely of the matter to several of our friends. Little Ray knew nothing of death, we had never spoken of it to him in any way; the last time i took him to the baby's grave shortly before he was taken sick we were sitting by the grave, and I thought, " Oh ! if I could only take baby up and look at it for just one minute, I would feel so glad." Instantly Ray said to me, " Mamma, let us take baby up and look at it just one minute; then we will feel better." Just as we were leaving the grave he smoothed it with his little hand, and said, " Ray is going to lie down and sleep right here beside little brother, but you must not cry, mamma." He is now lying just where he said he would.

P>S. — I wish to say that I have never known much of what is called modern Spiritualism, but was born and reared a Presbyterian and still belong to that Church, of which I am an active member. F. H.

Mr. H. wrote as follows : —

February 2*/th, 1895.

MR. R. HODGSON, — DEAR SIR, — In regard to B. B. Kingsbury's statement in the Religio-Philosophical Journal of May 5th, 1894, I can truly say that my wife related it to me the day it occurred when I came to dinner. I frequently heard our little boy tell his mamma that the baby called him all the time. — Yours respectfully, W. H. H.

H

The following corroboration was also received : —

116 SUMMIT STREET, DEFIANCE, OHIO, February 27^, 1895. R. HODGSON, — DEAR SIR,— I can truly say that Mrs. and Mr. H. often spoke to me of Ray seeing the baby in the chair before he took sick. They told me the next day after it happened. MRS. J. H. SHULTERS.

717 C. The next case appeared originally in Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 208. It came from Captain Cecil Norton, late of the 5th Lancers, who wrote as follows : —

5 QUEEN'S GATE, S.W., December 2Oth, 1885.

About Christmas time, 1875 or 1876, being officer on duty, I was seated at the mess-table of the 5th Lancers in the West Cavalry Barracks at Aldershot. There were ten or twelve other officers present, and amongst them Mr. John Atkinson (now of Erchfont Manor, near Devizes, Wilts), the Surgeon-Major of the regiment, who sat on my right, but at the end of the table furthest from me and next to Mr. Russell. [Captain Norton was sitting at the end of the table and directly facing the window.] At about 8.45 P.M. Atkinson suddenly glared at the window to his right, thereby attracting the notice of Russell, who seizing his arm, said, " Good gracious, Doctor, what's the matter with you ? " This caused me to look in the direction in which I saw Atkinson looking, viz., at the window opposite, and I there saw (for the curtains were looped up, although the room was lighted by a powerful central gas light in the roof and by candles on the table) a young woman, in what appeared a soiled or somewhat worn bridal dress, walk or glide slowly past the window from east to west. She was about at the centre of the window when I observed her, and outside the window. No person could have actually been in the position where she appeared, as the window in question is about 30 feet above the ground.

The nearest buildings to the window referred to are the Infantry Barracks opposite, about 300 yards distant. Behind where I sat is a conservatory, which was examined by me, as well as the front window, immediately after the occurrence. There was no person in the conservatory. [It was unused in the winter.] The nearest buildings to it are the officers' stables, over which are the staff-sergeants' quarters, about 50 yards distant.

The occurrence made little if any impression upon me, though it impressed others who were in the room. All present had been drinking very little wine ; and the dinner had been very quiet.

It has just occurred to me that I may be wrong as to the time of the year, and that the occurrence may have taken place about I5th October or about i5th March. CECIL NORTON.

717C] TO CHAPTER VII 337

Mr. Atkinson wrote : —

ERCHFONT MANOR, DEVIZES, August $ist, 1885.

The appearance of a woman which I saw pass the mess-room window at Aldershot seemed to be outside, and it passed from east to west. The messroom is on the first floor, so the woman would have been walking in the air. There has been a very nice story made out of it — like most other ghost-stories, founded on an optical illusion.

Mr. Gurney added : —

Captain Norton's iriva voce account made it tolerably clear, in my opinion, that the case was one of hallucination, not illusion. He further mentions that both Mr. Atkinson and he were " satisfied that the face and form of the woman seen were familiar," though they could not at the moment identify the person. Captain Norton afterwards felt sure that the likeness was to a photograph which he was in the habit of seeing in the room of the veterinary surgeon of the regiment, representing the surgeon's deceased wife in bridal dress. Oddly enough, this man was at the time, unknown to his friends, actually dying, or within a day or two of death, in the same building. But Mr. Atkinson recalls nothing about the photograph ; and the coincidence is not one to which we can attach weight.

Since the publication of the account in Phantasms we obtained from two of the officers who were present at the time their recollections of the incident. The letters relating to this were printed in they<?#r##/S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 76, from which I proceed to quote. Lieutenant Beaumont, in answer to a written request for his recollection of the alleged apparition in the 5th Lancers' mess-room at Aldershot, writes : —

HILLSIDE, BURGESS HILL, SUSSEX, March iQth, 1897.

I well remember the incident you refer to, and shall be pleased to tell you the circumstances as I recollect them.

It must have been in 1876, and in October, I fancy. It so happened that on the night in question there were very few officers present at the mess dinner — so far as I can recollect only Norton, E. the veterinary surgeon, Dr. Atkinson and myself, who, being orderly officer, sat at the end of the table. It was, I think, towards the close of the dinner, the servants having retired and we were smoking and chatting, when I was much struck with the expression on the faces of my brother officers, who appeared to be gazing in amazement at something behind me. At first I thought it was some joke, but they each of them seriously described what they had seen, viz., a figure of a woman in white, who passed silently through the room, coming, as it were, from the ante-room and going behind me through the door opposite. It was impossible to doubt, from their faces at the time, that there was something extraordinary happening. I afterwards asked them seriously about it, and Surgeon-Major Atkinson, who was a long way the senior, and a hard-headed man, assured me that he had ' certainly seen the apparition, and he seemed much impressed. The others were equally confident, and assured me there was no chaff about it. It was frequently alluded to afterwards in a joking way, but I believe that all those present thought it "uncanny."

VOL. II. Y

I must tell you that none of us had imbibed more than a glass or two of claret, and it was a most exceptionally quiet evening at mess.

I think E. died not long after. . . . MONTMORENCY BEAUMONT.

This letter having been shown to Captain Norton, he wrote that Lieutenant Beaumont was mistaken in supposing that Mr. E. was present on the occasion. He also sent us a sketch (reproduced in the Journal} of the position of the officers, which agrees with his own earlier account, but not with the present recollections of Lieutenant Beaumont. The discrepancy, however, is of comparatively slight importance.

The second officer whose testimony has been obtained, Lieutenant-Colonel Williams, writes : —

ROCKFIELDS, HEREFORD, March Wi, 1897.

I am afraid I can give you very little information on the subject ; it is so many years since the affair took place that I have nearly forgotten all about it. All that I remember is that one night when we were a very small party at mess, some time during the dinner, I think just before beginning dessert, I noticed Dr. Atkinson looking in rather a peculiar way at the window at the top of the ; room, and I think my brother-in-law [Captain Norton] said to him or he said j to Captain Norton, " Did you see it ? " There was some little joking about it at i the time, and on asking my brother-in-law after dinner what he really had seen, i he told me that he had seen a lady in a white dress and dark hair cross the) window on the outside. HUGH P. WILLIAMS.

Mrs. Atkinson, the widow of Surgeon-Major Atkinson, in answer to a letter asking if her late husband had ever spoken to her on the subject of the apparition at the mess- table of the 5th Lancers at Aldershot,j writes : —

ERCHFONT MANOR, DEVIZES, March nth [1897].

It is quite true that my husband saw the appearance at Aldershot in 1877 ;• he often told me about it. They were in the North Cavalry Barracks [ Captain j Norton states that there were no North Cavalry Barracks at Aldershot, but that it was in the West Cavalry Barracks] at Aldershot, and were at mess in the mess-room, which is on the first floor, a great distance from the ground. There is no balcony outside or even a ledge (I believe). My husband and Captain Norton were the only two sitting facing the window, when they sa\v the figure of a woman go slowly by. They were much astonished and told th others, and there was much excitement about it. Shortly after the veterinary surgeon died, and on going through his papers either my husband or Captair Norton found the photograph of the woman they had seen from the mess-roon window. I think they both recognised it. It was not known that the veterinary surgeon was married. The appearance was never in any way explained.

M. A. ATKINSON.

A tablet in All Saints' Church, Aldershot, gives the date of death o Mr. E., veterinary surgeon, 5th Lancers, as January 3rd, 1876. Thif shows that the date when the apparition was seen was probably aboui Christmas time, 1875, as botn Lieutenant Beaumont and Mrs. Atkinsoi

718A] TO CHAPTER VII 339

confirm Captain Norton's impression that the incident occurred shortly before Mr. E. died.

718 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 92. The writer of the

following account is Colonel , a well-known Irish gentleman, but

we are not allowed to publish his name. He writes from Arthur's on March ist, 1885 : —

Some sixteen years since Mrs. said to me, " We have some people staying

here all next week. Do you know any person I could get to sing with the girls ? " I suggested that my gunmaker. Mr. X., had a daughter with a fine

voice, who was training as a public singer, and that if she, Mrs. , liked I

would write to X. and ask if he would allow her to come down and spend a week with us. On my wife's approval I wrote, and Miss X. came down for a

week, and then left. As far as I know, Mrs. never saw her again. Shortly

after I called on X., thanked him for allowing his daughter to come to us, and said we were all much pleased with her. X. replied : " I fear you have spoilt her, for she says she never passed so happy a week in her life." Miss X. did not come out as a singer, but shortly after married Mr. Z., and none of us ever saw her again.

Six or seven years passed away, and Mrs. , who had been long ill, was

dying, in fact she did die the following day. I was sitting at the foot of her bed talking over some business matters that she was anxious to arrange, being perfectly composed and in thorough possession of her senses ; in fact she was right, and my solicitor, who advised that the step she wanted to be taken was not necessary, was wrong. She changed the subject, and said, " Do you hear those voices singing? " I replied that I did not; and she said, " I have heard them several times to-day, and I am sure they are the angels welcoming me to Heaven; but," she added, "it is strange, there is one voice amongst them I am sure I know, and cannot remember whose voice it is." Suddenly she stopped and said, pointing straight over my head, " Why, there she is in the corner of the room ; it is Julia X. ; she is coming on; she is leaning over you ; she has her hands up ; she is praying ; do look ; she is going." I turned but could see

nothing. Mrs. then said, " She is gone." All these things I imagined to

be the phantasies of a dying person.

Two days afterwards, taking up the Times newspaper, I saw recorded the death of Julia Z., wife of Mr. Z. I was so astounded that in a day or so after

the funeral I went up to and asked Mr. X. if Mrs. Z., his daughter, was

dead. He said, " Yes, poor thing, she died of puerperal fever. On the day she died she began singing in the morning, and sang and sang until she died."

Last year I saw mentioned that some person or persons were collecting remarkable ghost stories, and I wrote to Mr. Z. telling him shortly what I have now written at length. Mr. Z.'s answer was that I had described . . . accurately the scene of his wife's death. . . .

Colonel adds later : —

Mrs. Z. died on February 2nd at six or thereabout in the morning, 1874.

Mrs. died, February I3th, 1874, at about four in the evening. I saw

notice of Mrs. Z.'s death on February I4th. Mrs. never was subject to

hallucinations of any sort.

We received later the following letter from Mr. Webley, called above "Mr. Z.":—

84 WENMAN STREET, BIRMINGHAM, May i8M, 1885.

In reply to your letter, I shall be happy to give you the information asked for. My wife died on 2nd February 1884 [1874], about 5.30 A.M. The last hours of her life were spent in singing. I may say notes came from her within ten minutes of her decease ; and beautiful as her voice was, it never appeared so exquisitely beautiful as this. HENRY WEBLEY.

718 B. In the next case (quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiv. p. 288) a dying mother had an apparently telepathic vision of an absent son who happened to be dying at the same time. The account comes from Colonel C. F. Hicks.

46 VALPLAISANT, ST. HELIERS, JERSEY, December 2yd, 1889.

Agreeably to my promise I now give you a statement of my late wife's last moments. Some days beforehand I was informed she would not last long ; and it was in the evening about 5 or 6 o'clock P.M., on 3rd October 1887, I went into her bedroom. There was the nurse, my second and third daughters in the room with me. The door was a little ajar. She was looking at it very earnestly when she said to my second daughter, Flo, " There is some one outside, let him in." Flo answered and said, " Oh no, mamma ; there is no one — look," and she opened the door wider. We then talked to her gently for some little time. After a pause she said, " Poor Eddie (my second son who had gone out to Australia) ; oh, he is looking very ill — he has had a fall — broken his leg — poor Eddie." When we all assured her such was not the case — that the last news we had heard from him was that he was quite well — she became more pacified, although restless and doubtful, as she continued to say now and then, "Poor Eddie!" She died at about twenty minutes to 2 A.M., early on the 4th October. We little thought that her words would be verified, with the exception of the broken leg.

Some time afterwards I received a letter from Mr. Thomas Williams announcing my poor son's death. For he left a place called Wyndham on the Cambridge Gulf, N.W. of Australia, on the 4th [evidently meaning 3rd, see below] October 1887, with a young man of the name of Russell. He suddenly felt ill, and called for some water. The latter went off to a spring to get it, but coming back he found that he had fallen from his horse and was lying quite dead. So his poor mother's vision turned out to be quite true, excepting his leg being broken.

Now, the only question is about the time. Did the son die before the mother or after the mother? as, taking the longitude of Wyndham N.W. of Australia, so far to the east of us, there must be a good eight or ten hours' , difference, and a ship going round the world making east all the way would gain a day, and by westing would lose one.

I give you a few extracts from letters I have received. The one from Mr. Thomas Williams, with whom my son left a letter to be sent on to me. Mr. , T. W.'s letter is dated the 5th October 1887 : " Your son left Wyndham to go to Durack station on the 3rd October, in company with Louis Smith and John Russell. They had to go over a very rough country, and your poor boy succumbed to the pangs of thirst, suffering at the same time with fever. I am

718B] TO CHAPTER VII 341

glad to inform you that his sufferings were short, and that the great God was pleased to take him away quickly. He spoke very affectionately of his mother, and what he would do if he could only get back to Jersey, for he was heartsick when he was here."

I give you another extract from his employer, a Mr. Durack, a gentleman who dealt largely in horses, and had a great number of horse stations in Australia : —

" When I left your son at Wyndham on 27th September last, 1887, he was to start back to the station, as he had a horse, bridle, and saddle to ride."

In conclusion, I have now given you as succinctly as I can the death of the mother and son, the one having taken place here and the other at our Antipodes, both on the same day and date, and as far as I know about the same time. It is more than a coincidence — it is very mysterious.

(Signed) C. F. HICKS.

Colonel Hicks writes later : —

February 22nd, 1890.

. . . The witnesses in my wife's late case are none of them present here. My second daughter, whom I was expecting from Bombay when I received your letter, has arrived here. Her statement I enclose. My third daughter, another witness, is at present at Brisbane, in Australia. . . .

Discrepancy in dates: my late wife died at about forty minutes to 2 A.M. on 4th October 1887 — that is, taking the time from 12 A.M. on the 3rd to 12 P.M., after which it becomes the 4th. So all the conversation that took place with the above-named witnesses, viz., the nurse, Miss E. Fenn, two daughters and self, took place in the evening of the 3rd, about 5 or 6 P.M., as she died the same night, or more correctly speaking, being after 12 P.M., it was early in the morning of the 4th.

Now for my son's death. Mr. Thomas Williams' letter is dated the 5th October 1887. He says my son left Wyndham, on the Gulf of Cambridge, on the 4th [the date given in Mr. Williams' letter is 3rd, see below] October 1887, but he does not mention at what time. But being within the tropics, where people generally travel as early as they can to escape the heat of the sun, it is presumed that he and his friend, Mr. Russell, must have started early, and it is certain that they could not have gone far before he met his end, and most probably Mr. T. Williams must have heard of it the same day, as his letter is dated the 5th October 1887. . . . (Signed) C. F. HICKS.

The following letter from Miss Hicks was enclosed : —

February 2"ith, 1890.

I was in my late mother's bedroom between the hours of five and six in the evening, on the 3rd of October 1887, when she asked me to open the door, as some one was outside and wanted to come in. I answered and said, " Oh, mother, the door is open, and there is no one outside," and then I opened the door wider. Then I shut the door. She then said, " Poor Eddie, he looks very ill; he has had a fall." I said to her, " Oh, mother, how you go on; he is all right the last time we heard." She said, " Oh, he is looking very ill." The next morning, at about forty minutes to 2 A.M., she died. I heard from letters received that my poor brother Eddie died in Australia on the same day and about the same time. F. HICKS.

Colonel Hicks also sent us the letter from Mr. Williams giving an account of his son's death. The exact time is, as Colonel Hicks says, not stated, but the letter is dated October 5th, 1887, and states that Mr. E. Hicks started on his journey on October 3rd. It seems probable that the death took place on the same day.

For some other cases of this type see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 459, footnote.

719 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 214. The account is written by Mrs. J. P. Smith.

AMBLE, NORTHUMBERLAND, January ijtk, 1891.

In June 1879, I was a teacher in Macclesfield. A friend, Mrs. , was

near her confinement. She told me she was afraid she would die. I went into the county of Durham for a holiday. While there I was roused from sleep by

Mrs. as I supposed. She was shaking me, and saying, " I have passed

away, but the baby will live." Then the figure left the room by the door, I got out of bed and went to my sister and related the incident. We agreed to make a note of it. Next day I received a letter from a friend in Macclesfield saying that Mrs. was dead but the baby was alive.

[I was] in the best of health and about twenty-nine years of age.

No other persons were present.

Mrs. Smith, who is the mistress of the Infants' School at Amble, informs us that this is the only experience of the kind she has ever had, and that to the best of her recollection the apparition was seen about an hoilr or two after the death.

Unfortunately, neither the note made at the time nor the letter announcing the death has been preserved, but we have received the following letter of corroboration from Mrs. Smith's sister : —

November 2nd, 1891.

I distinctly remember my sister coming into my room and waking me up to tell me of her dream, which was as follows : —

That she had dreamt that a lady friend of hers some miles away had appeared to her and said she was dead ; but that her baby would live. The dream had evidently impressed my sister very much, as she seemed quite agitated, and we said we would note it down, and to our utter astonishment the next morning my sister received a letter to say that her friend had passed away that same night. ANNIE BROWN.

It will be observed that Mrs. Smith's experience is here referred to as a dream. That this is not her own view of it appears from the following account given by Professor and Mrs. Sidgwick of an interview which they had with her on September i6th, 1891. The account was written within two hours of their seeing Mrs. Smith, from notes made at the time.

The figure appeared twice on the same night. The first time was in the breaking dawn of a June morning, before there was any sun. It woke her, and

719 B] TO CHAPTER VII 343

she heard the words she mentions, but she did not get out of bed, and was probably only half awake. The second time the same thing happened, but she is quite sure she was awake. It appeared at the left-hand side of her bed, and, after speaking, it moved very quickly round the bed and apparently through the door, which was at the right-hand side of the bed parallel to the head and hidden by the curtains, so that she did not see it go out. The figure went as if in a great hurry. It seemed to be dressed in drab ; the face was seen — it seemed exactly as in life. She felt no fear, nor sense of the supernatural — only anxiety to question further — and regarded it as real until, running after the figure downstairs, she became convinced that it was a vision. She felt as she ran as though she would have caught it up, had she not had to open the door. It was about five o'clock when she went to her sister, which she did at once after

the second vision. Mrs. had told her she thought she should not live, but

Mrs. Smith had thought little of this, and it had quite passed out of her mind.

She was in no anxiety. Mrs. was no special friend of hers. Her children

came to Mrs. Smith's school, and she was interested in them. She did not

know why Mrs. should have told her of her expectation of dying ; but she

said at the same time, " If I go, you will be very kind to my children."

The friend who wrote telling her of the death mentioned it casually — as especially sad because of the young children. She mentioned the time as in the early hours of the morning, and it struck Mrs. Smith when she got the letter that the vision had been coincident with the death, but she did not verify this by ascertaining the exact time of the death.

Mrs. Smith told us that when she communicated what she had seen to her sister, the latter said it must have been just a very vivid dream, to which she replied, " Well, it was a very vivid one, then," or words to that effect.

719 B. The following case, taken from Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 449, was received through the Rev. J. Barmby, of Pittington Vicarage, Durham, who obtained it from the Rev. J. T. Fowler, Librarian and Hebrew Lecturer in the University of Durham, in October 1872. The events related had occurred about four years earlier. I omit Mr. Barmby's account (given in Phantasms of the Living) which is practically a repetition of Mr. Clarke's, given below.

The Rev. J. T. Fowler, of Bishop Hatfield's Hall, Durham, writes :—

November z6th, 1884.

I know nothing about the case I mentioned to Mr. Barmby beyond what I gave him in writing. Mr. Clarke, a tradesman in Hull, told me of the case of Mrs. Palliser, and got her to come to his office, in Queen Street, Hull, for me to take down from her own lips the notes I gave to Mr. Barmby. I took great pains to get the whole of the story correctly. J. T. FOWLER.

Mr. Clarke writes : —

WINTER-TON HALL, DONCASTER, January 2oM, 1885.

Widow Palliser was a woman who had seen better days, and worked for my firm, Clarke & Son, Clothiers, Queen Street, Hull. She had an only son, Matthew. I assisted her in getting him to sea. One morning she came to me with tears rolling down her cheeks, and said, "Mat's dead; I saw him drowned! Poor Mat, the last words he said were, 'Oh! my dear mother.'

He threw up his hands and sank to rise no more." I asked how she knew. She said, " I saw him going on board his ship, and the plank that he walked upon slipped on one side, and he fell overboard between the quay and the ship and was drowned. My own mother, who had been dead many years, came to the foot of my bed and said, ' Poor Mat's gone ; he's drowned.' " I then said, " Why, Mat's in New York " (I always felt interested in this woman and her son). " Yes," she said, " he was drowned last night at New York ; I saw him."

Mrs. P.'s object in coming to me was to ask if I would write to the agent in New York to ascertain the facts. I said I would, and wrote stating that a poor widow had an only son on board such a ship, and she had a vision that an accident (I said nothing about drowning) had happened to her son, and I would take it as a great favour if he would ascertain and tell me all particulars. In about three to five weeks (she came day by day to ask if we had received a reply, always saying that she knew what the answer would be), at length, the letter arrived. We sent for Mrs. P., and before the letter was opened by my son, I said to her, " What will be its contents ?" She at once and decidedly said that " Mat was drowned on the very night that she saw him, and in going on board the ship the plank slipped, and he fell overboard between the quay and the ship." So it was. Mrs. P. was then wearing mourning for Mat.

My son and half-a-dozen young men can verify this if needful.

Mrs. P. died soon after. M. W. CLARKE.

Reproduction of the letter received from the agent of the ship, as nearly as I and my son can remember : —

" NEW YORK, date unknown.

" I have made inquiries of Matthew Palliser, age about twenty, and learn that he fell off a plank in going on board his ship, and got drowned on . . .'* The date was the same as Mrs. Palliser said. . . .

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Clarke adds : —

April 6th, 1885.

We have no copy of the agent's letter, but both my son and myself and others are certain that Mrs. P.'s vision and the agent's account of the accident were the same, both as to the time and cause, viz., that Mrs. P. saw her son slip off the plank in going on board his ship, and that he was drowned between the quay and the ship ; agent's account that he fell off the plank and was drowned, at the time mentioned, between the ship and the quay. Mrs. P. died soon after the event, which in my opinion shortened her life.

[In the absence of a written note, we cannot of course be perfectly certain that Mrs. Palliser did not read back the details of the plank and the quay into her vision after the arrival of the news, and that Mr. Clarke is right in his recollection of having heard these details from the first. But there can hardly be a doubt that the vision was described as a very impressive one before the arrival of the news ; and Mr. Clarke's interest in the matter may fairly be supposed to have made him careful in his scrutiny of the dates.]

719 C. The following case of an apparition coinciding with a death, but representing a near relative of the dying person, instead of the dying person herself, is taken from the " Report on the Census of Hallucinations," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 261. There were four cases of

719C] TO CHAPTER VII 345

this type in the Census, of which one had already been published in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 357 (No. 124), and two others are given in the " Report." I quote the preliminary comments of the writers of the " Report " on these cases.

"Such cases need present no difficulty on the telepathic theory. Indeed, it may be rather said that the absence of any cases of the kind would render the theory improbable. They raise the question, however, who the ' agent ' — the person, that is, from whom the telepathic communication comes — is, in hallucinations coinciding with a death. Usually it seems natural to assume that it is the dying person, and in some cases — as we have seen in Chapter XII. — this view is supported by evidence that the dying person's thoughts were specially directed to the percipient. The mere fact, however, that the apparition represents a particular person does not prove that that person was the agent. It is possible for an agent to transfer to a percipient an image of some third person, and it is possible for a percipient to embody an impression telepathically received in a form suggested by his own mind and not by the agent's. As an instance where it seems improbable that the person whose figure was seen was the agent, see Mrs. McAlpine's vision of her baby nephew at the time of its death (printed at p. 281). It seems more likely in this case that the agent was some one with the child, than the child itself, aged six months. In one of the death coincidences quoted in Chapter XII. (No. 579.24, p. 223), there is some reason for thinking that the agent was the sister who telegraphed the news rather than the decedent; because (i) the hallucination nearly coincided in time with the despatch of the telegram, while it occurred some hours after the death, and (2) it foretold the arrival of the telegram. These cases, of course, differ from those we are about to quote, in that the apparition is of the dying person, but they should be kept in view in interpreting them."

[In the first case, omitted here, the apparition represented a man who was at the time at the deathbed of his mother.]

" In the next case the fact that the person whose figure was seen can hardly by any normal means have known of his mother's death at the time of the hallucination makes it difficult to suppose that he was the agent, without a telepathic hypothesis so complicated as to be extremely improbable."

The account came from Miss C. L. Hawkins-Dempster, having been written in 1890.

I ran downstairs and entered the drawing-room at 7.30 P.M., believing I had kept my two sisters waiting for dinner. They had gone to dinner, the room was empty. Behind a long sofa I saw Mr. H. standing. He moved three steps nearer. I heard nothing. I was not at all afraid or surprised, only felt concern as [to] what he wanted, as he was in South America. I learnt next morning that at that moment his mother was breathing her last. I went and arranged

her for burial, my picture still hanging above the bed, between the portraits of her two absent sons.

I was in the habit of hearing often from [Mr. H.], and was not at that moment anxious about Mrs. H.'s health, though she was aged.

I had had twenty-five days before the grief of losing an only brother. No [other persons were present at the time]. C. L. H. DEMPSTER.

In answer to further inquiries, we learnt from Miss Hawkins- Dempster that the above incident occurred on New Year's Eve, 1876-77 ; the room was lighted by " one bright lamp and a fire," and the figure did not seem to go away, she merely " ceased to see it." She used to see Mrs. H. often, and was in no anxiety as to her health at the time. Mrs. H. was very old, but not definitely ill. Miss Hawkins-Dempster corrected her first statement as to the exactness of the coincidence by informing us that Mrs. H. died in the morning of the same day on which the apparition was seen.

Miss Hawkins-Dempster mentioned what she had seen to her sister, who thus corroborates : —

July i$M, 1892.

I heard of my sister Miss C. L. Hawkins-Dempster's vision of Mr. H. in the drawing-room at 7.30 P.M. on New Year's Eve, 1876-77, immediately after it happened, and before hearing that Mrs. H. died the same day, the news of which reached us later that evening. H. H. DEMPSTER.

We have verified the date of death at Somerset House. I had an interview with the Misses Hawkins- Dempster on July i6th, 1892, and wrote the following account of it the next day : —

Miss C. Hawkins-Dempster's veridical experience is well remembered by both sisters. The decedent was a very old lady, who was on very intimate terms with them, and had special reasons for thinking of Miss C. Hawkins-Dempster in connection with the son whose figure appeared. He was at the other side of the world, and almost certainly had not heard of his mother's death at the time.

The figure was absolutely life-like. Miss Hawkins-Dempster noticed the slight cast of the eye and the delicate hands. The figure rested one hand on the back of a chair and held the other out. Miss Hawkins-Dempster called out, " What can I do for you? " forgetting for the moment the impossibility that it could be the real man. Then she simply ceased to see the figure.

She was in good health at the time, and her thoughts were occupied with business matters.

" Here "(say the writers of the " Report ") " the apparition followed the death by some hours, so that, if Mrs. H. was the agent, the telepathic impression must either have remained latent for some time, or have been produced by the agent after death."

722 A. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 188. The following case was sent to us from Brazil by Professor A. Alexander, the witnesses being persons well known to him. He informs us that the incident is " of a type rather frequent among Brazilian Catholics," and the votive

722A] TO CHAPTER VII 347

candle seems indeed a natural thing to dream of under the circumstances described, but the exact place where the candle was to be found and the fact of its having been already partly burnt were not likely to be guessed. The account of the dreamer, Donna Nery, is as follows : —

BARBACENA, March 26th, 1895.

In January 1894, the decease occurred of Fe'licite' G., a young Belgian lady, who was married to a nephew of mine. After the death of his wife, the latter came to our house at Barbacena, bringing with him much luggage belonging to the deceased, and he stayed here with his children for some days.

Some two months afterwards — I have no means of ascertaining the exact date — I went to a soiree and returned home about two o'clock in the morning, having passed some pleasant hours in which all thoughts of sadness were temporarily swept from my memory. On that very night, however, I had a vivid dream of Felicitd. It seemed to me that she entered the room where I really lay asleep, and, sitting down on the bedside, asked me, as a favour, to look into an old tin box under the staircase for a certain wax candle, which had been already lighted, and which she had promised to Our Lady. On my consenting to do so, she took leave of me, saying, " At6 o outro mundo (Till the other world)."1 I awoke from the dream much impressed. It was still dark, but I could no longer sleep.

On that day, the others having gone out, I called a servant and ordered her to search in the tin box, which had, in fact, been placed under the staircase, and which had belonged to Fe'licite'. No one had opened the box before. It was full of old clothes and cuttings, among which it was by no means probable that we should find a wax candle. The servant turned over these clothes at first without result, and I was already beginning to think that my dream was of no importance, when, on straightening out the clothes so that the box might be closed, I saw the end of a candle, which I at once ordered her to take out. It was of wax — of the kind used for promises [to saints]— and, what was a still more singular coincidence, it had already been lighted.

We delivered the candle to Monsenhor Jose" Augusto, of Barbacena, in performance of my niece's pious vow thus curiously revealed in a dream.

(Signed) GUILHERMINA NERY.

Senhor Nery writes : —

BARBACENA, March 26th, 1895.

I recollect that, on the occasion, my wife told me of the dream, much impressed by it. It is exactly what is written.

(Signed) DOMINGOS NERY.

Professor Alexander adds : —

At my request, Catharina, the servant referred to in the above account, was called to be examined. I found that she was a mere child. On being questioned she confirmed the narrative of her mistress, and recollected the circumstance of finding the wax candle in the tin box.

Jose', a black boy, declared that he carried the candle to Monsenhor Josd Augusto, who told him to give it to the sacristan.

A. ALEXANDER.

1 "Till soon," "Till to-morrow," "Till the return," &c., are the expressions generally used in Brazilian leave-taking. — A. A.

722 B. Dr. Binns, an author of some scientific repute in his day, gives the following narrative in his Anatomy of Sleep, p. 462, adding that " perhaps there is not a better authenticated case on record." It consists of a letter written, October 2ist, 1842, by the Rev. Charles M'Kay, a Catholic priest, to the Countess of Shrewsbury. The Earl of Shrewsbury sent on the letter to Dr. Binns. It is quoted by Dale Owen (Footfalls, p. 294). I abbreviate it here: —

In July, 1838, I left Edinburgh to take charge of the Perthshire missions. On my arrival in Perth I was called upon by a Presbyterian woman, Anne Simpson, who for more than a week had been in the utmost anxiety to see a priest. [This woman stated that a woman lately dead (date not given) named Maloy, slightly known to Anne Simpson, had " appeared to her during the night for several nights" urging her to go to the priest, who would pay a sum of money, three and tenpence, which the deceased owed to a person not specified.]

I made inquiry, and found that a woman of that name had died, who had acted as washerwoman and followed the regiment. Following up the inquiry I found a grocer with whom she had dealt, and on asking him if a female named Maloy owed him anything, he turned up his books, and told me she did owe him three and tenpence. I paid the sum. Subsequently the Presbyterian woman came to me, saying that she was no more troubled.

725 A. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 556. The account was received in 1882, from Captain G. F. Russell Colt, of Gartsherrie, Coatbridge, N.B.

I was at home for my holidays, and residing with my father and mother, not here, but at another old family place in Mid-Lothian, built by an ancestor in Mary Queen of Scots' time, called Inveresk House. My bedroom was a curious old room, long and narrow, with a window at one end of the room and a door at the other. My bed was on the right of the window, looking towards the door. I had a very dear brother (my eldest brother), Oliver, lieutenant in the 7th Royal Fusiliers. He was about nineteen years old, and had at that time been some months before Sebastopol. I corresponded frequently with him ; and once when he wrote in low spirits, not being well, I said in answer that he was to cheer up, but that if anything did happen to him, he must let me know by appearing to me in my room, where we had often as boys together sat at night and indulged in a surreptitious pipe and chat. This letter (I found subsequently) he received as he was starting to receive the Sacrament from a clergyman who has since related the fact to me. Having done this, he went to the entrenchments and never returned, as in a few hours afterwards the storming of the Redan commenced. He, on the captain of his company falling, took his place, and led his men bravely on. He had just led them within the walls, though already wounded in several places, when a bullet struck him on the right temple and he fell amongst heaps of others, where he was found in a sort of kneeling posture (being propped up by other dead bodies) thirty-six hours afterwards. His death took place, or rather he fell, though he may not have died immediately, on the 8th September 1855.

725 A] TO CHAPTER VII 349

That night I awoke suddenly, and saw facing the window of my room, by my bedside, surrounded by a light sort of phosphorescent mist, as it were, my brother kneeling. I tried to speak but could not. I buried my head in the bedclothes, not at all afraid (because we had all been brought up not to believe in ghosts or apparitions), but simply to collect my ideas, because I had not been thinking or dreaming of him, and, indeed, had forgotten all about what I had written to him a fortnight before. I decided that it must be fancy, and the moonlight playing on a towel, or something out of place. But on looking up, there he was again, looking lovingly, imploringly, and sadly at me. I tried again to speak, but found myself tongue-tied. I could not utter a sound. I sprang out of bed, glanced through the window, and saw that there was no moon, but it was very dark and raining hard, by the sound against the panes. I turned, and still saw poor Oliver. I shut my eyes, walked through it, and reached the door of the room. As I turned the handle, before leaving the room, I looked once more back. The apparition turned round his head slowly and again looked anxiously and lovingly at me, and I saw then for the first time a wound on the right temple with a red stream from it. His face was of a waxy pale tint, but transparent-looking, and so was the reddish mark. But it is almost impossible to describe his appearance. I only know I shall never forget it. I left the room and went into a friend's room, and lay on the sofa the rest of the night. I told him why. I told others in the house, but when I told my father, he ordered me not to repeat such nonsense, and especially not to let my mother know.

On the Monday following l he received a note from Sir Alexander Milne to say that the Redan was stormed, but no particulars. I told my friend to let me know if he saw the name among the killed and wounded before me. About a fortnight later he came to my bedroom in his mother's house in Athole Crescent, in Edinburgh, with a very grave face. I said, " I suppose it is to tell me the sad news I expect ; " and he said "Yes." Both the colonel of the regiment and one or two officers who saw the body confirmed the fact that the appearance was much according to my description, and the death-wound was exactly where I had seen it. But none could say whether he actually died at the moment. His appearance, if so, must have been some hours after death, as he appeared to me a few minutes after two in the morning. Months later, a small prayer-book and the letter I had 'written to him were returned to Inveresk, found in the inner breast pocket of his tunic which he wore at his death. I have them now.

The account in the London Gazette Extraordinary of September 22nd, 1855, shows that the storming of the Redan began shortly after noon on September 8th, and lasted upwards of an hour and a half. We learn from Russell's account that " the dead, the dying, and the uninjured were all lying in piles together " ; and it would seem that the search for the wounded was still continuing on the morning of the Qth. The exact time of Lieutenant Oliver Colt's death is uncertain.

Captain Colt mentioned several persons who could corroborate this

1 Communication with the Crimea was then conducted by telegraph for only part of the way.

narrative. We received the following letter from his sister, Mrs. Hope, of Fermoy : —

December \2th, 1882.

On the morning of September 8th, 1855, my brother, Mr. Colt, told myself, Captain Ferguson of the 42nd regiment, since dead, and Major Borthwick of the Rifle Brigade (who is living), and others, that he had during the night awakened from sleep and seen, as he thought, my eldest brother, Lieutenant Oliver Colt of the Royal Fusiliers (who was in the Crimea), standing between his bed and the door ; that he saw he was wounded in more than one place — I remember he named the temple as one place — by bullet-wounds ; that he aroused himself, rushed to the door with closed eyes and looked back at the apparition, which stood between him and the bed. My father enjoined silence, lest my mother should be made uneasy ; but shortly afterwards came the news of the fall of the Redan and my brother's death. Two years afterwards, my husband, Colonel Hope, invited my brother to dine with him ; the former being still a lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers, the latter an ensign in the Royal Welsh Fusiliers. While dining they were talking of my eldest brother. My husband was about to describe his appearance when found, when my brother described what he had seen, and to the astonishment of all present, the description of the wounds tallied with the facts. My husband was my eldest brother's greatest friend, and was among those who saw the body as soon as it was found.

It will be seen that this corroboration varies from the previous account in two points, which, however, do not greatly affect its value. The date was really September 9th, not the 8th — but it is very natural that the vision should have become associated with the memorable date, which was of course the 8th ; and the figure was kneeling, not standing.

727 A. The following case (quoted from Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. p. 216, foot-note) was received from the Rev. Arthur Bellamy, of Publow Vicarage, Bristol, in February 1886 ; but the particulars were first published in 1878.

When a girl at school my wife made an agreement with a fellow pupil, Miss W., that the one of them who died first should, if Divinely permitted, appear after her decease to the survivor. In 1874 my wife, who had not seen or heard anything of her former school-friend for some years, casually heard of her death. The news reminded her of her former agreement, and then, becoming nervous, she told me of it. I knew of my wife's compact, but I had never seen a photograph of her friend, or heard any description of her. [Mr. Bellamy told Gurney, in conversation, that his mind had not been in the least dwelling on the cpmpact.]

A night or two afterwards as I was sleeping with my wife, a fire brightly burning in the room and a candle alight, I suddenly awoke, and saw a lady sitting by the side of the bed where my wife was sleeping soundly. At once I sat up in the bed, and gazed so intently that even now I can recall her form and features. Had I the pencil and the brush of a Millais, I could transfer to canvas an exact likeness of the ghostly visitant. I remember that I was much struck, as I looked intently at her, with the careful arrangement of her coiffure, every single hair being most carefully brushed down. How long I sat and gazed I cannot say, but directly the apparition ceased to be, I got out of bed to

727B] TO CHAPTER VII 351

see if any of my wife's garments had by any means optically deluded me. I found nothing in the line of vision but a bare wall. Hallucination on my part I rejected as out of the question, and I doubted not that I had really seen an apparition. Returning to bed, I lay till my wife some hours after awoke and then I gave her an account of her friend's appearance. I described her colour, form, &c., all of which exactly tallied with my wife's recollection of Miss W. Finally I asked, " But was there any special point to strike one in her appearance ? " " Yes," my wife promptly replied ; " we girls used to tease her at school for devoting so much time to the arrangement of her hair." This was the very thing which I have said so much struck me. Such are the simple facts.

I will only add that till 1874 I had never seen an apparition, and that I have not seen one since. ARTHUR BELLAMY.

We have also seen an account written by Mrs. Bellamy in May 1879, which entirely agrees with the above, except that she " thinks it was a fortnight after the death " that the vision occurred, and that the light was " the dim light of a night-lamp." She says, " The description accorded in all points with my deceased friend." In conversation, Mr. Bellamy described the form as seen in a very clear light ; and this may account for his idea that the room itself was lighted by fire and candle. Gurney adds : —

This experience, as I have said, may have been purely subjective ; and identification of a person's appearance by mere description is generally to be regarded with great doubt. But in view of the circumstances, and especially of the fact that Mr. Bellamy has never had any other hallucination, two alternative hypotheses seem at least worth suggesting. (i) Believers in telepathic phantasms may suspect Mr. Bellamy's experience to have been conditioned by his wife's state of mind — possibly even by a dream, forgotten on waking, in which her friend figured. (2) Believers in the possibility of postmortem communications, if they believe that this was one of them, might further suppose that Mr. Bellamy's experience depended on a psychical influence exercised in the first instance on Mrs. Bellamy, though acting below the level of her normal consciousness. To me, I confess, this appears a more reasonable supposition than that a direct influence (so to speak) missed its mark, and was exercised on Mr. Bellamy by a stranger who cared nothing about him.

727 B. The following is another case which seems analogous to a deflected fulfilment of a compact, though we do not know that any compact to appear had been made, but only that the dying person had had a strong desire to see her niece before she died. The case is taken from the "Report on the Census of Hallucinations," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 263. The account, given by Miss S. Money, was written in 1890.

At Redhill on Thanksgiving Day, between eight and nine in the evening, when I was taking charge of the little daughter of a friend, during [my] friend's absence for that evening, I left the child sleeping in the bedroom, and went

to drop the blinds in two neighbouring rooms, being absent about three minutes. On returning to the child's room, in the full light of the gas-burner from above I distinctly saw, coming from the child's cot, a white figure, which figure turned, looked me full in the face, and passed down the staircase. I instantly followed, leaned over the banisters in astonishment, and saw the glistening of the white drapery as the figure passed down the staircase, through the lighted hall, and silently through the hall door itself, which was barred, chained, and locked. I felt for the moment perfectly staggered, went back to the bedroom, and found the child peacefully sleeping. I related the circumstance to the mother immediately on her return late that night. She was incredulous, but said that my description of the figure answered to that of an invalid aunt of the child's. The next morning came a telegram to say that this relative, who had greatly wished to see her niece, had died between eight and nine the previous evening.

I had just put down the Pickwick Papers with which I had been whiling the time, was free from trouble, and in good health.

No one was in the house but myself, the child, and one servant, who, at the time, was in the kitchen, dressed in black.

This is the only experience of this nature I have ever had.

P.S.— The writer cannot give the date in figures without reference to an almanac of that year, but is certain that this occurred on the evening of Thanksgiving Day for the recovery of the Prince of Wales [.., February 2;th, 1872.] S. MONEY.

In answer to our inquiries, the collector, Miss B. Garnett, writes :—

HIGHLANDS, CLARENDON ROAD, LEWISHAM, S.E., December 2Oth, 1890.

I obtained lately an interview with Miss Money, and wrote down her replies to the four questions enclosed. This was all the information she was able to give. I should state that Miss Money's rather interesting experience was told me long before I was asked to collect answers for the Society, and then merely was told by her in the course of conversation, when I had been expressing my scepticism about all so-called spiritual manifestations. She then said she had been utterly sceptical until she herself met with this experience.

The replies enclosed were : —

1. The child's mother died about ten or eleven years ago.

2. Miss Money did not even know of the existence of the aunt at the time of [her] experience.

3. Miss Money has scruples about giving the name without permission. She states that the aunt was a single woman, and a step-sister of the father of the child, and that the aunt was not living near.

4. As the lady (the aunt) was no acquaintance of Miss Money's, and as she heard no further details, she knows of no further way of proving the fact. Miss Money lost sight of the parents, having been abroad herself for many years afterwards.

Miss Garnett says further, in speaking of the original account, which was first given to her verbally by Miss Money, " It was clearly and repeatedly given, amid many critical suggestions on my part. I may add that Miss Money's testimony on any subject is one that I have always

728A] TO CHAPTER VII 353

found reliable. I merely add this because there are so many people who seem scarcely able to help exaggerating in the direction of the particular bias of their minds."

Mr. Podmore called on Miss Money on February 2nd, 1892, and heard full particulars of the incident from her. He further ascertained that no corroboration is now obtainable, and that Miss Money has failed to obtain permission to give the name of the lady who died. We have therefore been unable to verify the date of the death.

728 A. From the " Report on the Census of Hallucinations," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 383. " In the case we have next to quote " (say the writers of the "Report"), "unless we accept the hypothesis of chance-coincidence — the evidence for the agency of the dead is certainly strong, because any other explanation compatible with the veracity of the narrators requires a very complicated and improbable hypothesis as regards the sub-conscious action of Senhor Cabral's mind. The case came into our collection merely as a tactile hallucination : but the main interest of it depends on the coincident experience of Donna Feliciana Fortes. It seems doubtful from the account given whether she had a hallucinatory vision, or merely a mental vision, but for our present purpose this is unimportant."

From SENHOR ULYSSES J. C. CABRAL.

RUA ESCOBAR 48, Rio DE JANEIRO, March. i2th, 1892.

[After relating his first meeting in June 1886, with " Deolinda," a child whom he had found in great poverty and had taken charge of, and her death from consumption shortly afterwards, Senhor Cabral continues : — ]

Some months passed, and my family (which now included my wife's other sister, Amelia) went to stay at a plantation belonging to friends. I escorted them thither, and returned to attend to my obligations in the city. In order not to be alone, I accepted the invitation of my friend, Barboza de Andrade, and went to live with him in S. Christovam. One month afterwards, a sister of Barboza's, who was ill, came into his house. She grew daily worse, and after the lapse of a few months had sunk so low that we had to sit up with her at night.

One night, when I had taken my turn at nursing, I felt sleepy, and went to lie down. Two sisters, Donnas Anna Ignez Dias Fortes and Feliciana Dias (now deceased), took my place. I had made their acquaintance but a few days before. After stretching myself on the bed, I was rilled with a feeling of unbounded joy. I was happy, and could not imagine what was the cause of my happiness. I had a sensation as if some one were holding my head and placing something round it.

Astonished at my experience, I called to the ladies who were watching in the next room, and Donna Feliciana, though from the place where she was seated she could not see me, answered me back, " I see at your bedside a spirit child clothed in white. She places on your head a crown of roses. She says her name is Deolinda, and she comes to thank you for the kindness and charity with which you behaved to her." I was amazed at such a declaration, for that very day was the anniversary of Deolinda's death, and neither I nor

VOL. II. Z

any other person in the house had recollected this.1 Besides, I had never spoken on the subject.

The two ladies were worthy of the highest respect. As for Donna Anna Fortes, who is still alive, our friendship is now of long standing, and I render her all the homage which her virtue and goodness merit.

ULYSSES CABRAL, (Director of the " Atheneu Brazileiro ").

The following corroborative statements were obtained by Professor Alexander: —

Rio DE JANEIRO, March i6th, 1892.

The part of the above narrative which respects me is exact. I am sure that neither my sister nor I knew of the story of Deolinda before she was seen by the side of Senhor Ulysses Cabral on the night mentioned.

ANNA IGNEZ DIAS FORTES.

Rio DE JANEIRO, March \*jth, 1892.

The above narrative coincides with our recollection of what happened in our house.2 We are certain that our friend, Senhor Ulysses Cabral, told us the story of Deolinda only after the latter had been seen by Donna Feliciana Fortes. MANUEL JM. BARBOZA DE ANDRADE.

EMILIA BARBOZA DE ANDRADE.

Professor Alexander writes : —

Rio DE JANEIRO, March 17 'th, 1892.

In reply to further questions, Senhor Ulysses Cabral said the sensation on the head was that of a slight but distinct compression. He supposed at first that a towel had in some way wound itself round his head. He did not speak of this sensation to the ladies in the next room. The ecstatic feeling would not allow him to sleep when he lay down. It was on the night of the anniversary of the child's death, about twelve o'clock, that this occurred. Senhor Cabral believed that he had not spoken of Deolinda to the people of the house, and this is confirmed, if there are no lapses of memory, by the statements of the other persons concerned. He thought that the lustre of his deed of charity would be somewhat tarnished if told even to friends. Though at my request he has made the whole incident public, he does so, I am well assured, with the intention of helping us in a quest which he holds to be all-important. Both he and Donna Anna Fortes affirm that they came together in that house for the first time on that night, although they had met once or twice before at Spiritist sittings. The lady says they were conversing about Spiritism at the time of Senhor Cabral's experience.

Donna Feliciana Fortes, now dead, was a remarkable sensitive, according to the accounts I have received of her by surviving friends.

The witnesses to the above case are all Spiritists ; but they are people in whose veracity I can trust implicitly. ALFRED ALEXANDER.

"If" (say the writers of the " Report ") "we are to exclude Deolinda's agency here, we must suppose that Senhor Cabral was sub-consciously

1 Note by the collector, Professor Alexander : — " According to the other statements, no other person in the house knew anything about Deolinda. — A. A."

2 " They were sleeping at the time, and only heard of it the next day. — A. A."

728B] TO CHAPTER VII 355

aware that it was the anniversary of her death, and that this sub-conscious recollection produced by association the feeling of happiness and the tactile hallucination, without even then influencing his conscious memory ; and, further, that the other witnesses were affected by telepathic influence from his unconscious memory. This is certainly a highly strained hypothesis, and a few more well-evidenced cases of this sort would go far to establish the agency of the dead."

728 B. From the " Report on the Census of Hallucinations," Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 371. Mrs. B. writes as follows : —

April 1892.

At Fiesole, on March nth, 1869, 1 was giving my little children their dinner at half-past one o'clock. It was a fine hot day. As I was in the act of serving macaroni and milk from a high tureen, so that I had to stand to reach it, and give my attention to what I was doing — on raising my head (as much from fatigue as for any purpose), the wall opposite me seemed to open, and I saw my

mother lying dead on her bed in her little house at . Some flowers were

at her side and on her breast ; she looked calm, but unmistakably dead, and the coffin was there.

It was so real that I could scarcely believe that the wall was really brick and mortar, and not a transparent window — in fact, it was a wall dividing the hotel in which we were living from the Carabinieri.

I was in very weak health — suffering intensely with neuralgia — having gone through a bad confinement, brought on by travelling — the baby was almost still-born, on January 3ist.

Owing to a family quarrel, I had left England without telling my people where I was going ; but I was so fond of my mother that, when in Paris, I made an excuse to write to an old servant, who lived with my mother, to ask her for a toy which we had left with her, the object being to get news of my mother. Reply came that for years she had not been so well and strong ; thus I had no reason for imagining her to be dead.

I was so distressed at the vision that I wrote to her (my mother) to give her my address, and entreat her to let me know how she was. By return of post came the statement that she had died on March 5th, and was buried on the nth. At the hour I saw her she was removed from her home to Kensal Green Cemetery. She had wished to see me so much that letters had been sent to a great many continental cities, hoping I might be found ; but I never got a letter from my sister till long after I had received the news of my mother's death.

When I was married my mother made me promise as I was leaving home to be sure to let her know in any way God permitted if I died, and she would try to find some way of communicating to me the fact of her death, supposing that circumstances prevented the usual methods of writing or telegraphing. I considered the vision a fulfilment of this promise, for my mind was engrossed with my own grief and pain — the loss of baby, and my neuralgia, and the anxieties of starting a new life.

My youngest sister, since dead, was called to my mother, and left Devonshire, where she was staying with friends, to come home. When she arrived at home, she entered the drawing-room, but rushed out terrified, exclaiming that she had seen godmamma, who was seated by the fire in my mother's chair. Godmamma had been dead since 1852. She had been my mother's governess

— almost foster-mother ; had lived with her during her married life, been godmother to her eldest girl, and when my father died, had accepted the duty of taking his place as far as possible in the family, to shield her from trouble and protect her— a duty which she fulfilled nobly.

My other sister went into the drawing-room to see what had scared K ,

and saw the figure of godmamma just as K had. Later in the day the

same figure stood by, then sat on the edge of my mother's bed, and was seen by both my sisters and the old servant, looking just as she had when alive, except that she wore a grey dress, and, as far as we could remember, she had always worn black. My mother saw her, for she turned towards her and said, " Mary " — her name.

We have verified the date of death through the Register at Somerset House.

Mrs. B. has had several other hallucinatory experiences, e.g., in 1876, in an Italian church, she saw an apparition of a child, which had been pointed out to her by her little daughter, then aged three, but was invisible to a friend who accompanied her. It disappeared, and immediately afterwards the body of a dead child, resembling the figure they had seen, was brought into the church. The friend who was with Mrs. B. is now dead, so that no corroboration can be obtained, her daughter not being able to remember the incident. Most of Mrs. B.'s other experiences were, so far as can be ascertained, purely subjective.

Mr. Podmore, who visited Mr. and Mrs. B. on April 8th, 1893, writes : —

April loth, 1893.

Mrs. B. gave me a full account of her vision of her mother. She had absolutely no cause for anxiety, the last news being that her mother was better than she had been for years. There was a chronic ailment, but no reason to anticipate death soon. The children were too young to remember it, but Mr. B. told me that he came in a few minutes later and comforted his wife, whilst she was crying on the sofa. A written note of the date was taken and compared with the date given in the letter afterwards received, but all memoranda and letters of that time were lost. Both Mr. and Mrs. B. are satisfied of the coincidence of the vision with the day of the funeral.

731 A. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 173. The following case was sent to us by Mrs. Browne, of Bidston, Alleyn Road, West Dulwich. The first narrative is extracted from an account privately printed a few months after the events occurred.

HAYLETT HOUSE, SURBITON,T«/J/ 1891.

Newbray Hall was drowned off Start Point, Devon, during the great storm of March 9th, 1891, his vessel, the Marana, being one of the many which were lost at that spot.

He had had the offer of two or three vessels, including the Marana, and came home on the 28th February, to consider what he should do, and discussed the matter at considerable length on Tuesday evening, the 3rd March, with his father and Captain Byng, an old naval friend. The deceased slept at home on

731 A] TO CHAPTER VII 357

Wednesday and Friday, and stated that he would return to dinner on the Saturday, but he did not do so, and on Monday morning his mother received a letter from him stating that he had sailed the previous day in the Marana.

On Monday evening the storm took place, and on the Tuesday or Wednesday night following, Miss Annie Hall, aged twenty-seven, the sister of the deceased, dreamt that she saw her brother on a raft apparently composed of loose planks of wood, and he appeared to be swimming. On the same or subsequent nights she had other dreams, in which she saw her brother lying in a room, but she was unable to say whether alive or dead. This all took place before any news had been received of the loss of the Marana, and Miss Hall related her dreams immediately to Mrs. Syms, aged forty, who had lived with the family as cook for about ten years. On Friday night a telegram was received at Surbiton from the owners stating that the Marana had been wrecked, and on the Saturday morning Mr. Wood, who was in the employ of the deceased's father, went down to Devonshire, and having ascertained that the body of the deceased had been recovered, and was lying in a house at Prawle, South Devon, he identified it, and brought it to Brookwood for burial.

Matters remained in this position until the i6th June, when Mrs. Hall and her daughter went to the house at Prawle in which the body had been placed, and Miss Hall at once positively identified the room as the one she had seen in her dreams. Upon going to the spot also where the body had been found, a large number of railway sleepers were observed, which had been washed up from the wreck, and, as can be seen from a photograph, have very much the appearance of a raft such as that described in the first dream.

The sister's dreams, so far as can be ascertained, accurately represented the events which took place in connection with the death of her brother.

Miss Hall wrote to Mrs. Browne : —

BLENHEIM LODGE, SURBITON, /«/*/ 4//z, 1895.

My brother Newbray sailed on Sunday, March 8th, 1891, in the Marana, a small steamer, as he had to fill up six months before he could pass as captain • then he was going in the P. & O. I had no idea Newbray was going to sail so soon, but we were to meet him in London on Saturday, March 7th, but he didn't come. On Sunday mother had a letter to say they were sailing that morning and he couldn't get away. I wrote him a long letter on Monday [the] 9th, and in the afternoon went to see a girl friend in Kingston, but I felt so ill and depressed that I didn't stay very late. It was about 4.30 when I went into the market-place to take the omnibus home. When I was standing waiting, a fearful gust of wind and snow seemed to blow, especially round me, — that was about the time the ship struck, — though the storm was getting very bad indeed. Newbray and I were so devoted that I felt he was in some awful trouble. When I got home I gave up a concert I was going to, as I felt so ill and anxious. I didn't dream anything on the Monday, but on Tuesday I dreamt that I saw him on a raft made up of loose planks of wood, and he appeared to be swimming. On the same and following nights I had other dreams, and in one particular one I saw him lying on the floor in a room with a slanting roof ; he looked very still and white, but I couldn't tell if he were alive or dead. I could tell the room was in the country somewhere, as I could see it was whitewashed and they had red flowers in the windows. I told our old cook, Mrs. Syms, who had been with us ten years, when she came up with my tea. On Friday we got a

telegram to say the Marana was wrecked. On June i6th mother and I went to the house at Prawle where they had taken his poor body. As soon as I got in I went upstairs to the room, as I knew it at once from my dream, and pointed out to mother the spot where he lay. The woman in the house couldn't understand it, as I had never been there. My dream was accurate in every detail, even to the low long windows, and the most wonderful thing was that I dreamt the dream the night he was taken to the cottage. His body was found amongst railway sleepers that looked just the same as I saw them in my first dream, so in every respect my dreams represented accurately the events which took place in connection with my brother's death. I had never been to South Devon, and never heard of Prawle. He was twenty-five and I twenty-seven when he died. We were most devoted. ANNIE HALL.

The following note was written by the servant to whom Miss Hall related her dreams at the time : —

BLENHEIM LODGE, SURBITON.

Miss Hall told me about her dreams when I took her bedroom tea in before she was up. MARY SYMS.

Mrs. Hall writes : —

BLENHEIM LODGE, SURBITON,/«/J/ \zth.

I beg to say that my daughter, Annie Hall, described the room at Prawle to me before we visited the place, in fact so distinctly that on entering the room I was struck with the resemblance and turned to my daughter for confirmation.

E. O. HALL. Miss Hall writes further : —

BLENHEIM LODGE, SURBITON, July i2th, 1895.

The dreams were of conditions actually existing, just as it was happening to my brother Newbray, not prophetic. I have never had any other dreams in my life. And I can only conclude that I had these because my brother and I were so devoted.

See also a case given in the Journal S.P.R., vol. v. p. 239, where a man while boating sees in the water a vision of the soles of two stockinged feet, which he recognises as those of a friend. The friend is drowning three miles off at the time.

733 A. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 230. The following account was sent to Mr. Podmore, by Miss F. Atkinson, of 25 Aldershot Road, Willesden Lane, N.W., enclosed in a letter dated November 5th, 1893. Mr. Podmore had received a verbal account of the incident from Miss Atkinson on the previous day.

On Saturday, July ist, 1893, 1 was in L for the purpose of looking over

the old churches with a friend with whom I was staying. Among others we

went to St. M 's. My friend had been telling me of a very dear old friend

of the family who was buried in that church, and who had left a sum of money to have a window put in to his memory, and had even had the window prepared for the glass to be put in, but that the person who had inherited his fortune neglected his wish. (I don't know how many years he had been dead.)

733A] TO CHAPTER VII 359

After we had looked over the church, and among other things seen the brass over this gentleman's vault, we came to the window which ought to have been filled in. I remember that the neglect of his wish quite made me angry,

and I said, looking at the window, " If I was Dr. I should come back and

throw stones at it."

Just then I saw an old gentleman behind us, but thinking he was looking over the church took no notice. But my friend got very white and said, " Come

away, there is Dr. ! " Not being a believer in apparitions, I simply for the

moment thought she was crazy, though I knew they were a ghost-seeing family. But, when I moved, still looking at him, and the figure before my very eyes vanished, I had to give in. Then it dawned upon me that nobody could have been looking over the church but ourselves.

First, the church had been empty when we went in, and nobody could have come in without their footsteps being heard, and secondly, the part where we were standing ended in a " cul de sac" and the person to get there would have been obliged to ask us to move, as we entirely blocked up the narrow aisle. For the few moments he was visible I saw him distinctly ; he was short and broad, and wore an old-fashioned tie, and a waistcoat cut low and showing a great deal of shirt-front. One hand was resting on a pew, and one down at his side holding his very tall hat. But the thing that struck me most was the sun shining on his white hair, and making it look like silver ; even now I can see him distinctly in my mind's eye. It certainly surprised me to see what was apparently " too solid flesh " disappear before my very eyes, and when we got outside my friend told me that his was the figure which came to different members of their family so often, and, indeed, had been the cause of their leaving one house. One of her sisters had been so affected by it, that she will never sleep alone, or go upstairs alone. When we got home I easily recognised the doctor by his photograph. F. ATKINSON.

In reply to Mr. Podmore's further inquiries, Miss Atkinson writes : —

25 ALDERSHOT ROAD, WILLESDEN LANE, N.W., November tyk, 1893.

I have not heard from Miss yet, but am writing to answer your

questions.

No. i. I heard no noise whatever, not the slightest sound. But I had a feeling that I cannot describe that somebody was behind us. So I turned round.

No. 2. As far as I can now remember we both turned at precisely the same moment. My friend naturally recognised him. I did not think anything of it, until I saw her face when I turned back again to look at the window.

No. 3. Long before we went into L , my friend told me they had

been haunted to a dreadful extent at their old house. But beyond saying that it was a man and an old friend of her mother's, [she] did not describe it, and I did not [pay any attention to it] — knowing them to be a highly nervous, hysterical family. We otherwise never talked about it, as she can't bear the

subject. Afterwards she told me it was Dr. , the figure we saw in the

church, who haunted them.

No. 4. The photograph was in a frame and Mrs. said : " Was it anything like this ? " And it was exactly like the figure. I forgot to tell you that afterwards my friend told me that on going into the church she had felt as though she could not go in, as if something was there, but did not like to

3<5o APPENDICES [733 B

say so to me, as she knew I very much wished to go over it. She also thought it might frighten me.

My only other experience was when I was a baby of about two or three, when my little brother, who died, came to my mother, and then to me : I don't remember it, but my mother says I cried out that he had come back again, and she herself had just seen him. F. ATKINSON.

Miss Atkinson asked her friend to give an account of her share in the experience, but she declined to do so, alleging as a reason her strong dislike of the whole subject. We have, therefore, been unable to obtain any further evidence in the matter.

733 B. The next case is remarkable for the frequent repetition of the percipient's experience. It is one of those that suggest, as we have said (see 703 and 733), a kind of local imprint left by past events, and perceptible at times to persons endowed with some special form of sensitiveness. I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 418, the account, given by Mr. D. M. Tyre, 157 St. Andrew's Road, Pollokshields, Glasgow.

October $th, 1885.

In the summer of 1874 mv sister and I went during our holidays to stay with a gardener and his wife in a house which was built far up, fully threequarters of a mile, on the face of a hill overlooking one of the most beautiful lochs in Dumbartonshire, just on the boundary of the Highlands. A charming spot indeed, although far off the main roadway. We never wearied, and so delighted were we with the place that my people took a lease of the house for the following three years. From this point my narrative begins. Being connected in business with the city, we could not get down to Glen M. all together, so that my two sisters and myself were sent away early in May to have the house put in order and attend to the garden, &c. &c., for the coming holidays, when we would be all down together. We had lots of work to do, and as the nearest village was five miles distant, and our nearest neighbours, the people at the shore, nearly a mile away, we were pretty quiet on the hill and left to our own resources.

One day my elder sister J. required to go to the village for something or other, leaving us alone ; and as the afternoon came on I went part of the way to meet her, leaving my other sister L. all alone. When we returned, about 6 P.M., we found L. down the hill to meet us in a rather excited state, saying that an old woman had taken up her quarters in the kitchen and was lying in the bed. We asked if she knew who she was. She said no, that the old wife was lying on the bed with her clothes on, and that possibly she was a tinker body (a gipsy), therefore she was afraid to go in without us. We went up to the house with L. ; my younger sister L. going in first said, on going into the kitchen, " There she is," pointing to the bed, and turning to us expecting that we would wake her up and ask what she was there for. I looked in the bed and so did my elder sister, but the clothes were flat and unruffled, and when we said that there was nothing there she was quite surprised, and pointing with her finger, said, " Look, why there's the old wife with her clothes on and lying with her head towards the window ; " but we could not see anything. Then for the first time it seemed to dawn upon her that she was seeing some-

733B] TO CHAPTER VII 361

