And it may here be observed that, just as in the phenomena which looked the most crude and massive we seemed to discern on closer scrutiny an element of molecular guidance, so also even in phenomena on a physically small scale, like these directly-written signatures, we have constantly to face the question — Has matter been rearranged in the room itself? — e.g. disaggregated and reaggregated into what seems like green chalk when there was no green chalk in the room before ? Or has it, on the other hand, been brought from outside the room by "passage of matter through matter," as the phrase goes? In reality I think that we have not knowledge enough to make a broad distinction between seemingly different operations of this transcendental kind. D. D. Home's guides denied the possibility of the passage of matter through matter ; but Sir William Crookes has narrated how in Home's presence a thick stalk passed uninjured through a chink in the table, through which no human power could thus have pushed it. Again, when, as quoted a few pages above, Home's guides withdrew the brandy from the brandyand-water, was not that a passage of the material alcohol through the material water? To suppose that the special form of cohesion which we call solidity is alone insuperable by such powers as these does not seem to me a specially plausible view. Even in our own world we could

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 537

hardly have guessed, a priori, that a bullet would sink, or a floating cork rise through apparently solid cold pitch by the slow force of gravity forcing asunder the tenacious mass, or that a copper wire could be passed insensibly through a block of ice by melting and regelation. Or let me, on the other hand, suppose a man who had never seen anything but explosions of dynamite. To him it would seem easy to shatter rocks with gases, but almost impossible to lift or pierce the vast superincumbent weight of air. We should have to explain to him that it was really easier to shoot through air than through rock, if you only propelled your rifle bullet slowly enough to allow the air to get out of the way. Or to get matter through matter may be like the puzzles which consist in getting linked rings through linked rings; there is plenty of space if you can only circumvent the attachments. I do not think then that we need either postulate a fourth dimension to explain Mr. Moses' apports, or even adopt the more anthropomorphic conception that they were taken up one chimney and down another. At the same time, there are few of the incidents recorded which this last supposition might not be pressed to cover.

(c) Control over Etherial Manifestations : with Possible Effects in the Domains of Light, Electricity, Gravitation, and Cohesion. — Our next topic, could we deal with it with fuller knowledge, must needs be one of far-reaching significance. The influence of spiritual control upon etherial phenomena, if once understood, might bring us nearer than any other line of inquiry to a comprehension of the mode of interpenetration of the metetherial world with our own. Unfortunately, while our observed facts are rare and difficult, the explanations professing to come from the other side are far from clear. It is sometimes said, for example, that raps —the percussive sounds which occur so frequently in all series of these psycho-physical phenomena — are of electrical origin. But no attempt is made to work this out, and in themselves the raps suggest rather a suspension and re-establishment of the force of cohesion than any form of electric discharge. Again, the alteration of the weights of objects, frequently recorded both with D. D. Home and with Mr. Moses, may conceivably be the manifestation of some control over gravitation, otherwise than by the opposition of another force, such as living men can apply; but no information, so far as I know, has been offered on this point.

The only etherial phenomenon of which, as spiritually controlled, we have clear and frequent instances is light. And this indeed is offered to us in many forms, and needs our careful study. We must needs begin by an enumeration of the known sources of terrestrial light, to some of the less familiar, among which we shall, if I mistake not, trace a certain affinity in some of the luminous phenomena recorded.

Light, as we know, is a term somewhat vaguely given to two pheno-

mena habitually concurrent, but essentially distinct ; namely, to a certain type of etherial undulation, and to a certain sensation experienced by such animated beings as possess visual organs, and evoked as a rule by the aforesaid type of undulation.

Let us take first objective light, as it is called, or the light- waves themselves, and consider the various sources from which they are derived. They may be generated by special forms of etherial disturbance, or they may be originated by molecular or by vital activity. Without aiming at a precision of phraseology not here essential, let us take light in relation to the worlds of matter, ether, and life, in the order in which we have touched upon those worlds in previous discussions.

(L. i.) LIGHT ACCOMPANYING INANIMATE MOLECULAR MOTION.

(a.) — Incandescence. When matter is raised to a certain temperature, as by arrest of motion, chemical action, combustion following minute subdivision, &c., light-waves are generated, among waves of many other amplitudes.

(/?.) — Phosphorescence. Phosphorus and some of its compounds during the process of slow oxidation emit light-waves either solely, or at least in far greater proportion to heat-waves than is the case in ordinary oxidation, which is generally non-luminous until it gives rise to incandescence. To this head belongs the phosphorescence of decaying matter, when not due to luminous microbes.

(y.) — Luminescence and Fluorescence. Many bodies after insolation, or after exposure to dim light, or sometimes even to ultra-violet rays, (perhaps all bodies if their temperature is sufficiently reduced), have the power of re-radiating a part of the incident energy in the form of light. Some so-called phosphorescences due to heat (short of incandescence) , to cleavage, to crystallisation, &c., probably fall under this category, for which one may propose the name of luminescence, since there is a practical inconvenience in extending the term phosphorescence to phenomena in whiqh phosphorus is not concerned.

(L. 2.) — LIGHT ACCOMPANYING SPECIAL FORMS OF ETHERIAL DISTURBANCE.

I introduce this heading rather for the sake of completeness, than as venturing to affirm that light could accompany electric or magnetic oscillations in a hypothetical absence of matter. If a magnetic field has really been seen as luminous, it is perhaps here that such a phenomenon should be placed.

(L. 3.) — LIGHT ACCOMPANYING VITAL ACTION.

(a.) — Vital Secretory Phosphorescence. Under secretory phosphorescence I include all cases where animal luminosity appears due to the

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 539

secretion by the animal of a substance capable of emitting light, presumably (though not certainly) due to slow oxidation. The glow-worm (Lampyris noctiluca) and the firefly (Elater noctilucus) are the stock examples of this. It is an interesting but uncertain question how far the light of these and other luminous animals is under their own control. Professor Herdman, F.R.S., kindly writing to me on the subject of animal luminosity, says : — " In many cases there is probably a connection with the nervous system {e.g., Nyctiphanes and other Schizopoda), and the luminosity is the result of a reflex, if not of a voluntary action ; and so possibly might be regarded as a direct transmutation of nerve energy into an ethereal disturbance visible as light."

In many species, however, the luminous substance retains luminosity after the death of the animal.

(/?.) — Excretory Phosphorescence. Under this term I include the various forms of elimination of phosphorescent matter, as a waste product from the system. This last phenomenon, as will be seen, is of much importance for our present purpose. It is at present the only unquestioned form of emission of light from the human subject. It is well known that in phthisis, cancer, and other diseases where much phosphorus has been administered by the mouth, the breath, the perspiration, and other excretions and secretions, are frequently observed to be slightly luminous. The perspiration in subjects of miliaria is also said to be sometimes luminous, although the phosphorus thus excreted must come from the ordinary stock contained in the body.1

(y.) — Vital Luminescence. Some experiments cited by Dr. T. L. Phipson, whose little work on Phosphorescence (1870) is still the best collection known to me of the rarer phenomena, suggest to him that the light emitted by a mushroom (Agaricus olearius), and perhaps that emitted by a centipede (Scolopendra Electrica), and a firefly (Lampyris italica), may be a luminescent phenomenon, and depend at least partially on previous absorption of light. There seems no a priori reason against this view, which, if proved true for these organisms, would probably apply to others as well.

(8.) — Vital Fulguration. Certain phanerogamous plants have occasionally been seen to emit positive flashes of light. The daughter of Linnaeus had the good fortune to make the first and classical observation on the garden nasturtium in 1762, and the phenomenon has since been witnessed in sunflowers, marigolds, and orange lilies by other observers. This light appears to be truly electric, and not to be merely the result of a current passing through the organism (as when a man lights the gas with his fingers), but to imply a generation of electricity within the organism itself.

The diffused electric luminosity, which has sometimes been seen (as by Dr. Kane, the explorer, cited by Phipson, p. 1 6 1 ) to illuminate the human skin, may be in some sense a vital phenomenon, or may be due 1 See (for instance) Diseases of the Skin, by Dr. H. Radcliffe Crocker (1888), p. i6o,&c.

to friction ; but in any case belongs rather to the surface of the skin itself than to the vital processes going on underneath.

(e.) — Vital Photogeny. By this name I designate the direct production of light by living organisms, as a result or bye-product of their own metabolism. Such, I cannot but think, is the explanation of the widespread luminosity of low marine forms, especially when transparent : — a source of light, in comparison with which the greasy organs of glow-worm and firefly sink into insignificance. Noctiluca miliaris, to take one species alone, " offers," in the lofty language of Humboldt, " the magnificent spectacle of a starry firmament reflected in the sea." On these primitive forms Professor Herdman writes : " It is in these cases of simple, undifferentiated protoplasm that I fancy the luminosity might be an exaggeration of some necessary accompaniment of metabolism, or practically of life, i.e. of the functions of the living protoplasm. It would then be a katabolic action or molecular disturbance which might be supposed to affect the surrounding ether so as to produce light. We might imagine that this katabolic action goes on always in living protoplasm, but so slightly as not to produce visible light, while in some cases (cells, tissues, or organisms) it has become emphasised, and then ; seized upon ' by natural selection as serving some useful purpose (which may be a very different purpose in different cases), and so perfected." " This," adds Professor Herdman, " is speculation," and it is only as such that I venture to print it here. As will be presently seen, it is precisely the conclusion to which observations of a very different kind had already pointed me.

A few words only need be added here as to subjective or phantasmal luminosity. The immediate link between objective and subjective light may be said to be the intra-cerebral flash, seen when the optic nerve is pressed or cut, or the brain concussed.

Then come the whole series of illuminated phantasms ; either simply phantasmal lights, diffused or definite, or figures seen in darkness, or otherwise more highly illuminated than the objects around them. All these sensations of light, like other phantasms, are prima facie subjective; but as with other phantasms, we have the difficulty of collective hallucinations, and the gradual merging of these phantasms into the physical phenomena with which I am here dealing.

Turning back to the luminous phenomena recorded in Mr. Moses* stances, have we now any clue as to the mechanism of their production,, or as to the headings in our scheme of luminosities under which they most fitly fall ? I will at once say, that at least two of the less familiar of these headings do appear to me to be applicable to lights produced under spirit control. I mean Excretory Phosphorescence and Vital Photogeny.

Excretory Phosphorescence undet Spirit Control. — I have already noted, under subliminal phenomena (II. 3. r.), the luminous appearance of Mr. Moses' hands, which he records as persisting after a stance. We

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 541

have also seen reason to suppose that the emanation of scent from Mr. Moses' head was a form of hyperidrosis purposely modified by spirit control. May not the appearance of his hands also have been due to the phosphorescent perspiration of which we have just heard as a symptom after much phosphorus has been taken into the system? The "guides" themselves alleged that many of the lights depended upon phosphorus extracted from the medium's organism. May not the glow on the hands represent an after-effect of this extraction? The sweat glands are, as we know, readily responsive in common life to psychical stimuli, and Dr. Milne Bramwell has found that hyperidroses which have obstinately resisted medication will sometimes yield at once to hypnotic suggestion. We have often observed that supernormal agencies are wont to follow as closely as possible processes familiar to the organisation, whether in health or in disease.

Nor was this glow confined to the hands alone. A kind of luminous cloud, which might be due either to breath or to some subtle cutaneous transpiration, was often observed round Mr. Moses' head and shoulders at seances. And on one marked occasion the phosphoric smoke was dense enough seriously to alarm Mr. Moses himself and Dr. Speer.

The luminosities which we have thus far been discussing have been of the apparent nature of cloudy emanations from the medium or similar collections of cloudy light in his near vicinity. Or if they have shown a tendency to concentration, it has been in the form of " spirit-lights," or apparently solid receptacles of quasi-phosphoric brightness — brightness, however, so steady and permanent as, by Sir William Crookes' own account, to have baffled his skill in imitation.1 Their general appearance has been not inconsistent with the proffered explanation — that they are made from phosphorus extracted from the medium, and perhaps from other members of the circle, and mingled or prepared in some manner beyond our earthly skill.

Vital Photogeny under Spiritual Control. — But we have next to deal with a class of lights whose nature and behaviour seem markedly different. These are lights which are not widely diffused but small and more or less definite, and which concentrate not into solid inert masses, but into hands. Of this ectoplastic formation of hands we must speak in the next section. For the moment I will only point out that these lights seem to be a directly vital phenomenon.

It is, perhaps, " this muddy vesture of decay " which hides from us in common life the glow which is an inseparable attribute of that life itself; and the radiance which at the outset of evolution the ocean-organisms attain in their primitive simplicity is achieved once more when intermediate stages have been passed through, and life and matter are manipulated with the freedom and mastery of the spirit-world.

I trust that as our knowledge increases there may prove to be some

1 Crookes' Researches in Spiritualism, p. 91.

usefulness, some reality, in the analogies between normal and supernormal modes of light-production on which I have here dwelt — but I am far from supposing that these analogies cover the whole ground. On the contrary, we see throughout these luminous phenomena a constant tendency towards a transition from objective to subjective light — from the luminosity of excreted phosphorus, or of vital metabolism, to light "which never was on sea or land," and whose discernment seems no longer to depend on earthly vision, nor its source to be akin to any earthly glow. We are introduced, as discussion under a future heading will show, to a metetherial, which is also a luminous state of being — to spirits who are independent of our earthly sources of brightness, solemquc suum, sua sidera norunt. If we endeavour to class their fulgent aspect among the headings which our scheme has offered, we should have to speak, I suppose, of metetherial luminescence, and to assume that they reradiate the incident energy of some supernal world.

Here it is plain that all attempt at terrestrial analogy must cease ; and in passing from the discussion of spirit-control over matter and ether to spirit-control over life itself, it seems fitting to remind the reader in clearest terms that no analogies can here be more than suggestive ; that no exaltation or sublimation of forces already familiar will really explain the modus operandi of these intimate dealings with seen and unseen things. Even though known laws be at work they must be working in subjection to laws unknown. For the very assumption of a metetherial world, as natural and as uniform as our own, implies that our widest material generalisations can be no more than formulae for special cases — deducible from laws still more fundamental, which must hold good whether matter and ether exist or no. Our world of matter is but a flocculence held in critical suspension, which a touch may dissolve or a touch precipitate. We cannot distinguish among metetherial energies ; we can but say that " psychic force," — if that be the least question-begging title that we can find for those energies as they affect mankind, — can form no true part of any mechanical synthesis of the universe which our science knows, and thus if we are asked if psychic force implies any disturbance of our law of the conservation of energy, we must reply that we have no reason to suppose that it does so ; but that even this question can scarcely be so expressed as to be capable of definite answer. If life be regarded, as for example, by Prof. Lodge * as merely a " directive and guiding force exercised upon matter," and " not affecting the amount of energy in the slightest degree " ; then a like predication may be made as to the manifestations of psychic force, — all of them ultimately vital in character, — which we here encounter. But at the same time it is conceivable that energy might be so defined as to show that the production of these phenomena requires the expenditure, in a metetherial world, of some form of energy akin to the so-called " willpower " which we at least appear to ourselves to exercise here on earth,

1 Nature, vol. xliv. p. 292.

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 543

although its true nature, or even its actual existence, is matter of controversy.

It is to " will-power " that the communicating spirits themselves ascribe their achievements ; to some mode of operation quite unexplained, — but even more direct, more fundamental than those imagined molecular powers which I cited to show how men who believed that no " demon " existed found it necessary to invent one.

(4) ACTION ON THE INCARNATION OF LIFE ON THE PLANET.

(a) Pre- conceptual Suggestion or Self -Suggestion. — And if this has been already perceived in tracing spirit-influence on the material and etherial worlds, much more will it be manifest when we come to our next heading, —the influence, namely, of spirits upon the incarnation of life; upon its derivation from its unknown reservoir and its distribution into organic matter upon this planet. What have we noted thus far as to human influence on the incarnation of life, — either under supraliminal or subliminal guidance ?

Under supraliminal control we find life incarnated for the most part with no conscious forethought, and when incarnated following certain laws of heredity apparently determined by terrene conditions in the remote past. And when we do set ourselves to influence the processes of incarnation our results appear slight and external. We can perpetuate some spontaneous variation ; we can select parents ; we can surround with helpful conditions the new-born offspring. But in our attempts at " eugenics " in the higher races — in the human race, — we tinker from without, we cannot mould from within.

And yet, if we stoop low enough, we can mould life more profoundly than we have yet realised. Let us go down to the very dust or spray of animated being, to that myriad life which even on this planet is in a true sense interpenetrant with our own, and we find the multitude of species as flexible beneath our rapid hands as our own ancestors have been beneath the slow choice of Nature and from the dawn of planetary time. Let us get beneath the line of definite birth, among the protean forms of " protoplasmic rejuvenescence," and we can alter almost every apparent character of the micro-organism, — inward to the very mode of reproduction itself. The smaller the parcels in which life descends into generation, the more modifiable is it in the terrene laboratory; the cell is waiting for its cue, and a day of our treatment is for it as a thousand years.

Under subliminal control, on the other hand, it is with the highest creature that we must begin. If we wish not to manipulate from without, but to suggest from within, we must approach the strongly centralised organism through " the ruling part " — TO ^ye/xovt/coV — its legitimate and subliminal king.

And in which direction then do we find that the disembodied spirit claims to extend his control over incarnate being? He sometimes claims

in the first place, — and it is a claim which we can neither confirm nor refute, — that he can push back pre-natal into pre-conceptual suggestion, and can so influence men and women already on earth, that they will give opportunity for the incarnation of some waiting spirit, who through such special access only can enter on the material world. And he claims too, with Plato, interpreter to men of the spiritual world, — that, as by a preconceptual self-suggestion, the descending spirit may choose and determine its earthly lot, somewhat as in the hypnotic trance a man may choose and suggest to himself the sensations and actions of subsequent waking hours. This may not mean more than that, in some few rare cases, a pre-existing spirit may have left the spiritual world to become a " missionary " to our planet.

(b) Ectoplasy or Materialisation; Temporary Extradition or Concentration of Vital Energy. — But, leaving such speculations to derive elsewhere from cases of precognition what support they may, we must pass on to a spiritual influence on incarnation to which some records have actually testified, an influence which in a sense combines the supralirninal and subliminal types. For it implies a command of the central authority so complete as to admit with safety of extreme, though transitory, decentralisations; — of a manipulation of component parts of complex organisms freer than any with which we ourselves have influenced the attractions, the division, the rejuvenescence, of a simple and independent cell.

But first let us consider the different ways in which the material organisms of our planet may be regarded according as they are seen from a material or from a metetherial standpoint.

To our ordinary view each of the higher organisms appears a definitely coherent mass of matter, from which no important part can be separated or withdrawn without injury. There is nothing to prove to us that the life which animates each organism can exist separately from the organism. One organism can communicate with another only through certain definite channels ; and each organism must run its separate course from birth to decay.

When, however, some glimpse of the subliminal working of these organisms has been attained, our relative conception of organism and informing spirit rapidly changes. We have now to recognise an informing life which, even if not yet proved capable of permanent existence apart from the body, does nevertheless act within the body as though with a separate initiative, controlling and modifying the organism in other than purely physiological ways. We find, moreover, that each individual organism is not so completely a closed system as at first appeared. Telepathic influences pass from one to another; and sometimes the spirit seems in some sense to leave the body, on some clairvoyant excursion, or when death is imminent, and to return to it again as though to a tabernacle from which it is itself detachable and distinct.

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 545

And now imagine the disembodied spirit as he regards this solid planet and the organisms which inhabit it. To him the metetherial world is clear and real ; the material world is unstable, shadowy, chaotic. Definite and permanent he sees the spirits that are lodged therein ; arresting each some transitory group out of the hurricane of molecules by a cogency that is all its own. The organism for him is the mere cloud of matter through which the spirit works ; its apparent periphery is no real boundary-wall. He sees one incarnate spirit telergically affecting another incarnate spirit's brain ; and to him that extra-peripheral, ultra-organic influence is the natural, the inevitable mode of communion.

He finds himself able to influence some of these organisms ; to rule them as their own indwelling spirit rules them, only with more knowledge of the possibilities of such control. He knows, let us say, the very way in which unbegotten life descended into generation ; he can see beyond the narrow portal of the omne vivum ex ovo ; behind the first quiver of the first slime-speck — the princeps limus — which entangled in carbon-compounds the Promethean fire. And thus he can push the vital force through and past the illusory integument ; he can act — with more or less of apparent likeness to fleshly, to organic action — upon external matter which the medium's ignorantly-guided body could not, without such training, have contrived to reach.

This is the phenomenon which (using a term adapted for the purpose by Professor Ochorowicz) I shall here call ectoplasy — the power of forming, outside some special organism, a collection or reservoir of vital force or of vitalised matter, which may or may not be visible, may or may not be tangible, but which operates in like fashion as the visible and tangible body from whence it is drawn.

Nay, more. To the disembodied spirit the organisms which he sees accreted about his incarnate fellows are no isolated, encapsuled things. The identity, the unbridgeable separation is for him — if it is anywhere — in the spirit-world. These protoplasmic clouds can mix, in his view, as easily as the tails of comets; or say as though from the tidal afflux of half-colliding vaporous suns some glowing prominence shot forth, to fall back presently, again divided, and a part attracted into each parent mass. Only by some such metaphor, perhaps, can we picture the spirit's next achievement, and the fusion of portions of the vital force of several persons into an agency which he wields in independence of them all ; " drawing power," as the phrase goes, from the circle as well as from the medium, and accomplishing mechanical work by the aid of their bodies, but at a distance from each.

All the energy that he exerts, then, is vital energy ; it is drawn from the organisms of the persons present, even when the effect achieved (as the production of a cold wind) is unlike the effects to which living organisms commonly give rise. But, for the most part, the effects which he produces do resemble the organism's natural action ; and hence, indeed, the VOL. n. 2 M

objections of triviality and uselessness largely arise. The " telekinetic movements " (to use Mr. Aksakoff's term) which it is easiest to produce seem to differ from movements which the medium himself could have made only by starting from a point in space at some little distance outside his apparent periphery. The movements are interesting, not as spectacles in themselves, but as indications that life can act at some distance from a living organism ; just as the movement of a half-drowned man's finger is interesting to the friend who knows not whether there still be life in that organism at all. -

The condition of the medium from whom this vital force is being drawn seems to vary from complete tranquillity to extreme agitation, according to the ease or difficulty of the process. With Mr. Moses there were sometimes agitated movements during some difficult manifestation (as the giving of minute direct writing) ; but generally he was tranquilly entranced, with his arms resting on the table in front of him.

Let us now survey the various grades of these ectoplastic phenomena.

We will begin with the phenomena which keep closest to the medium's person, and in that sense prepare the way for the production of visible hands, &c., acting at a distance of some feet.

(a) And first I may mention a mode of dealing with the medium's body which involves no actual extradition of any part of its substance, but which, nevertheless, seems to imply a molecular manipulation (so to say) of its soft tissues. I refer to the elongations noticed with Mr. D. D. Home. In these cases — if, provisionally, they can be contemplated as actual objective occurrences — the intercostal regions seemed to be the especial seat of the extension, which is described as rapid and painless, although sometimes followed by vomiting.

(/3) Another and apparently more developed form of prolongation has been observed with Mr. Moses. These are phantom arms and hands, reproducing the arms of the medium, coat-sleeves, shirt-cuffs, and all ; and extended generally from the shoulder, straight out, and above the true arms. These supplemetnary or " counterpartal" arms (suspicious objects enough, until observed under good conditions) seem never to have been actually touched, but are swiftly retracted into the medium, or simply vanish, if an attempt is made to grasp them. Nevertheless, the hands in which they terminate do appear to move objects.

Odd and unexpected as these phantasmal arms are, they are instructive in more than one respect. In the first place they supply in a certain way a missing link between mere phantasms and ectoplastic phenomena. We know that as a rule phantasmal appearances exert no objective effect upon the material world ;— and we know also that to this rule there seem to be some few exceptions. It is through these shadowy, yet materially active, prolongations, — collective hallucinations which yet can affect the solid world,— that the line of continuity, if such there be, between purely sub-

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 547

jective phantasm and firmly materialised hand or body may have to be drawn.

In the second place, these reproduced coat-sleeves stand apparently midway between two phenomena not obviously allied ; — viz., the appearance of dying persons as though draped in their habitual clothing, — and the greater facility (attested by Mr. Moses' guides) of manufacturing a duplicate of some object already existing on earth, rather than a new and original object of their own devising.

Perhaps we may link the two by saying that everything which is not a purely earthy phenomenon must be for us mortals to some extent symbolical; and that the simplest form of symbolism depends on mere reminiscence; that thus the line of least resistance for the psychic force or telergic impulse leads to the upbuilding of the ectoplastic fabric upon the basis of thoughts and images which are already fashioned and stored in the human spirit.

(y) In the classes of ectoplasms already enumerated, there has been at least an apparent continuous connection with the body of the sensitive ; — although, in the last-mentioned case especially, that connection is of a very shadowy kind.

We now come to ectoplasms without apparent connection with the organism from which we still must suppose them to be in some way derived. Two incomplete forms of such isolated ectoplasm first present themselves ; the one manifesting, so to say, definition without visibility ; the other, visibility without definition.

As examples of a certain amount of definition without visibility, I take touches and imprints. Slight but unmistakable touches are often observed even when the ectoplastic process never gets any further, nor is identified with any one spirit. Imprints are more rarely recorded.

(8) A commoner way in which the detached ectoplasm begins its development is with an appearance of cloud, or light, or luminous mist, surrounding some object which is presently moved, — the stem of a flower broken, or a bell carried about the room. Such appearances, already mentioned under the heading of vital photogeny, are frequently recorded both with D. D. Home and with Mr. Moses. Their connection with ectoplasms is shown by the fact that sometimes some of those present have perceived a hand, while others have seen only a cloud or a light ; and sometimes all present have seen the cloud or light change into a hand. The hand seems to oscillate about the limits of definite visibility, like vapour which in a changing temperature condenses and re-expands.

Two short passages (quoted from Mr. Moses' note-books) will illustrate this semi-materialisation.

Q. The beads that came in the light seemed to be projected from behind me ; in the dark they seemed to fall.

A. " It is necessary to use the force or power emanating from your body more carefully in light. It is far more difficult to regulate it. The objects

were thrown near you gently. At other times they were allowed to fall as might chance."

Q. One seemed to come out of the letter I was handing to Mrs. G.

A. " No, but the movement of your hand threw off force, as in darkness you may see luminous vapour proceeding from the fingers. The force is given off at the fingers and head most, hence objects are brought or moved more readily near your head or hands. Hence the movement of objects over your head and the production of the scent. Hence, too, rubbing the hands is useful, and placing the fingers on the table charges the wood. So when you moved your hand it gave the opportunity which was used."

Q. That scent from my head is very curious. Is it put on, or drawn out ?

A. " Drawn out, but I cannot tell you of that."

Monday, March 2$rd, 1874.

Q. Can I have any information about that extraordinary writing?

(We held a stance last night at which some very minute direct writing was given by Doctor and Prudens.)

A. " It was done with great pains and care as an experiment. We can do more than that."

Q. It is the most curious piece I ever saw. Who wrote it ?

A. " The spirits who signed, aided by many others. We were assisted last night by a powerful band who were able to overcome unfavourable conditions. We have said before that no such manifestation is ever done by us alone, but by many assistants."

Q. The writing is so minute and clear.

A. *' We could do more minute writing and will endeavour so to do. Much power was used in endeavouring to complete the manifestation with care. To that reason is due the physical contortion which attends the manifestation. It is more difficult to write with minute care. We will show you what we can do one day."

Q. Doctor and Prudens were the actual amanuenses ?

A. " Yes, they actually wrote, as you would see from the character of the writing. It is always so."

Q. I thought Prudens' writing was not his, but an imitation.

A. " That would not be allowed."

Q. Was the pencil actually used ?

A. " Oh, yes."

Q. Was a hand materialised ?

A. " Not as you understand it, but sufficiently so to use the instrument. It would not have been visible to the natural eye."

Q. The pencil would have seemed to move alone,

A. " Yes, to the natural eye."

(e) In describing these imperfectly aggregated ectoplasms we have , already touched on the next class, that of quasi-organic detached ectoplasms. These are especially hands, sometimes with wrists or arms attached, but now with no mere shadowy or duplicated drapery, but a drapery which is their own, and for the time being is as tangible as themselves. Such hands are reported in the cases of D. D. Home and Mr. Moses.

These ectoplasms, moreover, when developed, may be recognisable •

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 549

they may serve as indications of identity. With D. D. Home this seems frequently to have been the case ; and the special shape and character of hands seen formed one of the most generally impressive points in his phenomena. In Mr. Moses' case the hands (except once in a photograph) were not claimed as belonging to personal friends; but the lean brown hand and wrist which usually appeared (Mr. Moses' own hand being thick, plump, and white) seemed appropriate to the Arabian philosopher to whom it was asserted to belong.

Amongst these detached ectoplasms must be reckoned the phenomenon of " the direct voice." Utterance may be referable to an ectoplastic throat as distinctly as grip to ectoplastic fingers ; — and may form of course an even higher manifestation, — capable of manifesting more intelligence and of giving more convincing indications of identity. But this phenomenon (which I believe myself to have observed elsewhere) has been only imperfectly shown in the cases on which this present survey is based.

(£) Nor is it desirable here to dwell at length upon the most advanced type of ectoplasy ; — when an apparently complete form seems to live for the time an independent life. This never occurred through Mr. Moses. Something like it occurred through D. D. Home several times ; though the solidity of the form was not tested. No more, therefore, need here be said than that this completer development of the isolated or independent ectoplasm differs in no fundamental way from the types which we have already discussed. On the frequent fraudulent simulations of this phenomenon, there is no need here to dwell. But for those who admit that a hand can be temporarily thrown off in this strange kind of asexual gemmation, it would be illogical to deny the possibility of a whole apparent human form thus originated, and thus re-absorbed or disappearing.

At whatever point, indeed, among the phenomena of ectoplasy we may draw our evidential line, it seems to me probable that we have here got at the root of most of the physical phenomena assignable to external control. It is this power of using the vital force of men which brings unembodied beings into relation with the material world. It is this power, too, which links the physical with the mental phenomena of spirit-control ; — enabling the unseen guide to use the machinery of thought as well as of motion, in wa>s which the unaided organism could never have devised. To some of these intellectual phenomena we must now turn.

(5) MENTAL NUTRITION MODIFIED BY SPIRIT CONTROL.

(a) Ordinary Sensory Perception Spiritually Controlled. — The next heading in our previous series was sensory receptivity. In the scheme of supraliminal faculty this included the ordinary action of the senseorgans, whose limits so largely determine our intellectual life. In the subliminal scheme, we found that the action of these senses was sometimes heightened in hyperaesthesia, and sometimes deadened in anaesthesia

more or less complete. We found also, — and this was the most significant extension of faculty, — that under certain circumstances the sensation of pain could be voluntarily inhibited, and the organism thus devoted without interruption to those higher purposes, with which pain, — an ancient form of warning, now often worse than useless, — too frequently interferes. Passing on to the effects on sensory receptivity produced by spiritual control, we find, as under previous headings, that the effects which selfsuggestion can produce on the organism are produced also, and with apparently greater facility, by spirit power; and moreover that a new delicacy of directive or selective action is observable under the more skilful manipulations (so to say) of disembodied intelligence. Such at least is the claim advanced; although naturally it is often only by the analogy of other phenomena occurring in connection that one can be guided in attributing these intellectual results to an external rather than a merely subliminal influence. The hyperaesthesia, anaesthesia, or analgesia of trance, for example, does not in itself indicate whether a spirit external to the subject has been at the work or no. If however during a trance D. D. Home places his head without pain or injury amid glowing coals, and if we there admit a spirit's action (although perhaps on the environment rather than on the organism), we may consequently attribute to similarly external influence other forms of insensibility shown during the same or similar trances. And in connection with trance, when we reach that topic, there will be further instances of the abeyance in which ordinary sensation can be held by spirit-control.

(b) Memory Controlled; Retrocognition Spiritually Given. — And somewhat similarly, just as the subliminal control over memory is greater than the supraliminal, so it is claimed by spirits also that they can influence the sensitive's memory; can make him recall things forgotten or never noticed, and on the other hand, can obliterate from his recollection things previously known. This claim — thoroughly concordant with our scheme — is hardly capable of objective proof.

(c) Sensory Automatism Spiritually Controlled ; Phantasms of the Dead, &c. — This parallelism of action continues under our next heading of "sensory automatism." Even as the subliminal self can present visual or auditory phantasms for supraliminal observation ; even as the human agent, acting telepathically, can present — still through subliminal agency— his own phantasmal appearance for the percipient to recognise, so can the spirit. The "ghost " of common parlance — the "phantasm of the dead" — may often seem but a dreamy and purposeless reflection of some portion only of the departed spirit's being; but, nevertheless, it comes from that spirit, I believe, as truly as the still living agent's phantasm comes from him, in his dying or his critical hour. The spirit here i acting concurrently with the supraliminal intelligence, just as the subliminal intelligence has already done.

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 551

(^/) Telcesthesia Developed into Perception of Spiritual Environment ; Precognition. — But this series of spiritual modifications of sensory receptivity which has thus far seemed merely to run parallel with the similar modifications introduced by subliminal control, takes here a great, a significant extension. We have come to the heading of tel&sthesia — to the point where the man's unaided spirit has seemed already, though still acting in the physical, the planetary, environment — to transcend the bounds of space. Whether and how far at the same time it has learnt to transcend the bounds of time — in retrocognition or precognition — is a point which we have not here felt it needful to discuss at length. But now, when we consider the scope of clairvoyance under spiritual guidance, we find that the word must assume a strange and novel meaning. There are, indeed, some instances of spiritually-guided clairvoyance of the terrestrial type. It was clairvoyance of that kind, one may say, when, under spiritual control, Mr. Moses felt himself present — though rather as by translation than by clairvoyant vision — at the distant funeral of his friend.

But the form of clairvoyance characteristic of spirit-guidance is that which enables the sensitive to perceive the spiritual environment interpenetrating the environment which we know.

To perceive it how? with what senses? with what standard of interpretation or faculty of control? We cannot say. We know that even our perception of this common world is in a sense symbolical ; that the whirling molecules are translated for us by our narrow senses into patterns which our minds can comprehend. Still more strangely symbolical must be man's perception of those things which come to him through channels which he knows not, and on a tide of life which he can neither sound nor stem. When hues beyond his spectrum are revealed to him, with what words shall he describe the broadening ray? We have seen the single phantasm presented as by a special subliminal effort to the still dominant supraliminal view; we have seen the ghost stand in detachment and incommensurable amid a scene of common day. But at the farther stage at which we have now arrived there is for the percipient a fusion of subliminal and supraliminal outlook ; he sees the terrene perspective still, but the cloud qua nunc obducta tuenti Mortalis hebetat visus has been caught away, and he sees moving through the familiar outlook the visitants of an interwoven world.

Such a condition — varying in degree and duration — has been described in various places as coming upon Mr. Moses during or after a stance. The habit of double perception grew on him as time went on, and is described in the latter paragraph of a letter which I print as given in Light, January 2Oth, I894.1

1 The letter is quoted "by Light from Col. Olcott, to whom it was written September 4th, 1876. I have not seen the original MS., but the internal evidence of genuineness is convincing.

I have followed out the train of thought myself of late. Myself, what is it? I do things one day, and especially say things, of which I have no remembrance. I find myself absorbed in thought in the evening, and go to bed with no lecture for the morrow prepared. In the morning I get up, go about my work as usual, lecture a little more fluently than usual, do all my business, converse with my friends, and yet know absolutely nothing of what I have done. One person alone, who knows me very intimately, can tell by a far-off look in the eyes that I am in an abnormal state. The notes of my lectures so delivered — as I read them in the books of those who attend my lectures — read to me precise, accurate, clear, and fit into their place exactly. My friends find me absent, short in manner, brusque and rude of speech. Else there is no difference. When I "come to myself" I know nothing of what has taken place, but sometimes memory recurs to me, and I gradually recollect. This is becoming a very much more frequent thing with me, so that I hardly know when I am (what I call) my proper self, and when I am the vehicle of another intelligence. My spirit friends give hints, but do not say much. I am beginning, however, to realise far more than I once could, how completely a man may be a "gas-pipe " — a mere vehicle for another spirit. Is it possible a man may lead the life I do, and have no Individuality at all? I lead three distinct lives, and I often think that each is separate. Is it possible for a man, to ordinary eyes a common human being, to be a vehicle for Intelligences from above, and to have no separate personality ? Can it be that my spirit may be away, learning perhaps, leading a separate spiritual life, whilst my body is going about and is animated by other Intelligences? Can it be that instruction is so administered to my soul, and that growth in knowledge becomes manifest to me as now and again I return from my spirit life and occupy my body again ? And is it possible that I may one day become conscious of these wanderings, and lead a conscious spiritual existence alongside of my corporeal existence ?

Once or twice — once very lately in the Isle of Wight — my interior dormant faculties awoke, and I lost the external altogether. For a day and a night I lived in another world, while dimly conscious of material surroundings. I saw my friends, the house, the room, the landscape, but dimly. I talked, and walked, and went about as usual, but through all, and far more clearly, I saw my spiritual surroundings, the friends I know so well, and many I had never seen before. The scene was clearer than the material landscape, yet blended with it in a certain way. I did not wish to talk. I was content to look and live among such surroundings. It was as I have heard Swedenborg's visions described.

(6) RESPONSE TO STIMULI SPIRITUALLY CONTROLLED.

(a) Ideation Inspired by Spirits. — We enter in this section 6 upon a group of phenomena of great interest and importance, but not of a type on which objective evidence can easily be forthcoming.

The belief that unseen powers inspire men — not merely by prompting their hands to automatic writing, but by " putting thoughts into their hearts " — is one of the most deeply-rooted, the most widespread, and the most encouraging to which the higher races of man have clung. It is strongly insisted upon by Mr. Moses' guides ; and will be found repeated

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 553

in various forms in his book, " Spirit Teachings." What are held as inspirations of this type, however, deal mainly with religious and moral conceptions, or if unknown and verifiable earthly facts are included, they are usually such as might with equal plausibility be deemed to arise from the thinker's subliminal self. The strong assertions made by spirits who show themselves able to operate powerfully in other ways may fairly, I think, be taken as carrying weight. They represent the fusion of the spirit's thought with the man's as sometimes becoming indescribably close and intimate. When we have compared the inspirations of a man's own " genius " to subliminal uprushes, or eruptions from a volcano, we might better compare the combination of spiritual and human thought to one of those cases where crystals of two totally different substances have developed within the space bounded by the same planes ; and, intergrown as they are and interpenetrant, still testify by the optical characters of their minutest parts that here is no congeries of fragments, but two crystals made inextricably one.

(b} Motor Automatism Spiritually Controlled ; Possession. — I have spoken of the difficulty of proving or tracing spiritual influence so long as its manifestations are purely intra-cerebral, are confined to infusing into the mind of the sensitive ideas which he cannot distinguish from his own.

But, as we know, there are various methods by which the authorship of certain ideas can be claimed by the inspiring intelligence. A distinctive mark can be affixed to them by the mode of their promulgation — by giving them expression concurrently with the expression of the sensitive's normal thoughts, or even while the sensitive's ordinary personality is plunged in trance. In the one case there may be automatic writing while the sensitive is reading or talking on other matters. In the other case there may be " trance-utterances " — replies to questions, or long addresses, given while the medium is unaware of what is going on around him, and of the words which issue from his lips. In each case, of course, the proof of spirit-influence depends not merely on the manner of the message, but on the facts which it contains, or on the supernormal phenomena with which it is in other ways associated. There is no need here to re-discuss these automatisms at length. They form, as the reader will see, a large part of Mr. Moses' phenomena, and almost the whole of those discussed in Mrs. Piper's case ; and indeed in their various forms they supply the bulk of the evidence to the very existence of spirit control, which physical movements by themselves could never demonstrate.

One addition to previous descriptions, however, must be made, if we are to realise the extent to which these automatisms may be carried. The control may be pushed beyond the point at which our analyses of evidence generally stop. Consider, for instance, the scene (948 A), where Mr. Moses is entranced by the spirit of a suicide. Here we have evidential writing and utterance, — agitated words uttered in a

trance, — rude drawings made. But we have also more than this. We have an apparent possession ; a temporary occupation of the medium's whole personality by the spirit which is finding utterance through him. This possession is not, indeed, a matter of evidence in the same sense that messages containing facts unknown to the writer may be evidence of external control. Yet we can hardly dissociate the two parts of the phenomenon ; and if in such a case as this we believe that the message really came from the suicide, we shall probably feel also that the distress, the agitation, the bewilderment, which did not leave the medium for many hours, were due also to the influence or possession of the same unhappy soul.

The possibility of being thus dominated by some unwelcome spirit was naturally regarded by Mr. Moses with fear and dislike. His guides admitted it as a real, but not as an alarming, danger. Such spiritual infections, they said in effect, take root only in a congenial soil. The healthy spirit can repel their attack, much as the healthy organism destroys the germs which are perpetually seeking lodgment within it.

(c) Extension of Will-power into the Spiritual World ; Prayer. — The next heading in the scheme of subliminally guided faculty for which we are now seeking parallels under spirit-control includes will-power extended beyond the organism, and affecting telepathically other incarnate minds. The parallel to this would be some influence exerted by incarnate men upon disembodied spirits. The exercise of such an influence must necessarily be almost impossible to prove ; nor is it at first easy to imagine in what way it could plausibly be represented as taking place. At this point in our argument, however, we have become familiar with conceptions which, when looked at from both sides, do apparently imply some reciprocal action between spirits and incarnate men. But what further I have to say of prayer has been said in the final chapter of this book. And as to the last heading in my " Scheme of Vital Faculty," namely, " Modifications of Spiritual Personality," the reader who studies its projected headings will see at once how needful their discussion will some day be, and how far we are as yet from being able to undertake it. That must be the task of a later age. My own discussion, already so highly speculative, could hardly be pressed further without overstepping the limits of all legitimate speculation.

926 B. The following are references to the chief accounts of telekinetic phenomena in the Proceedings S.P.R. : —

" On some Physical Phenomena, commonly called Spiritualistic, witnessed by the Author," by Professor W. F. Barrett (vol. iv. p. 25).

" Notes of Stances with D. D. Home," by William Crookes (vol. vi. p. 98).

" On Alleged Movements of Objects, without contact, occurring not in the presence of a paid Medium," by F. W. H. Myers (vol. vii. p. 146, and P- 383).

927A] TO CHAPTER IX 555

"The Experiences of W. Stainton Moses," by F. W. H. Myers (vol. ix. p. 245, and vol. xi. p. 24).

" Poltergeists," by Frank Podmore (vol. xii. p. 45).

" The Fire Walk," by Andrew Lang (vol. xv. p. 2). This gives instances of an alleged capacity on the part of certain persons under certain circumstances of resistance to the normal effects of fire on the human organism. The phenomenon, if genuine, is not exactly telekinetic, but may rather be regarded as an extended form of motor automatism. Some mediums, especially D. D. Home, are said to have had the same power.

Other works dealing with telekinetic phenomena to which I may refer the reader are : —

Report on Spiritualism of the Committee of the London Dialectical Society (London : Longmans, Green, Reader & Dyer, 1871).

Les Tables Tournantes, par le Comte Ag. de Gasparin (Paris : Calmann LeVy ; 4th edition, 1889). A pamphlet describing some of de Gasparin's experiments was published by Professor Thury under the title of Les Tables Tournantes, considerees au point de vue de la question de physique generale qui s'y rattache (Geneva, 1885). This is now out of print and rare. It contains various cases of movements obtained without contact, by seemingly careful observers.

Experimental Investigation of the Spirit Manifestations, by Robert Hare, M.D., Emeritus Professor of Chemistry in the University of Pennsylvania (New York, 1855).

Researches in the Phenomena of Spiritualism, by William Crookes ; reprinted from The Quarterly Journal of Science (London: J. Burns,

Animismus und Spiritismus, von Alexander N. AksakorT. 2 vols. (Leipzig: Oswald Mutze, 1890.) An account of this book, which deals chiefly with the theoretical side of the subject, in opposition to the views of von Hartmann, was given in a review by the present writer in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 665.

The Precursors of Spiritism for the last 250 years, by A. N. AksakorT (in Russian, St. Petersburg, 1895) ; reviewed by Dr. Walter Leaf in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. p. 319.

The Scientific Investigation of Physical Phenomena with Mediums, by M. M. Petrovo-Solovovo (in Russian, St. Petersburg, 1900) ; reviewed by Dr. Walter Leaf in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xv. p. 416.

For the physical phenomena connected with D. D. Home, see the references given in 938 A.

For the so-called " Reichenbach " phenomena, see the brief discussion given in vol. i., 541 D.

927 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 119. In the following case the phenomena described were various, but consisted mainly of automatic writing and speech. Some of the writings evinced a knowledge

greater than the automatist possessed. Especially two lines from Homer were correctly written in response to a request for some Greek, although the writer was certainly quite ignorant even of the Greek alphabet. Some indications of identity were also given.

Certain physical phenomena (the most important of which occurred in my informant's absence) were interpolated, as it were, at random among the intellectual phenomena, and carried with them no clear indication of their source ; except that they occurred only in the presence of the sitter here styled Mr. Andrew.

For my introduction to Mr. O. (as I shall call him), the narrator of these incidents, I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. Andrew Lang. I first heard Mr. O.'s narrative from himself by word of mouth on November 2Oth, 1889, while the events were still fresh in his memory. I regard him as an excellent witness. The delay in producing the evidence has been partly caused by Mr. O.'s persistent but unavailing efforts to induce the survivors among his fellow-sitters to add their testimony to his own. I have reason to believe that their refusal is in no way due to any disagreement with Mr. O.'s account, but mainly to scruples of a quasi-religious nature. Such scruples have repeatedly baulked our inquiries ; but I hope that they may gradually die out among our informants, as the innocence and the importance of experiments of this kind come to be better understood. In Mr. O.'s own case there are, I think, amply sufficient reasons why his anonymity should be preserved. His brother — in deference to whose serious wish during dangerous illness the sittings were undertaken — is now dead.

I will add that the intimacy among the members of the circle was such that I cannot doubt that Mr. O. heard, without delay, from his brother and others, of the physical phenomena which had occurred during his own absence from the circle. Mr. O. writes in 1890 : —

In the winter of '88-9 I began, along with a few intimate friends, to investigate the phenomena commonly called Spiritualistic. None of the company was at all anxious for any specific communication from another sphere, but partly for the gratification of an invalid brother, and partly for the sake of satisfying ourselves as to the possibility of some things we had read, we attempted a sitting. The results far exceeded our expectation. We were favoured with phenomena somewhat startling to novices in the art — phenomena styled in Scotland uncanny — but their interesting nature soon overcame our natural diffidence, and before the end of the winter we were on quite familiar terms with our unsubstantial vistants.

As a rule the circle consisted of two of my brothers, two personal friends, and myself, though occasionally we admitted other members of the family, and once or twice an acquaintance. We were not Spiritualists, nor had we any desire to be known as such ; all we did was done solely by way of experiment and amusement. The opportunity was the best possible ; we had all our sittings in our own home, the circle was confined to personal friends in whom we had full confidence, so that there was neither motive nor opportunity for

927A] TO CHAPTER IX 557

deception. We usually met twice a week when my invalid brother was able for company, but during the winter months relapses of his illness caused interruptions ; and indeed, I often thought the excitement of our sittings did not affect him beneficially.

Our sittings were all in the dark. Our medium was, in most cases, Mr.

Andrew, though we had also a less efficient medium in the case of Mr. S .

The performances of the latter were mostly of a somnambulistic kind, and do not call for special notice.

With Andrew, however, phenomena assumed quite another aspect. He would play charming music on the violin, or produce beautiful pencil sketches of city and rural scenes. Sometimes the locus of these scenes was named, oftener not, but they were invariably unknown to any member of the company.

For a time I failed to see anything very unaccountable in Andrew's trance productions. I knew him to be an accomplished violinist and a fairly good sketcher, and I naturally put everything down to an unconscious exercise of his own skill. One little thing did perplex me, namely, the very different styles of handwriting he seemed to accomplish with equal facility.

I mentioned an invalid brother. He suffered from a heart affection known as presystolic murmur. At one sitting we consulted a medical man, who called himself Dr. Snobinski of Russia. This gentleman not only prescribed for my brother, but also furnished us with a diagram of the human heart, and put a special mark to indicate the valve diseased in my brother's case. How this diagram was actually drawn by a person ignorant of human physiology, and how the diseased valve was shown and explained by one ignorant of pathology, was more than I could account for.

On another occasion another doctor, calling himself Arnold, confirmed the diagnosis of Dr. Snobinski, and rated my brother for having neglected to follow the regimen recommended by the famous Russian. On this occasion, during examination of the chest, when the patient chanced to laugh, the doctor [in the person of Mr. Andrew] suddenly gave him a mild box on the ear with his open palm. This, I understood, was to rebuke his laughter, which, as is well known, is a dangerous luxury to one suffering from valvular disease.

At times we were entertained by a negro, who gave us no little fun. His effort to speak English was most amusing, and presented just those difficulties which perplex the negro in this more matter-of-fact sphere.

These phenomena had led me to perplexing thoughts, and, though unable to explain them on purely psychological grounds, I was slow to admit that the medium was not also the cause of the effects he produced. I had so far accounted for the music and the sketches ; the varieties of the handwriting were a little puzzling, the diagram and the prescription a little more so, but I was still inclined to suspend judgment till I should acquire more facts. With a view to this, lone evening interrogated: "Where are you?" Answer: "In the sphere next the earth." " Could you tell anything of the future ? " Answer : " We are as ignorant of the future as you are." This I thought was at least honest, and very probable, but too general to be of service to me in arriving at any decision. I resolved to put what seemed to me a searching test. None of the others knew Latin or Greek, so I asked an answer in Latin. This was readily given, but so badly spelt that I failed to fully translate it. Not yet satisfied, I asked any quotation from a Greek author — so that by comparison

with the original, identity or variation might be satisfactorily apparent. This resulted in a quotation from the Odyssey, Bk. xi., lines 57-8: —

wy y\6es VTTO £o0oi> rjepocvra ; €(fedr}s TTf^os f(i>v % eyeb crvv vr)t jje\aivrj.

These lines were beautifully written in cursive characters, and minute even to the accents. As a student I had read Odyssey XI., but could not have given the lines from memory, or written them out with correct accents. On comparing the lines with the Greek text I found them to be without flaw. My puzzle was now twofold : (i) That I was not able to read the Latin proved that what was given was not anything I had previously been revolving in my own mind, but had come from an independent intelligence; (2) The medium was not acquainted with either Latin or Greek — did not know one from the other. Clearly I must now quit the hypothesis that the medium was the author of his own message, as not adequate to account for all the facts.

The Greek and the Latin [Mr. O. adds in a later letter] were both obtained at the same sitting. I asked for the Greek because the Latin was so badly written that I could not fully make it out. The medium that evening was Andrew, who, I am fully convinced, could not possibly have any knowledge that Greek would be asked for — and even if he had known, he could not have given it, since he did not know the Greek when it was given. The controlling spirit was unknown to any of the company. In reply to my questions he described himself as a youth of nineteen, according to their reckoning, but was only twelve years of age when he died. When I asked how he was occupied he told us he was still at school. This information led me to ask for the Latin and subsequently for the Greek.

Still more inexplicable was the evidential sign given to a doubting acquaintance. This gentleman requested permission to be present at one of the sittings, but his general behaviour there indicated that he regarded a sitting as a kind of farce. He brought with him another gentleman of equally sceptical temper. The first remark from the medium that evening was, "There are strangers present to-night." This remark seemed to our friend so commonplace that he requested evidence of the presence of a spirit. On being asked what evidence he would like, he jokingly said, " Bring a candle ! " — an idea probably suggested by sitting in the dark. The wish had scarcely been expressed when a candle was placed on the table before him, with the request that he should immediately quit the company. The candle was found to be warm, a circumstance explained by the fact that it had been used in the next room only a few minutes before. My brother immediately went to the next room and asked for a candle. The good lady was much surprised to find that while the candlestick was still standing where she had placed it shortly before, the candle itself was gone. My brother then showed her the candle which he held in his hand, and this she identified as the one she had used a few minutes before — indeed there could not be two opinions, as there was only one candle in the house. This was regarded by the circle as the most wonderful result yet obtained. Here was proof amounting to a demonstration that a material object had been passed through matter ; the candle had been brought from one room to another, though both doors (there were two doors in the room in which the sittings were held) were locked before the sitting was commenced.

This candle incident I give on the testimony of the others, as I myself was

927B] TO CHAPTER IX 559

not present that evening, a circumstance which I afterwards regretted. Personally I have not seen a case of matter through matter.

During that winter we obtained many interesting phenomena. The spirits (?) would strike any note we asked on a violin or harmonium which stood by. The notes requested would sound forth distinctly, though no visible hand was near ; and this was done both in the dark and in the light, though more often in the dark.

One evening a visitant addressed one of my brothers as an old schoolfellow, and in proof of his identity he reminded my brother of a poem they had once learnt together as boys, namely, one by " Surfaceman" (Alexander Anderson), entitled " The blood on the 'wheel.'1'' My brother perfectly recollected the exercise, and had no doubt as to the identity of the speaker. The wonderful thing here was that the medium had become acquainted with my brother later in life and had no knowledge of his schooldays.

Of the scientific value of these results I was not aware till I had the pleasure of meeting yourself, and if we had met some months earlier I should certainly have preserved the legible results of our sittings. They were destroyed in ignorance of their scientific worth, and chiefly because associated with a departed brother whose early death we still lament. Though our sittings are long past their results still dwell with me in all but their first freshness. Circumstances conspired to break up our little company. Of our circle of five two have since married, one has left the district, and another has departed this life. The death of our most spirited member was the end of our meetings.

927 B. The experiences described in connection with Miss White and Miss Lottie Fowler (both of whom are now dead) seem analogous to experiences with Mrs. Piper. The case of Miss White comes from America, and is specially interesting both in the apparent fulfilment of the promise made by the alleged discarnate spirit control to appear to the narrator's sick wife, and in the apparent knowledge shown of the immediate approach of death.

From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 227.

January 2$th, 1891.

About eleven years ago I was much distressed owing to the illness of my wife, who suffered from cancer in the stomach. I heard about a medium, Miss Susie Nickerson White, who was said to have given some remarkable tests, and I called on her as a stranger and requested a sitting. My wife's sister purported to " control," giving her name, Maria, and mentioning facts about my family which were correct. She also called my wife by her name, Eliza Anne, described her sickness, and said that she would pass over, but not for some months. I said, " What do you call this ? Is it psychology, or mesmerism, or what?" Maria said, " I knew you were going to ask that ; I saw it in your mind." I said, " Do you get all the things out of my mind ? " She replied, " No. I'll tell you some things that are not in your mind. Within three days Eliza Anne will say that she has seen me and mother, too, if I can get mother to come along." (My wife's mother had died about forty-five years previously, and my wife's sister had been dead from six to eight years.)

I kept these circumstances to myself, but within three days the nurse who was in attendance upon my wife came running to me and said that my wife was worse, and was going out of her mind; that she had called upon Maria and

56o APPENDICES [927 C

mother, and had sprung out of bed and ran towards the door crying, " Stop, Maria ! Stop, mother ! Don't go yet ! "

I soon consulted Miss White again, and Maria again purported to control. My wife had been unable for some days to retain any food in her stomach, could not keep even water or milk, and was very weak and also unable to sleep.

Maria told me to give her some hot, very strong coffee, with plenty of cream and sugar and some cream toast. This prescription amazed me, but it was prepared. My wife ate and drank with relish, and slept soundly afterwards. She lived upon this food for some days, but gradually became unable even to take this.

I consulted Miss White again, and Maria told me to get some limes, and to give my wife some pure juice of the lime several times a day ; she said that this would give her an appetite and enable her to retain food. The prescription was a success ; but gradually my wife failed, and I consulted Miss White again, and asked Maria how long my wife would continue to suffer. She said she could not tell exactly when she would pass away, but would give me a warning—" The next time she says she has seen me, don't leave her afterwards."

Some days later, as I was relieving the nurse about three or four in the morning, the nurse said, " Mammie " (meaning my wife) " says she has seen Maria again." In a few minutes my wife said, " I must go." And she expired. (Signed) E. PAIGE, MARY A. PAIGE.

[Formerly Mary A. Dockerty, the nurse.]

[I have had long interviews with Mr. Paige. He seems to be a shrewd and careful witness.— RICHARD HODGSON.]

927 C. Concerning Miss Lottie Fowler, I quote accounts of two incidents, one recorded by Mr. W. Stainton Moses and the other by Mr. C. C. Massey. Mr. Moses' account is given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 78, as follows : —

Perhaps one of the most striking cases I can present is the first experience that occurred to me. (See Spirit Identity, pp. 124-126, Appendix V.) :—

I inquired where I could see for myself these new phenomena, and was informed that Miss Lottie Fowler [a well-known professional medium] was about to hold a stance that very evening (April 2nd, 1872), at 15 Southampton Row. I went, and was greatly astonished at what I saw and heard. I need not take up time by detailing the occurrences of the first part of the sitting; most Spiritualists are familiar with the usual routine of Miss Fowler's stances. Much hazy nonsense was talked, and many vague statements made, which seemed to me to be of no use whatever as tests of spirit identity. I was rapidly becoming nauseated. I craved for something more clear, something on which I could rest as a staple piece of evidence. I inquired, therefore, whether I might endeavour to obtain some such proof for myself. Leave was at once given by the director of the circle, and I addressed the spirit who controlled the medium.

" You are tiring your medium, and making fun of us. Go and send some one who is serious."

The medium shivered and turned away, and the voice came as though troubled.

" You've nothing to do with me. I won't go. Me no go."

" Yes, you will. You'll go and send some one else."

After more colloquy the medium shivered again, seemed to be in pain, and stood rooted to the spot, crouching as if in dread.

927C] TO CHAPTER IX 561

After a time the voice came again, but utterly changed ; the voice, this time of a man, very calm and unimpassioned, instead of the child-voice speaking baby jargon.

" You want me ? "

" Yes. What is your name ? "

" I'd rather not tell you. You can ask me any questions."

" No. Tell me what you see, or describe any one whom you see near me. I will answer yes or no ; no more."

" I see a man, very old, tall, with a long white beard, and long hair."

"Yes."

" The beard is very white indeed."

" No. Go on."

" He has a very high, broad forehead, and his eyes are drawn down. Why, he's blind!"

" Yes."

" And his face is black and blue. And " (here the medium shuddered violently) — " oh ! what's that in his mouth ? It's like slime — and mud — and oh ! blood."

" Yes ? "

" And— it's dark. I can't see."

" Go on. How is he dressed ? "

"He has a long blue coat. No, not exactly a coat — something long. I can't see his feet."

"Where does he stand?"

" Right opposite ; close by you."

" Can you see his name ? "

" No. He seems in trouble. I think it's money. He looks so horrible. Let me go. Why do you keep me here."

" Go, then. Do you know me ? "

" No." (This very emphatically.)

I shall not attempt to describe the scene during the time that this conversation was held. I have quoted from a full and careful record written at the time, and the whole scene is photographed indelibly on my mind. Every one seemed petrified and astonished. They would have been still more so had they known with what photographic accuracy a scene in my own private experience was being re-enacted before my eyes. It was, I am , sure, as unknown as I was myself. It was a scene that passed in a very distant part of Great Britain, and it was reproduced with a realistic power that bore down before it, as with torrent force, all doubt and hesitation. I lelt that the man was there before me ; himself reproducing the story of his death for my conviction.

Here we have the case of a man who went to a seance with absolutely no expectations in his mind; he did not know what to expect; he did not expect anything ; and he got what in any police-court would be considered perfect evidence of life beyond the grave.

I quote Mr. Massey's account from the Journal S.P.R., vol. v. p. 5.

January i&tA, 1890.

On April yth, 1883, died an old and dear friend of mine, by name Francis -Paynton Pigott-Carleton (his patronymic was Pigott— he took the name of

VOL. II. 2 N

Carleton on his marriage). On April 27th in the same year I took an old glove of his, given to me for the purpose by his widow, to Lottie Fowler, putting it into her hand when she was apparently into trance, and was "controlled," and requesting the "control" to get into rapport with the owner of the glove, and give me any particulars concerning that person. The " control " gave me a description of the person of my friend which I thought remarkably good. I then asked for the name. She, or the " control," seemed to listen for it, and then said, with apparent vexation, " Oh, it is all nonsense, I can make nothing of it. I hear only ' Pig — Pig ' — that is not a name ; what do they (sic) mean by 4 Pig ' ? "

It is obvious that the first syllable of the name "Pigott" is that which would be accentuated most strongly, and the sound dropping (we may suppose), the latter half of the name would not be caught by an ear unfamiliar with it.

I had given her not the slightest clue, except the glove, which was not marked with the name, and she had never seen or heard of my friend, who lived in the country and was not interested in "Spiritualism," and was quite unknown to "mediums"; though his wife had on more than one occasion been with me to stances. (Not, however, to Lottie Fowler, to the best of my present memory and belief.) And I had not mentioned my friend's death among my spiritualistic friends, nor my intention to visit her to any one who might, intentionally or otherwise, prepare her.

C. C. MASSEY.

934 A. An account of the experiences of the Rev. C. B. Sanders was published in a book entitled X+ Y=Z; or, The Sleeping Preacher of North Alabama. Containing an account of most wonderful mysterious mental phenomena, fully authenticated by living witnesses. By Rev. G. W. Mitchell. (New York: VV. C. Smith, 65 John Street. 1876.) The book includes statements by numerous witnesses of the supernormal manifestations of Mr. Sanders, and additional corroborations were obtained by Professor James and Dr. Hodgson in reply to inquiries about the case. From these sources of information the following brief sketch is made.

Mr. F. G. Bromberg, of Mobile, Ala., a friend of Professor James, wrote to the latter in 1886 : —

The book has only recently been called to my attention by Chief-Justice Stone, of this State, and a copy was sent to me by late Chief-Justice Brickell, whose home is at Huntsville, Ala., and amongst the witnesses cited in the book. In a letter which accompanied the book he writes as follows : " I have frequently seen Mr. Sanders, the subject of the book, and of many of the incidents related I heard soon after their occurrence. The witnesses or contributors referred to are of the most unquestionable, unimpeachable character. Two of them, Dr. Ross and Dr. Shelby, were of very considerable learning, and of very high character ; the first as a theologian, the other as a physician." . . .

Jud^e Brickell's assurances put at rest all doubts as to the absolute integrity of all parties named therein, either as observers or observed. The elements of fraud, collusion, or fabrication are entirely eliminated from the problem to be solved.

934 A] TO CHAPTER IX 563

Constantine Blackmon Sanders was born in 1831, near Huntsville, Alabama, the seventh child in a family of ten children. His father died when he was in his sixth year.

Constantine lived with his mother, and laboured on the farm until he was a full-grown man. From his mother, and others who knew him during the days of his youth, we learn that he was dutiful to his mother, kind to his sisters, moral in his habits, and avoided association with the vicious. His temperament was cheerful, and he had considerable fondness for music. From his early childhood his mind was much interested on the subject of preaching the gospel. And he was in the habit of preaching juvenile funeral sermons over dead chickens, pigs, &c., and baptizing the boys, both black and white; and, on this account, was often familiarily called " The Preacher."

When he was twenty years old he attended a revival meeting, and became deeply interested in religious matters ; presented himself as a candidate for the ministry under the care of the Presbytery of Tennessee ; was licensed to preach in 1855, and ordained in 1862. At the time he joined Presbytery in 1852, when he was twenty-one years old, he could scarcely read and write. In the spring of 1854, when studying at school in Elkton, Tenn., he had attacks of sickness, described by Mrs. Harlow, in whose family he was living, as follows. Until then his health is described as having always been good.

Though at times he had spells of mental trouble, yet, in the main, he was quite cheerful. When he had been with us about three months, he was taken quite sick of a flux. And when he had so far recovered as to be able to begin to walk, he was taken down with typhoid fever, and confined to bed again for several weeks. During this confinement he was seized with occasional convulsions, affecting at times his whole system, but especially his arms, chest, throat, and tongue. He also complained terribly of his head. Often would he exclaim : —

" It surely will kill me." On one occasion he said :

" My head feels like it has opened."

Taking my hand with his, he placed it on his head, when, to my astonishment, I found what appeared to be a separation of the bone, nearly wide enough to bury my little finger, ranging from above his eyes near the centre of his forehead to the top of his head, and from the top down towards and near to each ear. The opening increased in width as it reached the top of the head. This condition of his head I saw frequently. When the paroxysms would subside, the openings would nearly close up.

He had many similar attacks of these paroxysms during the next five years, accompanied by much physical suffering. In the meantime, in 1856, he married, and his family consisted in 1876 "of six healthy children, of more than ordinary promise." After recovering from an unusually violent convulsive cramp in 1859, he declared that it had been "shown to him that he would never have another spell of cramping." But although

the violent convulsions apparently did not recur, he still suffered much, as appears from the following statement made by Dr. W. T. Thach in 1876.

I have been acquainted with him about sixteen years. He has complained ever since my acquaintance with him, and he says, for a number of years previous, with a continuous headache, though differing in severity at different times, often becoming excruciating; and until a year or two since attended with violent lancinating pains in the chest, accompanied with great difficulty of respiration, which indeed I have often seen suspended for such a length of time as to induce me to believe it impossible that it could ever be restored ; at length returning with a gurgling sound in the upper portion of the trachea. In these extreme cases the pulse is very feeble, and in frequency from 120 to such a celerity as to render it impossible to count it. Extremities cold, temples throbbing violently, eyes surcharged with blood to such an extent that frequently the blood would trickle down the cheeks in drops. These paroxysms are attended with very great nervous excitement, so that he cannot bear to be touched by any one without producing a shock to the system (very similar to that felt by one who comes in contact with a galvanic battery with considerable charge), which seems to increase the already excruciating pain.

With these paroxysms of suffering there is almost always a peculiar condition, to me inexplicable, and which I know not what to denominate, which those acquainted with him generally call " sleep," merely from the fact that, when recovered from this condition, he is totally ignorant of any and everything that has occurred while in this state (even the length of time that has elapsed, not knowing whether an hour or a week). Hence the name of the " Sleeping Preacher." And yet, at the time, he seems conscious of everything that is going on around him; and not only so, but of what is transpiring at any point to which his attention is directed, regardless of distance. The length of these paroxysms is quite variable, extending from a moment to hours and days, during which time he gets no natural sleep ; the mind to all appearance being much more active than when in a normal condition ; being all the time engaged in conversation or writing (of which he does a great deal), or some other active mental exercise. In this condition he frequently complains of hunger, and partakes of food as at other times. Except in cases of protracted spells of nervous sleep (when he gets none), he usually averages about three hours in twenty-four of natural sleep ; yet the physical man does not seem to suffer from loss of sleep. He looks as hearty as any man, and weighs about 195 pounds.

This condition is not always attended with an unusual amount of pain, being often very cheerful ; at which times he is more than ordinarily communicative.

In all of his notes, letters, and writing of every kind, while in this condition, he ignores the name of " Sanders." His signature is " X + Y = Z."

While in these sleeps, if left to himself, his thoughts are confined mostly to theology or medicine. And though never having studied medicine, he seems, while in this mental state, to be very conversant with it ; using the technical names, giving the properties, uses, &c., thereof. He always examines the sick who may happen to be about him when in this state, without coming in contact with the patient; making in writing a diagnosis and prescription, which he will usually give, if requested. And I could mention a great many who have been relieved by his directions. I have frequently had him to give me the

934A] TO CHAPTER IX 565

exact condition of patients whom he had never seen, and who were miles distant. His prescriptions frequently contain medicines which cannot be procured in this country ; which he makes arrangements to import ; showing his comprehensive view of Materia Medica in this preternatural way.

Mr. Mitchell writes : —

This peculiar state, which is involuntary in its recurrence, is not usually heralded by any premonitions visible to those who may be present. He may be taking part in social conversation, when all at once, if looking at him, you will see his eyelids fall and his head droop ; at the same time making a slight but audible noise through his nose, which may be called a grunt, usually repeated in quick succession two or three times, and he is asleep. The spell may continue for a few moments ; a quarter, a half-hour, or an hour, or a number of hours ; a day, or a night ; or a day and night ; or several days and nights ; or a week, or even several weeks, without an interval of consciousness.

When in ordinary health, without bodily fatigue, or any strong or exhausting mental excitement, he can be easily aroused to consciousness, when he first goes into this state, by giving him a shake or by slapping him with the hand. In coming to consciousness, he seems to be momentarily surprised; and his body is slightly affected, as if lightly shocked by a galvanic battery.

When under the more favourable conditions of body and mind, upon his going to sleep, by immediately waking him up, he has been enabled to keep awake for many hours in succession, though there was a constant inclination to go to sleep. As a general rule, the longer the spells are protracted, the more intense are his sufferings. . . .

In these sleeps his eyes are generally closed, but there are instances in which they are as wide open as when awake. In this case, if he is free comparatively from suffering, one not acquainted with his peculiarities would not likely suspect that there was anything unusual in his condition.

The " sleeping personality " of Mr. Sanders, calling himself" X + Y = Z," " never betrays any scepticism nor the slightest taint of heresy," and seems to have held the ordinary chief orthodox doctrines of the church to which Mr. Sanders belonged. He apparently wrote a good deal — including letters to other persons, and instructions to his own normal self (to whom he invariably referred as " my casket,") and various books and papers which have not been published, and which he enjoined Mr. Sanders "on no account to exhibit till I come." This injunction appears in a message from "X+Y = Z's Valedictory to His Casket" in May 1876, when he took leave of his " casket," but indicated that at a later period he would return. In reply to inquiries in July 1890, Mr. Mitchell stated that the peculiar mental indications had recurred several times during the previous eighteen months.

The separation of the cranial bones referred to by several witnesses is a curious feature of the case, and in reply to a special inquiry, Mr. Mitchell states that " when the patient's head was greatly affected with pain the sutures would separate, but in some instances, when the suffering was slight while he was in one of his peculiar states, the sutures were not visibly separated."

The normal Mr. Sanders had no recollection of anything occurring in his "sleep" state, "but X + Y = Z seems to have had entire consciousness of Mr. Sanders, or of his ' casket,' as he always called him."

Hyperaesthesia might be invoked as an explanation to account for a few of the apparently supernormal incidents recorded, such as shooting a rifle ball through a hat " very near the centre " at the distance of forty yards at night when Dr. Thach, who describes the incident, could not even see the sights of the gun. Such an explanation might also be stretched to cover the cases of reading books and writing on paper under cover, allowing for a margin of malobservation or misdescription by the witnesses. It would, however, be quite inadequate to account for the bulk of the manifestations recorded. The cases on the whole suggest the action of telaesthesia rather than telepathy, although telepathy might be extended to apply to most of them, as, for example, his occasional knowledge of conversations and scenes occurring elsewhere, or of letters written or sermons preached at a distance.1 He himself, however, described such matters as if seeing or hearing them directly. I now quote the details of a few cases in illustration of the supernormal powers of "X + Y = Z."

Mr. John W. Pruit gives the following account.

MERIDIANVILLE, ALA., May "jth, 1876.

I certify that one day about the middle of the month of February 1866, while Brother Sanders was confined to his bed from his dislocated thigh, I was at his house, and he was lying in his bed and in one of his so-called " sleeps." He attracted my attention by a hearty laugh.

I asked him the cause of his amusement.

He replied, " I was laughing at De Witt."

I asked what De Witt was doing.

He said, " He was having a hard scuffle to keep from falling off the fence, for the top rail was turning with him and he was trying to keep from falling over it."

Nothing more was said on the subject until De Witt arrived, which was in ten or fifteen minutes.

The fence where the difficulty occurred was from three-fourths to a mile distant, on the other side of a thick grove of timber and underbrush, and of an intervening hill.

And I further certify that no communication from any person or source was received in reference to De Witt until he arrived and confirmed what S. said.

J. W. PRUIT.

Mr. De Witt gives a concordant account, explaining the trouble he had in getting over the fence with a sack of pease in one hand and a bowl of custard in the other, and referring to the knowledge of the incident shown on his arrival by Mr. Sanders.

Various cases are described of Mr. Sanders' finding lost articles, — such

1 Some of these cases resemble those given in Dr. J. W. Haddock's Somnolism and Psycheism, referred to in vol. i. p. 556.

934 A] TO CHAPTER IX 567

as dollar-bills, coins, a watch chain, a bunch of keys, — or specifying correctly where they would be found. I give an instance. Mr. Bentley writes : —

STATE OF ALA., MADISON Co.,

MERIDIANVILLE, May iotk, 1876.

In 1867, I lived two and a half miles east of this village, on what is known as the Harris place, on the other side of Brier Fork Creek ; and was engaged in selling goods in this place, spending the nights at home.

