I reply that there is absolutely no need to go as far as this. In admitting suggestion as a vera causa of hypnosis, we are recognising a cause which, if we really try to grasp it, resolves itself into subliminal operation, brought about we know not how. So far, therefore, from negativing and excluding any obscure and perhaps supernormal agency, the suggestion theory leaves the way for any such agency broadly open. Some unknown cause or other must determine whether each suggestion is to " take " or no ; and that unknown cause must presumably act somehow upon the subliminal self. We should have something like a real explanation of suggestion, if we could show that a suggestion's success or failure was linked with some telepathic impact from the suggester's mind, or with some mesmeric effluence from his person.

I know well that in many cases we can establish no link of this kind. In Bernheim's rapid hospital practice there seems no opportunity to bring the hypnotist's will, or the hypnotiser's organism, into any effective rapport with the subject. Rather, the subject seems to do all that is wanted for himself almost instantaneously. He often falls into the suggested slumber almost before the word " Dortnez! " has left the physician's mouth. But on the other hand, this is by no means the only type of hypnotic success. Just as in the mesmeric days, so also now there are continual instances where much more than the mere command has been needed for effective hypnotisation. Persistence, proximity, passes — all these prove needful still in the practice even of physicians who place no faith at all in the old mesmeric theory.

568. The fact is, that since the days of those old controversies between mesmerists proper and hypnotists proper, the conditions of the controversy have greatly changed. The supposed mesmeric effluence was then treated as an entirely isolated, yet an entirely physiological phenomenon. There was supposed to be a kind of radiation or infection passing from one nervous system to another. It was of this that Cuvier (for instance)

569] HYPNOTISM 207

was convinced ; it was this theory which EUiotson defended in the Zoisi with a wealth of illustration and argument to which little justice has even yet been done. Yet it was hard to prove effluence as opposed to suggestion, because where there was proximity enough for effluence to be effective there was also proximity enough for suggestion to be possible. Only in some few circumstances, — such as Esdaile's mesmerisation of a bhnd man over a wall/ — was it possible to claim that the mesmeric trance had been induced without any suspicion whatever on the subject's part that the mesmerist was trying to entrance him.

Since those days, however, the evidence for telepathy — for psychical influence from a distance — has grown to goodly proportions. A new form of experiment has been found possible, from which the influence of suggestion can be entirely excluded. It has now, as I shall presently try to show, been actually proved that the hypnotic trance can be induced from a distance so great, and with precautions so complete, that telepathy or some similar supernormal influence is the only efficient cause which can be conceived.

I subjoin a series of experiments in this " telepathic hypnotism," in one of the best of which (Dr. Gibert's, see 568 A) I had the good fortune to take a part. These experiments are not easy to manage, since it is essential at once to prevent the subject from suspecting that the experiment is being tried, and also to provide for his safety in the event of its success. In Dr. Gibert's experiment, for instance, it was a responsible matter to bring this elderly woman in her dream-like state through the streets of Havre. It was needful to provide her with an unnoticed escort ; and, in fact, several persons had to devote themselves for some hours to a single experiment.

569. I have cited first this long series of experiments at a distance, without attempting to analyse the nature of the suggestion given or power employed by the hypnotist. Of course it is plain that if one can thus influence unexpectant persons from a distance, there must be sometimes some kind of power actually exercised by the hypnotiser ; — something beyond the mere tact and impressiveness of address, which is all that Bernheim and his followers admit or claim. Evidence of this has been afforded by the occasional production of organic and other effects in hypnotised subjects by the unuttered will of the operator when near them. The ingenious experiments of Gurney (569 A) in the production of local rigidity and anaesthesia were undertaken to test whether the agency employed were more in the nature of an effort of will or, — as the early mesmerists claimed, — of an emission of actual " mesmeric fluid " or physical effluence of some sort. Gurney was inclined to think that his results could not be explained solely by mental suggestion or telepathy, because the physical proximity of the operator's hand seemed necessary to produce them, and he thought it probable that they were due to a direct nervous influence, exercised through the hand

1 Natural and Mesmeric Clairvoyance, pp. 227-28 ; quoted in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 88.

2o8 CHAPTER V [570-

of the operator, but not perceptible through the ordinary sensory channels. Mrs, Sidgwick's experiments of the same kind, however (569 B), in which success was obtained when the operator was standing with folded arms several feet away from the subject, removed Gurney's main objection to the telepathic explanation. The fact that a thick sheet of glass over the subject's hands did not interfere with the results also afforded some presumption against the hypothesis of a physical influence ; and Mrs. Sidgwick pointed out that the delicate discrimination involved in the specific limitations of the effects is much more easily attributable to mental suggestion, through the action of the operator's mind on that of the subject, than to any direct physical influence on the latter's nerves. Following these accounts, I refer briefly (in 569 C) to experiments in the so-called " silent willing," frequently practised by the early mesmerists. I may mention that Mr. H. S. Thompson, who figures largely in their records, was a gentleman of high character, active benevolence, and marked ability. I never saw him myself; but I have known various persons (some of these his own relations) in the Yorkshire county society of that date, and his powers were there universally recognised as genuine, although they were sometimes regarded with social disapproval, or even with superstitious horror.

Mr. H. S. Thompson's history is to my mind a real proof that some one individual man may be endowed for hypnotic efficacy in a quite exceptional way. His experience, indeed, goes far to prove the reality of "silent willing" and was thought by himself to prove also the direct local influence of passes, — the "mesmeric effluence" theory.

570. With all our later evidence in view, however, — with so much proof of a transmission from man to man of something which needs no action of the finger-tips, — it would be natural indeed to dismiss that notion altogether, as a first rude theory which wider knowledge had shown to be needless. Needless it is, in the sense that we could plausibly refer to mere suggestion all the sensations which subjects have alleged as accompanying the passes ; — as following the track, so to say, of the mesmerising hand. If the effluence were something in itself monstrously improbable, we might think it needful to interpret the evidence in this way. But since, in my view, it is by no means improbable that effluences, as yet unknown to science, but perceptible by sensitive persons as the telepathic impulse is perceptible, should radiate from living human organisms, I see no reason to assume that the varied and concordant statements made by patients in the Zoist and early mesmeric works merely reflect subjective fancies. I have myself performed and witnessed experiments on intelligent persons expressly designed to test whether or no the sensation following the hand was a mere fancy. It seems to me hardly likely that persons who have never experienced other purely subjective sensations, and who are expressly alive to the question here at issue, should nevertheless again and again feel the classical tingling, &c., along the track of

572] HYPNOTISM 209

the hypnotiser's passes without any real external cause. To assume that all which they feel is a mere result of suggestion may be a premature attempt at simplifying modes of supernormal communication which, in fact, are probably not simpler but more complex than any idea which we have as yet formed of them.

571. And here at last we arrive at what is in reality the most interesting group of inquiries connected with the hypnotic trance.

We have just seen that the subliminal state of the hypnotised subject may be approached by ways subtler than mere verbal suggestion — by telepathic impacts and perhaps by some effluence of kindred supernormal type. We have now to trace the supernormal elements in the hypnotic response. Whether those elements are most readily excited by a directly subliminal appeal, or whether they depend mainly on the special powers innate in the hypnotised person, we can as yet but imperfectly guess. We can be pretty sure, at any rate, that they are not often evoked in answer to any rapid and, so to say, perfunctory hypnotic suggestion ; they do not spring up in miscellaneous hospital practice ; they need an education and a development which is hardly bestowed on one hypnotised subject in a hundred. The first stage of this response lies in a subliminal relation established between the subject and his hypnotiser, and manifesting itself in what is called rapport, or in community of sensation. The earlier stages of rapport — conditions when the subject apparently hears or feels the hypnotiser only, and so forth — arise probably from mere selfsuggestion or from the suggestions of the operator (see 571 A) causing the conscious attention of the subject to be exclusively directed to him. Indications of the possible development of a real link between the two persons may rather be found in the cases where there is provable community of sensation, — the hypnotised subject tasting or feeling what the hypnotiser (unknown to the subject) does actually at that moment taste or feel. Of this there was much evidence in the palmy days of Esdaile and Elliotson, when psychological experiment was pursued regardless of time or trouble ; there is some evidence of our own recent collecting (see 571 B) ; and there will be, I venture to say, far more evidence so soon as the study of hypnotism devolves upon the psychologist, without therefore being deserted by the physician. It must be observed, however, that in experiments of this kind with hypnotised persons, the hypnotist was generally — if not invariably — the only person who attempted to play the part of agent, so that the evidence of a special relation between him and his subject is inconclusive. And in the similar experiments with non-hypnotised persons, quoted in 571 C, several different agents were successful in transferring sensations to the same percipients.

572. We have thus brought the hypnotised subject up to the point of knowing supernormally, at any rate, the superficial sensations of his hypnotiser. From that starting-point, — or, at any rate, from some supernormal perception of narrow range, — his cognition widens and

VOL. I. o

2IO CHAPTER V [573

deepens. He may seem to discern some picture of the past, and may retrace the history of some object which he holds in his hand, or he may seem to wander in spirit over the habitable globe, and to bring back knowledge of present facts discernible by no other means. Perhaps he seems to behold the future, predicting oftenest the organic history of some person near him ; but sometimes discerning, as it were pictorially, scattered events to which we can guess at no attainable clue. For all this there is already more of positive evidence than is generally realised ; nor (I must repeat) is there any negative evidence which might lead us to doubt that further care in developing hypnotic subjects may not at any moment be rewarded in the same way. We have here, in fact, a successful branch of investigation which has of late years been practically dropped from mere inattention to what has been done already, — mere diversion of effort to the easier and more practical triumphs of suggestive therapeutics. I begin with two cases partly retrocognitive, in 572 A and B.

573. The next group of cases to which I pass relate chiefly to knowledge of present facts. I place first some experiments in thought-transference with hypnotised persons (573 A) analogous to the experiments with persons in a normal condition recorded in my next chapter. Here the subject seems simply to become aware telepathically of the thoughts of his hypnotiser, the hypnotic condition perhaps facilitating the transfer of the impression. Next come the cases of what used to be called " travelling clairvoyance " in the hypnotic state. These are more like the partially retrocognitive cases in that they cannot be traced with certainty to the contemporary thoughts of any particular person, though they very rarely relate to facts unknown to any one (as in Major Buckley's cases, 573 E). In travelling clairvoyance we seem to have a development of " invasive dreams," — of those visions of the night in which the sleeper seems to visit distant scenes and to bring back intelligence otherwise unattainable. These distant hypnotic visions seem to develop out of thought-transference ; thus the subject may discern an imaginary picture as it is conceived in the hypnotiser's mind {e.g. in 573 A). Thence he may pass on and discern a true contemporaneous scene {e.g. in 573 B, C, and D), unknown to any one present, and in some few cases there is an element of apparent prevision in the impression (573 F).

574. Our survey of that important, though inchoate, appeal to the subliminal self which passes under the name of hypnotism is now nearly as complete — in its brief sketchy form — as the present state of knowledge permits. I have traced the inception of the mesmeric or hypnotic processes ; I have followed out in both directions the development of the sleeping phase of personality which hypnotism involves. In the first place, I have illustrated the hypnotic extension of that regenerative or vivifying power which the subliminal self habitually manifests in sleep. In the second place, I have indicated the still more important hypnotic development of that greater detachment, that supernormal faculty, which also the sub-

575] HYPNOTISM 211

liminal self has been found in the visions of slumber not rarely to display.

Here, then, my review of hypnotism might not unfitly close ; and I might venture to hope that I had welded many scattered and obscure phenomena into at least something more of apparent unity than previous writers have achieved.

And yet from my point of view — attaching to hypnotism the grave importance which has here been attached to it — one line of reflection seems still lacking before we can pass on with satisfaction to another topic. I have attempted to trace the inevitable rise of hypnotism — its necessary development out of the spontaneous phenomena which preceded and which might so naturally have suggested it. I have shown, nevertheless, its almost accidental initiation, and then its rapid development in ways which no single experimenter has ever been able to correlate or to foresee. I am bound to say something further as to its prospect in the future. A systematic appeal to the deeper powers in man — conceived with the generality with which I have here conceived it — cannot remain a mere appanage of medical practice. It must be fitted on in some way to the whole serious life of man ; it must present itself to him as a development of faiths and instincts which He already deep in his heart. In other words, there must needs be some scheme of self-suggestion, — some general theory which can give the individual a basis for his appeal, whether he regards that appeal as directed to an intelligence outside himself or to his own inherent faculties and informing soul. These helps to the power of generalisation— to the feeling of confidence — we must consider now.

575. The schemes of self-suggestion which have actually been found effective have covered, not unnaturally, a range as wide as all the superstition and all the religion of men. That is to say, that each form of supernatural belief in turn has been utilised as a means of securing that urgently-needed temporal blessing — relief from physical pain. We see the same tendency running through fetichistic, polytheistic, monotheistic forms of belief. Beginning with fetichistic peoples, we observe that charms of various kinds, — inert objects, arbitrary gestures, meaningless words, — have probably been actually the most general means which our race has employed for the cure of disease. We know how long some forms of primitive belief persisted in medicine, — as, for example, the doctrine of likenesses, or the cure of a disease by some object supposed to resemble its leading symptom. What is, however, even more remarkable ^is the efficacy which charms still continue in some cases to possess, even i'hen they are worn merely as an experiment in self-suggestion by a person i^ho is perfectly well aware of their intrinsic futility. The experiments Ion this subject, given in 575 A, seem to show that the mere continual Icontact of some small unfamiliar object will often act as a reminder to the ■subliminal self, and keep, at any rate, some nervous disturbances in check. [Until one reads these modern examples, one can hardly realise how

veritably potent for good may have been the savage amulet, the savage incantation.

576. The transition from fetichistic to polytheistic conceptions of cure is, of course, a gradual one. It may be said to begin when curative properties are ascribed to objects not arbitrarily, nor on account of the look of the objects themselves, but on account of their having been blessed or handled by some divine or semi-divine personage, or having formed part of his body or surroundings during some incarnation. Thus Lourdes water, bottled and exported, is still held to possess curative virtue on account of the Virgin's original blessing bestowed upon the Lourdes spring. But generally the influence of the divine or divinised being is more directly exercised, as in oracles, dreams, invisible touches, or actual theophanies, or appearances of the gods to the adoring patient. It will be seen as we proceed how amply the tradition of Lourdes has incorporated these ancient aids to faith.

But at this point our modern experience suggests to us a remarkable interpolation in the antique chain of ideas. It is now alleged that departed persons need not exert influence through their dead bones alone, nor yet only by their supposed intermediacy with higher powers. There intervenes, in fact, the whole topic of spirit-healing, — which cannot, however, be treated fully here.

Next in the ascending scale from polytheism to monotheism we come to the " Miracles of Lourdes," to which I have just alluded, where the supposed healer is the Virgin Mary, reverenced as semi-divine. This form of belief, however, retains (as has been said) some affinity with fetichism, since the actual water from the Lourdes spring, supposed to have been blessed by the Virgin, is an important factor in the cures.

Much further removed from primitive belief is the appeal made by Christian scientists to the aid of Jesus Christ ; — either as directly answering prayer, or as enabling the worshippers to comprehend the infinite love on which the universe is based, and in face of which pain and sickness become a vain imagination or even a sheer nonentity.

577. Nor, again, is this attempt to rise above pain at all exclusively dependent upon the Christian revelation. " Mind-healing " is a generalised term which includes not only so-called Christian science, but a number of other ways of so regarding the universe as to triumph, while still in the body, over bodily distress and infirmity. Oriental ideas of the unreality of matter (Maya), stoical ideas of the sage's command over external circumstances, mystical ideas of the painless ecstasy into which the purified spirit can enter at will ; — all these conceptions have the advantage of being independent of dogmatic systems, with the accompanying disadvantage of being difficult for ordinary minds to grasp. Mind-healing is a modern name for all this ancient and lofty protest against the tyranny of the flesh.

The points of view thus briefly hinted at do, no doubt, differ widely

577] HYPNOTISM 213

from one another. To the believer in mind-cure, — tne denier of physical evils, — that anguished supplication of the Lourdes pilgrim for the removal of pains, which the sufferer holds as the most urgent of realities, would be in the highest degree distasteful. To both mind-curer and Lourdes pilgrim alike the charms and fetiches of the African savage would seem contemptible or shocking.

To the readers of this chapter, however, there will be nothing surprising in my own inclination to include almost all these efforts at health under the general category of schemes of self-suggestion. Abnost all, I say \ reserving thus for future notice the special case — a small element in the general total — of possible cure by definite spirit-agency.^ But with regard to the great bulk of these psychical cures, the differences involved are subjective rather than objective ; — are differences in the frames of mind of the sufferers rather than in any scientific evidence as to the nature of the healing agency.

It would not be difficult, I think, to show in detail the crudity even of those schemes of thought which have proved in practice the most helpful in the relief of pain. This crudity, indeed, is inevitable ; we are in the very earliest days of self-suggestion ; — a few pioneers only are groping after ways in which the suggestions may be made to take hold ; — and the task is quite as difficult for the self-suggester as for the hypnotist. The present duty, therefore, of psychical criticism is not so much to expose the inconsistencies of each in turn, as to indicate the lines on which this difficult attempt may be pushed with the best chance of lasting success.

In a paper printed in vol. ix. of S.P.R. Proceedings, in 1893,^ my late brother. Dr. A, T. Myers, and I found little difficulty in pointing out the childish inadequacy of much of the evidence which had then been offered by mind-curers or Christian scientists. We endeavoured to indicate certain simple rules to which such evidence ought to conform, in order to bring it into line with ordinary medical practice. Other critics, no doubt, have urged the same precautions ; but I am not aware that any serious effort has yet been made by mind-healers to comply with such conditions. Yet I see a real reason for this reluctance : the Christian scientists, &c., feel more or less consciously that the all-important thing is to keep the selfsuggestion strong and undisturbed, and that medical discussion would tend to weaken and disturb it. There is some truth here ; and in view of that truth I now think that it may be weir to abstain from analysing absurdities which may very easily drop off from the self- suggestive movement as it gathers confidence from success.

Especially must one insist on the underlying philosophical aspiration, — not merely for the prolongation of life on earth, but for the abrogation and annihilation of evil, including physical pain. The strength of the

1 See the case of Dr. X. in Chapter VIII., section 833.

2 " Mind-Cure, Faith-Cure, and the Miracles of Lourdes," by A. T. Myers, M.D., F.R.C.P., and F. W. H. Myers, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 160-210.

mind-curer's position lies in the true thesis that evil is a less real, a less permanent thing than good. It is well that self-suggestion should be turned in this direction, through whatever strange perversions or exaggerations the ultimate goal be won.

578. The so-called '^ Miracles of Lourdes " present a somewhat different problem. They resemble rather a resuscitation of antique methods of self-suggestion than an attempt at breaking new ground. In describing these as a form of self-suggestion (I should at once explain), I am by no means denying (what I am, in fact, presently about to assert) that some inflow from the spiritual world may be an essential element in all these triumphs over the infirmities of the flesh. All that I deny, — and I think that my Appendix will show that I have ample reason for the denial, — is that there is any real evidence whatever for the agency of the Virgin Mary in these cures. The story is, no doubt, a picturesque one, and (as will again be seen in 578 A) one may fairly credit the original seeress, Bernadette, with the possession of some kind of psychical faculty. Further than that the legend cannot, I think, be maintained. Judged by our habitual canons of evidence, — which, as the reader knows, do, in fact, admit the veridical character of many apparitions. — there is no reason to suppose that the figure which appeared to Bernadette was more than a purely subjective hallucination ; — still less reason to assume that that apparition was in any way connected with the subsequent cures. As to those cures themselves, moreover, — in spite of many loud assertions, in spite of what I must call the pseudo-accuracy, the pseudo-candour, of some of the advocates of the miraculous at Lourdes, — neither my brother nor I could discover any well-attested incident which raised them into a different category from the marvels which hypnotic suggestion is effecting daily in the cliniques of many physicians. For my brother's discussion of some of the cases oftenest cited at that date I must refer the reader to our article in the S.P.R. Proceedings, previously mentioned. My own analysis of the legend I have thought it needful to reprint in this volume. I have treated the story, I hope, not without sympathy, — in its analogies with much of ancient and venerable tradition, — in its appeal to hopes, not necessarily illegitimate, and ever recurrent in the heart of man. To the student of suggestion, indeed, to the psychologist, the story of Lourdes is a mine of attractive material. Yet from a point of view perhaps profounder still, I cannot but sympathise with those wiser Catholics who bitterly regret the whole series of incidents ; — who stand aloof from that organised traffic in human ignorance ; — from the vested interests sanctimoniously alert on every side ; — from the money-changers in the temple ; — nay, even from that cowardly craving for earth-life prolonged at any cost which drives the leprous and the cancerous to implore a deferment of their entry into the promised heaven. What a contrast between that crippled and abject multitude, supplicating for another year of useless pain, and Odin's worshippers of old, in a ruder but a braver faith !

580] HYPNOTISM 215

'* For on earth they thought of my threshold, and the gifts 1 have to give ; Nor prayed for a little longer, and a little longer to live."

579. These words will sound, perhaps, needlessly severe. Cormptio optimi pessima. It is hard to keep the balance when one sees, as one surely does at Lourdes, forces — which, if rightly directed, may indefinitely bless and elevate mankind — distorted and abused in such fashion as must ultimately lead to some infidel reaction, — some crushing desertion and downfall of ancient faith. It is 7iot true, a thousand times it is not true, that a bottle of water from a spring near which a girl saw a hallucinatory .figure will by miraculous virtue heal a Turk in Constantinople ; but it is true that on some influx from the unseen world, — an influence dimly adumbrated in that Virgin figure and that sanctified spring, — depends the life and energy of this world of every day.

To me, at least, it seems that no real explanation of hypnotic vitalisation can, in fact, be given except upon the general theory supported in this work — the theory that a world of spiritual life exists, an environment profounder than those environments of matter and ether which in a sense we know. Let us look at this hypothesis a little more closely. When we say that an organism exists in a certain environment, we mean that its energy, or some part thereof, forms an element in a certain system of cosmic forces, which represents some special modification of the ultimate energy. The life of the organism consists in its power of interchanging energy with its environment, — of appropriating by its own action some fragment of that pre-existent and limitless Power. We human beings exist in the first place in a world of matter, whence we draw the obvious sustenance of our bodily functions.

We exist also in a world of ether ; — that is to say, we are constructed to respond to a system of laws, — ultimately continuous, no doubt, with the laws of matter, but affording a new, a generalised, a profounder conception of the Cosmos. So widely different, indeed, is this new aspect of things from the old, that it is common to speak of the ether as a newlyknown environment. On this environment our organic existence depends as absolutely as on the material environment, although less obviously. In ways which we cannot fathom, the ether is at the foundation of our physical being. Perceiving heat, light, electricity, we do but recognise in certain conspicuous ways, — as in perceiving the "X rays " we recognise in a way less conspicuous, — the pervading influence of etherial vibrations which in range and variety far transcend our capacity of response.

580. Within, beyond, the world of ether, — as a still profounder, still more generalised aspect of the Cosmos, — must lie, as I believe, the world of spiritual life. That the world of spiritual life does not depend upon the existence of the material world I hold as now proved by actual evidence. That it is in some way continuous with the world of ether I can well suppose. But for our minds there must needs be a "critical point " in any such imagined continuity ; so that the world where life and

2i6 CHAPTER V [580

thought are carried on apart from matter, must certainly rank again as a new, a metetherial environment. In giving it this name I expressly imply only that from our human point of view it hes after or beyond the ether, as metaphysic lies after or beyond physics. I say only that what does not originate in matter or in ether originates there ; but I well believe that beyond the ether there must be not one stage only, but countless stages in the infinity of things.

Having thus indicated this third great environment on whose preexistent energy I conceive that our organisms do actually draw, I return to show the manner in which this hypothesis may be used to explain the hypnotic results which I have in this chapter recorded. Those results must have brought before the reader with new vividness the ancient unsolved problem of the ultimate source of energy. For what we have in effect been doing with the aid of these hypnotic artifices is simply to energise Life. What Life does for the organism, in slow imperfect fashion, we here train it to do a little faster, a little more completely. Typical of Life is its self-adaptive power, its capacity of responding to new needs, of righting the organism when it has been in any way injured ; — that vis medicatrix Naturcz which is the inmost secret of the living organism. Hypnotism has shown us this vis medicatrix in an unprecedently definite and controllable form. It has shown us in this Natura — the subliminal self of the self-suggester — an intelligence no longer vague and impersonal, but bearing some analogy, some direct relation, to that which we recognise as our own.

We have here, in short, a striking picture not only of subliminal intelhgence but of subliminal power. Of our submerged intelligence enough has already been said to make it conceivable that these complex therapeutical commands should be thus comprehended ; but whence comes the energy needful for so effectual a response?

The word energy is, of course, open to immediate objection. It may be urged that there is here no true increase or illation of energy, but merely a translation into some fresh mode of action of energy already developed by ordinary material nutrition. Man's prayer, it is said, implies no more energy than his curse ; the philosopher's theorem no more than the maniac's fancy. It is obvious, indeed, that the rapidity of organic metabolism does not vary in proportion to the value of the results obtained. In fact, the maniac's hurrying anarchic thought is probably more destructive of tissue than the steady thought of the philosopher. But plainly this mere chemical change by no means goes to the root of the matter. What I desire for my life is neither slow metabolism nor rapid metabolism as such, but metabolism guided by intelligent central force to useful ends. I desire integration of the personality, — intellectual, moral, spiritual concentration. This concentration is hard for me to maintain j I feel it to need, even in its lowest degrees, that special effort which we call attention ; and I see reason to believe that there are far higher degrees

581] HYPNOTISM 217

which no voluntary effort of mine can reach. Now no one can say under what cycle of forces the energy of this vital effort falls ; and until it be resolved into better known forces, I cannot justly be condemned for a hypothesis which treats it as an energy sui generis, and seeks for traces of its realm of origin and hints as to its possible extent.

581. In my view, then, each man is essentially a spirit, controlling an organism which is itself a complex of lower and smaller lives. The spirit's control is not uniform throughout the organism, nor in all phases of organic life. In waking life it controls mainly the centres of supraliminal thought and feehng, exercising little control over deeper centres, which have been educated into a routine sufficient for common needs. But in subliminal states — trance and the like — the supraliminal processes are inhibited, and the lower organic centres are retained more directly under the spirit's control. As you get into the profounder part of man's being, you get nearer to the source of his human vitality. You get thus into a region of essentially greater responsiveness to spiritual appeal than is offered by the superficial stratum which has been shaped and hardened by external needs into a definite adaptation to the earthly environment. Even thus the caterpillar's outside integument is fashioned stiffly to suit larval requirements ; while, deeper in the animal, unseen processes of rapid change are going on, in obedience to an impulse not derived from larval life.

The ultimate lesson of hypnotic suggestion, especially in the somnambulic state, is, therefore, that we thus get, by empirical artifices, at these strata of greater plasticity — plasticity not to external but to internal forces — where the informing spirit controls the organism more immediately, and can act on it with greater freedom.

This conception seems to throw light on a fact repeatedly observed, but hitherto hard of explanation. The somnambulic state seems to be the introduction to two powers apparently quite disparate — the selfsanative and the telsesthetic. The highest development of sleep thus involves at once more penetrative bodily recuperation, and more independent spiritual activity. The spirit is more powerful either to draw metetherial energy into the organism, or to act in partial independence of the organism. The cases already cited of " travelling clairvoyance " have, in fact, generally occurred during sleep-waking states, originally induced for some healing purpose. I take this to mean that the spirit can in such states more easily either modify the body, or partially quit and return to the body. In other words, it can for the time either pay the body more attention, with benefit, or less attention, without injury. I use the word attention because, in the impossibility of conceiving how a spirit can affect or control an organism, the most fitting term seems to be that by which we designate our own attempts at concentrating the personality. I would say in crude terms that the soul keeps the body alive by attending to it, and (as explained in Chapter IV.) can attend to central operations more

2i8 CHAPTER V [582.

directly than to superficial ones — to the activities of sleep more directly than to those of waking. Hence in deep states it can partially withdraw attention from the organism and bestow it elsewhere, while remaining capable of at once resuming its ordinary attitude towards that organism. Bodily death ensues when the soul's attention is wholly and irrevocably withdrawn from the organism, which has become from physical causes unfit to act as the exponent of an informing spirit. Life means the maintenance of this attention ; achieved, in this view, by the soul's absorption of energy from the spiritual or metetherial environment. For if our individual spirits and organisms live by dint of this spiritual energy, underlying the chemical energy by which organic change is carried on, then we must presumably renew and replenish the spiritual energy as continuously as the chemical. To keep our chemical energy at work, we live in a warm environment, and from time to time take food. By analogy, in order to keep the spiritual energy at work, we should live in a spiritual environment, and possibly from time to time absorb some special influx of spiritual life.

582. If this be so, there may be a truth — deeper than we can at this moment stay to discuss — in many subjective experiences of poets, philosophers, mystics, saints. And if their sense of inflowing and indwelling life indeed be true ; — if the subliminal uprushes which renew and illumine them are fed in reality from some metetherial environment ; — then a similar influence may by analogy exist and be recognisable along the whole gamut of psychophysical phenomena ; — not only in the realm of high spiritual emotions, but wheresoever there is a quickening and an elevation of even our lower organic life. The nascent life of each of us is perhaps a fresh draft, — the continued life is an ever-varying draft, — upon the cosmic energy. In that environing energy — call it by what name we will — we live and move and have our being; and it may well be that certain dispositions of mind, certain phases of personality, may draw in for the moment from that energy a fuller vitalising stream.

On this hypothesis there will be an essential concordance between all views — spiritual or materialistic — which ascribe to any direction of attention or will any practical effect upon the human organism. " The prayer of faith shall save the sick," says St. James. "There is nothing in hypnotism but suggestion," says Bernheim. In my clumsier language these two statements (setting aside a possible telepathic element in St. James' words) will be expressible in identical terms. "There will be effective therapeutical or ethical self-suggestion whenever by any artifice subliminal attention to a bodily function or to a moral purpose is carried to some unknown pitch of intensity which draws energy from the metetherial world."

583. A great practical question remains, to which St. James' words supply a direct, though perhaps an inadequate answer, while Bernheim's words supply no answer at all.

583] HYPNOTISM 219

What is this saving faith to be, and how is it to be attained? Can we find any sure way of touching the spring which moves us so potently, at once from without and from within ? Can we propose any form of selfsuggestion effective for all the human race? any controlling thought on which all ahke can fix that long-sought mountain-moving faith ?

Assuredly no man can extemporise such a faith as this. Whatever form it may ultimately take, it must begin as the purification, the intensification, of the purest, the intensest beliefs to which human minds have yet attained. It must invoke the whole strength of all philosophies, of all religions ; — not indeed the special arguments or evidence adduced for each, which lie outside my present theme, but all the spiritual energy by which in truth they live. And so far as this purpose goes, of drawing strength from the unseen, if one faith is true, all faiths are true ; in so far at least as human mind can grasp or human prayer appropriate the unknown metetherial energy, the inscrutable Grace of God.

The mystery of these extreme phenomena of suggestion is certainly not thus fully solved. No more than my predecessors have I been able to explain why it is that certain organisms at certain moments should become thus superior to themselves ; — capable of a response so vigorous, submissive to a control so profound. But I have set forth a point of view which helps towards the subsumption of this minor mystery under a mystery of universal scope and world-old experience. I have placed " suggestion," I think, in a truer relation to other forms of external suasion or internal will than the Nancy School have done. They have spoken as though suggestion were comparable with supraliminal suasion, supraliminal endeavour. I have tried to show that its real efficacy lies among subliminal processes ; — as an empirical facilitation of our absorption of spiritual energy or acquisition of directive force from a metetherial environment. Large and assumptive as this definition may seem to be, it is not too wide for nascent phenomena which already include mind-cure and the miracles of Lourdes as well as ordinary hypnotic practice. And it suggests — what narrower definitions have not yet suggested — the possibiHty of a world-wide faith, or set of the human spirit, which may make for an ever more potent mastery over organic hindrance and physical ill. Let the great currents of belief run gradually into a deeper channel. Let men realise that their most comprehensive duty, in this or other worlds, is intensity of spiritual life ; nay, that their own spirits are co-operative elements in the cosmic evolution, are part and parcel of the ultimate vitalising Power.



Chapter VI. Sensory Automatism

BXcTTO^cv yap apri St kcroTTTpov ev divty/Aari.

600. We have now reached a central node in our complex argument. Several hnes of evidence, already pursued, converge here to form the starting-point for a new departure. Our view of the subUminal self must pass in this chapter through a profound transition. The glimpses which we have till now obtained of it have shown it as something incidental, subordinate, fragmentary. But henceforth it will gradually assume the character of something persistent, principal, unitary ; appearing at last as the deepest and most permanent representative of man's true being.

Let us consider what the successive stages of our realisation of this submerged consciousness have thus far taught us.

First of all, in Chapter II., we realised that secondary streams of consciousness and memory, separate from the ordinary supraliminal stream, are in certain cases developed, and may even become permanent, thus either alternating with the original stream of memory or supplanting it altogether. Yet in most cases the uprush of these subterranean streams, the upheaval of these submerged strata, seemed merely disintegrative phenomena; seemed rather to reveal the incoherent elements from which human personality has been thus far unified than to suggest hope of its still closer unity, its still further concentration.

In the next Chapter (III.) we approached the subject from a different side. Without entering on any cases obviously abnormal, we traced the uprushes of the subliminal faculty which occur, helpfully and sanely, in the course of ordinary thought and life. We saw that there lay hidden beneath the threshold a concentrative or imaginative power more vivid than that with which we habitually deal. The " inspirations of genius " which seem to spring full-armed into our ken from the depths of our being must count as a form of subliminal faculty, when that is otherwise established, although no theory of such faculty could be based solely upon mental products so closely interwoven with supraliminal or voluntary thinking.

In the next following Chapter (IV.) we traced the varieties of subliminal

600] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 221

action in that alternating phase of our personality which may be said to lie wholly beneath the threshold of waking consciousness.

We found that the state of sleep reproduced and varied the subliminal phenomena observed in waking hours. The pictures and utterances of some dreams, presenting themselves without our conscious elaboration, resemble confused fragments of the inspiration of genius. Pushed somewhat further, becoming more intense and more separate from waking life, dreams turn into so77inambulisms (discussed in Chapter V.), and thus may develop into veritable fissions of personality.

For the most part, dream introduces us only to incoherent thought, somnambulism only to irrational action. Yet from time to time we have found in dreams indications of a memory which surpasses waking memory ; nay, which even impHes that something within us has exercised in waking hours a perception more minute and comprehensive than our supraliminal consciousness ever knew. During various forms of sleep itself, moreover, something of unusual faculty seems to be exercised ; mathematical or philological ingenuity may surpass its waking level ; the senses may show a delicacy of which we had not judged them capable. And in the background of all this we catch glimpses of still higher faculty ; of those supernormal powers of telepathy and telaesthesia on whose existence our belief in a unitary Self must ultimately be so largely based.

Beneath the apparent blankness of sleep, many changes, both physical and psychical, may occur unnoted, for evil or for good. On the degenerative side sleep passes into coma, and somnambulisms merge into hysteria ; and at many points our description of sleep indicates the nearness of those morbid dissociations already described. But sleep and sleep-waking states may be developed on the other, the evolutive side as well. The subliminal self appears to exercise in sleep an increased control, and to be able to carry thereby the physical organism into higher vitality, the mind into readier communication, by supernormal methods, with other minds, and into scenes beyond the range of sense. Incidentally we perceive a new development of multiplex personality ; a new power of alternating or combining streams of memory, of changing for a time or permanently the character and the will.

Our last Chapter (V.) was devoted to this hypnotic concentration and expansion of human faculty. I briefly detailed the empirical artifices employed to give effect to self-suggestion, and reviewed the results, especially the intellectual and moral results, to which that self-suggestion ultimately leads. And here more than ever, — both in hypnotic phenomena and in the analogous cases of spontaneous somnambulism described in the same chapter, — we perceived elements of new supernormal faculty mingling with heightened faculty of familiar types.

Each, then, of these several lines of inquiry has led us, through widely varying phenomena, in substantially the same direction. From

every side we have indications of something complex and obscure in the structure of human personaHty ; of something transcending sensory experience in the reserves of human faculty.

601. We have come to a point where we need some further colligating generalisation ; some conception under which these scattered phenomena may be gathered and exhibited in their true kinship.

Some steps at least towards such a generalisation the evidence to be presented in these next chapters may allow us to take. Considering together, under the heading of sensory and motor automatism, the whole range of that subliminal action of which we have as yet discussed fragments only, we shall gradually come to see that its distinctive faculty of telepathy or telaesthesia is in fact an introduction into a realm where the limitations of organic life can no longer be assumed to persist. Considering, again, the evidence which shows that that portion of the personality which exercises these powers during our earthly existence does actually continue to exercise them after our bodily decay, we shall recognise a relation — obscui'e but indisputable — betwee?i the subliffiifial and the surviving self.

I begin, then, with my definition of automatism, as the widest term under which to include the range of subliminal emergences into ordinary life. Different classes of those uprushes have already received special names. The turbulent uprush and downdraught of hysteria ; the helpful uprushes of genius, co-operating with supraliminal thought ; the profound and recuperative changes which follow on hypnotic suggestion ; these have been described under their separate headings. But the main mass of subliminal manifestations remains unde scribed. 1 have dealt little with veridical hallucinations, not at all with automatic writing, nor with the utterances of spontaneous trance. The products of inner vision or inner audition externalised into quasi-percepts, — these form what I term sensory automaiis7ns. The messages conveyed by movement of limbs or hand or tongue, initiated by an inner motor impulse beyond the conscious will — these are what I term motor automatisms. And I claim that when all these are surveyed together their essential analogy will be recognised beneath much diversity of form. They will be seen to be messages from the subliminal to the supraliminal self; endeavours — conscious or unconscious — of submerged tracts of our personality to present to ordinary waking thought fragments of a knowledge which no ordinary waking thought could attain.

602. And since it is plain that the point of view here taken is one unfamiUar to psychologists — and indeed that the distinction here insisted on would have seemed till recently quite unmeaning — I must dwell a little longer on the relation which I conceive to exist between intellectual life above and below the conscious threshold. By ordinary psychology, supraliminal life is accepted as representing the normal or substantive personality, of which subliminal life is the semi-conscious substratum, or

662] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 223

half-illuminated fringe, or the morbid excrescence. I, on the other hand, regard supraliminal life merely as a privileged case of personality ; a special phase of our personality, which is easiest for us to study, because it is simplified for us by our ready consciousness of what is going on in it ; yet which is by no means necessarily either central or prepotent, could we see our whole being in comprehensive view.

Now if we thus regard the whole supraliminal personality as a special case of something much more extensive, it follows that we must similarly regard all human faculty, and each sense severally, as mere special or privileged cases of some more general power.

All human terrene faculty will be in this view simply a selection from faculty existing in the metetherial world ; such part of that antecedent, even if not individualised, faculty as may be expressible through each several human organism.

Each of our special senses, therefore, may be conceived as straining towards development of a wider kind than earthly experience has as yet allowed. And each special sense is both an internal and an external sense ; involves a tract of the brain, of unknown capacity, as well as an end-organ, whose capacity is more nearly measurable. The relation of this internal, mental, mind's-eye vision to non-sensory psychological perception on the one hand, and to ocular vision on the other hand, is exactly one of the points on which some profounder observation will be seen to be necessary. One must at least speak of " mind's eye " perception in these sensory terms, if one is to discuss it at all.

But ordinary experience at any rate assumes that the end-organ alone can acquire fresh information, and that the central tract can but combine this new information with information already sent in to it. This must plainly be the case, for instance, with optical or acoustic knowledge ; — with such knowledge as is borne on waves of ether or of air, and is caught by a terminal apparatus, evolved for the purpose. But observe that it is by no means necessary that all seeing and all hearing should be through eye or ear.

The vision of our dreams — to keep to vision alone for greater simplicity— is non-optical vision. It is usually generated in the central brain, not sent up thither from an excited retina. Optical laws can only by a stretch of terms be said to apply to it at all.

This fact is commonly held to be unimportant, because dreamvision itself is commonly held to be worthless ; achieving nothing more than a mere rifacimento of the knowledge gained by day.

From our present point of view, however, we have no right to make any such assumption. We cannot possibly say a priori by what means, or from what quarters, knowledge may come to the subliminal self. That must be purely a matter for observation and experiment.

What we are bound to do is to generalise our conception of vision as far as possible, — no longer confining it to the definite phenomenon

of retinal or optical vision, — and thus to find out by actual inquiry, what sort of messages are brought to us by each form of vision which this enlarged conception contains.

There is a point, as all know, where vision differentiates itself from various indefinite forms of perception. There is a point, as I shall claim, where vision merges again into perception not less definite but more general than sight itself.

Between this inferior and this superior limit two main streams of vision may be discerned — the external and the internal, the optical and the mental, of which the one is almost wholly supraliminal, the other largely subliminal. Let us attempt some rough conspectus, which may show something of the relation in which central and peripheral vision stand to each other.

603. We start from a region below the specialisation of visual faculty. The study of the successive dermal and nervous modifications which have led up to that faculty belongs to Biology, and all that our argument needs here is to point out that the very fact that this faculty has been developed in a germ, animated by metetherial life, indicates that some perceptivity from which sight could take its origin pre-existed in the originating, the unseen world. The germ was so constructed ab initio that it could develop in this and in other ways : whether we assume that each specific modifiability existed (and might have been discerned in the germ by an all-wise spectator) from the first, or that only a ground-plan existed, to which, in successive generations, fresh elements of determination and precision were added from the world of Life. We know vaguely how vision differentiated itself peripherally, with the growing sensibility of the pigment-spot to light and shadow. But there must have been a cerebral differentiation also, and also a psychological differentiation, namely, a gradual shaping of a distinct feeling from obscure feelings, whose history we cannot recover.

Yet I believe that we have still persistent in our brain-structure some dim vestige of the transition from that early undifferentiated continuous sensitivity to our existing specialisation of sense. Probably in all of us, though in some men much more distinctly than in others, there exist certain syncesthesice or concomitances of sense-impression, which are at any rate not dependent on any recognisable link of association. A second sense sometimes reacts automatically to a stimulus which seems fitted to excite a single sense alone, I do not merely mean that the dog's bark calls up the look of the dog, while his look suggests his bark ; that is an association formed by the mere experience of life. But for a true synsesthetic or "sound-seer," — to take the commonest form of these central repercussions of sensory shock, — there is a connection between sight and sound which is instinctive, complex, and yet for our intelligence altogether arbitrary. In some cases, indeed, these chromatisms can be watched in development, if not in origination, and may be referred to some odd

607] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 225

chance of fanciful association. But this first group of cases of soundseeing melts into a second, where the chromatisms seem to be determined before birth, and to have preceded conscious mentation, in all their meaningless precision of correspondence, between, say, a particular note played on the piano and a particular tint of apple-green. The specimens given in 603 A and B will show something of this irrational complexity. My present point is that these synaesthesiae stand on the dividing hne between percepts externally and internally originated. These irradiations of sensitivity, sometimes, as I have said, apparently congenital, cannot, on the one hand, be called a purely mental phenomenon. Nor again can they be definitely classed under external vision ; since they do sometimes follow upon a mental process of association. It seems safer to term them enteticephalic, on the analogy of entoptic, since they seem to be due to something in brain-structure, much as entoptic percepts are due to something in the structure of the eye.

604. I will, then, start with the synaesthesiae as the most generalised form of inward perception, and will pass on to other classes which approach more nearly to ordinary external vision.

From these entencephalic photisms we seem to proceed by an easy transition to the most inward form of unmistakable entoptic vision — which is therefore the most inward form of all external vision — the flash of light consequent on electrisation of the optic nerve. Next on our outward road we may place the phosphenes caused by pressure on the optic nerve or irritation of the retina. Next Purkinje's figures, or shadows cast by the blood-vessels of the middle layer upon the bacillary layer of the retina. Then muscce voliiantes, or shadows cast by motes in the vitreous humour upon the fibrous layer of the retina.

605. Midway, again, between entoptic and ordinary external vision we may place after-images ,- which, although themselves perceptible with shut eyes, presuppose a previous retinal stimulation from without ; — forming, in fact, the entoptic sequelae of ordinary external vision.

606. Next comes our ordinary vision of the external world — and this, again, is pushed to its highest degree of externality by the employment of artificial aids to sight. He who gazes through a telescope at the stars has mechanically improved his end-organs to the furthest point now possible to man.

607. And now, standing once more upon our watershed of entencephalic vision, let us trace the advancing capacities of internal vision. The forms of vision now to be considered are virtually independent of the eye ; they can persist, that is to say, after the destruction of the eye, if only the eye has worked for a few years, so as to give visual education to the brain. We do not, in fact, fully know the limits of this independence, which can only be learnt by a fuller examination of intelligent blind persons than has yet been made. Nor can we say with certainty how far in a seeing person the eye is in its turn influenced by the brain. I shall avoid postulating

VOL. I. P

any " retropulsive current " from brain to retina, just as I have avoided any expression more specific than " the brain" to indicate the primary seat of sight. The arrangement here presented, as already explained, is a psychological one, and can be set forth without trespassing on controverted physiological ground.

We may take memory-images as the simplest type of internal vision. These images, as commonly understood, introduce us to no fresh knowledge ; they preserve the knowledge gained by conscious gaze upon the outer world. In their simplest spontaneous form they are the cerebral sequelae of external vision, just as after-images are its entoptic sequelae. And we find that in some cases these two classes of vision are confounded (see 607 A). But we see that into the cerebral storage of impressions one element habitually enters which is totally absent from the mere retinal storage, namely, a psychical element — a rearrangement or generalisation of the impressions retinally received.

608. Next we come to a common class of memory-images, in which the subliminal rearrangement is particularly marked. I speak of dreams — which lead us on in two directions from memory-images ; — in the direction of imagination-images , and in the direction of hallucinations. Certain individual dreams, indeed, of rare types point also in other directions which later on we shall have to follow. But dreams as a class consist of confused memory-images, reaching a kind of low hallucinatory intensity, a glow, so to say, sufficient to be perceptible in darkness.

609. I will give the name of imagination-images to those conscious recombinations of our store of visual imagery which we compose either for our mere enjoyment, as "waking dreams," or as artifices to help us to the better understanding of facts of nature confusedly discerned. Such, for instance, are imagined geometrical diagrams ; and Watt, lying in bed in a dark room and conceiving the steam-engine, illustrates the utmost limit to which voluntary internal visualisation can go.

610. Here at any rate the commonly admitted category of stages of inward vision will close. Thus far and no farther the brain's capacity for presenting visual images can be pushed on under the guidance of the conscious will of man. It is now my business to show, on the contrary, that we have here reached a mere intermediate point in the development of internal vision. These imagination-images, valuable as they are, are merely attempts to control supraliminally a form of yision which — as spontaneous memory-images have already shown us — is predominantly subliminal. The memory-images welled up from a just- submerged stratum ; we must now consider what other images also well upward from the same hidden source.

To begin with, it is by no means certain that some of Watt's images of steam-engines did not well up from that source, — did not emerge readymade into the supraliminal mind while it rested in that merely expectant state which forms generally a great part of invention. We have seen in

611] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 227

Chapter III. that there is reason to beUeve in such a conveyance in the much inferior mental processes of calculating boys, &c., and also in the mental processes of the painter. In short, without pretending to judge of the proportion of voluntary to involuntary imagery in each several creative mind, we must undoubtedly rank the spontaneously emergent visual images of genius as a further stage of internal vision.

And now we have reached, by a triple road, the verge of a most important development of inward vision — namely, that vast range of phenomena which we call hallucination. Each of our last three classes had led up to hallucination in a different way. Dreams actually are hallucinations ; but they are usually hallucinations of low intensity ; and are only rarely capable of maintaining themselves for a few seconds (as hypnopompic illusions) when the dreamer wakes to the stimuli of the material world. Imaginalioti-images may be carried to a hallucinatory pitch by good visualisers (see 610 A). And the inspirations of genius — Raphael's San Sisto is the classical instance — may present themselves in hallucinatory vividness to the astonished artist.

611. A hallucination, one may say boldly, is in fact a hyper (ss the sia ; and generally a central hyperaesthesia. That is to say, the hallucination is in some cases due indirectly to peripheral stimulation ; but often also it is the result of a stimulus to " mind's-eye vision," which sweeps the idea onwards into visual form, regardless of ordinary checks. It is a familiar remark, indeed, that each idea, according as its motor or its sensory elements predominate, is either a nascent movement or a nascent hallucination. We cannot possibly tell beforehand what kind of stimulus, — healthful or harmful, reinforcement of energy or mere breakdown of inhibition,— will carry on this nascency into actual birth. '' Mind's-eye vision," like retinal vision, has a habitual limit, in each case presumably determined by natural selection or otherwise as the limit most convenient for the race, considering the resources of the organism. In some individuals, however, these average limits are greatly overpassed, with or without resultant advantage. Exceptional keenness of ocular vision, useless to most men, may help the astronomer; exceptional power of inward visualisation, to most men a mere curiosity, may singularly help (as in an instance to which I have often alluded) the pourtrayers from memory of flying birds.

Here, then, is a comprehensive and reasonable way of regarding these multifarious hallucinations or sensory automatisms. They are phenomena of central or cerebral hyperassthesia — phenomena which must neither be feared nor ignored, but rather controlled and interpreted. Nor will that interpretation be an easy matter. The interpretation of the symbols by which the retina represents the external world has been, whether for the race or for the individual, no short or simple process. Yet ocular vision is in my view a simple, easy, privileged case of vision generally ; and the symbols which represent our internal percepts of an immaterial world are

likely to be far more complex than any impressions from the material world on the retina.

All inward visions are like symbols abridged from a picture-alphabet. In order to understand any one class of hallucinations, we ought to have all classes before us. At the lower limit of the series, indeed, the analysis of the physician should precede that of the psychologist. We already know to some extent, and may hope soon to know more accurately, what sensory disturbance corresponds to what nervous lesion. Yet these violent disturbances of inward perception — the snakes of the drunkard, the scarlet fire of the epileptic, the jeering voices of the paranoiac — these are perhaps of too gross a kind to afford more than a kind of neurological introduction to the subtler points which arise when hallucination is unaccompanied by any observable defect or malady.

It is, indeed, obvious enough that the more idiognomonic the hallucination is, the more isolated from any other disturbance of normality, the greater will be its psychological interest. An apparently sponta7ieous modification of central percepts — what phenomenon could promise to take us deeper into the mystery of the mind?

612. Yet until quite recently — until, in short, Edmund Gurney took up the inquiry in 1882 — this wide, important subject was treated, even in serious text-books, in a superficial and perfunctory way. Few statistics were collected ; hardly anything was really known ; rather there was a facile assumption that all hallucinations or sensory automatisms must somehow be due to physical malady, even when there was no evidence whatever for such a connection. I must refer my readers to Gurney's r6sum6 in his chapter on " Hallucinations " in Phantasms of the Living, if they would realise the gradual confused fashion in which men's minds had been prepared for the wider view soon to be opened, largely by Gurney's own statistical and analytical work. The wide collection of first-hand experiences of sensory automatisms of every kind which he initiated, and which the S.P.R. "Census of Hallucinations " continued after his death (see 612 A) has for the first time made it possible to treat these phenomena with some surety of hand.

The results of these inquiries show that a great number of sensory automatisms occur among sane and healthy persons, and that for many of these we can at present offer no explanation whatever. For some of them, however, we can offer a kind of explanation, or at least an indication of a probable determining cause, whose mode of working remains wholly obscure.

Thus, in some few instances, although there is no disturbance of health, there seems to be a predisposition to the externalisation of figures or sounds. Since this in no way interferes with comfort, we must simply class it as an idiosyncratic central hyperaesthesia — much like the tendency to extremely vivid dreams, which by no means always implies a poor quality of sleep.

613] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 229

In a few instances, again, we can trace moral predisposing causes — expectation, grief, anxiety.

These causes, however, turn out to be much less often effective than might have been expected from the popular readiness to invoke them. In two ways especially the weakness of this predisposing cause is impressed upon us. In the first place, the bulk of our percipients experience their hallucinations at ordinary unexciting moments ; traversing their more anxious crises without any such phenomenon. In the second place, those of our percipients whose hallucination is in fact more or less coincident with some distressing external event, seldom seem to have been predisposed to the hallucination by a knowledge of the event. For the event was generally unknown to them when the corresponding hallucination occurred.

613. This last remark, it will be seen, introduces us to the most interesting and important group of percipients and of percepts ; the percipients whose gift constitutes a fresh faculty rather than a degeneration ; the percepts which are veridical — which are (as we shall see cause to infer) in some way generated by some event outside the percipient's mind, so that their correspondence with that event conveys some new fact, in however obscure a form. It is this group, of course, which gives high importance to the whole inquiry ; which makes the study of inward vision no mere curiosity, but rather the opening of an inlet into forms of knowledge to which we can assign no bound.

Now these telepathic hallucinations will introduce us to very varying forms of inward vision. It will be well to begin their study by recalling and somewhat expanding the thesis already advanced : that man's ocuiar vision is but a special or privileged case of visual power, of which power his inner vision affords a more extensive example.

Ocular vision is the perception of material objects, in accordance with optical laws, from a definite point in space. Our review of hallucinations has already removed two of these limitations. If I see a hallucinatory figure — and figures seen in dremns come under this category — I see something which is not a material object, and I see it in a manner not determined by optical laws. A dream-figure may indeed seem to conform to optical laws ; but that will be the result of self-suggestion, or of organised memories, and will vary according to the dreamer's visualising power. While a portrait-painter may see a face in dream which he can paint from memory when he wakes, the ordinary man's dream-percept will be vague, shifting, and unrememberable.

Similarly, if I see a subjective hallucinatory figure " out in the room," its aspect is not determined by optical laws (it may even seem to stand behind \h.Q observer, or otherwise outside his visual field), but it will more or less confor?n — by my mere self-suggestion, if by nothing else — to optical laws ; and, moreover, it will still seem to be seen from a fixed point in space, namely, from the stationary observer's eyes or brain.

All this seems fairly plain, so long as we are admittedly dealing with hallucinatory figures whose origin must be in the percipient's own mind. But so soon as we come to quasi-percepts which we believe to exist or to originate somewhere outside the percipient's mind, our difficulties come thick and fast.

If there be some external origin for our inward vision (which thereby becomes veridical) we must not any longer assume that all veridical inward vision starts or is exercised from the same point. If it gets hold of facts (veridical impressions or pictures, not mere subjective fancies), we cannot be sure a priori whether it somehow goes to find the facts, or the facts come to find it. Again, we cannot any longer take for granted that it will be cognisant only of phantasmal or immaterial percepts. If it can get at phantasmal percepts outside the organism, may it not get at material percepts also? May it not see distant houses, as well as the images of distant souls?

The theoretical possibilities fall under four heads : — (i) One may see material objects from the fixed point where one's body stands. This is ordinary optical vision.

(2) One may see immaterial apparitions from a fixed point. This is the case with some dreams, with purely subjective hallucinations, and with some veridical hallucinations — as crystal-visions.

(3) One may see material objects, as though by " bilocation," from a point apparently remote from one's body. This would be what used to be called " travelling clairvoyance," or what I have spoken of as psychical excursion, involving some kind of perception as from a new standpoint, which perception may or may not include material objects in its purview.

(4) One may see phantasmal pictures from a point apparently remote from one's body. This last possibility follows necessarily upon the rest. If there be immaterial apparitions at all, and if one's point of observation can move, one may see visions or symbolical pictures, as though by "bilocation," from a point apparently remote from one's physical frame.

614. Hazardous as these speculations may seem, they nevertheless represent an attempt to get our notions of supersensory things as near down to our notions of sensory things as we fairly can.

I deliberately adopt the language which the percipient's own consciousness dictates as to "travelling clairvoyance" and the like; and this for two reasons. In the first place, as will be seen as we proceed, I think that this phraseology approximates as nearly as is now possible to a truth which we cannot hope to render in any adequate way ; and in the second place, I cannot discover any other form of words which would in reality carry greater philosophic authority, or involve a conception in itself more definite or reasonable than that which I adopt. Any attempt to deal with these spiritual phenomena as realities — as phenomena capable

615] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 231

of correlation with the material phenomena which we know — does at once and inevitably demonstrate the uselessness for such a purpose of ordinary metaphysical terminology. Whatever may be our ultimate conception of an ideal world, we must not for the present attempt to start from any standpoint too far removed from the spatial and temporal existence which alone we know.

We cannot, however, use these terms of " travelling clairvoyance," " psychical invasion," and the like, without making some suggestion towards an intermediate conception of space — something between space as we know it in the material world and space as we imagine it to disappear in the ideal world — which may enable the reader to grasp with less confusion the discussions which follow. Telepathy is a conception intermediate between the apparent isolation of minds here communicating only as a rule through material organs, and the ultimate conception of the unity of all mind. And similarly the conception which I am about to propose, of a recognition of space without our concomitant subjection to laws of matter, is strictly intermediate between man's incarnate condition and the condition of exemption from our present forms of thought to which we may imagine him ultimately to attain. I may go further and say that the general drift of all our evidence makes for the thesis of continuity in cosmic phenomena. We have no right to assume that our physical death is a unique crisis in our history; nor, again, if our soul survives, that death involves more of change in the soul's perceptions than we can plainly infer that it must involve. We perceive that the material body is destroyed ; and we may therefore infer that there is no further friction or inertia to overcome. We perceive that the sense-organs perish with the body ; and we may therefore infer that there are new forms of perceptivity. But we cannot possibly infer a priori that all recognition of space must needs disappear with the disappearance of the particular bodily sensations by means of which our conception of space has been developed. Under new conditions, involving the absence of various limitations which now bind us, there may even be a clearer and completer perception of space than is at present possible to us. We can at least imagine that a spirit should be essentially independeftt of space, but yet capable of recognising space, not only while yet confined by the material body, but in such action as he may take when partially and temporarily, or wholly and permanently, delivered from the body's constraint.

615. Provisionally admitting this view, let us consider what range we are now led to assign to inner vision, when it is no longer merely subjective but veridical ; bringing news to the percipient of actual fact outside his own organism.

We infer that it may represent to us (i) material objects; or (2) symbols of immaterial things; (3) in ways not necessarily accordant with optical laws; and (4) from a point of view not necessarily located within the organism. I will take an illustration from a case which will later on be quoted in detail (666 C).

A Mrs. Wilmot has a vision of her husband in a cabin in a distant steamer. Besides her husband, she sees in the cabin a stranger (who was in fact present there), with certain material details. Now here I should say that Mrs. Wilmot's inner vision discerned material objects, from a point of view outside her own organism. But, on the other hand, although the perception came to her in visual terms, I do not suppose that it was really optical, that it came through the eye.

Mrs. Wilmot might believe, say, that her husband's head concealed from her some part of the berth in which he lay; but this would not mean a real optical concealment, but only a special direction of her attention, guided by preconceived notions of what would be optically visible from a given point.

As we proceed further we shall see, I think, in many ways how needful is this excursive theory to explain viany telepathic and all telsesthetic experiences ; many, I mean, of the cases where two minds are in communication, and all the cases where the percipient learns material facts (as words in a book, mottoes in a nutshell, see 573 E, &:c.) with which no other known mind is concerned.

Another most important corollary of this excursive theory must just be mentioned here. If there be spiritual excursion to a particular point of space, it is conceivable that this should involve not only the migrant spirit's perception from that point, but also perception of that point by persons materially present near it. That point may become d, phaniasmogenetic centre, as well as a centre of outlook. In plain words, if A has spiritually invaded B's room, and there sees B, B on his part may see A symbolically standing there ; and C and D if present may see A as well.

This hint, here thrown out as an additional argument for the excursive theory, will fall to be developed later on. For the present we must confine our attention to our immediate subject ; the range of man's inner vision, and the means which he must take to understand, to foster, and to control it.

616. The word control implies repression as well as guidance ; and we have seen that there is in fact a class of inner visions where mere repression is needed. The hallucinatory delirium, indeed, of the drunkard or the maniac — the most disintegrated output of inner vision — can seldom be checked while the brain remains poisoned and ^unsound. But it is a noteworthy fact that such degenerative hallucinations as are at all curable are much more often curable by hypnotic suggestion than in any other way. The same kind of influence which generates harmless hallucinations can destroy harmful ones. That extension of power over submerged strata of the patient's mind, that ability to touch a deep-seated spring, which at first seemed a mere scientific curiosity, is found to have a novel practical use.

This is the first and simplest step in the control of inner vision.

617] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 233

617. The next step is one to which, as the reader of my chapter on hypnotism already knows, I attribute an importance much greater than is generally accorded to it. I refer to the hypnotiser's power not only of controlling but of inducing hallucinations in his subject.

These I have already described in some detail. I have noticed the facility of their production, their harmlessness, the advance which they show on ordinary imaginative power. Let us now consider them in relation to a wider field ; as the outcome of central sensory stimulation— as the result of an empirical effort to guide and quicken the inner vision.

It is at once clear that the explanation of induced hypnotic hallucinations which is offered in ordinary handbooks is quite insufficient. As I have already said (in 544), the evocation of hallucinations is commonly spoken of as a mere example of the subject's obedience to the hypnotiser. " I tell my subject to raise his arm, and he raises it ; I tell him to see a tiger in the room, and he sees one accordingly." But manifestly these two incidents are not on the same level, and only appear to be so through a certain laxity of language. The usage of speech allows me to say, " I will make my subject lift his arm," although I am of course unable to aff"ect the motor centres in his brain which start that motion. But it is so easy for a man to lift his arm that my speech takes that familiar power for granted, and notes only his readiness to lift it when I tell him — the hypnotic complaisance which prompts him to obey me if I suggest this trivial action. But when I say, "I will make him see a tiger," I take for granted a power on his part which is not familiar, which I have no longer a right to assume. For under ordinary circumstances my subject simply cannot see a tiger at will ; nor can I affect the visual centres which might enable him to do so. All that I can ask him to do, therefore, is to choose this particular way of indicating that in his hypnotic condition he has become able to stimulate his central sensory tracts more powerfully than ever before. In his hypnotic complaisance he adopts my suggestion ; he makes it a self-suggestion ; he uses his newly developed faculty in the trivial manner which I desire. It is not my command, but his faculty, that is the kernel of the whole matter. Of what kind precisely, then, is the new capacity here involved ?

Our discussion of hypnotism in the last chapter reviewed hypnotic increases of faculty of various kinds. First of all came that increase of profound organic faculty, of the vigour of the nutritive system, which lies at the base of psycho-therapeutics. Then came increase of sensibility to external stimuli ; hypnotic hyperaesthesia, or quickening of sight, hearing, taste, and smell ; apparently capable of being pushed to an unknown degree. Then came a group of extensions of faculty to which I gave the general name of hetercesihesice. These were perceptions or discriminations of a novel kind ; as of magnetic fields, or of the contact of specific metals. We could not, of course, determine whether

these were stimulations of peripheral or of central sensibility : whether the end-organs transmitted a message from the outer world in novel terms, or whether the brain applied to a familiar message a novel delicacy of interpretation.

We then passed on to those exaltations of faculty which were definitely central, and which were no longer sensory, but affected rather the intellect or the moral sense. But in making this transition I passed quickly over a wide range of possible stimulations to faculty — such stimulations, namely, as might be applied to central senso}j tracts; " quickening the imagination," as we say, and giving to images centrally initiated something more of that vividness to which only images from the external world can generally attain.

To this class of stimuli it is that our study of hallucinations now brings us back. And in another way these hallucinations connect themselves with an already traversed range of phenomena. The hallucinations with which we shall care to deal are not mere crude externalisations of some interior commotion, such as the flash of light with which the optic tracts respond to a blow on the head. They are in most cases elaborate products — complex images which must have needed intelligence to fashion them — although the process of their fashioning is hidden from our view. In this respect they resemble the inspirations of genius. For here we find again just what we found in those inspirations — the uprush of a complex intellectual product, preformed beneath the threshold, and projected ready-made into ordinary consciousness. The uprushing stream of intelligence, indeed, in the man of genius flowed habitually in conformity with the superficial stream. Only rarely does the great conception intrude itself upon him with such vigour and such untimeliness as to bring confusion and incoherence into his ordinary life. But in the case of these induced hallucinations the incongruity between the two streams of intelligence is much more marked. When a subject, for instance, is trying to keep down some post-hypnotic hallucinatory suggestion, one can watch the smooth surface of the supraliminal river disturbed by that suggestion, as though by jets of steam from below, which sometimes merely break in bubbles, but sometimes force themselves up bodily through the superficial film.

618. It is by considering hallucinations in this generalised manner and among these analogies, that we can best realise their absence of necessary connection with any bodily degeneration or disease. Often, of course, they accompany disease ; but that is only to say that the central sensory tracts, like any other part of the organism, are capable of morbid as well as of healthful stimulus. Taken in itself, the mere fact of the quasi-externalisation of a centrally initiated image indicates strong central stimulation, and absolutely nothing more. There is no physiological law whatever which can tell us what degree of vividness our central pictures may assume consistently with health — short of the point where they get to

619] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 235

be so indistinguishable from external perceptions that, as in madness, they interfere with the rational conduct of life. That point no well-attested case of veridical hallucinations, so far as my knowledge goes, has yet approached.

It was, of course, natural that in the study of these phantasms, as elsewhere, the therapeutic interest should have preceded the psychological. Men's need to understand themselves has never been so pressing as their need to keep themselves alive and comfortable. In the popular mind the rats and snakes that terrify the drunkard stand, one may say, for the whole category of externalised quasi-percepts ; and the plain duty of man seems to be to avoid them. Such a view — still lingering in a modified form even in some scientific circles — must gradually give way to the newer feeling that it is only by gazing long and profoundly into man that we can learn how to improve him in a profound and lasting way ; and that it is on man's steady and generic evolution, rather than on his occasional and individual degenerations, that the main thought and effort of science must henceforth be fixed.^ The main use of knowing in what ways the race tends to slip backwards is that we may know how to press it forward instead. In short, it is a science of eugenics rather than of therapeutics which is the characteristic, the primary science for any living and modifiable race ; and for our dawning practical science of eugenics experimental psychology is the indispensable theoretic precursor.

These reflections, I suppose, like many others in this work, will for the present hover, as it were, in men's minds between the paradox and the truism. To turn them definitely into truisms it is, I think, only needful that the study of inner vision should be pursued experimentally by competent persons from its very inception up to the most advanced degree which experimentation can attain. In the meantime I can offer as usual only the vhide7niatio prima, the scanty and hasty first ingatherings from an unharvested field.

619. I have spoken of the hallucinations which suggestion can induce, during or after the hypnotic trance, or in some few cases in a subject in the waking condition. With the possibility of such quasi-percepts

1 We may say that psychology is passing from the initial state of each science in turn, when the new science depends on observation only without experiment, into the second state when it depends on experiment ; but that thus far it remains in that early stage of the second state when the methods of experiment are such as other sciences have suggested, not such as this special branch of inquiry suggests for itself, or can use with unique effect. Thus, for instance, in the study of crystals men began by measuring their external angles. Then they sliced them and found their planes of cleavage ; and it seemed as though the crystals had been examined through and through. But with the discovery of the polarisation of light came a more intimate analysis ; and we classify the crystal now by the behaviour of the ray within. What we want to get hold of in psychology is some experiment which shall compare with the registry of reflexes and the description of end-organs as the polariscope compares with the goniometer ; which shall avail to detect double or multiple refraction within a personality which to less subtle analyses seems still a limpid homogeneous whole.

the world is now familiar, however little attention their true significance may have received. But when we leave these, to what must we next turn? Can this form of experiment be varied and improved upon? Can we get rid of the superfluous and intensify the interesting part?

We have been studying the hallucinatory images generated in obedience to A's suggestion in the mind of the hypnotised B.

Now, in the first place, it is no longer interesting to us that A should have any directing voice in starting the images. It is B's mind that we want to study, and we would rather leave it undisturbed by ordinary verbal suggestion ; although, of course, we shall be glad to observe telepathic impact, if we can.

In the second place, it would plainly be more convenient if we could dispense with hypnotisation, and get B to see and describe the hallucinations in his waking state. But can B get at these subliminal pictures by any mere effort of will? Can he do anything more than simply summon up memory-images and combine them in fantastic ways? Can he get at anything deeper than vague day-dreams or scrappy recollections? Let us consider whether, apart from such a rare and startling incident as an actual hallucination, there is any previous indication of a habit of receiving, or a power of summoning, pictures from a subliminal store-house? Any self-suggestion, conscious or unconscious, which places before the supraliminal inteUigence visual images apparently matured elsewhere?

Such indications have not been wanting. In the chapter on Genius, in the chapter on Sleep, and in 610 A we have traced the existence of many classes of these pictures ; all of them ready, as it would seem, to manifest themselves on slight inducement. Dream-figures will rise in any momentary blur of consciousness ; inspirations will respond to the concentrated desire or the mere passing emotion of the man of genius ; after-images will recur, under unknown conditions, long after the original stimulus has been withdrawn ; tnemory-images will surge up into our minds with even unwished-for vividness ; the brilliant exactness of iUiisions hypnagogiques will astonish us in the revealing transition from waking to sleep.

All is prepared, so to say, for some empirical short-cut to a fuller control of these subjacent pictures ; just as before Mesmer and Puysegur all was prepared for an empirical short-cut to trance, somnambulism, suggestibility.

All that we want is to hit on some simple empirical way of bringing out the correlation between all these types of subjacent vision, just as mesmerism was a simple empirical way of bringing out the correlation between various trances and sleep-waking states.

620. Crystal-vision, then, like hypnotic trance, might have been gradually evolved by a series of reasoned experiments, along an unexceptionable scientific road.

In reality, of course, this prehistoric practice must have been reached

621] SENSORY AUTOMATISM 237

in some quite different way. It does not fall within the scope of this book to trace the various streams of divination which converge into Dr. Dee's magic, and "the attracting of spirits into the ball." But it is really to the Elizabethan Dr. Dee — one of the leading savants of his time — that the credit must be given of the first systematic attempt to describe, analyse, and utihse these externalised pictures. -"^

