ELLIS COUNTY IN 1912
====================

Ellis County in 1912
From Blackmar's Kansas Cyclopedia (1912)


The Ellis County entries — the county article, its towns, and Fort Hays — gathered from Blackmar (ed.), Kansas: A Cyclopedia of State History, Volumes I–II (Chicago: Standard Publishing Co., 1912) — public domain. Reprinted as printed and cleaned of scanner noise. (Liebenthal lies in Rush County and is reserved for the Rush County companion.)


* * *


ANTONINO (VOL. I)

Antonino, a post-village of Ellis county, is situated in the Smoky Ilill valley about 8 miles southwest of Hays, the county seat. It is a small hamlet and receives mail Iri-weekly. Hays is the most convenient railroad station.


CATHARINE (VOL. I)

Catharine, a rural postoffice of Ellis county, is located on Victoria creek, in Catharine township, about 9 miles east of Hays, the county seat, and most convenient railroad station. The population of the village was 50 in 1910.

Catholic Church. — (See Roman Catholic Church.)


ELLIS (VOL. I)

Ellis, an incorporated city of the third class, the second largest in Ellis county, is located on the Union Pacific R. R. at the crossing of Big creek, 14 miles west of Hays, the county seat. The town was laid out in 1873 by the Kansas Pacific Tnow the Union Pacific) Railroad company, which established a roundhouse and machine shops there and erected a two-story stone building for a depot and hotel combined. Thomas Daily was the first merchant. Other early merchants were

Nichols Bros., Eli Sheldon, Reading & Bovven and G. F. Lee. For a time in 1877-78 Ellis was the center of a large cattle trade, and during that period, like all towns where the cattle trade centered, it had the reputation of being a "tough place." Law-abiding people were glad when the trade moved elsewhere. In 1882 a two-story stone school house was built, the old frame building being sold to the Congregationalists who converted it into a church, the first in the town. In 1910 there were four church edifices in the city.

The Ellis of the present da}' has 2 banks, 4 grain elevators, the railroad repair shops, a weekly newspaper (the Review-Headlight), good hotels, a modern public school building, several well appointed mercantile establishments, an international money order postoffice, etc., and in 1910 reported a population of 1,404, a gain of 472 during the preceding decade.


ELLIS COUNTY (VOL. I)

Ellis County, located in the third tier of counties south of the State of Nebraska and the sixth east of Colorado, was created by the act of Feb. 26, 1867, with the following boundaries: "Commencing where the east line of range 16 west intersects the second standard parallel, thence south to the third standard parallel, thence west to the east line of range 21 west, thence north to the second standard parallel, thence east to the place of beginning."

The boundaries as thus established are the same as at the present tirrie, giving the county an area of 900 square miles. Popularly speaking, it is bounded on the north by Rooks county ; on the east by Russell ; on the south by Rush, and on the west by Trego. It was named for Lieut. George Ellis of Company I, Twelfth Kansas infantrj', who was killed at the battle of Jenkins" Ferry, Ark., .'\pril 30, 1864. The surface of the county is practically the same as that of all western Kansas — one broad stretch of prairie, with but little natural timber growth, though some artificial groves have been planted, and there are about 25,000 bearing fruit trees in the county. Across the northern portion the Saline river flows in an easterly direction, and the southern part is watered by the Smoky Hill river and its tributaries, the largest of which is Big creek. Along some of the streams there is a natural growth of maple, Cottonwood, black walnut, ash, box-elder and hackberry, but these belts do not average more than 200 feet in width. Magnesian limestone is plentiful ; limestone of a finer quality is found along the Smoky Hill river; clay suitable for brick making is abundant near Hays; gypsum is known to exist in some localities, and there are a few salt marshes in tiie county.

Fort Fletcher (later Fort Hays, q. v.) was established in the fall of 1865, but the first settlement was made in the latter part of May, 1867, by the Lull brothers of Salina. They located on the west side of Big creek, a little north of the railroad, and by the middle of June several houses had been erected. The town was called Rome and its founders expected it to become the metropolis of the county. Early in June. Bli)nm(u'I(I, Moses & Co. established a general supjily store there, and

later Joseph Perry built a two-story frame hotel. A little later, however, the "Big Creek Land company" platted the town of Hays, or as it was at first called, "Hays City," on the east side of the creek. .\ rivalr}' at once sprang up between the two places, but the railroad company threw its support to Hays and the town of Rome passed out of existence. Some of the buildings, including Perr;^'s hotel, were removed to Hays.

In Oct., 1867, a memorial praying for the organization of the county was presented to the governor. The petitioners recommended Pliny Moore, William Rose and Judson E. Walker for commissioners, James G. Duncan for county clerk, and Hays City as the temporary county seat. W. E. Webb, H. P. Field and U. S. Thurmond were appointed to take a census of the county. The census showed a population of 633 — a few more than the minimum number required by law for the organization of the county — and Gov. Crawford issued his proclamation declaring the county organized, with the officers and temporary coimty seat recommended by the petitioners. At a special election in Api'il, 1870, for the location of the permanent county seat, 59 votes were cast, all in favor of Hays. On the question of erecting county buildings, there were 58 votes in favor of the proposition and i opposed. Consequently, on April 22, the commissioners issued an order for the erection of suitable buildings, but it was some time before the financial condition of the county would justify the execution of the order. At the present time (1911) Ellis county has a fine stone court-house, two stories high with basement, containing sufficient room for the transaction of all the county business.

The settlement was slow for a time. In 1872 a small colony from Ohio located near Walker, in the eastern part of the county, and was soon followed by two others — one from Pennsylvania and one from New York. The same year an Englishman named George Grant purchased 50,000 acres of land from the railroad company, intending to colonize it with English farmers, and during the next two years some 300 Englishmen, several of them with their families, located on the purchase. The grasshopper scourge of 1874 caused a large number of the settlers to leave the county, but in the three years beginning with 1875 a large number of Russian emigrants came to take the places of those who had left.

The first white child born in the county was John Bauer, whose birth occurred on Jan. 29, 1868, and the same year witnessed the first marriage, the contracting parties being Peter Tondell and Elizabeth Duncan. The first court was held soon after the county was organized, Judge Humphrey presiding. The county has but one line of railroad — the Union Pacific — which crosses it from east to west near the center, giving it a little over 32 miles of main track.

In 1910 the population of Ellis county was 12,170, a gain of 3,544 during the preceding decade. The county is divided into the following civil townships: Big Creek, Buckeye, Catherine, Ellis, Freedom, Hamil

ton, Herzog, Lookout. Pleasant Hill, Saline, Smoky Hill, Victoria, Walker and Wheatland. The assessed value of property for 1910 was $18,938,312, and the value of farm products, including live stock, was $2,867,960. The five leading crops, in the order of value, were : wheat, $1,718,900; corn, $261,882; hay, including alfalfa, $119,702; Kafir corn, $110,160; barley, $40,760. The value of dairy products for the year was $94,718. According to the report of the state superintendent of public instruction, there were 53 organized school districts, with a school population of 4,138. ,


FINCH (VOL. I)

Finch, a discontinued postoffice of Ellis county, is located on the Saline river, about 20 miles northeast of Hays, the county seat, and 10 miles south of Xatoma, whence mail is delivered by rural carrier.


FORT HAYS (VOL. I)

Fort Hays. — This post was established on ( )ct. 11. 1865, and \sas first named Fort Fletcher, in honor of cx-Gn\-. IHctchcr of Missouri. It was located on Big creek, about 14 miles Miutheast of the ])rcsent Hays City, and continued to be known as Fort Fletcher until Xnv. 17, 1866, when the name was changed to Fort Hays, for Gen. Isaac G. Hays, who was killed at the battle of the \\'il(lerness. In the summer of 1867 the post was flooded by an overflow of Big creek, and Gen. Gibbs, then a major in the Seventh United States cavalry, selected a new site by order of Gen. Hancock. The new location was about threefourths of a mile from Hays City, where a reservation of 7,503 acres in the form of an irregular triangle was laid out and substantial buildings were erected. Gen. Sheridan's headquarters were at Fort Hays at the time of the Black Kettle raid in 1868. By the act of :\Iarc'h i, 1876, the Kansas legislature ceded to the United States jurisdiction over the reservation, which continued to be used as a m.ilitary post until June I, 1889. Early in that year it became known that the fort was to be abandoned, and the Kansas legislature adopted a resolution asking Congress to donate the site to the state for a soldiers" home. No action was taken by Congress on the resolution, and in 1895 the legislature again asked that the reservation be donated to the state as a location for a branch of the state agricultural college, a branch of the state normal school, and a public park. Again no action was taken, and in 1899 a subordinate of the interior department declared the land opened for settlement, but in March, 1900, the Kansas delegation in Congress managed to secure the land and buildings for educational purposes. A branch of the state normal school is now established there, and the agricultural college maintains an experiment station on the reservation.


HAYS (VOL. I)

Hays, the county seat of Ellis county, is located a little south of the center of the county at the point where the Union Pacific R. R. crosses Big creek. In early days it was known as Hays City, and that name is still sometimes used. The site was selected late in 1866 by \\'. E. Webb, W. J. Wells and Judge Knight, and the town was platted in 1867. Its location was decided in a great measure by its proximity to Fort Hays, from which it took its name. Hays was the point from which the west and southwest obtained supplies before the railroad was completed to Dodge City. During its early period it had the reputation of being a "tough" town, and it was the scene of numerous escapades of J. B. Hickcik (Wild Bill) in the late '60s. The growth of Hays was rapid from the start. In 1867 a newspaper called the Railway Advance began its existence there, the Hays City Times was started in 1873, and the Sentinel followed the next year. In Aug., 1874, a L'nited States land office was opened there, the Catholics buib the first church in the city in 1877, and in 1880 the first grain elevator was erected. (See also Ellis County.)

The Hays (or Hays City) of 191 1 is one of the (irogressivc cities of western Kansas. It has an electric lighting |il;ml. waterworks, a fire department, a telephone exchange, and in the spring of 191 t comjiletcd a sewer system at a cost of $62,000. Educational opportunities are afforded by an excellent system of public schools and St Joseph's College, a Catholic institution. The western State Normal School is also located here, and a branch of the experiment station is maintained on the old military reservation, .\niong the industries and financial institutions are 2 banks, 3 weekly newspapers (the News, the b'ree Press and the Review-Headlight), flour mills, grain elevators, machine shops, marble works, a creamery, good hotels, and a number of well stocked mercantile establishments which carry all lines of goods. Hays is provided with an international money order postoffice. telcgr.-iph and express ofifices, and in 1910 reported a population of 1,931.


MUNJOR (VOL. II)

Munjor, a country postoffice in Ellis county, is located in the township of the same name 6 miles south of Hays, the county seat and nearest shipping point. The population in 1910 was 100.


PFEIFER (VOL. II)

Pfeifer, a village in Ellis county, is located m Freedom towniihip, 12 miles southeast of Hays, the county seat, and 8 miles south of Victoria, the nearest shipping point. There is a school, general stores, and a money order postoffice. The population in 1910 was 150.


SCHOENCHEN (VOL. II)

Schoenchen, a country postofifice in Ellis county, is located in Lookout township on the Smoky Hill river, 10 miles south of Hays, the county seat and most convenient railroad station.

Schools. — (See Public School System and the sketches of the higher educational institutions.)


TOULON (VOL. II)

Toulon, a country hamlet in Ellis county, is located on the Union Pacific R. R., 6 miles east of Hays, the county seat and the postoffice from which it receives mail.


VICTORIA (VOL. II)

Victoria, a little town in Ellis county, is located in Victoria township on the Union Pacific R. R., 10 miles east of Hays, the county seat. It has 2 banks, 2 mills, a grain elevator, a number of retail establishments, telegraph office, and a money order postoffice. The population is about 200. It is in the midst of a Russian settlement, one of the largest Catholic monasteries in the state is located here, and a fine Catholic church has just been built at a cost of $80,000. It is in the midst of a large agricultural district for which it is the receiving and shipping point.

Videttes. — About the beginning of the year 1888, representatives of the various labor organizations in Kansas got together and formed a secret, oath-bound society which was named the "Videttes." The order spread rapidly over the state until it included nearly all those opposed to the policies of the old political parties. On May 15, 1888, a convention assembled at Cincinnati, Ohio, organized the Union Labor party and nominated Alson J. Streeter for president. The Videttes were powerful enough at that time to control the action of the convention, and at Cincinnati the leading delegates from each state were initiated into the order, the object of this move being to control the policy of the Union Labor party in such a way ag to prevent fusion or coalition with either the Republican or Democratic party.

The ritual of the Videttes was printed in a code. After the Cincinnati convention the demand for copies of this ritual became so great that by the middle of the summer the suppl}' was exhausted. It therefore became necessary to order a new edition, which was printed at the office of the Nonconformist at Winfield, Kan. Here a printer got hold of a copy of the ritual and the key to the code, which he turned over to a leader in the Republican party. The ritual was rendered into plain English by the aid of the key, and on a given date was issued in the form of a supplement by nearly every Republican newspaper in the state. Names of prominent leaders and promoters of the Videttes were published in connection with the ritual, and the order was generally denounced as "anarchistic and contrary to the spirit and principles of American institutions."

It is doubtful, however, whether any votes were changed in the general election of that year, but the effect was to destroy in a measure the usefulness of the order. Accordingly, on Dec. 19, 1888, representatives of the Videttes met at Wichita, pursuant to the call of the commander, and disbanded as an organization, though the members immediately formed the State Reform Association, which ,was calculated to work along similar lines, but without a secret ritual. The State Reform Association subsequently played a rather conspicuous part in the work of the Farmers' Alliance. (See Farmers' Alliance.)

Vigilance Committees. — During the early dajs in Kansas, before civil government had become thoroiighlv established, numerous secret organizations known as viligance committees were organized along the eastern and southern boundaries of Kansas and the western boundary of Missouri. The main purpose of these committees was the protection of their horses and other live stock, and in emergencies for the trial of horse thieves and other offenders. Upon the apprehension of any criminal, he was given a prompt trial by these self-constituted authorities, and if his guilt was sufficient his punishment was both speedy and final.


WALKER (VOL. II)

Walker, a hamlet in Ellis county, is located in Walker township on the Uni(.)n Pacific R. R., 14 miles east of Hays, the county seal. It has a hotel, a grain elevator, several retail stores, telegraph and express offices, and a money order postoffice. The population in 1910 was 65.


YOCEMENTO (VOL. II)

Yocemento, a country postoffice in Ellis county, is located on the Union Pacific R. R., 6 miles west of Hays, the county seat. It has an express office and some local retail trade, and does some shipping. The population in 1910 was 75.


* * *


SOURCES

Sources: Blackmar, Kansas: A Cyclopedia of State History, Vol. I — Internet Archive `kansascyc01blac`; Vol. II — `kansascycloped02blac` (both public domain). Entries gathered 2026-10-08.

