ELLIS COUNTY IN 1883
====================

Ellis County in 1883
From the History of the State of Kansas (1883)


A clean reading-edition extract: the Ellis County chapter (printed pages 1289–1295 and Biographical Sketches) of Cutler & Andreas, History of the State of Kansas (Chicago: A. T. Andreas, 1883) — public domain. Reprinted as printed, with running heads, page numbers, and column furniture removed; period spelling kept. A light residue of scanner mis-readings survives in obscure proper names where certainty could not repair it.


* * *


LOCATION AND NATURAL FEATURES

Ellis county was named after Lieut. George Ellis, of the Twelfth Kansas Infantry, who was killed April 30, 1864, in a battle at Jenkins’ Ferry, Arkansas, tfntil 1867, the county was embraced in the unorganized territory of the western portion of the State, but the Legislature of that year deLied its boundaries and named it as above. The county contains 576,000 acres, or 900 sipiare miles, and is bounded on the north by Rooks County, on the south by Rush, on the east l)y Russell, and on the west by Trego County.

In formation, the county is exactly square, being thirty miles north and south and the same number east and west.

The territory embraced within the county limits is divided into five civil townships, Ellis em bracing a strip nine miles wide on the west side of the county, extending from the north to the south line of the county. Saline Township embraces a strip nine miles wide in the northern por tion, extending from the east line of the county to the east line of Ellis Township. Big Creek Township is twelve miles wide, joining Ellis Township on tlie east, and extending from the south line of Saline Town ship to the south line of the county. Victoria Township joins Big Creek on tlie east and its formation is very irregular, being only three miles wide on the north, which width it main tains for nine miles, when it widens to five miles, and three miles further south the width is increased to six miles, when three miles still farther south it is again increased to seven miles, which it maintains to the south line of the county. Walker is the remaining and eastern township of the county, whose formation is the same as that of Victoria, with the exception that, as the latter widens the former narrows until the southern por tion of it is only two miles wide.

Ellis is in the fifth tier of coun ties from the west line of the State.

The surface of the county is of the same character as that of most of Western Kansas, one vast stretch of prairie, almost completely destitute of timber,

what little there was originally havdng almost disappeared, except a small portion on Big Creek, within the limits of the military reservation at h ort Hays. The face of the country, however, is very far from being uniform, some portions, especially the southeastern, being quite level or gently

(a)

(b)

(c) Rl)

(e)

(f)

1880.

Big Creek Township . - . 1,390

Catherine Township . - 244

Fillis Township . 1.198

Freedom and VVheathind Townships - 791

Hiirailtoii Township . . 232

Hartsook Township . . - . 4.39

undulating, the central portion, though not bluffy, is very high and uneven while in the western and northern portion, especially in the vdcinity of the Saline River, there are considerable bluffs. About ten or twelve per cent of the county may properly be termed bottom-lands, that is, lands that lie in sti’ips of valley along the streams.

The only streams in the county of any importance are the Saline River, which runs from west to east along the northern boundary of the county, the Smoky Hill River, that runs in the same direction close to the southern boundary line, and Big Creek, that enters the county from the west, mid way between the northern and southern boundary lines of the county, and flows in a southeast erly direction. The lesser creeks that flow into these streams are rather insignificant, and even the larger streams, as a usual thing, contain but very little water.

At one time the timber-land of the county was estimated at one per cent of the total area, but even this little has been greatly diminished by settlers cutting it down for fuel. The. valleys along the creeks average about a mile in width, some being much less than this, and some considerably more. There are a few springs in the county, especially in the northern por tion, but almost in all parts of the county good well-water can be had at various depths, rang ing from fifteen to forty feet.

The soil of the county is good, being a rich, black loam, varying in depth from two to eight feet. With ordinary rains it is capable of producing al most anything that grows out of the ground. When the sea sons are favorable, immense yields of wheat are raised, but the scarcity of rain renders crops very uncertain. Notwith standing the richness and depth of the soil, Ellis cannot be classed as an agricultural coun ty, its chief adaptation being wool-growing and stock-raising. Cattle and sheep-raising are the most profitable, as they can sus tain themselves the year round the nutritious buffalo-grass

1880.

Lookout Township . - . — - 252

Saline Township - - 4.36

Sniokv Hill Township . 265

Victoria Township . 349

Walker Township . - . .583

'6,179

on

which grows all over the county. Swine, and stock that require to be corn-fed in the winter, are not so profitable, as it is only in exceptionally wet seasons that any corn can be raised, and in most seasons the corn required for feeding purposes has to be shipped in

from other counties. Owing to the uncertainty of the seasons, farming in the county is not engaged in to any great e.xtent, but with anything like a reasonable rainfall, the soil is very productive.

Hartsook and Lookout, (b) Organized in ■oin parts of Ellis and Saline, (f) Organizi d ■ in 1880, part detac-hed to form Hamilton, (k) Organized in 1878, from part of Big


GENERAL HISTORY

But little information coneerning the early history of the county could he obtained from the records, as they were very imperfectly , kei't. When tlie first election was ordered and held in the county, there is nothing in the records to indicate, nor is the appointment by the Governor of the first Gounty Commissioners an authenticated fact of record, although it is jiretty well established that the first County Commissioners were J. E. Walker, Dennis Ryan, and William Rose. The first County Clerk was J. W. Con nor, and the first Sheriff was Thomas Ganlon, and the first Justice of the Peace in the county was M. E. Joyce, who had been aiipointed to the office by the Governor early in 18G7.

In ISfiJ or 1865, a military post was established in Ellis County, on Big Creek, about fourteen miles southeast of where Hays City now stands. This post was known as Fort- Fletcher, and had (juarters for several companies of troops. The post was located on the low-lying land along the margin of the creek, and was utterly destroyed by the flood thaf occurred in the spring of 1867, by which several colored soldiers lost their lives. Fort Fletcher was then abandoned and immediately thereafter Fort Hays was estalilished on its jiresent site by Gen. Pope. "Up to that time the county was without settlement, but the location of Fort Hays,and the near approach of the Kan sas Pacific Railway to that point, attracted a good many settlers to that lo cality, and then followed the founding of Hays City. Some early attempts to cultivate the prairie in the vicinity of Hays City were made, but they proved failures, and nothing further in this line was essayed until the sum mer of 1871, when Thomas Arrowsmith, J. H. Edwards, and Ijouis Watson made some attempts at experimental farming adjacent to the town of Ellis, but the success they met with was far from encouraging. Aside from a few wood-claims that had been taken in the county, but very little of the land was taken, and in 1872 ten or twelve homestead and pre-emption claims were all that had been settled upon in the county. In that year a small colony from Ohio located at what is now known as Walker Station in the eastern portion of the county, l)ut the object of the colony seems to have been to found a town rather than become engaged in agricultural pursuits. The town, however, has had a very slow growth, and though it has passed its first decade it does not contain more than half a dozen houses and one store, and is merely a station on the line of the Kansas Pacific Railway.

Following this colony, two others, very limited in number, arrived the following year, one from New York, tliat settled in and about Ellis, and one from Pennsylvania, that located at Hays City. It was in that same year that George Grant arrived from England and purchased of the Railway Company 50,000 acres of land in the eastern portion of the county, for the purpose of colonizing it with English agriculturists, and stocking it with improved imported sheej) and cattle. This was the greatest accession the county had received, and during the next two or three years some two or three hundred Englishmen, many of them with their families, arrived in the county and located on the Grant purchase. Large numbers of fine sheei) and cattle were brought from England and the colony started out under very promising auspices. A town was started on the line of railway, a few miles west of Walker, to which was given the name of Victoria, and by which it is still known. A very fine- stone, depot was built, and a handsome stone church known as St. George’s Chapel. The latter was erected by the colonists and by subscriptions collected in England. A very fine eleva tor was also built and the place gave promise of growing to be quite a town. A store was put up and in a short time the place had about twenty-five houses and one hundred and fifty people. Ex]ierience,howevor,soon taught the colonists that Ellis County was not an agricultural country, and meet ing with nothing but failure and disappointment in their efforts at farming, they became discouraged and began to return to England, and now, of all those that came,but very few reinam. In 187!), the originator of the scheme, George Grant, died, and his remains are interred in front of St. George’s Chapel at Victoria, while the colony he, sought to found has about ceased to exist.

In 1875, and the two years following, large numbers of Russians came into the countv and located in colonies. There are, in all, about twelve hun dred Russians in the county, located in five separate settlements. Two of these colonies are located on the Smoky, close to the south line of the county, one on Big Creek, about a mile south of the military reservation, one just north of the Kansas Pacific Railway, about half a mile from Victoria, and one on Victoria Creek, about five miles farther north. IMost of these Rus■sians took claims upon their arrival, which they immediately commenced to improve. They also built villages to which they gave names after some place in tlieir native country. The village to the north is named Schoenchen and contains about 150 peojile; the one on Big Creek is named Catherine and has about 200 people ; the two on the Smoky are named respectively, Munjor and Peifer, the former having a population of about !S00, and the latter of about 150. The most important of the Russian villages is that just north of \ ict.oria, which is named Herzog, and which contains a population of aliqut 400. This latter has the appearance of being quite a town, and in building it .some attention has been paid to regularity in laying off the streets. Many of the buildings are, very comfortable frame houses, but the majority of them are made of sod, and so constructial as to afford the in mates a considerable degree of comfort. The other villages are similarly built, wdth the exception that regularitv in laying off streets has been disi'egarded.

Herzog is reganled as the capital of this Russia IMinor, and there isestalilished tlie chief patriarch and priests. The place has a very fine stoncCatholic Church, which was erected by Sir Walter Maxwell, who took con siderable interest in the English Colony under George Grant. The Russians also erected a large stone monastery, 45x120 fe(‘t, to which another wing similar in dimensions is now being adiled. Tlu'se Russia-n villages are oc cupied. chiellv, in the winter sea-son, as the people reside upon their farms

during the other seasons of tlu' year, and only retire t-o the villages when the weather will not permit them to work on their farms.

The early history of Ellis County is confined chiefiy to Hays City, as no attempt at settlement of the county was made until several years after its organization. The early settlement of the county was chara-c'terized by those incidents which are usually peculiar to frontier life, in which the re volver generally jdays such a conspicuous part. The first three Sheriffs of the county met with violent deaths. The manner of Ganlon’s death, the first Sheriff of the county, is not authenticated, but that he met his death at the hands of some desperadoes has been so strongly proven as not to ad mit of a doubt. Hovv Lanahan, the second Sheriff of the county, came by his death will be recorded at length in the history of Hays City. The third Sheriff, Alexander Ramsy, a brave and courageous officer, was killcil in at tempting to arrest two horse-thieves. In the summer of 1875, Rainsy went in pursuit of two horse-thieves and overtook them at Stockton, in Books County. Upon calling upon them to surrender, they drew their revolvers, whereupon Ramsy fired, killing one of them instantly. Almost simulta neously with his sliot, the thieves fired, the fire from oiie of their revolvers taking effect in the abdomen of Ramsy, inflicting a wound from which he died in a few hours. A witness of the affair, on seeing Ramsy wounded, drew his revolver and fired, wounding the otlier thief in the neck, the ball passing through his jaw. lie was then captured, tried at Stockton, and while the jury was out deliberating upon a verdict he esca})ed.

Many other incidents not quite so tragical in character, but which illus trate frontier life occurred, and the manner in which justice was adminis tered is woi'thy of mention. M. E. Joyce, as already stated, was the first Justice of the Peace in the county and had his office ' at Hays City. In the winter of 1867-68, one man who had killed another came in, confessed his crime, and surrendered himself to the Justice mentioned. A day was set for the hearing and the man was allowed to go, upon his promise to a|>pearand answer. The day came and a large crowd was assembled in the office of the .Tustice when the man who had surrendered himself entered. The case was called and upon the defendant’s answering, the Justice asked him if he was “ guilty or not guilty.” To the surprise of the Justice and everyone else, the man answered “guilty, ’’ whereupon the Justice adjusted his spectacles

on his nose, looked at the man a moment, and then said, “ You are a d - d

tool, and I will discharge you for waiiL of evidence. ”

In another case tried before this same Justice, the party against whom he rendered judgment desiied to give notice that he would take an aiq)eal from his decision, when the Justice gave him to understand that no appeal could be taken, as his was the highest court in Kansas.

The first case tried in the District Court in the county was “ Ruggles A Ryan vs. Ranahan. ” and the presiding Judge was Hon. Judge Humphrey. A great deal of interest was manifested in the case by the peojde, although the matter at issue was only a (piestion of debt. The Judge decided in favor of the defendant, and this so enraged one class of the people that they made preparations to handle the Judge roughly, and to escape being mobbed he was obliged to flee to the fort and seek the protection of the troops.

'I’lie first couple married in Ellis County was Peter Tondell and Eliza beth Duncan in 1868, and the first child born in the county was John Bauer, his birth occurring on January 20, 1868.

The first instrument recorded in the county as appears by the books in the office of the Register of Deeds, was a deed from Hira-m L. Cowdry to 0. B. Taylor, conveying Lot 26, in Block 5, of Hays City, the consideration being .$300. The instrument was dated March 3, 1871.

Ellis County is not an agricultural country as has been shown by ex perience. Thinking it was such, thousands of people have located within its borders from time to time, only to learn, after years of effort, that they had made a mistake, and left it for other fields. Proof of this is found in the falling away of the population within the two years from 1880 to 1882. In the former year, according to the United States Census, the population of the county was 6,179, while according to the census taken by the Town ship Assessors in 1882, the po]mlation was only 4,699. While not an agri cultural county, it has its advantages; however, and for stock-raising pur poses it is very desirable. Cattle and sheeinraising can be followed both to advantage and profit, as the rich buffalo-grass with which the surface of the county is matted, is amply sufficient to carry them through the winter with out feed of any other kind. The almost utter impossibility of raising corn for feeding purposes precludes the raising of hogs for profit, although in seasons when there is a reasonably fair rainfall, which is very seldom, cereals of all kinds can be raised in abundance. Stockmen, however, find it- an ex cellent county tor their business, and both cattle and sheep-ranches are becoming more numerous each year. Financially, the county is in very good condition. It has an excellent court house, and its debt is very trifling, and all orders drawn on the County Treasurer are paid to their full face value upon presentation.


SCHOOLS, MANUFACTORIES, ETC

TTierc wore in Ellis County in 1883, according to the annual report furnished by the County Superintendent to the State Superintendent of Public Instruction, thirty-nine organized scliool districts. Tliere were however, only twenty-two scliool buildings in tlie county, containing in all twenty-eight rooms, showing that seventeen of the di-stricts had no scliool buildings. How it is thus, is not shown. That the organized districts slionld so far exceed theuiiniberof school-buildings, may 8ugge.st an inquiry which cannot be answered from the record.s. It may be accounted for by the fact that many of the districts are very sparsely settled, and the few jieople residing in them, do not feel disposed to be taxed for schoolliouse purposes so long as they can send their children to school in the adjoining dis trict. The school population of the county in 1883, between the ages of live and twenty-one years, was 3,633, divided as to sex into 1,376 males and 1,347 females. Of this number there were enrolled 111 the public schools 1,001, of which nnmlier .'i33 were males and .02!) females, and the average daily attendance was 738. The number of teachers employed was 33. of whom 7 were males and 3.5 females The average salary per month paid teacliers was, males $14, and females $36. While the dill'erence in the rate.s'paid between the .sexes is quite strik ing. it was not nearly as great as it was in 1881. In the latter year ■ he average sal tary per monh paid male teachers, was $38.8.'), while all that females received, was $18.43. Of the thirty -nine

organized school districts in the county, but twenty of them sustained public school for three months in the year, while llfteen failed to sustain school even for three months. The average number of mills levied in the county for school purposes in 1,S8'2, was 1.5. 5(1, and the estimated value of all school property was $31,50h. In IKiSS, there were issued school bonds to the amount of StT,‘2,S5, and the total school bonded indebtedness of the county was l5;i5,8(X1, or $ '.TtXl less than the estimated value.

On August 1. 1881, the commencement of the .school year, there was a balance in the liands of the District Treasurer of $11,805.09, and the amount received during the year from district taxes, was Si.'r21.88. and from State and county funds $1,724.73; from sale of school bonds $7,285, and from all other sources $391.9!), making a total of $10,433.29 received for all school purposes. The total amount paid out during the year for all school purposes was $14.332.!)6, leaving a balance in the hands of the District Treasurer on August 1, 1882, of 82,l(Xi.;13.

The only establishments in the county of a manufacturing character, are tlouring-mills, of which there are four, one on the Saline River, about twenty miles nearly due north from Hays City. This was the first mill built in the county, and was erected by Jacob Meiers in 1870. The mill is built of stone, and is run by water-nower. It is valued at $15,000.

The next mill built in the county was that of M. Yost, about three fourths of a mile west of Hays City It is a frame constructed mill, and was erected in 1879, at a cost of $20,000. It is operated by steam-power and makes Hour by both the grinding process and roller system.

The third mill is that erected at Hays City, by Jacoti Meiers, in 1881. It is a substan tially constructed stone mill, with four rim of stone, and operated by steam-power. This mill'is lltted up with the most immoved machinery, and was built at a cost of $30,000.

The fourth mill is that erected at Victoria, by Brungardt, and completed in January 1883. It is a small frame-structure, fitted up and furnished in an excelient style, is operated by steam-power, and was put up at a cost of $15,000.


STATISTICS OF PROGRESS

In regard to population, the growth of the county has been exceedingly slow, and the latest returns show that it is more on the decrease than increase. For the first two or three years after the limits of the county were defined by the Legislature in 1867, the population increased quite rapidly, and in 1870 had reached 1,330. During the five years following it decreased to 940, being 396 less in 1875 than it was in 1870. The greater portion of this falling off took ])lace after the grasshopper raid in 1874. Those who left must have been of the original settlers, as during the five years for which the decrease is reported, the county received several accessions in the shape of colonies. During the three years fol lowing 1875, the population had increased again to 2,437. From 1878 to 1880, very large accessions ivere made to the population, as according to the United States Census for the latter year the population was 6,179, showing a gain of nearly 4,0 0 in two years. This increase, however, did not continue, as during the two following years (piitean exodus from the county took place, by which the county lost in population nearly as much as it had gained during the three years preceding.' The Census of 1882, as furnished by the various Township Assessors, sets the population down at 4,699, showing that the population in 1882 was 1,480 less than it was in 1^0.

Thematerial growthof the county, while it doesnot show any unusual degree of advance ment in the aggregate, yet, when compared with the population, is very far from being un favorable. Whatever progress has been made in the county towards increasing its material wealth, has, virtually, been made since 1875, because what few attempts had been made prior to that time at agricultural farming, had been, chiefly, experimental, except in 1874 when farming was entered upon quite extensivsly, but the bright promises created by the spring of that year were dashed by the grasshoppers, and hundreds of people left the county. The condition of the county in 1875, will be better understood by the fact that in that year the total area of field crops in the county was only 1,.391 acres, of which about one-third was de voted to different kinds of grass. The following year the acreage increased by only 400 acres, but by 1878 it had reached to 10,754. For the next three years the increase in the acreage of field crons averaged over one hundred per cent per annum, as shown by the sta tistical record of 1^82. According to the same record, the number of acres included in farms was 97 823 the assessed value of which was $361,023, which valuation represents about onethird of the real value During the year ending March 31, 1882, there were thirty-eight farm dwellin<r8 erected in the county, valued at $6,225. The field crops of 1881 were distributed as follows;— Winter wheat, 16,993 acres; rye, 1,223; spring wheat, 521 ; corn, 11,138; barley, 60; oats 836; buckwheat, 14; Irish potatoes, 195; sweet potatoes, 62; sorghum, l,23il; castor beans. 29; flax, 270; tobacco, 45; broom corn, 989; millet and hungarian. .3,734; pearl millet, 169; rice-corn, 1,374; grasses of various kinds. 1,423, making a total of 40,345. Tame grasses were not very extensively cultivated, there having been only 130 tons of tame hay cut, and 5 441 tons of Iirairie hay. But very little was done at gardening, there having been only $753 worth of garden products marketed during the year. The income from eggs and poultry was much larger, it being $3,2,5.3. The cheese product of the county, for the year ending March 31, 1882, was 1,680 pounds, and that of butter was .54,799 iiound.s.

The increase in the live-stock of the county has not been very rapid, as compared with that of some other counties, but yet a gradual increase has tahen place from year to year. The returns for 1882, give the number of horses in the county at 1,467: mules and asses. 194: milch cows 1 650; other cattle, 5,170; sheep. 13.278, and swine, 1,496. The value of animals shiimhtered, or sold for slaughter, was $9 518. The wool clip for the year was 16,747 pounds. Some efforts have been made at horticulture, but they have not met with that success so far as to render fruit raising a source of any income. In 1882 the trees in bearing in the county were-— Apple, 106; pear, 11; peach, 774; plum. 176, and cherry, 116. The number not in bearing was:— Apple. 2,129; pear. 91: peach, 7,469; plum, 717, and cherry, 759. The people who take an interest in the fruit culture and endeavor to make it a success, lahor under considerahle disadvantages, chief of which is the prevailing dryness of the season. Were it not fo- the absence of rain, horticulture would be a very profitable industry.

But very little of the county is under fence, the total number of rods of fence being 17 7-20 divided as follows-.— Board-fence, 113 rods; rail. 40; stone, 491; hedge, 4.000. and wire, 13.076; or about siifticieiit to enclose 196 square miles, or an area equal to nearly onefifth' of " the entire county. The agricultural implements in the county in 1882 were valued

Other attempts at material advancement have been made in the cultivation of artificial forestry but the success that has attended such attempt.s has been of a rather doiibtfiil and dif^coiirii^ing ch&rflctcr Th© number of iicres in tUe comity in 1^83, devoted to drtific uil forestry was 69L of which 108 acres were set out to walnut, 'Z to majile, ,50 to honey locust, 308 to cottonwood, and 100 to other varieties. Some three or four miles east of Hays City, and immediately south of the railroad track, one Martin Allen has a timber claim of eighty acres on which there is a grove containing about twenty-five acres, the trees of which were set out about six years ago. Some of the trees have attained a height^ of ten. twelve and fifteen feet and though the grove looks remarkably well when in foliage, yet a iier-onal examination of it shows a large percentage of the trees to be dead, and pjirties who have given considerable study to the subject of arboriculture, express grave doubts as to the succe.'‘S of tree growing in the county without some climatic changes take place.

Counfu omcers.-T\\^ officers chosen at the last election were as follows:— M M J ul er, C W Miller M M Shores, Commissioners: M. M. Bannister, County Clerk; J. M. btahley, District Clerk; John Schlyer, Treasurer; Eli Fox. Register of Deeds; B. F. Mi Her, Probate Jud‘’'e; Charles Howard, Sheriff; J. C. Leahey, County Attorney; W. L. Eullci, Siijierintendl-nt of Public Instruction; G. R. Wolfe, Surveyor; T. B. Yates, Coroner.


HAYS CITY

Hays City is loi-ateil on Bifi Croak, iiiid exactly iiiidvvay between the east ail'd west boundary lines of the county, and live miles south of t.lie geo'rraphical center. The records do not show when or by whom the town site was surveyed and platted, but from the best sources of information obtainable, it was in 1807. Near to where Hays City now stands, but south of the creek, a few adventurous individuals had located and had erected a few rudelv constructed buildiiiffs, with the ex|iectation that the place would grow to b'i‘ (piite a town; and that it miglit lie known abroad, they gave the iilaei- the name of Romo.

The establishment of Fort Hays in the early part of 1807, had consider

able to do with the location of Hays City. That .same year the Kansas Pacific Railway, in its westward eoiir.se, had reai-hed the ca.steru boundary line of tlie county, and, anticipating its early completion as far as Fort Hays, a jiarty from St. Louis, consisting of William Fi. Webb, W. J. Wells, ami one Judge Knight, in the hitter part of 180<!, proceeded as far westward as Fort Hays, ivhere they .selected three sections of land for the purpose of colonization. The land thus selected embraced t hat on which Hays City now stands. Having selected the lands deemed necessary for their purpose, Hie party returned East, and in the following June Mr. Webb again visited Fort Hays. During the interval between Ids first and second visit, several parties had arrived and established themselves at Rome. Mr. Webb then went to work and selected a tract of land for a town site, which he had surveyed and platted, and to which he gave the. name of Hays City. People flocked to the new town by the score, and the railway reaching it shortly afterwards, gave quite an impetus to its growth. Houses sprung up as if by magic, and in a short time it had grown to such proportions as to totally eclipse the town south of the creek, and Rome disappeared. Few towns over spring into notoriety in less time than did Hays City, and the notorious characters tliat flocked there, gave the place anytliing but an enviable reputation. Not that Hays City was an exception to other frontier towns that sprung into existence as the railway stretched westward, the only difference being in the numerical superiority of the disreputable characters that, for a time, were a curse to the place.

The town was not a year old when it contained over 1,000 population. Wliere the growtli was so rapid, it could not be permanent, and after events proimd that tlie early settlement of the place was nothing more than tem porary. P'or awhile Hays City remained tlie western terminus of the rail way, and while it was such, it was one of the most stirring, as well as one of the deadliest places in the West. Business, for a time, was exceedingly lively, as it became tlie outfitting station for all wagon trains following the Smoky Hill route eastward. Business hmises, many of ivhich were only of a temporary character, sprung iqi like mushrooms, and saloons were opened in great number. At the first meeting of the Board of County Commissioners no less than thirty-seven licenses to sell liquor ivere granted in two days. For a time it seemed as if all the disreputable characters of both sexes on the froidier were centered in Hays City. Saloons and bagnios fiourished. and against the characters that attended these resorts tlie better element of the community was powerless. The completion of the railway to Sheridan in 1868, while it put a temporary cheek to the business of Hays, had also its compensatory advantages, as it eliminated from the town those desperate and lewd cliaraeters who always desire to live on the line between civiliza tion and barbarism, where they can carry on their nefarious practices unde terred by law and unchecked iiy restraint.


CRIMES AND CRIMINALS

The early history of Hays City is one of bloodshed, and the class of desiieradoes liy wdiieh the place was infested, placed but very little value on linmaii life. The town was the scene of many an exploit of J. B. Ilickok, alias “ Wild Bill,” from 1867 to 1869. An erroneous statement has found its way into print, and has been published in liooks whose authoritative character entitles them to credence that “Wild Bill” was, at one time, Sheriff of Ellis County. Tlie records of the county refute such statement. He was a candidate for Sheriff in 1869, but he was defeated for election by one Peter Lanahan. Bill’s character for daring and recklessness of life, and his establislied reputation for expertness in getting the “drop” on a fellow, and snreiiess of aim made him the dread of others equally bad and reckless of life as himself. Believing that such a man was the best person to protect the law-abiding people against the thugs by which the place was infested, the citizens, and tlie business men especially, employed him as a special mar shal. Wliile thus employed, lie killed two soldiers, two citizens, and wounded several otliers, and the only way he answered admonition or brooked interference was with the revolver. After killing the soldiers to evade the military authorities he left the place and was next heard of at Abilene, where he continued his murderous practices.

“ Wild Bill,” however, was far from the worst cliaracter that found his wav to Hays City during its early days. One who was known by the name of '“ Jim Curry” was one of the 'most depraved specimens that ever visited the western country. He ivas the embodiment of everytliing Viad and dis reputable, the very quintessence of all wickedness, and a living persoiiificntion of crime ill its worst forms, without a single redeeming quality. No person was safe against his attacks; his murderous weapons were aimed at all alike. It would require pag--‘S to recite all his murderous acts, but a few will suffice to show the desperate character of the man during his short stay at Hays City. He killed several colored men, some of wliom lie threw into a dry well; he killed a man named Brady by cutting his throat, after which he threw him into an empty box car and fastened up the door._ Another time he was going up the street, and meeting a quiet, inoffensive youth, named Estes, vvho was about eighteen years of age, told him to throw up his hands. The youth begged that he would not kill liirn, but the villain, deaf to all such apjieals, placed a revolver to the boy’s breast and sent a bullet through his heart, stepped over his dead body and walked away.

This cowardly act aroused the citizens, and they then determined to protect themselves, and to deal out summary and condign punishment upon all offenders against life and property. This action on tlie part of the people had the effect of driving many of the evil-doers from the [ilace, hut notwithstanding tliis, a great deal had to be accomplished before tlie better class of the citizens could depend niion the law for protection.

While many of the worst characters had decamped and followed the railway to Sheridan, the majority of the bagnios and saloons, with tlieir inmates, reiuiiined, and in these took phw-e many a bloody encounter. In the spring of 1872, a row occurred one evening in front of “Uhl Man”

Kelly’s saloon on Xortli Main Street. At that tiTiie Peter Lanahan was Sheriff of the county, and hearing: of what was going on went dowji to quell the disturbance. Pistols were l)eing freely used and upon the Sheriff under taking to interfere, one Charles Harris, who. at that time, was bar-tender for one Thomas Dunn, commonly known as “ Tommy, ’’ tired at hirn.intlicting a mortal wound in the abdomen. Upon the Sheriff being .shot and wounded by Harris, one Em. Powen, the pro])rietress of a noted bagnio, ran out with two revolvers which she gave to the Sheriff, whereupon he immediately commenced firing, killing Ilarris instantly. Mortally wounded as he was. the Sheriff, after killing Harris, went into the saloon of “ Did Man " Kelly, where tlie shooting became general. Another Kelly who kept a saloon in another part of the town was a participant in the melee, and when the Sheriif commenced tiring in the saloon, this younger Kelly crept under the table, and while there Lanahan reached over and fired four shots at him, but becoming weak and unsteady from the wound he had received himself.his aim was uncertain and Kelly escaped unhurt. Lanahan. becojning exhausted, sank to the floor and was carried into the bagnio of Em. Bowen, where some parties undei’took to render him the best assistance t hey could. While there, tlie younger Kelly, who had e.scaped fi-om “Old Man” Kelly’s, returned with a rifle, and placing himself in front of the bagnio where Lanahan lay dying, commenced tiring into the house, wounding a man named Jlay in the knee. The Sheriff was then carried to the court house where he died the following day.

The history of Hays City for the first few years of its existence is one of lawlessness, blood.shed, and feuds, differing only in degree of recklessness. The only object to l)e accomplished in reciting the.se tragical enactments in history, is to show I he state of society that exi.sted in the frontier towns of Kansas as civilization moved westward, and also to show how those danger ous and terrorizing elements disappeared before the onward march of law and order. But few [jlaces in Kansas have such a blood-stained history as Hays City, and in no place had the better element of society so much to con tend against.

Not the least of those transactions which so darken the pages of the his tory of this city, was that which occurred in 1869. That year the govern ment had more military supplies accumulated at the military po.st than could be stored in the room provided, and a large (juantity were piled along side the track, which were covered with a tarpaulin. To prevent any of the goods from King stolen, twm watchmen were employed to w'atch them, who relieved each other at midnight. The name of one of the w'atehmen was .lohn Hays. One night Hays was on duty and about midnight he stepped across the street to Tommy Drumm’s .saloon to see what time it was, and just as he was about opening the door three colored soldiers came along, one of wiiom shot Hays dead. These soldiers l)elonged to the Thirty-eightli Infantry, at that time stationed at Port Hays, and having come to town that evening, had become slightly intoxicated. While in this condition they undertook to enter a bagnio and were refused admission, whereupon they concluded to raise a row. Tliey next went to a barber’s shop, where they commenced to smash things generally, and caused tlie colored barber to secrete himself for safety. They next resolved to go out and kill the first man they met, and Hays being the first man they saw they unceremoniously shot and killed him. Next morning the barber related to the Sheriff how I he three colored soldiers had acted in his sho[) and what he had heard tJiem say, whereiqion the Sheritf, taking the barber with him to identify tlie soldiers, went over to the fort and reported to the military authorities there w'hat had happened and said that he was there to arrest the three soldiers who had participated in the murder of Hays. 'I'he troops w'ere drawn iqi in line and the three soldiers were identified by tlic l)arber and turned ovei’ to Hie custody of the Sheritf. who took them over to Hays City where a siijiposed preliminary examination was held which W'as protracted until evening.

The three colored soldiers w’cre then locked up in a cellar to aw'ait a flirt her examination the folio wdng morning. That same night they w^ere taken from the cellar by a party of men who took them to the trestle-work that crosses a ravine about four hundred yards w’est of the depot, where' ropes W'erc adjusted to their necks, the other end being fastened to the sleepers, after wdiich they were lifted up and dropped down between the lies where they hung until morning, wdien the riqies were cut by some sec tion-men and their lifeless bodies were allowed to droji to the bottom of tlie ravine, from which they were taken to the fort by a party of soldiers where they were luiried.

About one-fourth of a mile from Hays City then' is a [latcli of ground known as “ Boot Hill. ’’ and why it was thus named will sufficient ly indicati' what kind of a place Hays City was during its early days. 'Phis jiarticiilar picei' ot ground was the burial [ilace for those who died violent deaths, that is, those of the rutlians with which the iilaco was inlVsted who were killed at each other's hands. The.se parties were buried without cer emony, with their boots on, and from the fact that forty-five of the characters who thus died were thus buried in that ]iartienlar spot the place received the name of “ Boot Hill. ’’ and by this name it is still known.

In 1874. an outbreak occurred, consequent upon the murder of .lohn Hays. At that time the fort was garrisoned by the Ninth Regiment of Col ored Cavalry, who sought to wreak vengeance iq ion tlie citizens for the hanging of the three colored soldiers of tlie Thirty-eigiith Infantry that we liave just detailed. One night a party of the Ninth went to town prejiared to “clean it out, ” as they expressed it. The jieojilc hearing of this, armed t lieinselvcs and determined to resist the premeditated" cleaning out ” [irocess. The colored cavalry commenced the liall and the fight became general

between them and the citizens. 'I'lie . . pic were victors, and six of the

soldiers were killed and thrown ini o a dry wi'll. Eroiii that time on t he better class of citizens were in the ascendancy, and while their determined ri'sislance. jiiil an end to all fnt ure I roiililc with the soldiers, it also .served as a lesson to the few desperate characters that still remained in llu' town.

who, finding that tlu' people wi're determined that law and order should rule, sought other fields where they could carry on their nefarious practices with greater assurance of impunity.

t.OCAI. MATTERS.

Hay-s City was made the first county seat of the county, wliich position it li.as occupied since Ellis County was organized, and which position it still retains. Among the rtrst to establish themselves in business in the place were W. A. Rose, Ryan & Carl. Mr. Walker, Mr. Robbins, and Moses * Bloomfleld, all of whom started in 1807. The buildings in which they commenced business were all oiie-story frame buildings. The tir.“t hotel in town was built by .Joseph Perry, in September, 1807, which was followed by another in October of the same year, erected by a man named Boggs. The first school taught in town was by a man named Reese, who started a private school in I860, and the following year a public school was opened, thetlrst teacher of which was one Mrs. Jones.

The first substantial improvement made in town was by James O’Brien, on Xortli Main Street, being the stone building now occuiiied by .Tohn Ilobbs as a drug store. In 1873 bonds were issued to build a court house, and a very fine stone building was ftrected, the basement of which is used for a county jail. It is a good, substantial building, the first floor of which is partitioned off into well-finished county offices, the upper fioor being used for a court room. That same year Slg.ofKI in bonds were issued for the erection of a schoolhouse, which was built about two lilocks west of the court house.

From the time the railway was pushed westward from Hays City, to .Sheridan, the growth of the former place was rather backward than forward, and a good many business men and others took down their buildings and moved to the latter point.

The Porty-si.xtU Congress having created a land district in Western Kansas, and desig nated Hays City as the jilace where the United States Land Office should be located, it was establi.shed there in March, ISf.'i, occupying as an office a frame building on North Fort Street. The following year Henry Krueger erected a very line two-story stone building on North Port Street, into which, when coinpletcd, the United States Laud Office was moved, and was so occiijiied until the office was moved to Wakeciiay. in October, 1879.

The same year in which the land office was built. H. P. Vvilson jiiit up a fine two-story stone buildiiio- on Chestnut Street, which for some time was used for hotel purjioses, anil known us the Pennsylvania House, and also a one-story building of the same material. In 1877, Henry Krueger erected a large two-story stone building on South Fort Street. It is a double building, the ground floor being fitted up into one large store room, while the iijiper story is used as a public hall.

Up to 1877 the town was without a church, although there were two or three church so cieties in the place. In 1877 a Catholic Church was organized by Father Fogarty, of Solo mon City, and in that same year a very neat frame chapel was erected, which was the first church edifice in town. The present pastor of the church is Rev. Father Athanase.

On -January 13, 1879, the town was visited by a tire which carried away the (iibbs House, which was the hotel built by -Joseph Perry in 1807. Besides the hotel, two grocery stores and harness sho]) were also swent out of existence. Notwithstanding the loss occasioned by this fire, there were better and m 're substantial improvements made in 1879 than had tieen made in any year since the town had an existence. Hall & Sou erected a beautiful two-story stone 'building on South -Main Street, which they now occupy as a hardware store. A few lots east of Hall & Sou's building, H. P. Wilson put up a one-story stone building, in which he opened a bank, and where he still continues to carry on a hanking business This was the first, and is the oniy bank in town. That same year an elevator of not very large dimensions was ])ut up alongside the railroad track by Simon Motz. While tliese improve ments of a public character were going on, several very handsome residences were being built, J. B. Millner erected a very fine two-story stone residence on North Fort .Street. Beach Brothers juit up. aliout the same time, one of the finest and neatest finislu'd stone residences in Western Kansas: and that of A. S. Hall, on Fourth Avenue, while it is frame, is a very elegant dwelling. The town was further improved that year by the erection of the Presbyterian Church, and this was followed in 1880 by a very neat church which the Lutherans erected.

In 1880, also, a goodly-sized elevator was erected by Henry Krueger, and a still larger one iu 1881 by Simon Motz. In the latter year an extensive addition was made to the schoolhouse, and Hays City now has one of the finest .school buildings in all of Western Kansas.

In December. 1881, Hays City was again visited liy a fire, which carried away six build ings on South Fort Street, none of them, however, very extensive, but yet the lo.ss occa sioned thereby was considerable, as the entire stock of goods in some of the buildings was completely destroyed. Neither in business houses nor in residences has any improvement been made in Hays City since 1879. but, on the contrary, the place has lost largely in pojiiilation since that tiniie. At that time the pn])ulation of the town was estimated at J,(KI0; whereas, according to the assessor's returns for 1882, the population of Big Creek Township, in which Hays City is located, and which is twelve miles east and west by twenty-one north and south, contained, all told, a ])opiilation of 9(;9; and while considerable of this falling off took jilace in the country, a .grvat iiortioii of it occiirri'd in town.

The location of Hays City is (piite beautiful, and the military post of Fort Hays adds not a little to its appearance: and being located almost immediately beyond tlie corporate limits of the town, makes the city aiipear much larger than it really is. It is a six-company post, but at present the garrison is coinjiosed of but three companies— two white and one colored. The barracks, officers' qiiaiters and grounds are handsomely planned, and the tow ering flag-staff, from wliich floats daily the Star-spangled Banner, all add to the pictiirescpiciiess of the Jilace.

X heavy belt of timber, which extends along the banks of Big Creek the entire length of the land embraced within the military reservation, sejiarates the fort from the city, and adds to the beauty of the location. Hays City is quite a business jioiiit and commands a good trade, and most of its business houses are good, substantial buildings, and aie well stocked with goods.

The benevolent fraternities are rejiresented by a Masonic and an Odd Fellows' Lodge, the latter instituted in Februarv, i8'2. with five charter members. The first officers of the lodge were: B. 0. Arnold, N, (t. ; G. W. Kay. V G; W L. Fuller, R. S. : C. Swallow, Treas. : S. Mot'.W.. and D. C. Nellis Con. The lodge has now a membership of twenty-three, ami the jireseiit otlicers are: VV. L. Fuller, N. G : I). C. Nellis, V. G.; A. K. Shade. R. S.: Cephas Grasse, Treas.; G. B. Snyder, Con.: John Nichols, W.

The business of the place is rejire.seiited by six general merchandise stores; three hard ware stores; three drug stores; three hotels — all very inferior buildings, being small frame structures: one dry goods store; one harness and saddlery shop; one millinery establish ment; two book, notions and stationery stores; two jewelry stores; two bakeries and res taurants; two carriage and wagon-shops; two lumber-yards; two newspajiers, and one bank. The palmiest days of Hays City were in its early years; aud as the country surrounding it has proved, thus' far, unremuuerative to those who engaged in agricultural pursuits, there is not much on which to base encouragement for the future, although, situated as it is. it will always be a fair trading jioint.

The Press. — The first attemjit to establish a uewsjiaper in Ellis County was made in 1.SU7, by Joseph Clarke A Co,, who in that year, at H.ays City, established and jniblished a jiajier 'named the Railway Advance. It was Republican in jrolitics, and was issued tri weekly; but its existence was very brief, having exjiired early the following year.

Tile Hays City Tunes was the next to make its ajipearance, having been established in 1873. by Allen A -Jones; but like the one that preceded it, its existence was very short.

Ill February, 1874. the Hays City Sentinel was established by W. H. Johiisoii, but in the following August it jiassed into the possession of Reed A Motz, who reriiained at the head of the paper until November of the same year, when the paper, office and material jiassed into the hands of W. I’. Montgomery A Son, by whom the pajier was published until Fetiruary, 1882, when the jiress and office material were taken by F. C. Montgomery to Cheency, Washington Territory, where he continues to jmblish a paper, liiion the removal of the office from Hays City, the "unfulfilled contracts between the Sentinel and its patrons were comjileted by the Star, the latter becoming the official organ of the county.

The Star was established at Hays City iu March, 187(i. by J. H. Downing, who has been and continues to be sole editor and projirietor since the pajier was first issued. When the Jiress and material of the Sentinel were taken to Washington Territory iu 18.82, its subscrijilioii list Jiassed to the Star, the latter e.liaiigiiig its name to that of the Star-Sentinel. The jiajier i.s still owned aud edited by Mr. Downing, and is the official jiajier of the county. It s an eight-coliiuiii folio. Republican iu politics, aud has a circulation of between 7(XJ and 8II1.I.


ELLIS COUNTY

129.'^

OiriiHtn- imeriran AilvocnU tin- iininc of a pnpn. tin- first nmnhcr of wliich was issiu'il 'll ll-ivs t'ity on Octoljfr 4. IWV*. Tin- was started and pnlilished liy the Advo cate i*nl)lisliin<' t'oinpany. with Natlianicl Hol)hins as e<litor. but subsequently it inissed into tile hands of C'liarles Miller, wlio is now sole editor and iiroprietor. The paper is iniblished in both Knglisli and German. It is a seven-eohmiii folio, independent in polities, and has a circulation of ahoiit 450.

HIGGKAlMlR'Ah SKl'iTt'llKS.

MAltTlN' \LLKN. fanner, and the present Reiireseiitative in the State Lcftislatnru from Ellis County. He first came to Hays City in 1H72, and was one of tlie first to enttaue in aoricnltiirc in what is known as the •' Plain Region ” of Western Kansas, lie was also one "of the proprietors of the town of Hays City and its additions, and still owns a large number of lots there, and while in the land business, located most of the early settlors of Kills Conntv on their homesteads and other claims. He was horn in Alonroe County, Ghio, in 18-xi- settled at Mendota, Ill., in 18.02, and followed farming and horticultural pursuits until comiim to Kansas. He was married in 1H,")4 to Miss Elizabeth Augustine, a native of Tiiscara\vas‘’Countv, Ohio. They have two children living— Charles T., now clerking in a sutler’s store at'Fort Hays, and Lizzie, now a school teacher. Mr. Allan has served as .liistice of the Peace in both Illinois and Kansas, and was United States Circuit Court Com missioner from August. 1874, to December, 18S(l, when he resigned on account of represeiriim his county in the Legislature; has been County Surveyor, and is now a member of the State ilorticnltural Society, and one of its vice-presidents, and chairman of its Standing Com mittee on Forestry.' He identified himself with the old Free-soil party at the time of its first orc'anization in 1848, and has generally been considered a la former, and sometimes a fanatic, hiu since the war of the Rebellion has always been conceded to be a Kepublicanin iiolitics. H. ( '. ARNOLD, manufacturer and dealer in harness, saddles, shoe findings and sundries. Ic began the trade in ISW, and carries a general stock of S3,.")()0. He erected his building at

Mary’s Kan., where he followed the same business, coming to Hays City in I81 , . He has served as County Commissioner; also as chairman of the Board of Supervisors, and 111 the fall of 1884 w'as a candidate lor Reiiresentative from his county to the Legislature on the Democratic ticket. He was married in 1877 to Miss Ida Gregory, a native of Huntsville, Ala.

F R BUSSARD manufacturer of carriages, buggies and fine work, also general rejiairiim lie’ located in Hays City in the fall of 1877, and began the above business. He was Iio'i-n in Alarietta AVasliiiigtoii County. Oliio, in 1845. When quite a young man he moved to Jasper Comity Ill., and farmed two years, then went to Laramie City, 'Wyoming, asabookkeeper and salesman six years, thence to Hays City. He was married 111 18157 to Miss Lucy E H'lH of Connersville, liid. They have three children— Daniel H., Felix R. and Samuel. Al'r. Biissard .joined Harmar Lodge. I. (). O. F., at Harmar, Ohio, and is now a member of the Fidelity Lodge, No. l!Hi, 1. <). F., Hays City, Kan.

FRANK F CORLISS, dealer in drugs, paints, oils and druggists sundries, began trade May 1 1878 and carries a general stock of $3,0110. He erected his building at a cost of <-i 1x111' It is built of wood, two stories high. 2.5x40 feet, with basement same size. He was born in Boston Mass.. Februarv 23. 1866. Lived in his native city until became to Hays City Kan He bco-an as clerk in a drug store at the age of fifteen years. Married in Decem ber 1880, to -Miss Estella Robbins, a native of Knoxville, Iowa. Air. Corliss is Notary

Public for Hays City. „ , „ j. , i ■ o

J H DOVVNING editor and proprietor of the Star-Senhnel, was born m Scott County, 111 ill 1842. Lived in his native iilace until 18(50, when he went to Council Bluffs, Iowa, and attended school, etc. Enlisted in the early part of 1864 in Company E, One Huiidrcd and Thirtv-seventli Regiment. Illinois Volunteer Infantry, as a private; was Commissary Sei-'eant of his company; particiiuited in the battle of Memphis, August 20, 1864, and many skinnislies; was mustered out at Springfield, Ill., in the fall of 1864. He then returned to Council Bluffs and clerked, etc., and also went to Yankton, D. T., and clerked m 186i-b8; then returned to the former city, where he secured a position on the Council Bluffs Nonpa reil which was his first newspaper work. He went to Leavenworth, Kan., 111 August, 1868, where he emuv'ed in reportorial work until late in 186!l, w iieii he went on the road as a cor respondent for the Leavenworth Rulleiiji ^ in which position he remained until late in 18; R then wan tr&VGliiig corrcspoiKlGnt for tlic Louvciiworth until Jaiiiuiry, 18/b.

Wi

tinei.MWO. consoiuuueu me two IJUI/UIO. ........ -

7ii0. is the official organ of Ellis County. Early 111 l.'-80 he was aiipointed United States Commissioner Married in November. 1879. to Miss Ella L. West, of Council Bluffs.

MARTIN GATES dealer in general merchandise, opened trade in 1878. He erected his store buildiiiv the same year, size of which is 20x88 feet, two stories hi-jh, costing |2,0(K». Employs three clerks and he carries a general stock of $6,000. He came to Ellis County in 1877 and followed farming a year. He has a farm of 160 acres. 120 of which is ciiltn ated. He was born in Blair County. Pa., in 1842, and ivas raised and educated in his native county He started business in life in the furniture trade, and followed it a few mouths. He then opened the grocery trade and continued it until he came to Kansas. He enlisted in the spriiiv of 1861 and in tlie three months’ service, served hie time and re-eiihsted for three vcar.s in Company C, Seventy-sixth Regiment Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry; participated ill all the battles of his command, and served until shot through his right lung in the skirmish ill front of Petersburg, June 3 1804 was luustered out July 12, lh65. IIis was a terrible w ouiul fora iiersou to survive J’he hall entered in front, passed through the right lung and came out on his liack He was married in 1872 to Miss Anna Beamer, of Diiiicaiisville, Blair County. Pa They have six children— William A. L. by a former marriage, and by the latter marriave-Cliarles H John B.. Edward, Mary J. and George. He is a member of the Methodist I'fpiscopal Church, and Mrs. Gates of the Lutheran Church. He is a member of A ance I ost.

No

2 GAR of Hays City, and a member of Hays Clity school board. JOHN W. GOODALL, carriage-maker and general carriage work and

He

_ repair slioj)

loeated'in Havs City January 1, 1877, and engaged as a carpenter, etc. He was born in Eng land in 1836; came to America alone in 1854, and settled in Wayne County, I a., where he enmmed in carriage making until he came to Kansas. He was married October 11. 1846 to Mi^s^Esther Bid^leconibc. also a native of England Tliey have three children Alfred

^ ‘ _ _ _ TT? -100/4 Tin,,.. ,-v> m,,

July, 1862. Enlisted ill ('ompaiiy F, Second Regimeut .Massacliiisetls \ oluiiteer f avalry. and particiiiated in all the battles of his command; mustered out in the fall ot 186.>. Me then engaged in the barber Imsiiu'ss in Boston, Alass., and afterward in New A ork City. . an Francisco, Cal, Jacksonville. (Iregon. etc. Returned to New A'ork City and thence to Hays City, Kan. Married in 1872 to Aliss Catlieriiie A. Donovan, a native of Ireland, t Jiey have three children— Mary Agnes. Hattie and Frederick S. He is a memher of A ance I ost

FRANHA HAVEMANN, agent for the sale of lumber, hiiildiiig material, ami coal, carry ing a stock of S-5,000 Mr. Ilavemaii is also a dealer in household furniture and cothiis. He opened the business in 1874 and i-arries a stock of $1,.5IXI, lie came to Hays City in Aiiril 1873, and followed contracting and building until 1878. He was horn in (,ermany in 1818 ' Came to America in 1873 and immediately to Kansas. .Air. Ilaveraaii was a member of the German army during the Fraiico-Prussiaii war but took leave after its close and wisely came to America. Married in 1873 to Aliss Dorris W’edemeyer, a native of t,eriiiaiiy. 1 hey have five children— Freddie, Emma, Frank, Giistaf and Henry. Air. Ilaveman has served four years as Treasurer of Big Creek Township, Ellis County. Ho is a memher of Hays I.odge, No. 195, A. F. & A. M.

CONNELL IIENLEA', bookkeeper for the mercantile house of H. Krueger. He hrst came to Fort Riley, Kansas, in 1867 where he clerked in the (Quartermaster's Department tor two years thence to Hays City in the same occupation at L'ort Hays until 18<2 He then en-mo-ed in general merehaiulisiiig in Hays City until 1879, after winch he took tiis present position He was born in Ireland in 1839; came to America in 1862; enlisted July 8. ot the same year in the Tliird United States Artillery; afterward was transferred to the war depart ment wliere lie remained until the close of the war. He was mustered out ui October 18b.o. He then went into the quartermaster's Department Jefferson Barracks, St. Louis, Alo., as clerk, until he came to Fort Riley. He was married in 1875 to Aliss Ellen Gl,ynn, a native ot Fort Wayne. Did. They have one daiiLditer, Irma. , .

CHARLES HOWARD, Sheriff of Ellis County. He first came to Kansas ir. the winter of 1867. and went on an expedition after the Cheyenne Indians, being a member of the Nineteenth United States Infantry. He served in Kansas, New Alexico and the Indian Territory, and was mustered out at Dodge City, Kan., iii 1870. He was born in Prussia in 1844. Came to America early in 1859; remained until 1860, wlieii be returned to his native countri-. Returned to America in the early part of 1863, when he enlisted in Company I , Forty second Regiment New York Volunteer Infantry. Some time afterwanl re-enlisted in Company C. Tliirtieth Regiment Alassachiisetts A'olunteer Infantry. Participated in all the battles of liis command, and was mustered out in July, 1866. He then returned to his native land and was soon drafted to serve in the Prussian-Aiistrian war; was sent to the front ami served three months, when he returned to America and enhsted in the N meteentti United States Infantry. He has served about seven years in the Linited States and Europemi armies After his discharge of time in the regular army, he located in Hays City. He was mail-carrier a year, and since that time has served in various capacities Elected Sheriff in the fall of 1879: re-elected in' the fall of 1881. AA’as County Assessor iiil8i (-iH. AA'as Deputy Sheriff three preceding terms before his election. He has made several iinportant arrests, and has taken seventeen men to the penitentiary. He was also princiiial in the arrest of the notorious train robber. Michael Roarke, who is now serving out a term in

then moved to Hays City and was elected Probate Judge iii the fall of 1880. Born iii Williamsport, Pa., iu 1836. Left his native place in 1850 and engaged in different occupa tions. AVas in the fur trade for fifteen years in the country from Chicago to Hudson Bay. He was married at Hazel Green, Wis., in 1861 to Miss Clara A. Sinitli, who was born near Rochester N. A". Tliey have two children— Eva L . married to Air. Alexander Grant, a nephew of the late George Grant of ATctoria, and Benjamin, now clerking iii Hays City.

SAAIUEL AIELLISON. post trader, Fort Hays, first came to Kansas in IbG, and located near Saline River, Ellis County, on a farm where he engaged in stock-raising and farming until 1878. He then came to Hays City, where he engaged in the restaurant business two years, when he was appointed sutler at Fort IlayR ”

Born in Prospect, Butler Co., Pa., in

ried in 1879 to Aliss Bessie Normoyle, a native of the State of New York. They have two

children— Anna Atay and Nellie Elizabeth. . , ,,

S. MOTZ, dealer 111 general merchandise and all kinds of grain, broom corn, etc. ^ He opened the business of merchandising in 1871 and gfa™ ■ w

>reneral stock of about $10,(100. He erected his store building in 18,3. size 4;>x8() feet, built of wood at a cost of $4,000. He erected the first elevator in Hays City in 18,6, and his present elevator in 1879 and named it the Union elevator, size of which is -tox",^ feet and 40 Lt hivh. It Is built of wood at a cost of $5,000, capacity of which is 3.0 lo bushels of grain .

In 188'1'he handled 3 0 car-loads. He enqiloys five men. He first came to Hays City in June 1867 and clerked in a general store until 1868. AVhen he first came to Hays City, he was neimiless, but he went to hunting buffalo and other wild game from wh^'i E® made his first accniniilatioiis. Born in Centro County, Pa., iml8.35; raised and educated in Imion County. Graduated from Union County Seminary. He enlisted in October, tofai, in Company B Second Colorado Cavalry and participated in all the battles of his command. Alnstered out In Wphninrv 1865. After locating in Hays City he studied law and was admitted to tlie bar ot

He served as Representative in National Convention

all the county offices except Treasurer and County Clerk. He served s the Kansas Legislature in 1869-70-71. He was Delegate at large to the A for the nomination of James A. Garfield.

D. C NELLIS, of the firm of Nellis etc. He located in Hays City March 26,

tgomery County. N. Y.. in 1849. Kanciueii m r,uiuc.u n,

I N. Y. Began the study of law in 1870 at Camijohane, N. A .. in a law othce am, e'd a year, 'fheuce to Topeka. Kansas, and entered the office of Martin, Burns A

country. He has some of the finest carriages and buggies of his own make to he fouiid m the West; also tuMiufactiires all kinds of edge tools, and does all kinds of painting. Hn is ahso the inventor of making over common guns into breach loaders, said to be one ot the

greatest inventions of this age. . , , • ,

MICHAEL HAFEAMIER, manufacturer of carriages, wagons and general rejiair sho)). he also manufactures farm implements. He located in Hays City in 18,1._ He was born in Bavaria. Germany, in 1845; came to Americii^ in 18.54 with his pare'E';'- ■‘Eey located near

they trade in ail

IHiI UAJ iHi.'.-' ivan; it *.in**v- . . . xt -» a r>

Clareiue Al. and Agnes. He is a memher of A ance Post, No. 2, G. A. R

A. S. HALL, of the firm of Hall .V Son-Frank F.— dealers in a general line of hard ware. stoves, tinware and farm imiilemeiits. Oiiened trade in 1872, and erected a store huihling of stone in 1878, size of which is 2.5x75 feet, two stories high and basement, at a cost of S(i.. 5110. They carry a general stock of $24,000 Air. Hall first came to Hays City. Kan., in 1873. He was horn in Seneca County, N. A., in 1827. P®’’™!? n'0''6d to

Monroe Alich. in 18:15, where he was raised and educated. He went to hort AAayne, Did., and clerked for several years. He then went into the boot and shoe business for twelve years, in the ineHiitime went lo the Pacilic Coast, where he eiii^a^ed in j^eneral inerchaiuiieing; followed mining in Montana some time, themie to_ Fort Wayne. Ind-. and remaiiied some time, and thence to Kansas, lie was married in 18.55 to Miss Priscilla J. Fairfield, ot Keniiehiink. Maine. 'Phey have three children— Frank f ., Bertha J. and Carrie E. Mr.

Hail is a memher of the Ala.sonic Order and Ihe 1. O. O. E _

WILLIAAI S. IIANNIFORD, barber and dealer in cigars and tobacco, came to Hajs Citv in 1876 and began in business. Bom in Ireland March 1, 1858. Came to America in

Fairfield.

Case,'sep\eYber’l2,^8VL " Continued uTitiiTe’briiary 21.;8ri, when Im was admitted to the baro’f practice in the district courts. ^ tx . ... o.. i . . .

/-N . 1... A ITlIiu r’/Annf-V A I

Came to Hays City Alarch 26, 1873. Was appointed

of Toiieka Kan They liave three children — Luther Ale.. Celeste B.. and Anna AI. He is a member of the 1. O. O. F., and the Atasonic order of Hays City. ...

S C RAMEY came to Hays City in Alarch. 1879, and began raerchandisiiig in August of the same year. He was born in Blair County. Pa., in July, 18a0; \yas raised in his native county and educated at Williamsport. Pa. He kept hooks for the Williamsbiirgh Maniifaet urine- Comiianv for some time, then engaged in merchandising iii the same place, under the firm name of John Sewhab & Co., until 1875. . Thence to Tyrone Pa., where he engaged in the same business under the firm name of Smith & Ramey, until 18i6, thence to Ilollidayshiiri'in various occupations until he came to Kansas and became one of the hrm of Metz A Ramey wliolesale and retail dealers iu general mercliaiidise. 'I'hey opened riule in August. 1870 aiid occupy two floors, 25x1110 feet, and a basement, carrying a general line of goods to the amount of $20,000. They also deal in all kinds of farmers produce, and control a

member of the ATasonic order. Hays City, ,

ternitv of Greeiicastle. Ind. He began the practice of law in a i,, hunt

JOHN SCIIYLEli, County Treasurer, came to llays City iii eUp^a^i a in nunt

buffalo and other game four years on the great plains, after which he farmed and was

mg

post butcher at Fort Hays, and raised stock until 1878. Was elected Sheriff in the, fall of 1877 and served two years. He followed merchandising some time. Was elected County Treasurer in the fall of 18-11. He has been identitied in farming all the time since he came to Kansas, He was born in Iluffalo, N. Y.. in 18-19, and lived in his native State until 18(18, when he came out to the great plains. He was married in 1872 to Miss Barbara Uhlein, a native of Buffalo, N. Y. They have live children— Ro.sa, Anna, F'rances ,1., Henry A. and Catherine,

H. D. SHAFFER, Clerk of the District Court, first came to Hays City in July, 1877, when he engaged in sheep-raising and stock business generally. He has a sheep ranch on Big Creek, three miles southeast of Hays City, of 880 acres, where he now owns 1,100 head of merino sheep and cotswolds. He sheared 8,000 pounds of wool in 1882, and realized 20 cents per pound. He was elected Clerk of the District Court in the fall of 1878, and by re-elections has since held the office. He was born in Somerset County, Pa., in 1848: moved to Canton. Ohio, in 1885; attended Mount Union College three years, and was postmaster eight years at Canton, Ohio, after which he came to Kansas. He enlisted September 1, 1861. in Company C, Fifty-ninth Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry. He was wounded at

I.ynchburg, Va., June 18, 180.5, and taken i)rlsouer at the same time, and was conlined in Libby i)rison three months and over. Was discharged in February, 1885, on account of his wound. He was married in 1887 to Miss Addie Ritz, of Canton, Ohio. They have four children— Harry, Joseph, Ida and Frank. He is a member of Fidelity Post, No. 124, G. A. R.. of Have City.

GEORGE B. SNYDER, physician and surgeon, located in Hays City in 1870, where he has since continued the juactice of medicine. He was born in Holiidaysburg, Blair County, Pa,, in 18.53. He attended the common schools and the academy of his native place. Began the study of medicine in 1872; entered the medical department of the University of Pennsylvania’in Philadelphia in 1873, graduating in March, 1876, and began the practice of his chosen profession in Hays City. He has been County Coroner and County Physician of Ellis County. He is a member of the Blair County Medical Society, and the'juniata Valley Medical Association of Pennsylvania. He is United States Examining Burgeon for pensions for Ellis County. He is a member of Fidelity Lodge, No. 194, of Ha^ s City, Kan.

,1. E. WILSON, Postmaster, came to Hays City in the fall of 1867. The following spring he was em])loycd as clerk in the post trader's store; after serving eight years in that capacity, he was apiiointed post trader. He resigned in 1880 and was appoiiited postmaster. He was born in Williamsburg. Pa., in 18-38. Wlien the war broke out he was serving on board the United States Sloop of War— “Siisiiuehaniia.” He was in the battle of F'orts Clark ami Hatteras. and soon after in the battle at Port Royal. His term of service expired in Septemlier, 1883; during the same month he enlisted in the Ninetieth PennsylvaiiiaVolunteers; was woiiiuied and taken iirisoner in the battle of the Wilderness, May 4. 1864. After being in Andersonville six months he was exchanged. The Ninetieth having been mustered out of service, he was transferred to the Eleventh Pennsylvania Volunteers, where he remained till the war was over. In 1872 he was married to Miss Jane S Martin, of Williamsburg, Pa.

HILI, P. WILSON, owner of the Bank of Hays City. This bank was opened for biisiness January 1, 1880. being the first and only bank in the place. The bank correspondents are the American Exchange, National Bank of New York. Bank of Kansas City, Mo., and First National Bank of Leivenworth. Mr. Wilson was born in Williamsburgh, Blair Co.. Pa., in 1840. He came to Fort Hays, Kan., in 18(57. and was post trader at the post until 1878. In 1882 he raised 285 acres of wheat, which produced over 7,000 bushels, one field of 132 acres averaging thirty and one-half bushels per acre. He was married January 20, 1880, to Miss Mary \ . Montgomery, daughter of W. P. Montgomery, Esep, of Hays City.

T. B. YATES, iihysiciaii and surgeon, of the firm of Yates & Middlekauf; they also deal in drugs, medicines and druggists sundries. They opened the drug trade in January, 1881, and carry a stock of $1,200. He located in Hays City and began the practice of his profession in the fall of 1878. He was born in Grafton. We^t Virginia, in 1853, and educated 111 the home schools and West Virginia University. He began the study of medicine at the age of twenty years, entering the University of Maryland, at Baltimore, graduating in the spring of 1878. Practiced in Grafton, West Virginia, where he continued until he came to Hays City, Kan. He is a member of the Masonic Order of Hays City. Was married in 1878 to Miss Georgela K. Mackin, of West Virginia. Mr. Yates is County Coroner of Ellis Countv, Kan.

I. M. YOST, dealer in all kinds of gi-ain, seed, and manufacturer of semolino, etc. He located in Hays City in 1877, and followed the lumbering business for six months, then into his present business. He erected a fiouring-mill in 1878. with a capacity of 100 barrels in twenty-four hours, at a cost of |il5,000. He has recently introduced the gradual reduction process by the roller and granulation system, and now manufactures the finest grades of flour. He erected an elevator in 1878, with a capacity of 5,000 bushels, at a cost of $1,500. He shipped 250 car loads of grain in the season of 18'‘2. He is also engaged in farming,’ and has .32ii acres of land, 1.50 of which is cultivated. He raised 1,900 bushels of wheat in 1882 from 100 acres. He was born in Norristown, Montgomery County, Pa., in 1848, and lived in his native county until he came to Kansas. At the age of nineteen years he engaged in the dry goods and cariiet trade. He came to Kansas with J. M. Yost, a brother. Was

married in 1871 to Miss Sallie T. Johnson, of Norristown, Pa. They have three children _

Edward, Rosina and Genie. Mr. Yost also owns a saw-mill at Breckinridge. Col., with a capacity of 0,(XX) feet in ten hours. It was built at a cost of $2,(XKI. He established a flour and feed store at Ellis, Kan., in 1881, where they sell a part of their own production.


ELLIS

Tlie town known by tlie name of EllLs was laid out by the Kansas Pacific Railway Comjiany in 187:1, and was surveyed and platted by Holland Wheeler, a civil engineer in the employ of the company. It is located on the northeast quarter of Section 8, Township 13 south. Range 20 west of the Sixth Princii)al Meridian. It is .situated on the north bank of Big Ereek, and .just one mile east of the west line of the county.

It is what is usually known as a railroad town, and the fact of it lieing the terminus of the third division of the Kansas Pacific Railway, it is de])endent, chiefly for its support, on the employes of the comimny. The ronndliouse and machine sho])S of the company being located there, gives em])loyment to a great many men, and aside from the support derived from these sources, the town has very little to rely upon. It is surrounded bv a rough, broken country, altogether unsuited for agric(dtural jmrsiuts," so that its country trade is very limited.

The railway runs through the center of the town from east to west, and that portion north of the track is designated the Korth side, and the opj>osite ])ortion the South side. All the business portion of the town is north of the track, and confined chiefly to the street fronting the railway, whilst the greater portion of the residence piirt is south of the track. The Iniildings of the railway company are all good, substantial, stone structures, and quite extensive, the roundhouse having stalls for fourteen locomotives. The Iniilding erected by the company for a depot is a very fine two-story stone building, and is both a depot and hotel combined. All the business" houses are rather inferior buildings, there being only onti two-story stone laisiness hou.se in town, that of Kelly <& Ormrod. The others are all one-story build ings, some stone and some, frame.

The fir.st man to start merchandising in town was Thomas Daily, who erected a one-story double storeroom, one room being devoted to the sale of clothing exclusively, and the other to general merchandising. There are but few business houses in the town, but what there are, is amply sufficient for the trade. The business men of the place are Thomas Daily, Nichols & Bros., Reading & Bowen, G. P. Lee, Kelly & Grmrod, and Eli Sheldon. The

majority of the residences of Die town are plain, unjiretentious, but, neat and comfortable looking buildings, and such as woidd indicate the home of tlie thrifty, industrious mechanic.

In 1882, a very fine improvement was made to the town in the erection of a very fine two-story stone school building in the southern portion of the town, it is a very neat, well-finished structure, surmounted by a belfry that is quite ornamental in design. Although there have been for some years several church organizations in town, there never has been a church building erected. Aftei' the new schoolhouse was completed, however, in 1882, the mendiers of the Congregational (diurch Society purchased the old frame school building, which they are now converting into a church. There is a iMasonic Lodge in town, and one of Odd Fellows has been organized recently.

Like most of the other towns west of Abilene on the Kansas Pacific Railway, Ellis had for a brief jieriod the advantagi's and disadvantages of the cattle trade. This was during lcS77-78,and the history of the jdace dur ing that time was about similar to that of other places similarly situated. If bnsine.ss was increased by the trade, crime was also increased, and a certain class of characters attracted to Ellis by the cattle trade could be very well dispensed with in any society. So long as Ellis remains a terminus of a division of the railroad, and the company maintains its shops and round house there, it will be a town of some importance, but aside from these it has very little to suj)port it.


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES

W. H, BELL, i>ostma8ter and dealer in stationery, fruits, cigars and tobacco, came to Ellis, Kan., in 1872. He farmed until 1873, then worked for tlie Kansas Pacific 1-lailroad Company until February, i877, when he took charge of the post-office. Has been identified in farming since he settled in Kansas. He now has a farm of 160 acres north of Ellis, eighty of which are cultivated. He opened a general store after taking charge of the post-office; was burned out .March 10, 1881, with a total loss of $3,000. He was born in Montgomery County, N. Y., in 1837. Was engaged in photographing in Troy, N. Y., and afterward in grocery business in Syracuse. N. Y. Married in 1860 to .Miss Laura A. Hall, a native of Edenville, Herkimer Co.. N. Y. They havet-even children — Jessie M., Harry \V., Beecher. Bradley, Allie, William and Lynn. He is a member of Apollo Lodge, No, 13, Masonic, of Troy, N. Y. _

R. S. ORMEROD. firm of Kelley & Omerod, dealers in general merchandise. 'I'hey opened trade in 1878, and carry a stock of aliout $5,()(.X). They erected their store building in 1877, at a cost of $1,500; size of main building. 2.5x45 feet, and built of stone. R. S. Omerod first came to Ellis, Kan., in January, 1873. Being a machinist by trade, he worked in that capacity for the Kansas Pacific Railroad five years, then went into merchandising. Born in England in 1853, he came to America with his parents in 1863, and settled in Peoria, 111., where they lived until coming to Kansas.

THOMAS D.5,LY, dealer in a general line of merchandise. He keeps all varieties of goods, and carries a stock of $40,u00. He opened trade in 1870, and erected his present large store a few years afterward; occupies two rooms, 23x80 feet, built of stone. He came to Ellsworth iu 1868, where he engaged in merchaudising a short time, and was also in the employ of the United States Government some time. Afterward located in Ellis and began the above trade, lie was born in Ireland in 1830, and came to America when a small boy. He enlisted May 25, 1861, in Company E, Fourteenth Regiment, Illinois Volunteer Infantry, participating in all tlie battles of bis company; was mustered out in June. 1864.

DANIEL GRIEST, land agent for the Union Pacific Railroad; land office located at Ellis, Ellis County. He came to Ellis March 23, 1881, and took charge of the above busi ness. Came to Lamed, Pawnee Co., Kan., in January, 1878, where lie engaged in the same business as at present for tlie Atcliison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railroad two years. He was born in York County, Pa., in 18.37, and made that county liis home twenty-five years. He lived in Indiana five years and six months, Maryland eleven months, then went back to Pennsylvania, Adams Comity, and remained ten years, and from there came to Kansas. He first began business in life as a salesman for fruit trees, and followed it for fifteen years. He began to sliift for himself at the age of twelve years. He was married in 1861 to Miss Rose D Mendeleon, a native of Philadelphia, Pa. They have three sons and three daughters — Emily R., married to Oscar Erway, of Pawnee County; Wiliuer M., wlio now has charge of their dairy ranch in Pawnee County of 24(1 acres; Mary, Lizzie, John E., Florence T.. and Mordecai P. Mr. Griest was a member of Moneellen meeting of Hicksite Friends, Pennsylvania, and Relief Lodge, No. 145, 1. 0. O. P.,of Camden, Ind. His wife is a Hoinceopathic physician and surgeon, self-taught, and lias quite a practice in the place where they live. He followed teaching in the winter until thirty-one years of age. He has now 200,0(X1 acres of land for sale for the Union Pacific Railroad Company; also agent for 1(),0(X) acres in Pulaski County, Ky.

J. E. HUBBARD, superintendent of bridges and building on Smoky Hill Division, Union Pacific Railroad, in Kansas. He has forty men under his supervision, and the iiayrolls show $8tXl paid out monthly on this division. He came to Kansas in the spring of 1866. and located at Leavenworth, where he worked at the carpenters’ trade a year. He then engaged in the same capacity for the United States Government at Fort Riley a year; thence to Fort Harker a year; thence to Fort Dodge, Kan., a year. Then entered the rail road service as a carpenter, and by strict attention to duty secured his present position in 1872. He was married in 1875 to Miss Louisa Palmer, a native of Buffalo, N. Y. They have two daughters — Irene and Stella. Mr. Hubbard is a native of Aurora, Ind., horn in 1843. He enlisted in September, 1861, in Company A, Seventh Regiment, Indiana Volunteer In fantry; i)articipated in all the battles of his command, comprising thirty-two engagements. He was mustered out in 1864.

H.W. MORGAN, physician and surgeon.carae to Wa Keeney, Kan., in April 1879, where lie practiced medicine for two years. He thin moved- to Ellis on account of its being a central location. He is a physician and surgeon for the Union Pacific Railroad. His private prac tice extends west from Ellis on the line of the road as far as Wallace (119 miles). His prac tice for the Union Pacific Railroad Company extends from Wallace on the west to Brookville on the east. He was born in Burlington, Iowa, in 1849. Was educated in New York City, and graduated from the medical department of the University of New York City in 18711. He practiced medicine three years in Dallas County, Iowa, previous to his going to New York City. He was married in Septem'ner 1877 to Miss Della C. Baldwin, of Grafton, N. H. He is a' member of W’a Keeney Lodge No. 148, Masonic.


VICTORIA

Victoriii was the scene of the attempt by George Grant to establish a jirosperous colony in the wilderness, elsewhere described. This colony was established in 1873. It brought considerable capital with it, and for a time its success seemed very probable. The first church in the county was built Ijy this colony in 1877. It wa.s intended for Episcopal services, nearly all of the colony holding the faith of the established church of England. Tlie final dissolution of the colony is detailed in the general history of the county.

St. Fidelis Church, of Victoria, Ellis County, Kan., was founded by Rev. Father Anthony Mary, and the erection began November 1, 1881, tuid will bo. completed in the fall of 1883. The size of the church building is 50x123 feet; including sacristy, it is 109 feet long. The walls are of cut Magnesia limestone, 30 feet high and 2^ feet thick. The steeple walls are 3 feet thick. Every 12| feet around the building is a pillow 2x2-1 feet. The sanctuary is 24x30 feet. The sacristy is 22x30 feet. The above church is

'rREGO COUNTY.

built ontircly by Russians. Tlic walls, iucludiiiff stcepb' towci-^ will cost $2,417. 'Potal cost of strm-luro will c-XCimmI $8,000. Thore arc lo2 fainilii's who an' monibers of l4io above ehurch.

BIOGR.VPmC.\ L SK KT( ' 1 1.

KEV. FATHER .\NTH()XY MARY, a ('atholic priest, was horn in Wostplialia. in tlio kinf.nioin of Prns.sia, in 1831, He began his scientilic ednoation in the (lymnasinin at .Miienster. in Westphalia. .Afterward he made Ins philosophical and theological studies at

Mainz, in Hessia, and became priest in 18.->!l. Then he worked as i)neHt, especial y as missionarv, in Westphalia until 187.’), when he came to America and located in (.mnherlunil 'fe he worked as priest in the Saint Peter and Panl's Church. I wo years afterward

under charge! hesides his own church at Herzog, Victoria Station He has built niai'y cliurcihes, niona^tories and schoolhouscs in bis ife-tiino. In 1870-71 lici was Chaplain in the FrancO'Prussian war. He is a member of the (’apuchiii Order.


* * *


SOURCES

Source: Cutler & Andreas, History of the State of Kansas (Chicago, A. T. Andreas, 1883), Ellis County chapter — Internet Archive `historyofstateof00andr` (public domain). Extract prepared 2026-10-08.

