Wakeen silt loam, 3 to 7 percent slopes (Wh).—This soil is on ridgetops and side slopes and along drainageways. It has a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but bedded chalky limestone is at a depth of 24 to 32 inches.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Nibson, Brownell, Mento, and Armo soils; small areas of Roxbury silt loam, frequently flooded; and areas of soils in which the depth to bedrock ranges from 41 to 60 inches. Also included are areas of soils that have a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but the surface layer is 5 to 7 inches thick. There are also eroded areas and rock outcrops, which are shown on the soil map by symbols.

Runoff is medium to rapid. Water erosion is the main hazard. Soil blowing is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated, but a few areas are in native grass and are used for range. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Terracing, constructing waterways, and contour farming help to control erosion, Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. Iron chlorosis can lower production of sorghum. Capability unit I[Ve-2; Limy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 3.

Wakeen silt loam, 5 to 15 percent slopes, eroded (Wk). —This soil is on ridgetops and side slopes and along drainageways on uplands. It has a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but the surface layer is 5 to 7 inches thick.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Brownell, Nibson, and Armo soils and Roxbury silt loam, frequently flooded. Also included were small areas of soils that have a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series but have bedrock at a depth of 40 to 50 inches, There are also small, severely eroded areas and rock outcrops, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is rapid. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

About 40 percent of the acreage of this soil is cultivated, and 60 percent is in native grass. The soil is better suited to native grass than to crops, and it is used for range. Some of the underlying limestone is thick enough to be used as building material and is strip mined. Proper rate of stocking, deferred grazing, rotation grazing, cross fencing, and proper placement of salt and water help to maintain range condition. Sites are available for water impoundments in most places. Capability unit VIe-1; Limy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 38.

Wann Series

The Wann series consists of deep, somewhat poorly drained soils that formed in calcareous, stratified, loamy alluvium along the major streams. These nearly level and gently undulating soils are on flood plains where the water table fluctuates between depths of 2 and 6 feet (fig. 19).

In a representative profile the surface layer is darkgray loam about 12 inches thick. The next layer is

grayish-brown, very friable fine sandy loam about 12 inches thick. The upper 10 inches of the underlying material is grayish-brown loam that has faint mottling; the next 10 inches is dark-gray loam that has faint mottling; and the lower part is light brownish-gray very fine sandy loam that has common distinct mottles.

Permeability is moderately rapid, and available water capacity is moderate. The water table fluctuates between depths of 2 and 6 feet and is at a depth of 2 feet during wet periods. Most of the acreage of this soi] is cultivated, but about a third of it is in native grass, to which it is well suited.

Representative profile of Wann loam, in a cultivated field, 2,800 feet south and 185 feet west of the northeast corner of sec. 14, T. 11 8., R. 20 W.:

A1—0 to 12 inches, dark-gray (10YR 4/1) loam, very dark gray (10YR 3/1) moist; moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; many worm casts in root channels and nests;

Figure 19.—Profile of Wann loam.

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 89

strongly effervescent; mildly alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

AC—12 to 24 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) fine sandy loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; single grained; soft, very friable; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

C1—24 to 34 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; few faint mottles; porous; few worm casts; common ¥% inch gravel; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

Alb—34 to 44 inches, dark-gray (10YR 4/1) loam, very dark gray (10YR 3/1) moist; moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; very porous; few faint mottles; several worm casts; a few, small, soft spots of segregated calcium carbonate; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

C2b—44 to 64 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) very fine sandy loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) moist; weak, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; common distinct mottles; very porous; many nests of worm casts; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; water table at a depth of 44 inches.

The solum ranges from 11 to 20 inches in thickness. The A horizon ranges from silt loam to sandy loam. The Al horizon ranges from dark gray to grayish brown. The AC horizon ranges from 1 to 12 inches in thickness and is intermediate in color between the A and C horizons. The C horizon ranges from gray to light gray. It is stratified with 1to 3-inch layers of loam or loamy sand.

Wann soils are near Boel, Inavale, and McCook soils. They contain less sand than Boel and Inavale soils. They are similar to Boel soils in being somewhat poorly drained, but they are less well drained than Inavale and McCook soils. They are more sandy than McCook soils.

Wann loam (0 to 2 percent slopes) (Wn).—This nearly level and gently undulating soil is on flood plains.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Boel, McCook, and Inavale soils. Also included were areas of soils that are similar to Wann soils, except that the water table is below a depth of 6 feet. Small saline spots are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

arooding and a high water table limit the use of this soil.

Most of the acreage of this soil is cultivated, but about a third is in native grass.

Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Crops may be damaged or lost through flooding or silting, or both. In wet years the high water table prevents harvesting. In years of below-average rainfall, however, the soil is very productive. The production of native grass is high, and this soil is well suited to range and meadow. Capability unit IIIw—2; Subirrigated range site; windbreak suitability group 1.

Use and Management of the Soils

This section first discusses the use of soils for crops, briefly explains the system of capability classification used by the Soil Conservation Service, and gives predictions of yields for dryland. Then it discusses the use of the soils for range, for windbreaks, for wildlife habitat, and for engineering purposes.

General Management of Dryland Soils 2

The soils in Ellis County were covered with grass

_? By Ear J, Bonpby, conservation agronomist, Soil Conservation Service.

before the sod was broken for cultivation. Roots permeated the soil, and living and dead vegetation covered the surface. The action of rain and wind on these protected soils caused little damage. Rains were absorbed rapidly by the soils, and there was little runoff. Winds had little chance to move protected soils. Erosion was limited to a slow, relatively harmless rate known as geologic erosion. In most areas erosion and soil formation were in balance.

Cultivation has reduced the content of organic matter in the soils. In many places the soil structure and general physical condition have deteriorated. This poorer physical condition, combined with management that left the soil bare and unprotected, has resulted in both soil blowing and water erosion.

Conservation of cropland in Ellis County should be based on continuously keeping a cover on the surface of the soil. It generally will not be necessary to restore the native vegetation on present cropland.

Such practices as conservation cropping systems, stubble mulching, and minimum tillage are needed on all cropland in the county. Terracing, contour farming, and wind stripcropping are additional practices that can be used to contro] soil blowing and water erosion. Erosion control and water conservation are more successful if a proper combination of these practices is used. A single practice may reduce erosion or conserve moisture, but it is seldom enough to conserve soil and water resources (fig. 20).

Winter wheat and sorghum are the principal dryland crops in the county. Three common cropping systems are summer fallow, wheat, wheat; summer fallow, wheat, wheat, sorghum; and summer fallow, wheat, sorghum. Most farmers, however, prefer a flexible cropping system. Such a system permits them to take advantage of moisture to produce protective cover and to stabilize farming in the county.

Crop production is often uncertain, even if summer fallow is used. But summer fallowing has increased in recent years, mainly because of crop reduction programs.

During the last 10 years about one-half of the wheat produced in Ellis County was planted on land fallowed the preceding year. Although not an efficient way to increase total moisture stored, the practice did increase wheat yields by 38 percent as compared to the continuous wheat system.

Crop residue does the most good if it is left on the surface to protect the soil from erosion. Residue also protects soil structure from the deteriorating effect of splashing raindrops. If left bare and unprotected, most of the cropland soils in the county are very susceptible to sealing and crusting after rainstorms.

Minimum, or reduced, tillage helps to prevent breakdown of soil aggregates and maintains more residue on the surface. Tilling when the soils are too wet should be avoided, because it causes a tillage pan to form, particularly in loam and silt loam. Terraces may be used on sloping soils to shorten the length of slope and help to prevent water erosion. Generally, a terrace will reduce water erosion by about 50 percent. Contour farming and other good management practices should be used together with terraces. Each row planted on the contour between terraces acts as a miniature ter-

nice EE ———7

oe YI:

ce ew ee a

i Te SS ~~ F igi:

Figure 20.—Snow trapped in sorghum stubble on terraced and contour-farmed Harney silt loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes.

race by holding back water and letting it soak into the soil. If both terracing and contour farming are used, crop production is increased and soil losses are decreased.

Wind stripecropping may be used on the few acres of sandy soils to control soil blowing by shortening the distance that the loose soil can move. Wind stripcropping is much more effective if used together with good residue management, minimum tillage, proper cropping system and a good fertility program.



Capability grouping

Capability grouping shows, in a general way, the suitability of soils for most kinds of field crops. The soils are grouped according to their limitations when used for field crops, the risk of damage when they are so used, and the way they respond to treatment. The grouping does not take into account major and generally expensive landforming that would change slope, depth, or other characteristics of the soils; does not take into consideration possible but unlikely major reclamation projects; and does not apply to rice, cranberries, horticultural crops, or other crops requiring special management.

Those familiar with the capability classification can infer from it much about the behavior of soils when used for other purposes, but this classification is not a substitute for interpretations designed to show suitability and limitations of groups of soils for range, for forest trees, or for engineering.

In the capability system, the kinds of soils are grouped at three levels: the capability class, subclass,

and unit. These are discussed in the following paragraphs.

CAPABILITY CLASSES, the broadest groups, are designated by Roman numerals I through VIII. The numerals indicate progressively greater limitations and narrower choices for practical use.

CAPABILITY SUBCLASSES are soil groups within one class; they are designated by adding a small letter, é, W, §, or ¢, to the class numeral, for example, Ile. The letter e shows that the main limitation is risk of erosion unless close-growing plant cover is maintained; w shows that water in or on the soil interferes with plant growth or cultivation (in some soils the wetness can be partly corrected by artificial drainage); s shows that the soil is limited mainly because it is shallow, droughty, or stony; and c, used in Ellis County but not in all parts of the United States, shows that the chief limitation ig climate that is too cold or too dry.

In class I there are no subclasses, because the soils of this class have few limitations. Class V can contain, at the most, only the subclasses indicated by w, s, and c, because the soils in class V are subject to little or no erosion, though they have other limitations that restrict their use largely to pasture, range, woodland, wildlife or recreation.

CAPABILITY UNITS are soil groups within the subclasses. The soils in one capability unit are enough alike to be suited to the same crops and pasture plants, to require similar management, and to have similar productivity and other responses to management, Thus, the capability unit is a convenient grouping for making many statements about management of soils. Capability

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 41

units are generally designated by adding an Arabic numeral to the subclass symbol, for example, IIe—4 or IITe-6. Thus, in one symbol, the Roman numeral designates the capability class, or degree of limitation; the small letter indicates the subclass, or kind of limitation, as defined in the foregoing paragraphs; and the Arabic numeral specifically identifies the capability unit within each subclass.

The eight capability classes in the system and the subclasses and units in the county are defined in the following pages.

Class I. Soils that have few limitations that restrict their use (no subclasses).

Unit I-l. Deep, nearly level, well-drained soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and subsoil; on stream terraces.

Unit I-2. Deep, nearly level, well-drained soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured to fine textured subsoil; on stream terraces.

Class II. Soils that have some limitations that reduce the choice of plants or require moderate conservation practices.

Subclass IIe. Soils subject to moderate erosion if they are not protected.

Unit Ile-1. Deep, gently sloping, welldrained soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and a medium-textured and moderately fine textured subsoil; on uplands.

Unit Ile-2. Deep, gently sloping, welldrained soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and a fine-textured subsoil; on uplands.

Unit Ile-3. Deep, nearly level, well-drained soils that have a moderately coarse textured surface layer and medium-textured layers below; on terraces.

Unit Ile-4. Deep, gently sloping, welldrained, calcareous soils that have a mediumtextured surface layer and a moderately fine textured subsoil; on uplands.

Subclass IIs. Soils that have moderate limitations due to slow permeability or slight to moderate sodium content.

Unit IIs-1. Deep, nearly level, moderately well drained soils that have a moderately fine textured surface layer and a fine textured subsoil; on uplands.

Unit IIs-2. Deep, nearly level, well drained to moderately well drained soils that have a medium-textured to fine-textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured subsoil; on uplands and terraces.

Subclass Ic. Soils that have slight limitations due to lack of moisture.

Unit Iie-1. Deep, nearly level, well-drained soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and a medium textured to moderately fine textured subsoil; on uplands.

Unit Tic-2. Deep, nearly level, well-drained soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured to fine textured subsoil; on uplands.

Class III. Soils that have severe limitations that reduce the choice of plants, require special conservation practices, or both.

Subclass IIIe. Soils subject to severe erosion if they are not protected.

Unit IIe-1. Deep, sloping, well-drained soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and medium-textured to moderately fine textured subsoil; on uplands.

Unit IIIe-2. Deep, sloping, well-drained soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and a fine-textured subsoil; on uplands.

Unit IIIe-3. Deep, gently sloping to sloping, well-drained soils that have a moderately coarse textured surface layer and subsoil; on uplands.

Unit IIIe-4. Deep, gently sloping, welldrained soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured subsoil that is high in sodium; on uplands.

Unit IIIe-5. Deep, gently sloping to sloping, well-drained, moderately eroded soils that have a moderately fine textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured to fine textured subsoil; on uplands.

Unit IIIe-6. Deep, sloping, well-drained, calcareous soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured subsoil; on uplands.

Unit IIIe-7. Deep, gently sloping, welldrained, moderately eroded soils that have a moderately fine textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured subsoil that is high in sodium; on uplands.

Unit IIIe-8. Moderately deep, gently sloping, well-drained, calcareous soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured subsoil; on uplands.

Uuit IIIe-9. Moderately deep, gently sloping, well-drained, calcareous soils that have a moderately fine textured surface layer and subsoil; on uplands.

Subclass IIIw. Soils that have severe limitations because of excess water either from flooding or a water table, or both.

Unit IIIw-1. Deep, nearly level, well-drained soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and subsoil; on bottom lands that are frequently flooded.

Unit TlIw-2. Deep, nearly level, well-drained to somewhat poorly drained soils that have a moderately coarse textured surface layer and a moderately coarse textured to coarse textured subsoil; on bottom lands that are frequently flooded.

Class IV. Soils that have very severe limitations that restrict the choice of plants, require very careful management, or both.

42 SOIL SURVEY

Subclass IVe. Soils that have very severe limitations that require special conservation treatment to control erosion if they are cultivated and not protected.

Unit IVe-1. Deep, sloping, well-drained, moderately eroded soils that have a moderately fine textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured subsoil that is high in sodium; on uplands.

Unit [Ve-2. Moderately deep and deep, sloping, well-drained, calcareous and noncalcareous soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and a medium-textured to fine-textured subsoil; on uplands.

Unit IVe-8. Moderately deep, sloping, welldrained, calcareous soils that have a moderately fine textured surface layer and subsoil; on uplands.

Unit IVe-4. Deep, sloping, well-drained, moderately eroded, calcareous soils that have a medium-textured to moderately fine textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured to fine textured subsoil; on uplands.

Unit I[Ve-5. Moderately deep, gently sloping, well-drained, calcareous, moderately eroded soils that have a moderately fine textured surface layer and subsoil; on uplands.

Class V. Soils subject to little erosion, if any, but have other limitations, impractical to remove, that limit their use largely to pasture, range, or wildlife food and cover.

Subclass Vw. Soils that are too wet for cultivation because of a high water table.

Unit Vw-1. Deep, nearly level, somewhat poorly drained and poorly drained soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and subsoil; on bottom lands.

Class VI. Soils that have severe limitations that make them generally unsuited to cultivation without major reclamation and limit their use largely to pasture, range, woodland, or wildlife food and cover.

Subclass Vle. Soils severely limited, mainly by risk of erosion, if protective cover is not maintained.

Unit VIe~1. Deep and moderately deep, sloping to strongly sloping, well-drained, calcareous soils that have a moderately coarse textured to moderately fine texture surface layer and subsoil; on uplands.

Unit VIe-2. Moderately deep, sloping to strongly sloping, moderately well drained soils that have a fine-textured surface layer and subsoil; on uplands.

Unit Vle-3. Shallow and moderately deep, gently sloping to strongly sloping, welldrained and somewhat excessively drained, calcareous soils that have a medium-textured surface layer and subsoil; on uplands.

Unit VIe-4. Deep, nearly level to strongly sloping, well-drained soils that have a coarse-textured surface layer and subsoil; on flood plains and terrace foot slopes.

Subclass VIw. Soils that have severe limitations Hee of flooding or a high water table, or

oth.

Unit VIw-1. Deep, nearly level to gently undulating, well-drained soils that have a fine-textured surface layer and subsoil; on flood plains along small drainageways.

Unit VIw-2. Deep, nearly level to gently undulating, somewhat poorly drained soils that have a moderately coarse textured surface layer and a coarse-textured subsoil; on bottom lands that are frequently flooded.

Class VII. Soils that have very severe limitations that make them unsuited to cultivation without major reclamation and restrict their use mainly to range, woodland, or wildlife food and cover.

Subclass VIIw. Alluvial soils that are subject to a severe hazard of flooding.

Unit VIlw-1. Steep, broken, medium-textured alluvial material along banks and beds of ee and streams that frequently over-

Subclass VIIs. Soils that have very severe soil limitations because of depth, texture, available water capacity, or permeability.

Unit VIIs-1. Moderately deep to deep, moderately well drained and well drained soils that have a medium-textured to fine-textured surface layer and subsoil; on rough broken uplands.

Unit VIIs-2. Shallow, moderately deep, and deep, well-drained, calcareous, sloping to moderately steep soils that have a mediumtextured surface layer and a mediumtextured to moderately fine textured subsoil; on uplands.

Unit VIIs—3. Shallow to deep, well-drained, calcareous, medium-textured soils and chalk outcrops; on rough broken uplands.

Class VIII. Soils and land forms that have limitations that preclude their use for commercial plant production without major reclamation and restrict their use to recreation, wildlife, water supply, or aesthetic purposes. (None in Ellis County)

The capability classification of the soils in Ellis County is given at the end of each mapping unit description and in the “Guide to Mapping Units” at the end of this survey.



Yield predictions

The average yields per acre that can be expected from seeded wheat, grain sorghum, and alfalfa over a long period of time on arable soils under a high level of management in Ellis County are given in table 2. These predictions are based on data obtained from farmers, personnel of the Fort Hays Experiment Station, the County Extension Agent, and members of the soil survey party. Predicted yields may not apply directly to any specific tract of soil in any particular year, because management practices vary slightly from farm to farm and climate fluctuates from year to year.

Under high-level management for wheat or sorghum, tillage is done on the contour and all sloping fields are

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS

TABLE 2.—Predicted average ytelds per acre of seeded wheat, sorghum, and alfalfa on arable soils under high-

Anselmo fine sandy loam, 2 te 6 percent slopes Armo loam, | to 3 percent slopes Armo loam, 3 to 7 percent slopes

Harney-Carlson silt loams, 1 to 3 percent slopes___ Harney-Wakcen silt, loams, 0 to 1 percent slopes__ Harney-Wakcen silt loams, 1 to 3 percent slopes- -

Wakcen silt loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes, eroded

Wann loaim2.25.2. tees eeedc Lhe eh oe sokeceemese acess

terraced to control erosion. Stubble mulching is used to keep the surface covered by residue. Generally, one operation with a sweep-type blade in the fall on wheat stubble is all that is used, and occasionally no operations are used in the fall, especially on sorghum stubble. Hybrid or improved seed is used, and nitrogen and phosphate are applied when the moisture condition is good.

Irrigation 3

Irrigation was little used on farms in the county until the organization of the Cedar Bluff Irrigation District. Before this, irrigation was confined to areas located near Big Creek, Smoky Hill, and Saline Rivers and to a few isolated areas suitable for irrigation wells.

During the first year of operation, in 1946, the Ellis County Soil Conservation District had four irrigation systems on a total of 116 acres. By 1960 a total of 601

8 BERTEL E. SoODERBLOOM, district conservationist, Soil Conservation Service, helped prepare this section.

acres had been leveled for irrigation, and most of the acreage was near streams. Only six to eight wells had been developed at that time.

The Cedar Bluff Irrigation District was officially organized in 1958 to irrigate 6,600 acres. The potential is estimated to be 6,900 acres. About 400 acres is in Trego County, and the rest is in Ellis County. By 1969 a total of 3,713 acres had been leveled for irrigation in the district.

Water was first available for crops in 1962, and in 1969 more than 5,500 acres received water. Some acreage was wild flooded.

The 1969 annual report of the Ellis County Soil Conservation District shows that 5,444 acres has been leveled or developed for flood irrigation in the county. Another 1,200 acres is irrigated with sprinkler systems.

Factors to be considered in planning an irrigation system, whether sprinkler or flooding, are the kind of soil, the quality and amount of irrigation water available, and the type of system to be used.

The kind of soil has been determined by study and evaluation of the properties and characteristics of the

44 SOIL SURVEY

soil by the soil scientist. Some of the properties important to the irrigation planner and irrigator are the depth of the soil and the texture and structure of the surface layer, subsoil, and underlying material. From these soil properties such characteristics as permeability, available water capacity, and drainage can be discerned and the suitability of the soil for irrigation determined.

Permeability, which is determined by texture and structure, is the rate of water movement through the soil. The least permeable layer in the root zone governs the infiltration of the water into the soil. The infiltration rate determines the length of run and the period of time required to irrigate the soil.

Available water capacity depends on the depth and texture. A loamy sand does not hold so much water available to plants as a silty clay loam. Inavale loamy sand, for instance, has low available water capacity, but Harney silt loam has high available water capacity. Available water capacity determines the frequency and amount of water applications needed.

Good subsurface drainage below the root zone is necessary to keep soluble salts from being deposited in the zone. Leaching of the soil with additional water may be necessary in some places to move salts from the root zone and into the substratum drainage flow.

All natural waters used for irrigation contain some soluble salts, generally chlorides and sulfates of calcium, magnesium, potassium, and sodium, The higher the concentration of these salts in the water, the poorer the quality of the water. Tests should be made of all water to be used for irrigation to determine the kind and amount of soluble salts in the water.

Range *

Native grassland covers about 238,540 acres, or about 41 percent, of the farmland in Ellis County. There are three grassland areas in the county. The largest is along the northern edge of the county, adjacent to both sides of the Saline River Valley. Another is in the central part of the county, adjacent to both sides of Big Creek Valley. In the southern part of the county, the grassland area is adjacent to both sides of the Smoky Hill River Valley. Small tracts of range occur throughout the county, intermingled with larger acreages of cropland, and are generally suitable for cultivation. About a third of the range is suitable for cultivation.

Beef production is the largest farm industry in the county. The principal livestock enterprise is a cow-calf operation. There are several feeder cattle operations in the county. Most of the ranches include some cropland that is used for supplemental grazing. The chief crops used for temporary grazing are wheat pasture and sorghum stubble.

Because the forage produced on rangeland is marketed through the sale of livestock and livestock products, the success of the livestock enterprise depends upon the way the ranchers manage their rangelands.

The native grass in most areas of Ellis County is a

4 By H. Ray Brown and Harianp E. Dietz, range conservationists, Soil Conservation Service.

mixture of short, tall, and mid grasses. The major range sites are Limy Upland and Loamy Upland. The Limy Upland range site produces a cover of mostly tall and mid grasses if it is in excellent condition. The Loamy Upland range site produces a cover of short, mid, and tall grasses if it is in excellent condition. Slope and topography enhance or limit the grazing of a particular area by affecting the accessibility to livestock.



Range sites and condition classes

Different kinds of soil vary in their capacity to produce grasses and other plants for grazing. Soils are grouped into range sites on the basis of similarity in the characteristics that affect their capacity for producing native forage plants. Each site has a distinctive potential plant community, the composition of which depends on a combination of environmental conditions, mainly the combined effects of climate on soil. The potential plant community reproduces itself so long as the environmental conditions remain the same. The potential plant community is referred to as climax vegetation and is considered the most productive combination of plants adapted to the soil and climatic conditions for each site. Range sites are areas of rangeland that differ from each other in their ability to produce different kinds and amounts of climax vegetation.

The plants on any given range site are identified, according to their response to grazing, as decreasers, increasers, and invaders. Decreasers are species in the potential plant community that tend to decrease in relative amount under continuous overgrazing. They generally are the tallest and most productive perennial grasses and forbs and are the most palatable to livestock. Increasers are species in the potential plant community that increase in relative amount as the decreaser plants decline. Invaders are plants not common in the climax plant community but that invade the site during extremes in weather or when the site is overgrazed. Most invaders are annual weeds. Some are forbs that have some grazing value, but others have little or no value for grazing.

Range condition is rated by comparing the composition of the existing plant community with that of the potential plant community. The purpose of classifying range condition is to provide an approximate measure of the deterioration that has taken place from the potential plant community, and thereby provide a basis for predicting the degree of improvement feasible. Potential forage production depends on the range site. Current forage production depends upon the range condition and the moisture that the plant receives during the growing season. Four range condition classes are recognized. A range is in excellent condition if 76 to 100 percent of the existing vegetation is of the same composition as that of the potential stand. It is in good condition if the percentage is 51 to 76, in fair condition if 26 to 50, and in poor condition if less than 26.

One of the main objectives of good range management is to keep range in excellent to good condition. If this is done, water is conserved, production is improved, and the soil is protected. The problem is in the recognition of the important changes in the kind of cover on a range site. These take place gradually and can be mis-

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 45

calculated or overlooked. Growth encouraged by heavy rainfall may lead to the conclusion that the range is in good condition, but actually the cover is weedy and the long-time trend is toward lower production. In contrast, some range that has been closely grazed for relatively short periods under the supervision of a careful manager may have a degraded appearance that temporarily conceals its quality and ability to recover.

Stocking the right kind and number of livestock on a range site results in the highest production and in the best use of the range resources. A feed and forage program that includes available range forage, concentrates, tame and native hay, silage, and tame pastures, and which will keep livestock in a productive or desirable condition throughout the year, is necessary. Roughage may be reserved and fed during an emergency to conserve plant cover, soil, and water. These reserves are in addition to normal winter requirements. Feed shortages can be avoided by carrying in reserve the surplus produced in years of high production.

In addition to providing adequate forage and reserve feed supplies, it is often desirable to keep part of the livestock as readily saleable livestock such as stocker steers. This allows ranchers to balance the number of livestock on hand with the available forage without marketing breeding stock.



Descriptions of the range sites

The soils of Ellis County have been grouped into fifteen range sites. Because of differences in the soils, the range sites vary considerably in the amount of forage produced. The total annual production of forage varies from year to year because of differences in the amount of precipitation, in the amount of grazing in past years, and in relief. Trampling or the activity of rodents and insects may damage forage plants or cause them to disappear.

The approximate total annual yield of forage on range in excellent condition, based on plot clippings, is given in air-dry weight per acre in average, favorable, and less favorable years. To find out the soils in each site, refer to the “Guide to Mapping Units.”

BLUE SHALE RANGE SITE

This range site ig on moderately deep, moderately well drained soils that formed in material weathered from clay shale. These soils have a clay surface layer and subsoil. They are sloping to moderately steep and are on uplands. The soils have slow permeability and have low available water capacity. They are easily eroded by water, and soil blowing is a hazard if the soils are overgrazed or otherwise mismanaged.

The climax plant community consists mostly of short and mid grasses and some tall grasses. About 70 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as side-oats grama, western wheatgrass, tall dropseed, big bluestem, Illinois bundleflower, leadplant, and catclaw sensitivebriar. The principal increasers are blue grama, buffalograss, red three-awn, western ragweed, and common pricklypear. Common invaders are silver bluestem, annual brome, and prairie three-awn.

The first plant to decrease under continuous overuse is big bluestem, then side-oats grama and western wheatgrass. Because of long years of overuse, a large

part of this range site is only in fair condition, and buffalograss and blue grama are the main plants grazed.

Forage production varies greatly because of the fine texture of the soil and because of slope aspect. Western wheatgrass production increases after high precipitation in winter and spring. During an extremely dry winter and spring, western wheatgrass remains semidormant and production is low. The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 1,800 pounds per acre, but it ranges from about 3,000 pounds in favorable years to 800 pounds in unfavorable years.

CLAY LOWLAND RANGE SITE

The only soil in this range site is Alluvial land, clayey. This is a deep, well-drained soil that formed in clayey alluvium. This soil has a fine-textured surface layer and subsoil. It is nearly level and gently undulating and is on flood plains, where it receives additional water. This soil has slow permeability and high available water capacity. The hazard of erosion is not severe,

The climax plant community consists mostly of tall and mid grasses. About 80 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as big bluestem, switchgrass, little bluestem and indiangrass. Other perennial forbs and grasses make up the rest. The principal increasers are side-oats grama, western wheatgrass, blue grama, and western ragweed. Common invaders are annual bromes, cocklebur, and barnyardgrass.

The first plants to decrease under continuous overuse are big bluestem, little bluestem, and indiangrass, then switchgrass. In many places, because of overuse, this site is in only fair condition, and side-oats grama, switchgrass, and western wheatgrass are the main plants grazed.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 4,500 pounds per acre, but it ranges from 5,500 pounds in favorable years to 3,500 pounds in less favorable years.

CLAY TERRACE RANGE SITE

The only soil in this range site is New Cambria silty clay. This is a deep, well-drained soil that formed in clayey alluvium. It has a fine-textured surface layer and subsoil. It is nearly level to gently sloping and is on terraces. This soil has slow permeability but high available water capacity. Water erosion is a hazard in the more sloping areas if they are overgrazed or otherwise mismanaged.

The climax plant community consists mostly of tall and mid grasses. About 70 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as big bluestem, little bluestem, switchgrass, and indiangrass. Other perennial forbs and grasses make up the rest. The principal increasers are side-oats grama, blue grama, western wheatgrass, and western ragweed. Common invaders are annual bromes, windmillgrass, tumblegrass, and little barley.

The first plants to decrease under continuous overuse are big bluestem, little bluestem, and indiangrass, then switchgrass. Because of many years of overuse, part of this range site is in only fair condition, and side-oats

46 SOIL SURVEY

grama, western wheatgrass, and blue grama are the main plants grazed.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 3,500 pounds per acre, but it ranges from 4,500 pounds in favorable years to 2,000 pounds in unfavorable years.

CLAY UPLAND RANGE SITE

This range site is on deep, well drained to moderately well drained soils that formed in loess. These soils have a medium-textured to moderately fine textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured to fine textured subsoil. They are nearly level to sloping and are on uplands. The soils have slow permeability and high available water capacity. Water erosion is a hazard on the gently sloping soils if they are overgrazed or otherwise mismanaged. Soil blowing is a hazard in areas where overgrazing has bared the soils.

The climax plant community consists mostly of short and mid grasses. About 60 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as western wheatgrass, side-oats grama, tall dropseed, slimflower scurfpea, and dotted gayfeather. Other perennial forbs and grasses make up the rest. The dominant increasers are buffalograss, blue grama, red three-awn, western ragweed, and common pricklypear. Western ragweed is the principal increaser forb. The principal invaders are prairie three-awn, annual bromes, little barley, and windmillgrass.

Side-oats grama generally is the first species to decrease under continuous overuse, then western wheatgrass. Because of many years of overuse, part of this range site is only in fair condition and blue grama and buffalograss are the most abundant plants.

Forage production varies greatly. If precipitation is high in winter and spring, the production of western wheatgrass is high; and if precipitation is low, the production is low. The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 2,000 pounds per acre, but it ranges from 4,000 pounds in favorable years to 800 pounds in unfavorable years.

LIMY UPLAND RANGE SITE

This range site is on shallow, moderately deep, and deep, well-drained and somewhat excessively drained soils. These soils formed in material weathered from chalky limestone, chalky shale caliche, and calcareous clay shale, and in loess, colluvium, and outwash. These soils have a medium-textured surface layer and a medium-textured to moderately fine textured subsoil. They are nearly level to moderately steep and are on uplands. They have moderately slow to moderate permeability and very low to high available water capacity. Water erosion is a hazard on the sloping soils.

The climax plant community consists of tall and mid grasses. About 70 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as big bluestem, little bluestem, switchgrass, indiangrass, leadplant, prairie-clover, and blacksamson. Other perennial forbs and grasses make up the rest. The principal increaser is side-oats grama, but blue grama, buffalograss, purple three-awn also are increasers. Common invaders are broom snakeweed, windmillgrass, tumblegrass, and annual bromes.

Big bluestem and little bluestem are the first plants

to decrease under continuous overgrazing. Because of many years of overuse, part of this range site is in only fair condition, and side-oats grama and blue grama are the main plants grazed. The vegetation will improve greatly if grazing is deferred at times.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 2,450 pounds per acre, but it ranges from 4,000 pounds in favorable years to 1,000 pounds in unfavorable years.

LOAMY LOWLAND RANGE SITE

This is a deep, well-drained soil that formed in calcareous alluvium. This soil has a medium-textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured subsoil, It is nearly level and gently undulating and is on flood plains. It has moderate permeability and high available water capacity. Erosion is not a hazard on this soil, except for that caused by flooding.

The climax plant community consists of tall and mid grasses. About 80 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as big bluestem, switchgrass, little bluestem, and indiangrass. Other perennial forbs and grasses make up the rest. The principal increasers are side-oats grama, tall dropseed, western wheatgrass, blue grama, and western ragweed. Common invaders are annual bromes, Kentucky bluegrass, and cocklebur.

Such trees as elm, ash, cottonwood, and hackberry commonly grow along streambanks and increase in abundance under excessive overgrazing. Under the canopy of these trees grow such shade-tolerant, coolseason grasses as Canada wildrye, Virginia wildrye, green muhly, and western wheatgrass. Under continuous overuse, the first plants to decrease are big bluestem, little bluestem, and indiangrass, then switchgrass. Because of many years of overuse, a large part of this range site is in only fair to good condition and side-oats grama, western wheatgrass, and switchgrass are the main plants grazed.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 4,500 pounds per acre, but it ranges from 6,000 pounds in favorable years to 8,500 pounds in unfavorable years.

LOAMY TERRACE RANGE SITE

This range site is on deep, well-drained soils that formed in calcareous alluvium. These soils have a medium-textured surface layer and a medium-textured to fine-textured subsoil. They are nearly level to gently undulating and are on alluvial terraces. They have slow to moderate permeability and high available water capacity. Erosion is not a hazard.

The climax plant community consists mostly of tall and mid grasses. About 70 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as big bluestem, little bluestem, switchgrass, indiangrass, and Canada wildrye. The rest is other perennial forbs and grasses. The principal increasers are western wheatgrass, blue grama, side-oats grama, and buffalograss. Common invaders are annual bromes, windmillgrass, tumblegrass, little barley, and western ragweed (fig. 21).

The first plants to decrease under continuous overuse are big bluestem, little bluestem, and indiangrass, and then switchgrass. Because of many years of overuse, a large part of this range site is in only fair condition,

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 47

Figure 21.—Root distribution from a solid stand of switchgrass on Roxbury silt loam.

and side-oats grama, blue grama, western wheatgrass, and buffalograss are the main plants grazed.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 3,500 pounds per acre, but it ranges from around 4,500 pounds in favorable years to 2,500 pounds in unfavorable years.

LOAMY UPLAND RANGE SITE This range site is on deep, well-drained soils that formed in loess. These soils have a medium-textured surface layer and a moderately fine textured subsoil. They are nearly level to gently sloping and are on uplands. They have moderate to moderately slow per-

meability and high available water capacity. Water erosion is a slight hazard.

The climax plant community consists mostly of tall and mid grasses and a lesser amount of short grasses. About 65 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers ag little bluestem, big bluestem, and switchgrass. Other perennial forbs and grasses make up the rest. The principal increasers are side-oats gramma, blue gramma, buffalograss, western wheatgrass, red three-awn, western ragweed, and prairie coneflower. Common invaders are windmillgrass, tumblegrass, annual bromes, and little barley.

The first plants to decrease under continuous overuse are big bluestem and little bluestem, and side-oats grama then increases. Because of many years of overuse, a large part of this range site is in only fair condition, and blue grama, buffalograss, and western wheatgrass are the main plants grazed.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 3,000 pounds per acre, but it ranges from 3,500 pounds in favorable years to 2,500 pounds in unfavorable years.

SANDS RANGE SITE

The only soil in this site is Inavale loamy sand. This is a deep, well-drained soil that formed in coarse-textured alluvium. It has a coarse-textured surface layer and subsoil. It is nearly level to strongly sloping and is on high terraces. This soil hag rapid permeability and low available water capacity. The hazard of water erosion is slight, but soil blowing is a severe hazard in areas that are overgrazed or otherwise mismanaged.

The climax plant community consists mostly of tall and mid grasses. About 80 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as sand bluestem, big bluestem, little bluestem, switchgrass, indiangrass, sand lovegrass, prairie sandreed, and scribner panicum. Principal increasers are sand dropseed, blue grama, hairy grama, buffalograss, sand paspalum, wildplum, red three-awn, purple lovegrass, and hairy goldaster. Common invaders are silver bluestem, annual threeawn, six-wecks fescue, and annual bromes.

The first plants to decrease under continuous use are sand bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass, and then little bluestem and switchgrass.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 3,000 pounds per acre, but it ranges from 3,500 pounds in favorable years to 2,500 pounds in unfavorable years.

SANDY RANGE SITE

The only soil in this site is Anselmo fine sandy loam, 2 to 6 percent slopes. This is a deep, well-drained soil that formed in moderately coarse textured outwash. It has a moderately coarse textured surface layer and subsoil. It is gently sloping to sloping and is on uplands. This soil has moderately rapid permeability and moderate available water capacity. The hazard of water erosion is slight, but soil blowing is a hazard if the range is overgrazed.

The climax plant community consists mostly of tall and mid grasses. About 70 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as sand bluestem, big bluestem, little bluestem, switchgrass, indiangrass, and

48 SOIL SURVEY

sand lovegrass. The principal increasers are sand dropseed, blue grama, hairy grama, buffalograss, sand paspalum, small soapweed, common pricklypear, wildplum, and red three-awn. Common invaders are silver bluestem, annual three-awn, windmillgrass, tumblegrass, and annual bromes.

The first plants to decrease under continuous use are big bluestem, sand bluestem, and indiangrass, and then switchgrass.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 2,200 pounds per acre, but it ranges from 3,000 pounds in favorable years to 1,800 pounds in unfavorable years.

SANDY LOWLAND RANGE SITE

The only soil in this site is Munjor sandy loam. This is a deep, well-drained soil that formed in moderately coarse textured alluvium. It has a moderately coarse textured surface layer and subsoil. It is nearly level to gently undulating and is on flood plains. This soil has moderately rapid permeability and moderate available water capacity. The hazard of water erosion is slight, but soil blowing is a hazard if the range is overgrazed.

The climax plant community on this site consists mostly of tall and mid grasses. About 80 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as sand bluestem, big bluestem, little bluestem, switchgrass, and indiangrass. Other perennial forbs and grasses make up the rest. The principal increasers are sand dropseed, blue grama, and western wheatgrass. Common invaders are sandbur, annual three-awn, annual bromes, and windmillgrass.

This site is readily accessible to grazing animals, and because of continuous overuse, it is generally in only

fair condition. The first plants to decrease are big bluestem, little bluestem, and indiangrass, then switchgrass. Blue grama, sand dropseed, and western wheatgrass generally are the main plants grazed.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 4,000 pounds per acre, but it ranges from 4,500 pounds per acre in favorable years to 3,500 pounds in unfavorable years.

SANDY TERRACE RANGE SITE

The only soil in this range site is McCook fine sandy loam. This is a deep, well-drained soil that formed in moderately coarse textured and medium-textured alluvium. It has a moderately coarse textured surface layer and a medium-textured subsoil. It is nearly level and gently undulating and is on terraces along the major streams. Permeability is moderate, and available water capacity is high. Water erosion is a slight hazard, but soil blowing is a severe hazard if the range is overgrazed.

The climax plant community consists mostly of tall and mid grasses. About 80 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as big bluestem, little bluestem, switchgrass, and indiangrass. Other perennial forbs and grasses make up the rest. The principal increasers are blue grama, sand dropseed, side-oats grama, and western wheatgrass. Common invaders are sandbur, annual bromes, windmillgrass, and tumblegrass.

The first plants to decrease under continuous overuse are big bluestem, little bluestem, and indiangrass, and then switchgrass and side-oats grama. Because of many years of overuse, a large part of this range site is in

Figure 22.—Heizer-Armo complex in Shallow Limy and Limy Upland range sites.

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 49

only fair condition, and side-oats grama, sand dropseed, and blue grama are the main plants grazed.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 3,200 pounds per acre, but it ranges from 4,000 pounds in favorable years to 2,800 pounds in unfavorable years.

SHALLOW LIMY RANGE SITE

This range site is on shallow, well-drained, mediumtextured soils that formed in material weathered from caliche or chalky limestone. They are sloping to moderately steep and are on uplands. In places there are outcrops of caliche or chalky limestone. The soils have moderate permeability but very low available water capacity. Water erosion is a severe hazard, and soil blowing is a hazard if the soils are severely overgrazed or otherwise mismanaged. The rough broken topography, characterized by some nearly vertical ledges, makes this site difficult for livestock to graze (fig. 22).

The climax plant community consists mostly of tall and mid grasses. About 80 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as little bluestem, big bluestem, switchgrass, plains muhly, leadplant, resinous skulleap, and prairieclover. The principal increagers are side-oats grama, blue grama, hairy grama, purple three-awn, broom snakeweed, and aromatic and smooth sumac. A common invader is annual three-awn.

Because of rough topography, some areas of this site are not readily accessible to grazing livestock and are in good to excellent condition. Continuous overuse results mostly in the decrease of big bluestem and little bluestem. The vegetation on this site will improve greatly if grazing igs deferred at times.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 1,600 pounds per acre,

but it ranges from 2,500 in favorable years to 900 pounds in unfavorable years.

SUBIRRIGATED RANGE SITE

This range site is on deep, somewhat poorly drained soils that formed in moderately coarse textured alluvium. These soils have a medium-textured to moderately coarse textured surface layer and a moderately coarse textured subsoil. They are nearly level to gently undulating and are on flood plains. The soils have moderately rapid permeability and low to high available water capacity. Water erosion is a slight hazard, and soil blowing is a hazard if the range is overgrazed or otherwise mismanaged.

The climax plant community consists mostly of tall and mid grasses. About 90 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as big bluestem, indiangrass, switchgrass, Canada wildrye, prairie cordgrass, little bluestem, and Illinois bundleflower. Other perennial forbs and grasses make up the rest. The principal increasers are western wheatgrass, side-oats grama, blue grama, sedges, and western ragweed. Common invaders are Kentucky bluegrass, saltgrass, barnyardgrass, little barley, and annual bromes.

The first plants to decrease under continuous overuse are big bluestem and indiangrass, then little bluestem, switchgrass, and prairie cordgrass.

The total annual production of air-dry herbage on this site averages approximately 7,000 pounds per acre. The subirrigated conditions nullify the effects of moisture received in favorable and less favorable years.

WETLAND RANGE SITE

The only soil in this range site is Alluvial land, wet. This is a deep, somewhat poorly drained to poorly

Figure 23.—Area of Wetland range site. Mixture of warm and cool-season grasses provides green forage for a long grazing season.

50 SOIL SURVEY

drained, medium-textured soil that formed in alluvium. It is nearly level to gently undulating and is on flood plains adjacent to streams. The water table is.above a depth of 2 feet most of the year. Permeability is moderate, and available water capacity is high. Water erosion, except for that produced by flooding, is slight. Soil blowing is not a hazard. This is one of the best sites for the production of forage (fig. 23).

The climax plant community consists mostly of tall grasses. About 90 percent of the total annual production is such decreasers as prairie cordgrass, alkali cordgrass, Canada wildrye, rice cutgrass, switchgrass, American bulrush, slough sedge, and Illinois bundleflower. Other perennial forbs and grasses make up the rest. The principal increasers are swamp smartweed, American licorice, knotroot bristlegrass, indigobush, slim sedge, foxtail barley, and cattail. Common invaders are barnyardgrass, yellow bristlegrass, annual sedge, and rushes.

The first plant to decrease under continuous overuse is switchgrass, and then rice cutgrass, prairie cordgrass, and alkali cordgrass.

The estimated total annual production of air-dry herbage averages approximately 7,500 pounds per acre. Wetness nullifies the effects of moisture received in favorable and less favorable years.

Windbreaks 5

Native woodlands in Ellis County are narrow strips and belts of trees along major streams and in river valleys. The principal native tree species in the deep, fertile river valleys are cottonwood, sandbar and peachleaf willows, red elm, American elm, hackberry, boxelder, and green ash. These species rarely grow in

5 By F. Dewitt ABBOTT, State resource conservationist.

stands large enough in acreage or in productivity to be rated as commercial woodland. The native woodlands did, however, provide the early settlers with wood for fuel, fenceposts, and rough lumber. At the present time trees are used mainly for farmstead windbreaks and field shelterbelts.

Farmstead windbreaks are planted around the farmsteads and ranch houses, corrals, feed yards, and orchards to protect these areas from cold wintery winds. If properly designed, farmstead windbreaks also control snowdrifts and keep them out of the farmyards and corrals. The wind-chill index is greatly influenced by a good farmstead windbreak. Fuel bills in the farm home can be reduced and the area surrounding the farmyard made more attractive, all of which increase the value of the property (fig. 24).

Field windbreaks are most effective in protecting soils susceptible to blowing if they are planted in belts, two or more rows wide, across the fields. The belts should be planted 10 to 40 rods apart, depending on the degree of the hazard of soi] blowing. In some years production may be increased, because blast damage from hot winds is prevented and damage to crops ig reduced.

Windbreaks should be carefully designed and laid out before the trees are planted. The species of trees and shrubs selected should be those best adapted to the soils of the area.

Poor establishment and survival of trees in windbreak plantings is generally caused by lack of application of moisture conservation practices and inadequate seedbed preparation. It is essential that a firm, weedfree seedbed be prepared before the trees are planted. On most soils in Ellis County, areas to be planted to windbreaks should be prepared in the same way as for field crops.

The trees and shrubs should be planted early in

Figure 24.—Windbreak of Siberian elm and redcedar on Harney silt loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes.

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 51

spring. The seedlings must be protected from drying out before they are planted. As tree and shrub seedlings are planted, the soil should be firmly tamped around the roots.

Young trees need a considerable amount of care to grow well. Rainfall is likely to be limited and irregular. The windbreak should be cultivated as often as necessary to contro] weeds and to reduce competition for soil moisture.

The windbreak must be protected from livestock. Protection from fire is important and can be done by continuous cultivation for weed control on the isolation strip surrounding the windbreak. Sometimes rabbits and mice chew the bark and girdle young trees in a windbreak.

Windbreak suitability groups

Successful survival and growth of trees in the Central Great Plains is influenced to a great extent by the kinds of soil and by soil-air-moisture relationships. Trees normally grow best on a sandy loam. They have only fair to poor growth on clay, because soil moisture ig absorbed and released slowly by the clay. This is especially true for clay soils on uplands, because they are more subject to drought. Very sandy soils are not well suited to trees, because they do not store enough water and plant nutrients.

The soils in each group are similar in characteristics that affect the growth of trees. The windbreak suitability group assigned to each soil is shown in the “Guide to Mapping Units” and in the section “Descriptions of the Soils.”

A vigor rating for the best adapted species by windbreak suitability group is given in table 3. A vigor of excellent indicates that the trees grow well, leaves have good color, there are no dead branches in the upper part of the crown, and there is no indication of damage by fungi or disease. A rating of good indicates that the trees grow moderately well, there are few dead branches and some die-back in upper part of crown, and fungi or insects cause slight damage. A rating of fair indicates that at least half of the trees have a significant number of dead branches in the upper part of the crown, about one-fourth of the trees are dead, tree growth is slow, and fungi or insects cause moderate damage. A rating of poor indicates that the surviving trees will have severe die-back, less than three-fourths of the trees planted will survive, and fungi and insects cause severe damage.

Estimated height of trees at 20 years of age for the four windbreak suitability groups is also given in table 3. The height is based on measurements by resource conservationists and soil scientists working in this area.

Fish and Wildlife Management ©

All soils in Ellis County can be managed to produce some kinds of wildlife. The soil associations provide information of value in planning wildlife habitat devel-

6 By Jack W. WALSTROM, biologist, Soil Conservation Service.

opments for the maximum use and production of the various species. Table 4 rates the potential of each of the seven soil associations for producing food and cover for various kinds of wildlife. In the following paragraphs, representative wildlife species are discussed according to the association in which they most generally occur.

Ring-necked pheasant are present on all soil associations. The Armo-Bogue-Heizer association probably has fewer birds, because it is dominantly range.

Fair to good populations of bobwhite are on all soil associations, The most are on the Roxbury-Eltree-Hord and Mento-Brownell-Wakeen associations.

White-tailed and mule deer are on all soil associations, White-tailed deer mainly inhabit the RoxburyEltree-Hord association. Mule deer are on all soil associations where there is woody cover.

Wetland wildlife, such as waterfowl, mink, and muskrat, is most numerous on the Roxbury-Eltree-Hord association. The soils of this association are in stream valleys, where trees and crops grow in close proximity.

Fishing varies from poor to good in the farm ponds, lakes, and streams in Ellis County. The Saline River, in the northern part of the county, provides limited fishing. The game fish in the county are largemouth bass, bluegill, channel catfish, yellow catfish, bullhead, and crappie.

Assistance in planning and developing wildlife habitat can be obtained at the local office of the Soil Conservation Service; the Kansas Forestry, Fish, and Game Commission; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; and the Extension Service.

Engineering Uses of the Soils?

This subsection provides information of special interest to engineers, contractors, farmers, and others who use soil as structural material or as foundation material upon which structures are built. It describes those properties of the soil that affect construction and maintenance of roads and airports, pipelines, building foundations, irrigation systems, water storage facilities, erosion control structures, drainage systems, landfills for solid waste disposal, and sewage disposal systems. Among the soil properties most important in engineering are permeability, shear strength, density, shrink-swel] potential, available water capacity, grain size distribution, plasticity, and reaction. Information concerning these and related soil properties is furnished in tables 5, 6, and 7. The estimates and interpretations of soil properties in these tables can be used in—

1. Planning and designing agricultural drainage systems, farm ponds, irrigation systems, diversion terraces, waterways, and other structures for controlling water and conserving soil.

2. Selecting potential locations for highways, airports, pipelines, sewage disposal structures, underground cables, and solid waste disposal facilities,

3. Locating probable sources of sand, gravel, and rock suitable for use as construction material.

7By Lawrence E. Rosins, civil engineer, and Ropert K. GLOVER, soil scientist, Soil Conservation Service.

52 SOIL SURVEY

TABLE 3.— Suitability of adapted trees for windbreaks

[Estimated height on soils given a poor suitability rating is not

Eastern redcedar Ponderosa pine Honeylocust Siberian elm Windbreak suitability group and description |

Vigor Height Vigor Height Vigor Height, Vigor Height

Fair to poor -_| 22 | Good___..--

1 Species not suited to soils of this group.

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 53

and estimated heights at 20 years of age

shown, because trees are either dead or resprouted but have little growth]

54 SOIL SURVEY

TABLE 4.—Potential of the soil associations for providing habitat required for various kinds of wildlife [Absence of a rating indicates that that type of habitat is not applicable to fish]

Kinds of

Potential for producing, for kinds of wildlife given—

Soil association wildlife

Woody cover

Aquatic habitat

Herbaceous

cover Food



1. Roxbury-Eltree-Hord association.

2. Mento-Brownell-Wakeen association. 3. Armo-Bogue-Heizer association.



4. Corinth-Harney association.

5. Campus-Harney-Carlson association. | Upland...

Woodland...



6. Harney-Carlson-Armo association.

Upland......_._.....

Upland__.__. Woodland... Wetland_..

7, Harney-Wakeen-Nibson association.

4. Selecting potential industrial, commercial, residential, and recreational areas.

The engineering interpretations reported here do not eliminate the need for sampling and testing specific engineering works involving heavy loads at the site and where the excavations are deeper than the depths or layers here reported. Even in these situations, however, the soil map is useful in planning more detailed field investigations and for indicating the kind of problems that may be expected.

Some terms used by soil scientists may be unfamiliar to engineers, and some of the words have different meanings in soil science than they have in engineering. Among the terms that have special meaning in soil science are sand, clay, silt, surface layer, subsoil, and horizon. These and other terms are defined in the Glossary at the back of this publication.



Engineering classification systems

The two systems most commonly used in classifying samples of soil for engineering (7) are the AASHO system, adopted by the American Association of State Highway Officials, and the Unified system, used by SCS engineers, the Department of Defense, and others.

The AASHO system is used to classify soils according to those properties that affect use in highway construction (1). In this system, a soil is placed in one of

seven basic groups ranging from A-1 through A-7 on the basis of grain-size distribution, liquid limit, and plasticity index. In group A-1 are gravelly soils of high bearing strength, and at the other extreme, A-7, are clay soils that have low strength when wet. The best soils for subgrade are therefore classified as A-1, the next best as A-2, and so on to class A-7, the poorest soil for subgrade. Where laboratory data are available to justify a further breakdown, the A-1, A-2, and A-7 groups are divided as follows: A-1l-a, A-1-b, A-2-4, A-2-5, A-2-6, A-2-7, A-7-5, and A-7-6. If soi] material is near a classification boundary, it is given a symbol showing both classes; for examples, A-2 or A-4. Within each group, the relative engineering value of a soil material can be indicated by a group index number. Group indexes range from 0 for the best material to 20 or more for the poorest. The AASHO classification for tested soils, with index numbers in parentheses, is shown in table 7; the estimated classification for all soils mapped in the survey is given in table 5.

In the Unified system soils are classified according to particle-size distribution, plasticity, liquid limit, and organic-matter content (12). Soils are grouped in 15 classes. There are eight classes of coarse-grained soils, identified as GW, GP, GM, GC, SW, SP, SM, SC; six classes of fine-grained soils, identified as ML, CL, OL, MH, CH, OH; and one class of highly organic soils,

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 55

identified as Pt. Soils on the borderline between two classes are designed by symbols for both classes; for example CL or CH.

Estimated soil properties significant to engineering

Table 5 provides estimates of soil properties important to engineering. The estimates are based on field classification and description, physical and chemical tests of selected representative samples, test data from comparable soils in adjacent areas, and detailed experience in working with the individual kinds of soil in the survey area. The information is generalized for each soil and is the best available estimate of the specific soil properties. The properties of a soil designated by a given name may vary somewhat within the county. In addition, some mapping units contain small included areas of contrasting soils.

Seasonal high water table, not given in table 5, relates to the periodic presence of free water within the profile each year. Only two series in this county, Boel and Wann, have a seasonal high water table. In these soils the depth from the soil surface to the surface of existing free water may vary from 2 to 6 feet, and it generally rises and falls with changes in streamflow in the adjacent watercourse.

Depth to bedrock is the distance from the surface of the soil to the upper surface of the rock layer.

USDA texture is determined by relative proportions of sand, silt, and clay in soil material that is less than 2.0 millimeters in diameter (9). “Sand,” “silt,” “clay,” and some of the other terms used in the USDA textural classification are defined in the Glossary.

Permeability, as used in table 5, relates only to movement of water downward through undisturbed and uncompacted soil. It does not include lateral seepage. The estimates are based on structure and porosity of the soil. Plowpans, surface crusts, and other properties resulting from use of the soil are not considered.

Available water capacity is that amount of water in the soil available for plant growth after all free water has drained away.

Reaction is the degree of acidity of alkalinity of a soil, expressed as pH. The pH value and relative terms used to describe soil reaction are explained in the Glossary.

Shrink-swell potential is an indication of the volume change to be expected of the soil material with changes in moisture content. Shrinking and swelling of soils cause much damage to building foundations, roads, and other structures. A high shrink-swell potential indicates hazards to construction and maintenance of structures constructed in, on, or of such material.

Interpretations of engineering properties of the soils

Table 6 contains selected information useful to engineers and others who plan to use soil material in construction of highways, farm facilities, buildings, sewage disposal systems, and solid waste disposal systems. Detrimental or undesirable features are emphasized, but important desirable features also are listed. The ratings and other interpretations in this table are based on estimated engineering properties of the soils given in table 5 and on field experience. Though the

information applies to soils only at depths indicated in table 5, it is reasonably reliable to a depth of about 6 feet for most soils, and several feet more for some.

Sanitary land fill cover material is influenced chiefly by slope, workability, drainage, and thickness of material. The degree of limitation and principal reasons for assigning fair and poor values are given in the table.

Topsoil is fertile soil or soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter, used as a topdressing for lawns, gardens, roadbanks, and the like. The ratings in table 6 indicate suitability for such use and the limitations that are present.

Sand and gravel ratings are based on the probability that mapped areas of soil contain deposits of sand and gravel. The ratings do not indicate the size of the deposit, but general restrictive features are given to indicate the quality of the material that can be expected.

Road subgrade is material used to support the subbase, base, and surface course of roads and highways. The ratings indicate the performance of soil material moved from borrow areas for this purpose.

Road fill is material used to build embankments. The ratings indicate performance of soil material moved from borrow areas for this purpose.

Highway location is influenced by features of the undisturbed soil that affect construction and maintenance of highways. The soil features, favorable as well as unfavorable, are the principal ones that affect geographic location of highways.

Pond reservoir areas are influenced by the features and qualities of undisturbed soils that affect their suitability for water impoundments. The controlling features for this use are permeability, slope, depth to restrictive layers, water table, sand, or bedrock.

Embankments, dikes, and levees are influenced by the features and qualities of disturbed soils that affect their suitability for constructing earthfills to impound or divert water. Soil features listed, favorable as well as unfavorable, are the principal ones that affect this use.

Terraces, diversions, and waterways are influenced by features of the soil, favorable as well as unfavorable, that affect stability or hinder layout, construction, and maintenance.

Irrigation is influenced by features, favorable as well as unfavorable, that affect the suitability of the soils for irrigation.

Septic tank absorption fields are affected mainly by permeability, depth to the water table, susceptibility to flooding, depth of the soil, and slope. The degree of limitation and principal. reasons for assigning moderate or severe limitations are given.

Sewage lagoons are influenced chiefly by such soil features as permeability, depth to the water table, slope, and depth of the soil. The degree of limitation and principal reasons for assigning moderate or severe limitations are given.

Shallow excavations are those that require trenching to a depth of 6 feet or less. They include excavations for underground utility lines, cemeteries, sanitary land fills, basements, and open ditches. The factors influencing this land use are workability, soil drainage, water

TABLE 5.—Estimates of soil

[An asterisk in the first column indicates that at least one mapping unit in this series is made up of two or more kinds of soil. fully the instructions for referring to other series that appear in the first column

Soil series and map symbols

Alluvial land: Ab, Ac, Ad.: Properties too variable to estimate.

Armo:

Boelst’ (BRes.6 cco ses osd eee sccneesetese sche see eee see

*Bogue:: For Armo part of Bo, see Armo series.

Brownell..Breco sco s2sedese cl hoete ws bees tcee eet Gteeseceetes

*Campus:: For Carlson part of Cc, see Carlson series; for Penden part of Cd, see Penden series.

Canlon:

Garlaonic: jxnorett ose ee hee sere Sado beeteke cece t eee eee

Mapped only in a complex with Campus and Harney soils.

Crete:

Detroit:!

Eltree:

See footnotes at end of table.

C6) Cd incu oe Sees ci hte Leistete eee eyes ausesods

Céiccdon Roh sesem cheese cscs das eee eases e sete

Pe oS ht Si oo Rote tk dadceveneees yas Seesaw

Eo, Ef {Eg EW: 22. s2scteed socSes pls l sees ate devise

Depth

bedrock

Feet

Depth from surface

Inches

Classification

USDA texture

Clay shale.

Chalky limestone. Loamtns 2 hese et ae pee eeteesn ches

LOR co chit od wd eo ee wae me

Caliche.

Clay loam:.2-os2-42. seo. eesees sec se ce

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 57

properties significant in engineering

The soils in such mapping units may have different properties and limitations, and for this reason it is necessary to follow careof this table. The symbol < means less than; the symbol > means more than]

Classification—Con. Percentage less than 3 inches passing sieve— Available Permeawater Reaction Shrink-swell. No. 4 No. 10 No. 40 No. 200 bility capacity potential Unified AASHO (4.7 (2.0 (0.42 (0.074 Inches per = Inches inch of pH per hour soil

8M A-4 100 100 75-85 40-50 2.0-6.3 0.10-0.14 6.1-6.5 | Low.

SM A-~4 or A-2 100 100 60-70 30-40 2.0-6.3 0.09-0.13 6.6-7.8 | Low

SM A-2 100 100 65-75 15-25 2.0-6.3 0.06-0.09 7.4-7.8 | Low

CL A-6 100 95-100 85-95 60-75 0.63-2.0 0.14-0.18 6.6-7.3 | Low.

CL A-6 100 95-100 90-100 80-90 0.63-2.0 0.14-0.18 7.4-7.8 | Low

CL A-6 100 95-100 90-100 70-80 0.63-2.0 0.14-0.18 7,9-8.4 | Low.

CL A-6 85-95 70-80 65-75 51-60 0.63-2.0 0.14-0.16 7.9-8.4 | Low.

SM or GM A-l 50-70 25-35 20-30 15-25 2.0-6.3 0.03-0.05 7.9-8.4 | Low

SM A-4 100 100 75-85 40-50 2.0-6.3 0.10-0.14 6.6-8.4 | Low.

SM A-2 100 100 65-75 15-30 2.0-6.3 0.06-0.09 6.6-8.4 | Low

ML A-4 100 100 90-100 80-90 0.63-2.0 0.16-0.18 6.6-8.4 | Low

CH A-7 100 100 95-100 90-100 <0.06/ 0.11-0.14 6.6-8.4 | High

CH A-7 100 100 95-100 90-100 < 0.06 0.11~0.14 4.5-6.0 | High.

CH A-7 100 100 90-100 90-100 < 0.06) 0.11-0.14 3.5-5.8 | High

SM or SC A-2 250-80 40-50 30-45 20-35 0.63-2.0 0.10-0.14 7.4-8.4 | Low

GM or GC A-2 240-50 30-45 20-40 13-30 0.63-2.0 0.06-0.10 7.9-8.4 | Low

GM, GC, GW-GM | A-l 220-40 15-35 10-30 8-25 0.63-2.0 0.06-0.10 7.9-8.4 | Low.

or GW-GC

SM A-4 or A-6 100 100 55-80 36-50 0.63-2.0 0.12-0.16 7.4~8.4 | Low

ML or ML-CL A-7 or A-6 100 100 85-100 60-85 0.63-2.0 0.12-0.16 7.4-8.4 | Low

SM A-6 100 100 55-80 36-50 0.63-2.0 0.12-0.16 7,4-8.4 | Low.

ML or CL A-4 or A-6 100 100 90-100 85-100 | 0.63-2.0 0.14-0.18 6.1-7.8 | Low.

CH or CL A-7 100 100 90-100 90-100 0.2-0.63; 0.14-0.18 7.9-8.4 | High.

CH or CL A-7 100 100 95-100 90-100 0.2-0.63} 0.14-0.18 6.6-7.8 | High.

CH A-7 100 100 95-100 90-95 0.06-0.2 0.14-0.18 6.6-7.8 | High.

CH or CL A-7 100 100 95-100 85-95 0.2-0.63 0.14-0.18 7.4-8.4 | High.

58 SOIL SURVEY

TABLE 5.—Estimates of soil properties

Soil series and map symbols

Hilly land: Hn. Properties too variable to estimate.

Mapped only in a complex with Campus soils.

Rough broken land: Ro Properties too variable to rate.

1 Subject to flooding.

Depth to bedrock

Feet

Depth from surface

Classification

USDA texture

Inches

Chalky limestone.

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 59

significant in engineering—Continued

2 Estimate of fragments larger than 3 inches in diameter in the Brownell soil is 0 to 10 percent in the 0to 7-inch layer; 5 to 35 percent in the 7to 15-inch layer; and 10 to 40 percent in the 15to 30-inch layer.

[An asterisk in the first column indicates that at least one map ping unit in this ser

TABLE 6.—I/nterpretations of

ies is made up of two or more kinds of soil.

the instructions for referring to other series

Soil series and map symbols

Alluvial land:

Ab, Ac, Ad. No interpretations, material too variable

Anselmo:

Armo: Ao, Ar.

Am, An,

*Bogue: Bg, Bo For Armo part of of Bo, see Armo series.

See footnotes at end of table.

engineering properties of the soils

The soils in such mapping units may have different properties and limitations,

that appear in the first column of this table]

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS

and for this reason it is necessary to follow carefully

Soil features affecting—Con.

Degree and kind of limitation for—

EmbankTerraces, Sanitary ments, diversions, Septic tank Foundations landfill 2 dikes, and and absorption Sewage Shallow for low (trench and

levees waterways Irrigation fields lagoons excavations buildings area types)

Fair stability; | Slopes of 2 to | Slopes of 2 to |Slight... Severe: mod-|Slight.0 0. Slight... Severe: good com6 percent; 6 percent; erately rapid moderately paction if moderate moderately permearapid perclosely erodibility; rapid perbility. meability. controlled; moderately meability; fair shear rapid perwell strength; meability. drained; high piping moderate hazard. available

water capacity.

Fair stability; | Slopes of 1 to | Slopes of 1 to | Slight where Moderate Moderate: Slight where Slight for good com15 percent; 15 percent; slopes are 1 where slopes slopes of 1 slopes are 1 trench type. paction; fair clay loam highly to 8 percent. are lto7 to 15 perto 8 percent.| Slight for shear subsoil; calcareous; Moderate percent; cent; clay Moderate area type strength. moderate well where slopes moderate loam where slopes where slopes

perdrained; are 8 to 15 permeasubsoil. are 8 to 15 are 1to8 meability. high percent: bility. percent. percent. available moderate Severe where Moderate for water permeaslopes are area type capacity. bility. 7 to 15 where slopes percent, are 8 to 15 percent.

Fair stability; | Frequently Frequently Severe: sea- | Severe: sea- | Severe: sea- | Severe: sea- | Severe: seagood comflooded; flooded; sonal high sonal high sonal high sonal high sonal high paction if seasonal somewhat water table water table water table water table water table closely conhigh water poorly at a depth of at a depth of at a depth of at a depth of at a depth of trolled; high table ata drained; low 2 to 6 feet; 2 to 6 feet; 2 to 6 feet; 2 to 6 feet; 2 to 6 feet; piping depth of 2 available frequently frequently somewhat frequently frequently hazard; fair to 6 feet; water flooded. flooded. poorly flooded. flooded. workability. somewhat capacity. drained.

poorly drained.

Poor stability;} Slopes of 8 to | Slopes of 3 to | Severe: very | Moderate Severe: Severe: shale; Severe: shale poor shear 25 percent; 25 percent; slow permewhere slopes shale at a at a depth of at a depth of strength; shale ata shale at a ability; are less than depth of 20 20 to 40 20 to 40 poor depth of 20 depth of 20 slopes of 3 7 percent. to 40 inches;) inches; inches; clay workability; to 40 inches; to 40 inches; to 25 perSevere where clay texslopes of 3 texture; high shrinkclay texture; clay texture; cent; shale slopes are ture; slopes to 25 perslopes of swell very firm if very slow at a depth of 7 to 25 of 3 to 25 cent; high 3 to 25 potential. moist. permea20 to 40 percent: percent. shrink-swell percent.

bility. inches. shale ata potential. depth of 20 to 40 inches.

TABLE 6.—Interpretations of engineering

Soil series and

Suitability as source of—

Soil features affecting —

See footnotes at end of table.

properties of the sotls—Continued

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS

Embankments, dikes, and levees

Soil features affecting—Con.

Terraces, diversions, and waterways

Degree and kind of limitation for—



Irrigation

Fair compaction; fair workability.

Poor stability; fair compaction; fair shear strength; high piping hazard.

Poor stability; fair compaction; high piping hazard; fair shear strength.

Poor stability; fair compaction; fair to poor shear strength.

Fair stability; fair compaction; moderate shrink-swell potential; high compressibility.

Slopes of 2 to 10 percent; coarse fragments; chalky limestone ata depth of 20 to 40 inches.

Slopes of 3 to 15 percent; clay loam subsoil; caliche and outwash ata depth of 20 inches,

Caliche at a depth of 10 inches; slopes of 5 percent; low fertility.

Slopes of 0 to 7 percent; silty clay loam subsoil; moderately slow permeability; moderate erodibility.

Shale at a depth of 20 inches; slopes of 1 percent; silty clay loam texture; moderately slow permeability.

Slopes of 2 to 10 percent; chalky limestone ata depth of 20 to 40 inches; low available water capacity.

Caliche and outwash at a depth of inches; slopes of 3 to 15 percent; low available water capacity.

Caliche ata depth of 10 inches; slopes of 5 percent; very low available water capacity.

Slopes of 0 to 7 percent; well drained; high available water capacity; moderately slow permeability.

Shale at a depth of 20 inches; slopes of 1 percent; well drained; moderate available water capacity;

erodibility.

. Sanitary Septic tank Foundations landfill 2 absorption Sewage Shallow for low (trench and

fields lagoons excavations buildings area types)

Severe: _ Severe: Severe: Moderate: Severe for chalky limechalky limechalky limeslopes of 2 trench type: stone ata stone ata stone ata to 10 perchalky limedepth of 20 depth of 20 depth of 20 cent; chalky stone at a to 40 inches; to 40 inches; to 40 inches; limestone at depth of 20 slopes of 2 slopes of 2 coarse a depth of to 40 inches. to 10 to 10 perfragments; 20 to 40 Slight to percent. cent; coarse slopes of inches. moderate for

fragments. 2 to 10 area type: percent. slopes of percent.

Severe: Severe: Severe: Moderate: Severe for caliche and ealiche and slopes of 3 slopes of trench type: outwash at outwash at a to 15 per8 to 15 caliche and a depth of depth of 20 cent; caliche percent; outwash at 20 to 40 to 40 inches. and outwash ealiche and a depth of inches, at a depth of outwash ata 20 to 40

20 to 40 depth of inches. inches. 20 to 40 Moderate for inches. area type: slopes of percent.

Severe: Slight to Slight | Moderate: Moderate for moderately moderate: silty clay trench type: slow slopes of 0 loam silty clay permeato 7 percent. texture; loam bility. moderate to texture,

high Slight for shrink-swell area type. potential.

shale at a moderate for area depth of 20 shrink-swell type:

to 40 potential. slopes of 1 inches, to 15

percent.

TABLE 6.—Interpretations of engineering

Soil series and map symbols

Suitability as source of—

Soil features affecting—

Sanitary land-

fill cover material Topsoil Crete: Cr, Ct... Poor: very Fair: 16 firm; silty inches of clay subsoil. silty clay loam over silty clay subsoil. Detroit: De... Poor: _ silty Fair: 12 clay subsoil. inches of silt loam over silty clay loam subsoil. Eltree: fe, €f, | Fair: slopes | Fair: slopes Eg, Eh. of 0 to 15 of 0 to 15 percent, percent. *Harney: Ha, Fair: firm; Fair: 6 Hb, Hc, Hd, He, silty clay inches of Hf, Hg, Hh, Hk. loam loam over For Armo subsoil. silty clay part of loam He, see subsoil. Armo series; for Carlson part of Hf and Hg, see Carlson series; for Wakeen part of Hh and Hk, see Wakeen series.

See footnotes at end of table.

Sand and gravel

Unsuited__......_.

Unsuited__.......

Unsuited._._._

Unsuited__.......

’ Pond Road Highway reservoir subgrade ! Road fill ! location 1 areas Poor: high Fair: fair Slow Slow permeaplasticity. shear permeability; slopes strength. bility. of 0 tol percent. Poor: high Fair: fair All features Slow plasticity. shear favorable. permeastrength. bility; slopes of 0 to 2 percent. Fair: Fair: fair Slopes of 0 to | Moderate medium soil shear 15 percent. permeasupport. strength. bility; slopes of 0 percent. Fair: Fair: fair Slopes of 0 to | Moderately medium shear 7 percent. slow plasticity. strength. permeability; slopes of 0

to 7 percent.

properties of the soils—Continued

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS

poet

Soil features affecting—Con.

Degree and kind of limitation for—

Embankments, dikes, and levees

Fair stability; fair compaction;

poor workability; high compressibilty.

Fair stability; fair compaction; high compressibility.

Fair stability; good compaction; moderate shrink-swell potential; medium compressibility.

Fair stability; good compaction; high shrink-swell potential; medium compressibility.

Terraces, Sanitary

diversions, Septic tank Foundations landfill] 2 and absorption Sewage Shallow for low (trench and waterways Irrigation fields lagoons excavations buildings area types)

Slopes of 0 to | Slopes of 0 to | Severe: Slight Severe: silty | Moderate: Severe for 1 percent; 1 percent; slow clay subsoil. moderately trench type: silty clay moderately permeawell silty clay subsoil; well bility. drained; subsoil. slow drained; high Slight for permeaslow shrink-swell area type. bility; permeapotential. moderate bility; high erodibility. available

water capacity,

Slopes of 0 to | Slopes of 0 to | Severe: slow Severe: Severe: silty } Severe: Severe:

2 percent; 2 percent; permeaoccasional clay subsoil; occasional occasional occasional occasional bility; flooding. occasional flooding; flooding. flooding; flooding; occasional flooding. high silty clay well flooding. shrink-swell subsoil; drained; potential. slow slow permeapermeability. bility; high available water capacity.

Slopes of 0 to | Slopes of 0 to | Slight where Severe: Moderate: Moderate: Moderate for 15 percent; 15 percent; slopes are 0 moderate slopes of 0 slopes of 0 trench type: silty clay well to 8 percent. permeato 15 to 15 silty clay loam drained; Moderate bility; percent. percent; loam subsoil; high where slopes of 0 moderate subsoil. moderate available slopes are 8 to 15 shrink-swell| Slight to erodibility. water to 15 percent. potential. moderate

capacity; percent: for area moderate moderate type: slopes permeapermeaof 0 to 15 bility, bility. percent.

Slopes of 0 to | Slopes of 0 to | Severe: Slight to Slight 20. Severe: high | Moderate for 7 percent; 7 percent; moderately moderate: shrink-swell trench type: silty clay well slow slopes of 0 potential; silty clay loam drained; permeato 7 percent. silty clay loam subsoil; high bility. loam subsoil. moderately available subsoil. Slight for slow water area type. permeacapacity; bility; moderately moderate slow erodibility. permea-

bility.

TABLE 6.—Interpretations of engineering

Soil series and

Suitability as source of—

Soil features affecting—

map symbols | Sanitary landfill cover material Topsoil *Heizer: Hl... Poor: chalky | Poor: more For Armo limestone at than 35 part of at depth of percent HI, see 10 to 20 coarse Armo inches; fragments; series, slopes of 8 chalky to 25 limestone at percent. a depth of inches, Hilly land: Hn. No interpretations, material too variable. Holdrege: Ho, | Fair: firm; Fair: 10 Hp. silty clay inches of silt loam loam over subsoil silty clay loam subsoil.

Inavale: In...-... Fair: loamy | Poor: loamy sand sand texture; texture. slopes of 0 percent.

McCook: Mc, Good................| Good...

Sea footnotes at end of table.

Good: road limestone gravel.

Unsuited__.......

Unsuited............

Fair for sand: excessive fines,

Poor for gravel: 3 to 5 feet overburden.

Unsuited..........

properties of the soils—Continued

Soil features affecting—Con.

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS

Degree and kind of limitation for—

EmbankTerraces, ments, diversions, Septic tank Foundations dikes, and and absorption Sewage Shallow for low levees waterways Irrigation fields lagoons excavations buildings

Good stability;; Chalky limeChalky limeSevere: Severe: Severe: Severe: good comstone at a stone ata chalky limechalky limechalky limechalky limepaction; depth of 10 depth of 10 stone ata stone ata stone ata stone ata high piping to 20 inches; to 20 inches; depth of 10 depth of 10 depth of 10 depth of 10 hazard. gravelly well to 20 inches; to 20 inches; to 20 inches; to 20 inches;

loam drained; slopes of 8 slopes of 8 slopes of 8 slopes of 8 surface; very low to 25 to 25 to 25 to 25 moderate available percent. percent, percent. percent, erodibility. water capa-

city; highly

calcareous.

Fair stability; | Slopes of 0 to | Slopes of 0 to | Slight to Moderate: Slight... Moderate: good com3 percent; 3 percent; moderate: slopes of 0 moderate paction silty clay well moderate to 3 percent; shrink-swell characterisloam subdrained; permemoderate potential. tics; soil; high availability. permemoderate moderate able water ability. piping erodibility. capacity; hazard; moderate moderate permeerodibility. ability.

Fair stability; | Slopes of 0 to | Slopes of 0 to | Slight to Moderate in Slight in most | Moderate: good com2 percent; 2 percent; moderate in most areas: areas. in most paction silty clay occasional most areas: moderate Severe in low areas: fair charisterisloam subflooding; moderate permeareas: shear tics; soil; well permeability. occasional strength. moderate occasional drained; ability. Severe in low flooding. Severe in low piping flooding. high avail- | Severe in low areas: areas: hazard, able water areas: occasional occasional

capacity. occasional flooding. flooding. flooding.

Fair stability; | Slopes of 0 to | Slopes of 0 to | Severe: Severe: Severe: Severe: good com10 percent; 10 percent; slopes of 0 rapid permeloamy sand occasional paction; loamy sand occasional to 10 perability; texture; flooding. high piping texture; low flooding; cent; slopes of 0 occasional hazard. available well occasional to 10 perflooding.

water capadrained; low flooding. cent;

city; high available occasional soil blowing water flooding. hazard. capacity.

Poor stability; | Slopes of 0to | Slopes of 0 to | Moderate Moderate Slight... Slight good com2 percent; 2 percent; where not where not paction if well moderate subject to subject to closely drained; available flooding: flooding: controlled; moderate water capamoderate moderate high piping permecity; well permepermehazard. ability; drained; ability. ability.

calcareous. moderate Severe where | Severe where permesubject to subject to ability. flooding. flooding.

Sanitary landfill 2 (trench and area types)

Severe: chalky limestone ata depth of 10 to 20 inches; slopes of 8 percent,

Slight: cover material good,

Slight where not flooded, severe where flooded; cover material good,

Severe: occasional flooding.

Slight.

Soil series and map symbols

Suitability as source of—

Sanitary land-

fill cover material Mento: Me, Mf, | Fair: firm; Mg, Mo. silty clay loam subsoil. Munjor: Mv... Good....._......-.-- New Cambria: Poor: very Ne. firm; silty

Nibson: Nn........

elay texture.

Poor: limestone at a depth of 10 to 20 inches.

Fair: clay loam

texture.

See footnotes at end of table.

