TABLE 6.—Interpretations of engineering

Soil features affecting—

Sand Pond and Road Highway reservoir Topsoil gravel subgrade! Road fill 1 location 1 areas

Fair: silty Unsuited__.__.... Poor: high Poor: poor High sodium Slopes of 0 to clay loam shrink-swell stability. content; 7 percent; subsoil. potential. chalky limechalky lime

stone ata stone ata depth of 40 depth of 40 to 70 inches; to 70 inches; slopes of 0 slow permeto 7 percent. ability.

Fair: sandy | Fair belowa | Good_.........| Good_......._.| Frequently Moderately loam depth of 4 flooded; rapid texture. feet: moderate perme-

excessive erodibility. ability;

fines. seasonal water table; slopes of 0 to 2 percent.

Poor: very Unsuited_...___. Poor: high Poor: poor Slow permeSlow permefirm; silty shrink-swell shear ability. ability; clay texture. potential. strength. slopes of 0

to 3 percent.

Fair: limeUnsuited.._....._.. Poor: low Fair: fair Limestone at a] Moderate stone at a soil support. shear depth of 10 permeadepth of 10 strength. to 20 inches; bility; slopes| to 20 inches; slopes of of 5 to 12 silty clay 5 to 12 percent; loam percent; limestone at texture. moderate a depth of

erodibility. 10 to 20 inches.

Fair: clay Poor for sand:| Poor: low Fair: fair Slopes of 5 to | Moderate loam texexcessive soil support. shear 15 percent. permeature; slopes fines; 5 to 7 strength. bility; slopes of 5 to 15 feet of of 5 to 15 percent. overburden. percent.

properties of the sotls—Continued

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS

Soil features affecting—Con.

Degree and kind of limitation for—

Embankments, dikes, and levees

Terraces, diversions, and waterways

Fair stability; fair compaction; moderate piping hazard.

Fair stability; good compaction; high piping hazard.

Fair stability; poor compaction; poor workability; poor shear strength; high compressibility.

Limestone at a depth of inches; fair stability; fair compaction; high piping hazard; fair shear strength.

Fair stability; good compaction;

erodibility.

Slopes of 0 to 7 percent; chalky limestone at a depth of inches; silty clay loam subsoil; high erodibility.

Slopes of 0 to 2 percent; seasonal water table; sandy loam texture; frequently flooded.

Slopes of 0 to 3 percent; silty clay texture; slow permeability; miderately well drained; high shrinkswell potential.

Slopes of 5 to 12 percent; limestone at a depth of 10 to 20 inches; very low available water capacity; silty clay loam subsoil; highly calcareous.

Slopes of 5 to 15 pereent; clay loam texture; high erodibility; calcareous,



Irrigation

Slopes of 0 to 7 percent; chalky limestone ata depth of 40 to 70 inches; high sodium content; high available water capacity.

Slopes of 0 to 2 percent; frequently flooded; seasonal water table; moderate available water capacity.

Slopes of 0 to 3 percent; moderately well drained; high available water capacity; slow permeability; silty clay texture,

Slopes of 5 to 12 percent; limestone at a depth of 10 to 20 inches; very low available water capacity; somewhat excessively drained.

Slopes of 5 to 15 percent; well drained; high available water capacity.

Septic tank absorption Sewage fields lagoons Severe: Moderate chalky limewhere slopes stone ata are 2 to 7 depth of 40 percent; to 70 inches; chalky limeslow permestone ata ability. depth of 40 to 70 inches. Slight where slopes are 0 to 2 percent. Severe: Severe: seasonal seasonal water table; water table; frequently frequently flooded. flooded. Severe: slow | Slight. permeability. Severe: Severe:

limestone at a depth of 10 to 20 inches; slopes of 5 to 12 percent.

Moderate: slopes of 5 to 15 percent; moderate permeability.

limestone at a depth of 10 to 20 inches; slopes of 5 to 12 percent.

Severe: slopes of 5 to 15 percent; moderate permeability.

Sanitary Foundations landfill 2 Shallow for low (trench and excavations buildings area types) Moderate: Moderate: Severe for chalky limemoderate trench type: stone ata to high chalky limedepth of 40 shrink-swell stone ata to 70 inches. potential; depth of 40 chalky limeto 70 inches, stone ata Slight for area depth of 40 type.

Severe: frequently flooded; seasonal water table.

Severe: silty clay texture; moderately well drained.

Severe: limestone at a depth of inches; slopes of 5 to 12 percent,

Severe: slopes of 5 to 15 percent; clay loam texture.

to 70 inches.

Severe: frequently flooded; seasonal water table.

Severe: high shrink-swell potential.

Severe: limestone at a depth of inches; slopes of 5 to 12 percent.

Moderate:

percent.

Severe: seasonal water table; frequently flooded; moderately rapid permeability,

Severe for trench type: silty clay texture.

Slight for ares type.

Severe for trench type: limestone at a depth of 10 to 20 inches.

Moderate for area type: slopes of 5 to 12 percent,

Moderate: clay loam texture; slopes of 5 percent.

Soil series and map symbols

Roxbury: Rb, Rf

Rough broken land: Ro. No inter-

variable.

Wakeen: Wa, We, Wh, Wk.

Sanitary landfill cover material

Fair: silty clay loam texture; chalky limestone ata depth of 20 to 40 inches.

TABLE 6.—Interpretations of engineering

1 Interpretations for road subgrade, road fill, and highway location were made with the assistance of Norman Clark, engineer of soils, and Herbert E. Worley, soils research engineer, Kansas State Highway Commission, in cooperation with the U.S. Depart-

ment of Commerce, Bureau of Public Roads.

properties of the soils—-Continued

Soil features affecting—Con.

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS

Degree and kind of limitation for—

EmbankTerraces, ments, diversions, Septic tank Foundations dikes, and and absorption Sewage Shallow for low levees waterways Irrigation fields lagoons excavations buildings Fair stability; | Slopes of 0 to | Slopes of 0 Severe: Severe: Severe: Severe: good 2 percent; to 2 percent; occasional moderate occasional occasional compaction; silty clay well drained; to frequent permeato frequent to frequent fair shear loam moderate flooding. bility; flooding. flooding. strength. subsoil; permeaoccasional to occasional to bility; high frequent frequent available flooding. flooding. water capacity; occasional to frequent flooding. Fair stability; | Slopes of 1 to | Slopes of 1 to | Severe: Severe: Severe: Severe: good 15 percent; 15 percent; chalky limechalky limechalky limechalky limecompaction; chalky limechalky limestone ata stone ata stone ata stone ata fair shear stone ata stone at a depth of 20 depth of 20 depth of 20 depth of 20 strength; depth of 20 depth of 20 to 40 inches; to 40 inches; to 40 inches; to 40 inches; moderate to 40 inches; to 40 inches; slopes of 1 slopes of 1 to slopes of 1 slopes of 1 erodibility. silty clay well drained; to 15 per15 percent. to 15 perto 15 loam submoderate cent. cent, percent, soil; highly permeacalcareous. bility; moderate erodibility; highly calcareous. Poor stability; | Slopes of 0 to 2} Slopes of 0 to | Severe: Severe: Severe: Severe: good compercent; 2 percent; seasonal seasonal seasonal seasonal paction if seasonal seasonal water table water table water table water table closely conwater table water table at a depth of at a depth of at a depth of ata depth trolled; high ata depth of at a depth of 2 to 6 feet; 2 to 6 feet; 2 to 6 feet; of 2 to 6 piping 2 to 6 feet; 2 to 6 feet; frequently frequently frequently feet; hazard. moderate somewhat flooded. flooded. flooded. frequently soil blowing poorly flooded; hazard; drained; somewhat frequently frequent poorly flooded. flooding; drained. moderate available water capacity.

Sanitary landfill 2 (trench and area types)

Severe: occasional to frequent flooding.

Severe for trench type: chalky limestone at a depth of 20 to 40 inches.

Slight to moderate for area type: slopes of 1 to 15 percent.

Severe: seasonal water table at a depth of 2 to 6 feet; frequently flooded.

2 Onsite deep studies of the underlying strata and water table to determine the hazards of aquifier pollution and drainage into

ground water should be made for landfills deeper than 5 to 6 feet.

72 SOIL SURVEY

TABLE 7.—Engineering

[Tests performed by the State Highway Commission of Kansas under a cooperative agreement with the Bureau of Public

Moisture-

Soil name and location Parent material Scs temple Depth | Maximum

dry density

Oe a

1 Based on AASHO Designation T99-57, Method A (1), with the following variations: (1) all material is ovendried at 230° F. and crushed in a laboratory crusher, and (2) no time is allowed for dispersion of moisture after mixing with the soil material.

2 Mechanical analysis according to AASHO Designation T88-57 (1), with the following variations: (1) all material is ovendried at 230° F. and crushed in a laboratory crusher, (2) the sample is not soaked prior to dispersion, (3) sodium silicate is used as the dispersing agent, and (4) dispersing time, in minutes, is established by dividing the plasticity index value by 2; the maximum time is 15 minutes, and the minimum time is 1 minute, Results by this procedure may differ somewhat from results obtained

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 73

test data

Roads (BPR) in accordance with standard procedures of the American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHO) ]}

density ! Mechanical analysis * Classification

Percentage less than 3 inches Percentage smaller than—; passing sieve— Liquid | Plasticity Optimum limit, index moisture AASHO Unified * 0.05 mm | 0.02 mm | 0.005 mm | 0.002 mm Pet

by soil survey procedure of the Soil Conservation Service (SCS). In the AASHO procedure, the fine material is analyzed by the hydrometer method and the various grain-size fractions are calculated on the basis of all the material, including that coarser than 2 millimeters in diameter. In the SCS soil survey procedure, the fine material is analyzed by the pine method and the material coarser than 2 millimeters in diameter is excluded from the calculations of grain-size fraction. The mechanical analysis data used in this table are not suitable for naming textural classes for soils.

3SCS and BPR have agreed to consider that all soils having plasticity indexes within two points of the A-line are to be given a borderline classification, Examples of borderline classifications obtained by this use are ML-CL and SM-SC.

74 SOIL SURVEY

table, flooding hazards, depth to bedrock, slopes, and soil texture. The principal reasons for assigning moderate or severe limitations are given in the table.

Foundations for low buildings are affected chiefly by features of the undisturbed soil that influence its capacity to support low buildings that have normal foundation loads. Specific values of bearing strength are not assigned.

Sanitary landfills are areas where layers of refuse are placed and compacted in existing gullies and depressions or in excavated trenches. The refuse is covered daily with 6-inch layers of soil until the gulley or trench is full, and then a final layer of soil 2 feet thick is placed on the landfill. The factors influencing this land use are hazard of flooding, water table, drainage, depth to bedrock, permeability, slope, and texture. The degree of limitation and reasons for assigning moderate or severe limitations are given in the table. Because soils in this survey were tested to depths of 6 feet or less, onsite investigation is essential for trench-type landfills.

Engineering test data

Table 7 contains the results of engineering tests performed by the Kansas State Highway Commission on several important soils in Ellis County. The table shows the specific location where samples were taken, the depth to which sampling was done, and the results of tests to determine particle-size distribution and other properties significant in soils engineering.

Maximum dry density is the maximum unit dry weight of the soil when it has been compacted at optimum moisture content by a prescribed method of compaction. The moisture content which gives the highest dry unit weight is called the optimum moisture content for the specific method of compaction.

Mechanical analyses show the percentages, by weight, of soil particles that pass sieves of specific sizes. Sand and coarser material does not pass through the No. 200 sieve. Silt and clay pass through the No. 200 sieve. Of the material that passes through the No. 200 sieve, silt ig the material larger than 0.002 millimeters in diameter and clay is the material smaller than 0.002 millimeters in diameter. The clay fraction was determined by the hydrometer method, rather than the pipette method most soil scientists use in determining the clay in a sample.

Liquid limit and plasticity index indicate the effect of water on the strength and consistence of soil material. As the moisture content of a clayey soil is increased from a dry state, the material changes from a solid to a plastic state. If the moisture content is further increased, the material changes from a plastic to a liquid state. The plastic limit is the moisture content at which the soil material changes from a solid to a plastic state; and the liquid limit, from a plastic to a liquid state. The plasticity index is the numerical difference between the liquid limit and the plastic limit. It indicates the range of moisture content within which a soil material is plastic.

Recreation 8

Several factors affect the increasing demand for various recreational facilities: the population is increasing and is becoming more mobile; highways are improving; personal incomes are rising, making more money available for leisure-time spending; and the amount of leisure time is increasing.

Ellis County is easily accessible by an excellent highway system. Interstate Highway 70 runs through the county from east to west, and U.S. Highway 183 runs north and south. Both highways are heavily used by vacationers.

Ft. Hays Kansas State University is located at Hays, and the students are potential recreation seekers. Three large reservoirs—Cedar Bluff, Webster, and Wilson— are located within 50 miles of Hays and provide much of the water-based recreation in the area.

Table 8 provides ratings of the limitation of the soils for recreational uses.

Camp areas are areas used for tents, small camp trailers, and related activities. They should be suitable for heavy foot or vehicular traffic. These areas are used frequently during the camping season. Suitability of the soils for vegetation should be considered separately in selecting sites for these uses.

Picnic areas are rated by the features of the soil only, but such other considerations as lakes, trees, or beauty may affect the desirability of the site.

Intensive play areas are areas used as playgrounds and for such activities as baseball, football, and badminton. Soils should be nearly level, well drained, and rock free. It is assumed that a good plant cover can be established and maintained where needed.

Paths and trails include areas for trails, crosscountry hiking, bridle paths, and other nonintensive uses, It is not anticipated that the soils will have to be graded and shaped to any great extent. Ratings are based on soil features only, and do not include other factors that are important in the selection of a site for this use.

For information concerning the suitability of various soils for use as septic tank filter fields or sewage lagoons, see table 6.

Formation and Classification

of the Soils

This section explains how soils form and discusses the factors that have affected the formation of soils in Ellis County. It describes briefly the current system of soil classification and places the soil series represented in the county in some classes of that system.

Factors of Soil Formation

Soil is produced by soil-forming processes acting on materials deposited or accumulated by geologic agencies. The characteristics of the soil at any given point are determined by (1) the physical and mineralogical composition of the parent material; (2) the climate

8 By Jack W. Watstrom, biologist, Soil Conservation Service.

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 16

TABLE 8.—Degree and kind of limitations affecting use of the soils for recreation

[An asterisk in the first column indicates that at least one mapping unit in this series is made up of two or more kinds of soil. The soils in such mapping units may have different properties and limitations, and for this reason it is necessary to follow carefully the instructions for referring to other series that appear in the first column of this table]

Soil series and map symbols

ACh

Brownell:

*Campus: For Carlson part of

Cc, see Carlson series; for Penden

part of Cd, see



Penden series.

Canlon:

Mapped only ina complex with

Campus and Harney

soils.

Bttschces eee

(cr -Fal @(~ eens ene

Cen ee ee eats

Camp areas

Severe: flooding_....

Severe: flooding; texture of surface layer.

Sever: wetness; flooding. Slightis. 02.02 Gi

Slight where slopes are less than 8 percent.

Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent.

Severe where slopes are more than 15 percent.

Severe: wetness; flooding.

Severe: very slow permeability; clay surface layer; slopes of more than 15 percent.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 8 percent. Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent: gravelly surface

layer.

Slight where slopes are less than 8 percent.

Moderate where slopes are more than 8 percent.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 8 percent. Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent. Severe where slopes

are more than 15 percent.

Moderate: moderately slow permeability;

Picnic areas

Severe: flooding__........

Severe: flooding; texture of surface layer.

Sever: wetness; flooding.

Slight where slopes are less than 8 percent.

Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent.

Severe where slopes are more than 15 percent.

Moderate: flooding.

wetness;

Severe: clay surface layer; slopes of more than 15 percent.

Slight where slopes are less than 8 percent. Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent: gravely surface

layer.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 8 percent.

Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent:

Slight where slopes are less than 8 percent. Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 precent. Severe where slopes

are more than 15 percent.

Intensive play areas

Severe: flooding...

Severe: flooding; texture of surface layer.

Severe: wetness; flooding.

Slight where slopes are less than 2 percent. Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent.

Slight where slopes are less than 2 percent. Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent. Severe where slopes are more than 6

percent. Severe: wetness -—-.. Severe: very slow

permeability; clay surface layer; slopes of more than 6 percent.

Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent. Severe where slopes are more than 6 percent: gravelly surface layer.

Moderate: slopes of 2 to 6 percent; depth to caliche is 20 to 40 inches.

Severe: slopes over 6 percent.

Severe: bedrock ata depth of less than 20 inches; slopes of more than 6 percent.

Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent; moderately slow permeability.

Severe where slopes are more than 6 percent.

Paths and trails

Slight: where slopes are less than 15 percent: flooding.

Severe where slopes are more than 25 percent.

Severe: texture of surface layer.

Severe: wetness.

Slight.

Slight where slopes are less than 15 percent.

Moderate where slopes are 15 to 25 percent.

Moderate: wetness.

Severe: clay surface layer.

Moderate: gravelly

surface layer.

Slight.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 15 percent. Moderate where slopes

are 15 to 25 percent.

Slight.

TABLE 8.—Degree and kind of limitations affecting use of the soils for recreation—Continued

Soil series and map symbols

Corinth: Cm, Cn, Co....-.....--—-

Crete!.. Cr Ct asp ed

Detroit:

Dees 22 cote nses seen

*Harney: Ha, Hb, He, Hf, Hg, Hh, Hk....-..!

Hd} Hews For Armo part of

He, see Armo series; for Carlson part of Hf and Hg, see Carlson series; for Wakeen part of Hh and Hk, see Wakeen series.

Hord: = Hr.........

Camp areas

Picnic areas

Intensive play areas

Paths and trails

Moderate: moderately slow permeability. silty clay loam surface layer.

Moderate: moderately well drained; slow permeability; silty loam surface layer.

Moderate: slow permeability.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 8 percent.

Moderate where slopes are more than 8 percent.

Moderate: moderately slow permeability.

Moderate: moderately slow permeability; silty clay loam surface layer.

Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent.

Severe where slopes are more than 15 percent: rockiness.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 8 percent.

Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent.

Severe where slopes are more than 15 percent.

Moderate: silty clay loam surface layer.

Moderate:

moderately well drained; silty clay loam surface layer.

Slight

Slight where slopes are 0 to 8 percent; Moderate where slopes are more than 8 percent.

Slight

Moderate: silty clay loam surface layer.

Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent.

Severe where slopes are more than 15 percent: rockiness.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 8 percent. Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent.

Severe where slopes are more than 15 to 25 percent.

Slight

Slight

Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent; moderately slow permeability; silty clay loam surface layer; bedrock at a depth of 20 to 40 inches.

Severe where slopes are more than 6 percent.

Moderate: moderately well drained; slow permeability; silty clay loam surface layer.

Moderate: slow permeability.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 2 percent. Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent, Severe where slopes are more than 6

percent.

Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent: moderately slow permeability.

Severe where slopes are more than 6 percent.

Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent: silty clay loam surface layer; moderately slow permeability.

Severe where slopes are more than 6 percent,

Severe: bedrock at a depth of less than 20 inches; slopes of more than 6 percent; rockiness,

Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent.

Severe where slopes are more than 6 percent,

Slight where slopes are 0 to 2 percent.

Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent.

Slight __.

Moderate: | silty clay loam surface layer.

Moderate: | silty clay loam surface layer.

Slight.

Slight.

Slight.

Moderate: silty clay loam surface layer.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 15 percent. Moderate where slopes are 15 to 25 percent:

rockiness.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 15 percent.

Moderate where slopes are more than 15 percent.

Slight.

Slight.

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS

TABLE 8.—Degree and kind of limitations affecting use of the soils for recreation—Continued

Soil series and map symbols

Tnavale: tna eee

McCook: Mc, Md.

Mento:

Mapped only ina complex with Campus soils.

Rideccse

Rough broken land: Re...

Wakeen: Wa, We, Wh, Wk

Camp areas

Moderate: slopes of 8 to 15 percent; loamy sand surface layer.

Slight where not subject to flooding.

Severe where subject to flooding.

Moderate: slow permeability.

Moderate: slow permeability; silty clay loam surface layer.

Severe: flooding

Severe: silty clay surface layer.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 8 percent. Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent.

Moderate: clay loam surface layer; slope.

Slight

Severe: flooding

Severe: flooding; slopes of more than 15 percent.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 8 percent. Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent.

Moderate where wet. Severe where subject to flooding.

Picnic areas

Moderate: loamy sand surface layer; slope.

Slight where not subject to flooding. Moderate where subject

to flooding.

Moderate: _ silty clay loam surface layer.

Moderate:

Severe: silty clay surface layer.

flooding _..

Slight where slopes are 0 to 8 percent. Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent.

Moderate: clay loam

surface layer; slope.

Severe: flooding.......

Severe: flooding; slopes of more than 15 percent.

Slight where slopes are 0 to 8 percent.

Moderate where slopes are 8 to 15 percent.

Moderate: flooding;

wetness.

Intensive play areas

Moderate where slopes are less than 6 percent,

Severe where slopes are more than 6 percent.

Slight where not subject to flooding. Moderate where subject

to flooding.

Moderate: slow permeability; slopes of 2 to 6 percent.

Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent; slow permeability; silty clay loam surface layer.

Severe where slopes are more than 6

percent. Severe: flooding Severe: silty clay

surface layer.

Severe: bedrock ata depth of less than 20 inches; slopes of more than 6 percent.

Severe: slopes of more than 6 percent.

flooding....... a

Severe:

Severe: flooding; slopes of more than 6 percent; bedrock at a depth of less than 20 inches.

Moderate where slopes are 2 to 6 percent; bedrock at a depth of 20 to 40 inches.

Severe where slopes are more than 6 percent.

Moderate: flooding.

wetness;

Paths and trails

Moderate: loamy sand surface layer.

Slight.

Slight.

Moderate: silty clay loam surface layer.

Slight.

Severe: silty clay surface layer.

Slight.

Moderate: clay loam surface layer.

Slight.

Moderate: flooding.

Moderate: where slopes are 15 to 25 percent: flooding.

Severe where slopes are more than 25 percent.

Slight.

Moderate: flooding.

wetness;

ne SSS a

78 SOIL SURVEY

under which the soil material has accumulated and existed since accumulation; (3) the plant and animal life on and in the soil; (4) the relief, or lay of the land; and (5) the length of time the forces of soil formation have acted on the soil material.

Climate and plant and animal life, chiefly plants, are active factors of soil formation. They act on the parent material that has accumulated through the weathering of rocks and slowly change it to_a natural body that has genetically related horizons. The effects of climate and plant and animal life are conditioned by relief, The parent material also affects the kind of soil profile that is formed and in a few places may determine it almost entirely. Finally, time is needed to change the parent material into a soil profile. It may be much or little, but some time is always required for soil horizon differentiation. Usually, a long time is required for the development of distinct horizons.

The factors of soil formation are so closely interrelated in their effects on the soil that few generalizations can be made regarding the effect of any one factor unless conditions are specified for the other four. Many of the processes of soil development are unknown. The five factors of soil formation as related to the soils of Ellis County are discussed in the following paragraphs.

Parent material

The soils of Ellis County formed in several kinds of parent material. The principal parent material is loess, probably Peorian Loess of Wisconsin age (4). In Ellis County the loess was deposited over chalky limestone, calcareous shale, unconsolidated outwash, and clay shale, and some was reworked and deposited along the streams as alluvium. The loess is high in silt, pale brown in color, calcareous, and porous. In Ellis County, Crete, Harney, Holdrege, Carlson, and Mento soils are the dominant soils formed in loess. Crete soils are the most clayey of the loess soils, then Harney, Mento, Carlson, and Holdrege soils. Carlson and Mento soils formed in thin deposits of loess. In Carlson soils calcareous unconsolidated outwash or colluvium from chalky limestone is below the subsoil. In Mento soils chalky limestone residuum mixed with loess is below the subsoil, and bedrock of chalky limestone is at a depth of 40 to 70 inches. Crete, Harney, and Holdrege soils formed in thicker deposits of loess over colluvialalluvial sediment with admixtures of loess. They are on uplands above the soils formed in alluvium in the present stream valley.

Local colluvium from chalky limestone is second to loess in importance as parent material. Armo soils are extensive on side slopes below outcrops of Cretaceous chalky limestone in most parts of the county. Brownell soils also formed in gravelly and channery colluvial sediment and in residuum from chalky limestone.

Residual parent materials from chalky limestone, calcareous shale, clay shale, and caliche are also important. Wakeen, Nibson, and Heizer soils formed in material weathered from chalky limestone. Corinth soils formed in material from calcareous shale, and Bogue soils formed in material from clay shale. Canlon soils formed in residuum from caliche, and Campus soils formed in unconsolidated outwash and caliche, All

these soils have a weakly developed profile, and all but the Bogue soils are strongly calcareous. They all formed in geologic material of the Cretaceous Period except Canlon and Campus soils, which formed in Pleistocene sediment.

The outwash or colluvial-alluvial terrace sediment occurring on the valley slopes of the Saline and Smoky Hill Rivers has a sandy to loamy texture. In some places the material has been reworked by wind. They are of Pleistocene or more recent time. Inavale, Eltree, and Anselmo soils formed in this parent material.

Alluvial parent material consists of sandy, loamy, and clayey sediment along the Saline and Smoky Hill Rivers, Big Creek, and small tributaries. The soils on flood plains include Boel, Munjor, Wann, and Inavale soils and the more silty Roxbury soils, frequently flooded. These soils formed in the most recent alluvium, On the low terraces, just above the flood plain, are McCook soils. Above McCook soils are Roxbury, Hord, and Detroit soils. New Cambria soils are on about the same terrace level as Detroit soils or slightly higher. They have the most clayey profile of the soils formed in alluvium and are adjacent to Bogue soils, which formed in material from clay shale on uplands.



Climate

Climate has played an important role in the formation of soils in Ellis County. Climate influences both physical and chemical weathering processes and the biological forces at work in soil. The climate factors are interrelated one with the other. Soil-forming processes are most active when the soil is warm and moist. Either inadequate moisture or excess moisture retards soil formation. If the supply of moisture is adequate, the soil-forming processes generally become more active as the soil temperature increases.

The downward movement of water is a major factor in transforming the parent material into a soil that has distinct horizons. The amount of water that percolates through a soil depends partly on rainfall, humidity, and the frost-free period. As water moves downward through the soil, calcium carbonate and other materials are moved in solution or suspension.

In Ellis County several of the soils, such as Roxbury silt loam, have free carbonates in the A horizon as well as in all lower horizons. Leaching has not been sufficient to move the calcium carbonate downward to any great extent. In other soils, such as Harney silt loam, calcium carbonate has been leached to a depth of 18 to 30 inches.

As water moves downward through the soil, it also carries clay particles into lower layers. The transported clay particles form a horizon of clay accumulation. This horizon indicates that weathering has removed most of the carbonates in the upper horizons and that clay is being translocated. The thickness of the clay layer and the amount of clay accumulated indicates the extent of soil profile development resulting from present or past climate influence.

Plant and animal life

Plants and animals assist in forming soil. Plants play perhaps the most important part by supplying roots

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 19

and tops of plants to decay and add organic matter to the soil. They not only aid by adding organic matter, but they have a profound effect on the structure of the soil and assist in the movement of water, minerals, and clay by the root channels left after the decay of the roots.

Plants supply food for micro-organisms, and the micro-organisms, in the digestion of the plant materials, assist in the production of organic matter. Organic matter must be digested by micro-organisms to release plant food, such as nitrogen, to plants growing in the soil.

Earthworms play an important role in the formation of soils by mixing organic material and the mineral material of the soil. Earthworms are very active in calcareous soils, such ag Armo, Wakeen, Campus, and Eltree soils, as well as in the soils on flood plains and terraces, such as Roxbury, Hord, and Detroit soils.

Mammals are very active in the moderately deep soils over caliche and chalky limestone and in the deep, calcareous soils. Badgers, skunks, mice, moles, and pocket gophers are notable for their activity in these moderately deep soils.

Relief

Soil formation is influenced by relief through the effects of runoff, drainage, erosion, and vegetation. Sloping, strongly sloping, and moderately steep soils have medium to rapid runoff. On these soils, unless they are very sandy, the amount of runoff may be more than the amount of water absorbed by the soil. When water is not absorbed the chemical processes of soil development are less than in similar but less sloping soils.

Permeability affects the amount of runoff. Soils that have slow or very slow permeability have greater runoff than soils that have moderate permeability. Bogue soils, for example, have very slow permeability. The runoff on Bogue soils that have slopes of 7 percent would be much greater than on Armo soils that have slopes of 7 percent, because Armo soils have moderate permeability. Steep soils tend to have a thinner darkcolored surface layer. This is because of the slower chemical weathering and the sparse vegetation produced because of a lack of moisture. If the vegetation is not dense enough to protect the steep soils, they erode.

Soils that have nearly level, depressional slopes, where runoff is slow or very slow and the surface layer and subsoil are wet for relatively long periods after rains, tend to have a gray or dark color and sometimes a mottled subsoil. Crete soils that have nearly level to depressional slopes are moderately well drained and have slow runoff and slow permeability. They are not mottled in the subsoil or substratum, but they do have dark-colored upper horizons 20 to 30 inches thick.

Time

The time required for soil formation depends upon the parent material, the climate, the plant and animal life, and the relief. A soil needs more time to develop in material weathered from rock than in a friable loess.

A soil needs more time to develop in drier climate than in more humid climates in the same parent material. A

soil needs more time to develop on steep slopes than on nearly level slopes.

Among the more strongly developed soils in Ellis County are Crete and Harney soils, which formed in loess. The amount of time needed to produce these soils in loess is not known exactly, but studies indicate it could have been as little as 1,000 years to as much as 10,000 years.

The soils that formed in residual material tend to be somewhat resistant to soil formation because of a high carbonate content. Examples are Wakeen, Nibson, Campus, Canlon, Corinth, Brownell, and Heizer soils. Of the soils that formed in alluvium, the least developed soils are on the flood plains. They have rather indistinct horizons. Of the soils on terraces, McCook soils are the least developed. Hord soils are intermediate, and Detroit soils have the most developed profile of the soils formed in alluvium. They rival Crete soils of the uplands in profile development. Again, the time required for the development of Detroit soils is not known, but the time required for Detroit soils is less than for Crete soils.

Classification of the Soils

Soils are classified so that we can more easily remember their significant characteristics. Classification enables us to assemble knowledge about the soils, to see their relationship to one another and to the whole environment, and to develop principles that help us to understand their behavior and their response to manipulation. First through classification, and then through use of soil maps, we can apply our knowledge of soils to specific fields and other tracts of land.

Thus, in classification, soils are placed in narrow categories that are used in detailed soil surveys so that knowledge about the soils can be organized and used in managing farms, fields, and woodland; in developing rural areas; in engineering work; and in many other ways. Soils are placed in broad classes to facilitate study and comparison in large areas, such as countries and continents.

The system of classification now followed was adopted for general use by the National Cooperative Soil Survey in 1965. The system is under continual study. Therefore, readers interested in developments of the system should search the latest literature available (8, 10). In table 9 the soil series of Ellis County are placed in some categories of the system.

The system of classification has six categories. Beginning with the broadest, these categories are order, suborder, great group, subgroup, family, and series. In this system the criteria used as a basis for classification are soil properties that are observable and measurable. The properties are chosen, however, so that the soils of similar genesis, or mode of origin, are grouped together. Most of the classes of the current system are briefly defined in the following paragraphs.

ORDER: Ten soil orders are recognized. They are Entisols, Vertisols, Inceptisols, Aridisols, Mbollisols, Spodosols, Alfisols, Ultisols, Oxisols, and Histosols. The properties used to differentiate these soil orders are those that tend to give broad climatic groupings of soils.

TABLE 9.—Classification of soil series

The two exceptions to this are the Entisols and Histosols, which are in many different kinds of climate. The four soil orders in Ellis County are Entisols, Inceptisols, Mollisols, and Vertisols.

Entisols are light-colored soils that do not have natural genetic horizons or that have only very weakly expressed horizons. These soils do not have traits that reflect soil mixing caused by shrinking and swelling.

Inceptisols typically are on flood plains and other recent surfaces. They generally have a light-colored surface layer and lack a high percentage of swelling clays (montmorillonite).

Mollisols formed under grass and have a thick, darkcolored surface horizon containing colloids dominated by bivalent cations. The soil material in these soils has not been mixed by shrinking and swelling.

Vertisols are soils that have enough swelling clay (montmorillonite) to cause cracking, shearing, and mixing of the soil material when there is alternate wetting and drying of the soil mass.

SUBORDER: Each order is divided into suborders, primarily on the basis of the soil characteristics that seem to produce classes that have the greatest genetic similarity. The suborders narrow the broad climatic range permitted in the orders, The soil properties used to separate suborders are mainly those that reflect either the presence or absence of waterlogging or soil differences resulting from the climate or vegetation.

GREAT GROUP: Suborders are divided into great groups on the basis of uniformity in the kinds and sequence of major soil horizons and features. The horizons used to make separations are those in which clay, iron, or humus have accumulated or those that contain a pan that interferes with the growth of roots or movement of water. The features used are the self-mulching properties of clays, soil temperature, major differences

in chemical composition (mainly calcium, magnesium, sodium, and potassium), and the like. The great group is not shown in table 9, because it is the last word in the name of the subgroups.

SupcRoUP: Great groups are divided into subgroups one representing the central (typic) segment of the group and others, called intergrades, that have properties of the group and also one or more properties of another great group, suborder, or order. Subgroups may also be made in those instances where soil properties intergrade outside of the range of any other great group, suborder, or order. The names of subgroups are derived by placing one or more adjectives before the great group name.

FAMILY: Families are separated within a subgroup primarily on the basis of properties important to the growth of plants or behavior of soils when used for engineering. Among the properties considered are texture, mineralogy, reaction, soil temperature, permeability, thickness of horizons, and consistence.

General Nature of the County

Some of the general characteristics of the county are discussed in this section. These are history and population, relief and drainage, climate, water supply, farming, industry, transportation and markets, and community facilities.

History and Population

Before 1867 the area that is now Ellis County was inhabited mostly by Indians and a few traders. In October 1865 Fort Fletcher was established, but it was abandoned in May 1866. Five months later the post was

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 81

reestablished and the name wag changed from Fort Fletcher to Fort Hays.

On June 7, 1867, a flood on Big Creek nearly destroyed the fort. The fort was moved to its present site, and on July 4, 1867, the United States flag was first raised over Fort Hays, a military reservation of 7,500 acres of rolling land.

The settlement of Ellis County began in 1867. Most of the inhabitants settled in Rome, which was across Big Creek from the present site of Hays. Hays City, later to become the county seat, was established very soon thereafter, following an outbreak of cholera at Rome. Hays City and Fort Hays were named in honor of General Alexander Hays. In 1885 Hays City was incorporated under the name of the city of Hays.

In 1870 the population of the county was 1,445. By 1930 it was 15,907. Thirty years later it had increased to 22,440, and by 1970 it was 24,730. The county seat, Hays, increased in population from 11,947 in 1960 to

Relief and Drainage

Ellis County lies in the Rolling Plains and Breaks section on the eastern edge of the High Plains in the Great Plains physiographic province. The county occupies nearly level to sloping tablelands and sloping to moderately steep broken lands dissected by the Saline River on the north, Big Creek in the middle, and the Smoky Hill River on the south.

Elevation ranges from about 2,370 feet in the westcentral part of the county to about 1,700 feet in the southeastern part in the streambed of the Smoky Hill River. The soils generally slope to the east, and elevation drops at an average of about 20 feet per mile. There are, however, some areas that drop 50 to 100 feet per mile and other areas that drop less than 10 feet per mile.

The Saline River rises in Sherman County, Kansas, and flows into northern Ellis County from the west. The Smoky Hill River rises in eastern Colorado and flows into the southern part of the county from the west. Big Creek enters the county from the west.

The valleys of the Smoky Hill and Saline Rivers are not wide. They range from less than 14 mile to as much as 2 miles in width. Big Creek Valley, however, has a more constant width than the valleys of either of the rivers. The divides between streams are narrow, or less than 1 mile to as much as 5 miles wide. Consequently, most of the smaller drainageways flow mostly north or south.

Climate ?

Ellis County, in western Kansas, has a typical continental climate characterized by abundant sunshine, low humidity, moderate winds, cold winters, warm to hot summers, light winter precipitation, and a pronounced rainfall peak late in spring and in summer.

Western Kansas is in the rain shadow of the Rocky Mountains. This massive mountain barrier is an im-

9 By MERLE J, BROWN, climatologist for Kansas, National Weather Service, U.S. Department of Commerce.

portant climatic control along the western border of the State, but its effect gradually diminishes eastward. Thus, average annual precipitation increases from 16 inches over extreme western parts of Kansas to more than 40 inches in the southeastern corner of Kansas (3). Ellis County, which has an average of 23 inches of precipitation, is located in the drier part of the State.

The seasonal distribution of the rainfall is of great significance to farming. About 77 percent of the average annual precipitation falls during the growing season, April through September. The peak rainfall is in May, June, and July; precipitation averages more than 3 inches in each of those months. After the peak early in summer, precipitation gradually declines, and reaches a minimum average of 0.48 inch in January. Winter is very dry; only 9 percent of the annual precipitation occurs in December, January, and February.

As in most dry climates, precipitation in Ellis County is undependable. Rainfall varies widely from month to month and from year to year. Between 1868 and 1968, annual precipitation ranged from 9.21 inches in 1956 to 43.34 inches in 1951. Some months during the period of record received no measurable precipitation, but a few months had more than 10 inches. Dry periods of several months are not uncommon, and droughts extending over a period of years may occur at irregular intervals. Droughts were especially devastating in Ellis County in the 1930’s and from 1952 through 1956.

Much of the moisture falls during showers late in the afternoon or at night and during thundershowers in the warmer part of the year. Thunderstorms can be violent at times and are accompanied by heavy rain, large hailstones, strong winds, and tornadoes. Severe storms, however, are generally local, are short, and produce damage in a variable and spotted pattern. Hail damage, which varies widely from year to year, can be extensive if the hail occurs in May or June, before harvest. The heaviest hail generally occurs in wet years when the potential wheat yield is highest.

Because of the continental climate and dry air, daily and annual temperature ranges are rather wide (table 10). The dry air allows rapid rise in temperature during periods of sunshine and marked cooling at night. Occasional surges of cold, arctic air in winter contribute to the wide annual temperature range. Average monthly temperature at Hays varies from 29.0° F. in January to 78.9° in July. Temperature extremes for the period of record at Hays have ranged from —24°

The probabilities for the last freeze in spring and the first in fall in central Ellis County are given for five temperatures in table 11. The freeze-free period averages 171 days and extends from April 27 to October 15 (2). There is little crop loss from freezing weather in most years, but freezes late in spring occasionally damage winter wheat.

Snowfall is light, averaging about 20 inches per year. Winter snowfall has been as much as 58 inches, but more than 35 inches is unusual.

The prevailing wind is southerly. Average windspeed which is moderately strong in all seasons, reaches a maximum in spring. Average hourly windspeed in the windiest month, March, is about 15 miles per hour.

TABLE 10.—Temperature and precipitation

[From records at Hays, Kans.]

Temperature Two years in 10 will have at least 4 days with— Month Average Average daily daily maximum! | minimum! | Maximum Minimum temperature | temperature equal to or | equal to or higher lower than— than— °F oF oF °F

1 Period 1897-1960. 2 Period 1868-1960. 8 Period 19438-1967.

Precipitation One year in 10 will have—

Days with Average

Averaré snow cover depth of

total of 1.0 snow on

Less More inch or days that

than= than— more $ have a snow cover? Inches Inches Inches Number Inches

4 Average annual highest temperature for the period 1893-1967. 5 Average annual lowest temperature for the period 1893-1967.

TABLE 11.—Probabilities of last freezing temperatures in spring and first in fall

[Data for Hays, Kans.]

Dates for given probability and temperature

Except for an inadequate amount of rainfall in most growing seasons and occasional late-spring freezes, climatic conditions in Ellis County are generally favorable for successful crop production. The percentage of possible sunshine, the growing season temperature, and the seasonal distribution of precipitation all contribute to a high production potential for the area.

Water Supply

The municipal water supply of most cities and towns in Ellis County is from wells drilled along Big Creek or the Smoky Hill River, Although water supplies can be found along the Saline River, there are no munici-

palities along the river in Ellis County. Many of the upland areas of the county lack sufficient water, and wells are drilled into the alluvium of small streams that incise the uplands. Small amounts of water, enough for cattle and farmhouses, are generally found along these small drainageways. Areas underlain by clayey shale have little water at a shallow depth. Some deep wells have been drilled 100 to 500 feet into the Dakota Formation. These wells generally have water of poor quality that is poorly suited for livestock water. Good wells from the Dakota Formation can be obtained in some places.

A large number of large and small impoundments of water for livestock are in the county. There are many

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 83

good sites available for ponds. Where wells are not easily drilled, the water in the ponds is the only source of water for livestock.



Farming

In the early 1870’s Martin Allen, a horticulturist of some renown, planted the first large field of wheat in Ellis County. This was the beginning of wheat as the major crop in the county. Since that time no other crop has come close to being the major crop. In 1958, 143,000 acres of wheat was harvested. At that time wheat produced about 55 percent of the farm income in Ellis County. The sorghum harvest was 44,000 acres. Other crops produced were barley, oats, corn, and rye; sorghum for silage; and alfalfa and prairie grass for forage. The income from livestock and livestock products produced in 1958 represented about 33 percent of the total farm income (5).

In 1968, 141,000 acres of wheat was harvested, and this made up only 30 percent of the total farm income. About 18,000 acres of grain sorghum was harvested. The trend in farming in Ellis County is toward raising livestock, and about 54.5 percent of the total farm income is derived from the sale of livestock and livestock products and 45.5 percent from farm crops (6). The number of livestock, mainly feeder-stocker beef cattle, has been increasing, and the number of cattle fed out for the fat cattle market has increased. One large feedlot was started in 1968, northwest of Hays, and several smaller yards are in operation.

Feed supplies of alfalfa hay, sorghum and corn for silage, and sorghum for forage have been increased to take care of the increasing number of livestock. Wheat and sorghum stubble is used as supplemental forage in winter.

Less than 2 percent of the cultivated land is irrigated. Most of this land has been planted to corn for grain, corn and sorghum for silage, and sorghum for grain. In 1966, in the Cedar Bluffs Irrigation District, Irish potatoes were tried as a cash crop, but production was too low and they failed to be profitable. Sprinkler irrigation outside the irrigation district is used mostly for alfalfa.

In August 1945 the farmers and landowners organized the Ellis County Soil Conservation District. The district was formed to promote practices that conserve soil and water, such ag terracing, contour farming, stubble mulching, and using irrigation properly.

In 1954, 1,065 farms were in Ellis County, and the average size was about 540 acres. By 1964, the number of farms had decreased to 851 and the average size had increased to 680 acres.

Farming in this area has been aided by the Fort Hays Branch, Kansas Agricultural Experiment Station, which tests and approves new species of plants for use in the general area. Many new varieties of sorghum and some varieties of wheat have been developed by the experiment station.



Industry

Hays, the county seat, has mostly a farming community economy, but the economy is backed by the

buying power of the students from Fort Hays Kansas State College. The enrollment at the college in 1970 was about 5,500 students.

The main nonfarm enterprises since the 1930’s have been oil production, separation of oil and water at the pumping site, and transportation of crude oil. New industries include a medical products factory and a hydraulic cylinder factory.

Transportation and Markets

Improved roads run throughout the county. They are eet surfaced with sand and gravel or crushed limestone,

Interstate Highway 70 and U.S. Highway 40 cross the county from east to west, and U.S. Highway 183 crosses the county from north to south. All highways intersect at Hays. Other surfaced roads join small communities to the main highways. A major railroad passes through Ellis, Hays, Victoria, Walker and Toulon.

Most of the grain is marketed locally, and Ellis, Hays, Victoria, Toulon, Yocemento, and Walker have facilities for storing grain. The grain is shipped to terminal elevators by railroad and truck.

Hays has a sales barn where many of the beef cattle, dairy cattle, and hogs are marketed.

Community Facilities

About 16 elementary schools, 5 high schools, and 1 college are in the county. In June 1902 Fort Hays Normal School, the forerunner of Fort Hays Kansas State College, opened. The college has about 3,600 acres of land in Ellis County, part of the old Fort Hays Military Reservation. The rest of the land of the former reservation is occupied by the Fort Hays Branch, Kansas Agricultural Experiment Station, which is one of the largest dryland experimental stations in the world.

Churches are located at Hays, Schoenchen, Ellis, Pfeifer, Victoria, Catharine, Severin, and Walker, Two hospitals are in Hays.



Literature Cited

(1) AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF STATE HIGHWAY OFFICIALS. 1961. STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR HIGHWAY MATERIALS AND METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TESTING. Ed. 8, 2 v., illus. (2) Bark, L. D. 1959. WHEN TO EXPECT LATE-SPRING AND EARLY-FALL FREEZES IN KANSAS. Agr. Expt. Sta. and Kans. State Univ. Agr. and Applied Sci. Bul. 413, 23 pp., illus,

1961. RAINFALL PATTERNS IN KANSAS. Kans. State Univ. Agr. and Applied Sci., Kans. Agr. Situation Reprint No. 9, 4 pp., illus.

(4) Frve, JoHN C., and LEONARD, A. BYRON.

1952. PLEISTOCENE GEOLOGY OF KANSAS. Univ. of Kansas., oa Geol. Survey of Kans., Bul. 99, 230 pp., ulus.

(5) Kansas STATE BOARD OF AGRICULTURE. 1958. FARM FACTS, 1957-58. 89 pp., illus. ( 1969, 52ND KANSAS AGRICULTURE REPORT, 1968-69. pp., illus.

84 SOIL SURVEY

(7) PorTLAND CEMENT ASSOCIATION, 1962. PCA SOIL PRIMER. 52 pp., illus. (8) Srtmonson, Roy W. 1962. SOIL CLASSIFICATION IN THE UNITED STATES. 187: 1027-1034, illus. (9) UNITED States DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. 1951. SOIL SURVEY MANUAL. Agr. Handbook 18, 503 pp., illus. [Supplement issued in May 1962]

Sci.

1960. SOIL CLASSIFICATION, A COMPREHENSIVE SYSTEM, 7TH APPROXIMATION. 265 pp., illus. [Supplement issued in March 1967 and September 1968] (11) Stare Sor, AND WaTEeR CONSERVATION NEEDS COMMITTEE, 1961. KANSAS SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION NEEDS INVENTORY. 164 pp., illus. [Revised 1966-67] (12) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. 1962. UNIFIED SOIL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM FOR ROADS, AIRFIELDS, EMBANKMENTS, AND FOUNDATIONS. MILSTD-619A, 13 pp., illus.



Glossary

Aggregate, soil. Many fine particles held in a single mass or cluster. Natural soil aggregates such as crumbs, blocks, or prisms, are called peds. Clods are aggregates produced by tillage or logging.

Alluvium. Soil material, such as sand, silt, or clay, that has been deposited on land by streams.

Available water capacity (also termed available moisture capacity). The capacity of soils to hold water available for use by most plants. It is commonly defined as the difference between the amount of soil water at field capacity and the amount at wilting point. It is commonly expressed as inches of water per inch of soil.

Caleareous soil. A soil containing enough calcium carbonate (often with magnesium carbonate) to effervesce (fizz) visibly when treated with cold, dilute hydrochloric acid.

Caliche. A more or less cemented deposit of calcium carbonate in many soils of warm-temperate areas, as in the Southwestern States. The material may consist of soft, thin layers in the soil or of hard, thick beds just beneath the solum, or it may be exposed at the surface by erosion.

Channery soil. A soil that contains thin, flat fragments of sandstone, limestone, or schist, as much as 6 inches in length along the longer axis. A single piece is called a fragment.

Chalk. Very soft, white to light-gray, unindurated limestone.

Clay. As a soil separate, the mineral soil particles less than 0.002 millimeter in diameter. As a soil textural class, soil material that is 40 percent or more clay, less than 45 percent sand, and less than 40 percent silt.

Chlorosis. Yellowing between veins on upper foilage resulting from chlorophyll deficiency. Many factors, including heredity, cause chlorosis.

Colluvium. Soil material, rock fragments, or both, moved by eae slide, or local wash and deposited at the base of steep slopes.

Concretions. Grains, pellets, or nodules of various sizes, shapes, and colors consisting of concentrations of compounds, or of soil grains cemented together, The composition of some coneretions is unlike that of the surrounding soil. Calcium carbonate and iron oxide are examples of material commonly found in concretions.

Consistence, soil. The feel of the soil and the ease with which a lump can be crushed by the fingers. Terms commonly used to describe consistence are—

Loose.—Noncoherent when dry or moist; does not hold together in a mass,

Friable—When moist, crushes easily under gentle pressure between thumb and forefinger and can be pressed together into a lump.

Firm.—When moist, crushes under moderate pressure between ry and forefinger, but resistance is distinctly noticeable.

Plastic—When wet, readily deformed by moderate pressure but can be pressed into a lump; will form a “wire” when rolled between thumb and forefinger.

Sticky—When wet, adheres to other material, and tends to stretch somewhat and pull apart, rather than to pull free from other material.

Hard.—When dry, moderately resistant to pressure; can be broken with difficulty between thumb and forefinger. Soft-——When dry, breaks into powder or individual grains

under very slight pressure.

Cemented.—Hard and brittle; little affected by moistening.

Drainage class (natural). Refers to the conditions of frequency and duration of periods of saturation or partial saturation that existed during the development of the soil, as opposed to altered drainage, which is commonly the result of artificial drainage or irrigation but may be caused by the sudden deepening of channels or the blocking of drainage outlets. Seven different classes of natural soil drainage are recognized.

Excessively drained soils are commonly very porous and rapidly permeable and have a low water-holding capacity.

Somewhat excessively drained soils are also very permeable and are free from mottling throughout their profile.

Well-drained soils are nearly free from mottling and are commonly of intermediate texture,

Moderately well drained soils commonly have a slowly permeable layer in or immediately beneath the solum. They have uniform color in the A and upper B horizons and have mottling in the lower B and the C horizons.

Somewhat poorly drained soils are wet for significant periods but not all the time, and some soils commonly have mottling at a depth below 6 to 16 inches.

Poorly drained soils are wet for long periods and are light gra and generally mottled from the surface downward, mithengn mottling may be absent or nearly so in some soils,

Very poorly drained soils are wet all the time. They have a dark-gray or black surface layer and are gray or light gray, with or without mottling, in the deeper parts of the profile.

Eolian soil material. Earthy parent materia] accumulated through wind action; commonly refers to sandy material in dunes or to loess in blankets on the surface.

Fallow. Cropland left idle in order to restore productivity, mainly through accumulation of water, nutrients, or both. Summer fallow is a common stage before cereal grain in regions of limited rainfall. The soil is tilled for at least one growing season to control weeds, to aid decomposition of plant residues, and to encourage the storage of moisture for the succeeding grain crop.

Fragipan. A loamy, brittle, subsurface horizon that is very low in organic-matter content and clay but is rich in silt or very fine sand. The layer is seemingly cemented. When dry, it is hard or very hard and has a high bulk density in comparison with the horizon or horizons above it. When moist, the fragipan tends to rupture suddenly if pressure is applied, rather than to deform slowly. The layer is generally mottled, is slowly or very slowly permeable to water, and has few or many bleached fracture planes that form polygons. Fragipans are a few inches to several feet thick; they generally occur below the B horizon, 15 to 40 inches below the surface.

Gravelly. Containing from 15 to 50 percent, by volume, rounded or angular rock fragments that are not prominently flattened and are up to 3 inches in diameter.

Ground water (geology). Water that fills all the unblocked pores of underlying material below the water table, which is the upper limit of saturation.

Horizon, soil. A layer of soil, approximately parallel to the surface, that has distinct characteristics produced by soilforming processes. These are the major horizons:

O horizon.—The layer of organic matter on the surface of a mineral soil. This layer consists of decaying plant residues.

A horizon.—The mineral horizon at the surface or just below an O horizon. This horizon is the one in which living organisms are most active and therefore is marked by the accumulation of humus. The horizon may have lost one or more of soluble salts, clay, and sesquioxides (iron and aluminum oxides).

B horizon—The mineral horizon below an A horizon. The B horizon is in part a layer of change from the overlying A to the underlying C horizon. The B horizon also has distinctive characteristics caused (1) by accumulation of clay, sesquioxides, humus, or some combination of these;

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 85

(2) by prismatic or blocky structure; (3) by redder or stronger colors than the A horizon; or (4) some combination of these. Combined A and B horizons are usually called the solum, or true soil. If a soil lacks a B horizon, the A horizon alone is the solum.

C horizon—The weathered rock material immediately beneath the solum, In most soils this material is presumed to be like that from which the overlying horizons were formed. If the material is known to be different from that in the solum, a Roman numeral precedes the letter C.

R layer.—Consolidated rock beneath the soil. The rock usually underlies a C horizon but may be immediately beneath an A or B horizon.

Intake rate. The rate at which water enters the soil.

Internal soi} drainage. The downward movement of water through the soil profile. The rate of movement is determined by the texture, structure, and other characteristics of the soil profile and underlying layers, and by height of the water table, either permanent or perched. Relative terms for expressing internal drainage are none, very slow, slow, medium, rapid, and very rapid.

Irrigation. Application of water to soils to assist in production of crops. Methods of irrigation are—

Border.—Water is applied at the upper end of a strip in which the lateral flow of water is controlled by small earth ridges called border dikes, or borders.

Basin.—Water is applied rapidly to relatively level plots surrounded by levees or dikes.

Controlled flooding —Water is released at intervals from closely spaced field ditches and distributed uniformly over the field.

Corrugation.—Water is applied to small, closely spaced furrows or ditches in fields of close-growing crops, or in orchards, to confine the flow of water to one direction.

Furrow.—Water is applied in small ditches made by cultivation implements used for tree and row crops.

Sprinkler——Water is sprayed over the soil surface through pipes or nozzles from a pressure system.

Subirrigation.—Water is applied in open ditches or tile lines

until the water table is raised enough to wet the soil.

Wild flooding.—Irrigation water, released at high points, flows onto the field without controlled distribution.

Leveling (of land). The reshaping, or modification, of the soil surface to a planned grade to permit uniform distribution of irrigation water without erosion or to provide proper surface drainage.

Leaching. The removal of soluble materials from soils or other material by percolating water.

Limestone. A rock which consists dominantly of calcium carbonate. Numerous kinds exist in accordance with impurities present, physical variations in texture, and hardness.

Loam. The textural class of soil that contains 7 to 27 percent clay, 28 to 50 percent silt, and less than 52 percent sand.

Loess, Fine-grained material, dominantly of silt-sized particles, that has been deposited by wind.

Mottling, soil. Irregularly marked with spots of different colors that vary in number and size. Mottling in soils usually indicates poor aeration and Jack of drainage. Descriptive terms are as follows: Abundance—few, common, and many; size— fine, medium, and coarse; and contrast—faint, distinct, and prominent. The size measurements are these: fine, less than 5 millimeters (about 0.2 inch) in diameter along the greatest dimension; medium, ranging from 5 millimeters to 15 millimeters (about 0.2 to 0.6 inch) in diameter along the greatest dimension; and coarse, more than 15 millimeters (about 0.6 inch) in diameter along the greatest dimension.

Parent material. Disintegrated and partly weathered rock from which soil has formed.

Ped. An individual natural soil aggregate, such as a crumb, a prism, or a block, in contrast to a clod.

Permeability. The quality that enables the soil to transmit water or air. Terms used to describe permeability are as follows: very slow, slow, moderately slow, moderate, moderately rapid, rapid, and very rapid.

pH value. A numerical means for designating acidity and alkallinity in soils. A pH value of 7.0 indicates precise neutrality; a higher value, alkalinity; and a lower value, acidity.

Poorly graded. A soil material consisting mainly of particles of nearly the same size. Because there is little difference in size of the particles in poorly graded soil material, density can be increased only slightly by compaction.

Profile, soil. A vertical section of the soil through all its horizons and extending into the parent material.

Reaction, soil. The degree of acidity or alkalinity of a soil, expressed in pH values. A soil that tests to pH 7.0 is precisely neutral in reaction because it is neither acid nor alkaline. An acid, or “sour”, soil is one that gives an acid reaction; an alkaline soil is one that is alkaline in reaction. ne words, the degrees of acidity or alkalinity are expressed thus:

Saline soil. A soil that contains soluble salts in amounts that impair growth of plants but that does not contain excess exchangeable sodium.

Sand. Individual rock or mineral fragments in a soil that range in diameter from 0.05 to 2.0 millimeters, Most sand grains consist of quartz, but they may be of any mineral composition. The textural class name of any soil that contains 85 percent or more sand and not more than 10 percent clay.

Shale. A sedimentary rock formed by the hardening of clay deposits.

Silt. Individual mineral particles in a soil that range in diameter from the upper limit of clay (0.002 millimeter) to the lower limit of every fine sand (0.05 millimeter). Soil of the silt textural class is 80 percent or more silt and less than 12 percent clay.

Soil. A natural, three-dimensional body on the earth’s surface that supports plants and that has properties resulting from the integrated effect of climate and living matter acting on earthy parent material, as conditioned by relief over periods of time.

Soil separates. Mineral particles, less than 2 millimeters in equivalent diameter and ranging between specified size limits. The names and sizes of separates recognized in the United States are as follows: Very coarse sand (2.0 to 1.0 millimeter); coarse sand (1.0 to 0.5 millimeter); medium sand (0.5 to 0.25 millimeter); fine sand (0.25 to 0.10 millimeter); very fine sand (0.10 to 0.05 millimeter); sit (0.05 to 0.002 millimeter); and clay (less than 0.002 millimeter). The separates recognized by the International Society of Soil Science are as follows: I (2.0 to 0.2 millimeter); IT (0.2 to 0.02 drerweeed|: TI (0.02 to 0.002 millimeter); IV (less than 0.002 millimeter).

Solum. The upper part of a soil profile, above the parent material, in which the processes of soil formation are active. The solum in mature soil includes the A and B horizons. Generally, the characteristics of the material in these horizons are unlike those of the underlying material. The living roots and other plant and animal life characteristic of the soil are largely confined to the solum.

Structure, soil. The arrangement of primary soil particles into compound particles or clusters that are separated from adjoining aggregates and have properties unlike those of an equal mass of unaggregated primary soil particles. The principal forms of soil structure are—platy (laminated), prismatic (vertical axis of aggregates longer than horizontal), columnar (prisms with rounded tops), blocky (angular or subangular), and granular. Structureless soils are either single grain (each grain by itself, as in dune saind) or massive (the particles adhering together without any regular cleavage, as in many claypans and hardpans).

Subsoil. Technically, the B horizon; roughly, the part of the solum below plow depth.

86 SOIL SURVEY

Surface layer. A term used in nontechnical soil descriptions for one or more layers above the subsoil. Includes the A horizon and part of the B horizon; has no depth limit.

Texture, soil. The relative proportions of sand, silt, and clay particles in a mass of soil. The basic textural classes, in order of increasing proportion of fine particles, are sand, loamy sand, sandy loam, loam, silt loam, silt, sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty elay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, and clay. The sand, loamy sand, and sandy loam classes may be further divided by specifying “coarse,” “fine,” or “very fine.”

Tilth, soil. The condition of the soil in relation to the growth of plants, especially soil structure. Good tilth refers to the friable state and is associated with high noncapillary porosity and stable, granular structure. A soil in poor tilth is nonfriable, hard, nonaggregated, and difficult to till.

Topsoil. A presumed fertile soil or soil material, or one that responds to fertilization, ordinarily rich in organic matter, used to topdress roadbanks, lawns, and gardens.

Underlying material. Layers below the subsoil; roughly the C horizon and below.

Water table. The highest part of the soil or underlying rock material that is wholly saturated with water, In some places an upper, or perched, water table may be separated from a lower one by a dry zone.

Weathering. All physical and chemical changes produced in rocks at or near the earth’s surface by atmospheric agents. These changes result in more or less complete disintegration and decomposition of the rock.

Well-graded soil. A soil or soil material consisting of particles that are well distributed over a wide range in size or diameter. Such a soil normally can be easily increased in density and bearing properties by compaction. Contrasts with poorly graded soil.

Workability, soil. The relative amount of work required to till the soil and the relative difficulty in using farm machinery.

