B21t—16 to 23 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) silty clay;. very dark grayish brown (10YR 8/2) moist; moderate, medium and fine, subangular blocky structure; very hard, very firm; clay films occur on ped faces and as fillings in pores; common fine and medium roots; slightly acid; clear, smooth boundary.

B22t—23 to 29 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) silty clay; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate, medium, subangular and angular blocky structure; very hard, very firm; few fine and medium roots; clay films occur as coatings on peds and as fillings in pores; neutral; clear, smooth boundary.

B38lca—29 to 34 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; moderate, medium, angular blocky structure; very hard, very firm; few fine and medium roots; some lime concretions minute to % inch in diameter; matrix calcareous; mildly alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

B32ca—34 to 41 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak, medium, angular blocky structure; hard, firm; few fine roots; many masses of lime, “4 inch or less in diameter; slightly effervescent; mildly alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

C—41 to 68 inches, pale-brown (10YR 6/3) silty clay loam, brown (10YR 5/3) moist; weak, coarse, prismatic structure; hard, friable; segregated calcium carbonate in root channels and pores; neutral.

The A horizon ranges from silt loam to silty clay loam in texture and from very dark gray to grayish brown in color. The upper layers that are dark grayish brown or darker range from 20 to 80 inches in combined thickness. These colors are throughout the A horizon and extend into the upper part of the B horizon. The B2t horizon is silty clay that averages between 45 to 52 percent clay. The B2t horizon ranges from dark grayish brown to pale brown in color. The depth to lime concretions or a calcareous matrix ranges from 25 to 40 inches.

Crete soils are associated with Harney, Carlson, and Armo soils. They have a more clayey and firm B2t horizon than Harney and Carlson soils. They are dark colored to a greater depth, and contain less carbonates in the solum than Armo soils and they have a B2t horizon which those soils lack. They lack the concentration of carbonates below the B2t horizon that is present in Carlson soils.

Crete silty clay loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (Cr).—This nearly level to slightly depressional soil is on uplands. It has the profile described as representative for the series.

Ineluded with this soil in mapping were small areas of Harney silt loam and Harney silty clay loam. Also included were areas of small depressions and eroded spots, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is slow, and ponding occurs in depressions. The clayey subsoil makes this soil droughty during periods of low rainfall. Soil blowing is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Good management of crop residue through stubble mulching helps to control soil blowing and maintain good tilth in the surface layer. Terraces and contouring help to control water erosion on long slopes. Capability unit IIs-1; Clay Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Crete silty clay loam, thin surface variant, 0 to 1 percent slopes (Ct).—This soil is in somewhat depressional areas on uplands. It has a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but the surface layer is thinner and the soil is calcareous at a shallower depth.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Harney silt loam and Harney silty clay loam. Also included were small depressional and eroded spots, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is slow, and some ponding occurs in depressions. The clayey subsoil makes this soil droughty during periods of low rainfall. Water erosion is a hazard on long slopes, and soil blowing is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are in wheat and sorghum. Good management of crop residue through stubble mulching helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, increase the content of organic matter, and maintain good tilth. Terraces and contour farming help to control water erosion on long slopes. Capability unit Ils-2; Clay Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Detroit Series

The Detroit series consists of deep, well-drained soils that formed in silty calcareous alluvium. These nearly level and gently undulating soils are on terraces along the major streams of the county.

In a representative profile the surface layer is about 16 inches thick. The upper 12 inches is very dark grayish-brown silt loam, and the lower 4 inches is very dark grayish-brown light silty clay loam. The subsoil is about 32 inches thick. The upper 10 inches is dark grayish-brown, firm light silty clay; the next 8 inches is brown, firm, caleareous heavy silty clay loam; the lower 14 inches is pale-brown, calcareous, firm silty clay loam.

_The underlying material is light-gray, calcareous silt loam.

: Permeability is slow, and available water capacity is high. Most areas of these soils are cultivated, but a few small areas are in native grass. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops, but some alfalfa is also grown.

Representative profile of Detroit silt loam, in native grass, 700 feet south and 300 feet east of the northwest corner of sec. 11, T. 15 8., R. 17 W.:

Al-—0 to 12 inches, very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) silt loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; many fine and medium roots; porous; few nests of worm casts; neutral; clear, smooth boundary.

A3—12 to 16 inches, very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) light silty clay loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; moderate, fine, subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; few fine and medium roots; porous; few nests of worm casts; silt coatings on ped faces; neutral; clear, smooth boundary.

B21t—16 to 26 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) light silty clay, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate, fine and medium, subangular blocky structure; very hard, firm; few fine roots mostly following cracks or ped faces; few fine open

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 23

pores; few worm casts; mildly alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

B22tca—26 to 34 inches, brown (10YR 5/8) heavy silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (LOYR 4/2) moist; weak, coarse, prismatic structure parting to moderate, medium, subangular blocky; hard, firm; few fine roots; common fine pores; many soft masses of segregated lime; weakly effervescent; mildly alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

B3tca—34 to 48 inches, pale-brown (10YR 6/8) silty clay loam, brown (10YR 5/3) moist; weak, coarse, prismatic structure parting to weak, medium and coarse, subangular blocky; hard, firm; few fine and medium roots; many open pores; many soft masses of segregated lime; strongly effervescent; mildly alkaline; diffuse, smooth boundary.

C—48 to 63 inches, light-gray (10YR 7/2) silt loam, pale brown (10YR 6/3) moist; weak, coarse, prismatic structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; very porous, many large open pores; few worm casts; few threads of segregated lime; weakly effervescent; mildly alkaline.

The A horizon ranges from silt loam to silty clay loam in texture and from grayish brown to very dark grayish brown in color. The B21t horizon ranges from silty clay loam to silty clay. The color is dark grayish brown or darker to a depth of 20 to 50 inches. The depth to free carbonates ranges from 22 inches to about 50 inches.

The Detroit soils are associated with Hord, Roxbury, MeCook, New Cambria, and Eltree soils. They have a clayey B2t horizon that is lacking in Hord, Roxbury, New Cambria, McCook, and Eltree soils. They are leached of carbonates to about the same depth as Hord soils but are more deeply leached of carbonates than Roxbury, McCook, and Eltree soils. They have a less clayey A horizon than New Cambria soils and are on terraces below those soils.

Detroit silt loam (0 to 2 percent slopes) (De).—This nearly level and gently undulating soil is on terraces along the major streams in the county.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Hord, Roxbury, and McCook soils. Also included were a few small areas of soils similar to Detroit soils but calcareous throughout. Areas of small depressions are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is slow, and a few areas are ponded. There are no hazards except occasional flooding in a few low-lying areas.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops, but some alfalfa also is grown. Good crop residue management through stubble mulching increases the water intake rate and helps to maintain good tilth. The potential for irrigation is high if water is available. A few acres of this soil are irrigated. Capability unit I-2; Loamy Terrace range site; windbreak suitability group 1.

Eltree Series

The Eltree series consists of deep, well-drained soils that formed in calcareous, silty, colluvial-alluvial sediment. These nearly level to strongly sloping soils are on high terraces and sides of valleys.

In a representative profile the surface layer is grayish-brown silt loam about 26 inches thick. The subsoil is about 23 inches thick. The upper part is grayish-brown, friable heavy silt loam about 9 inches thick; and the lower part is light brownish-gray, firm light silty clay loam about 14 inches thick. The underlying material is pale-brown light silty clay loam.

Permeability is moderate, and available water capacity is high. Most areas of the nearly level to sloping soils are cultivated. Most areas of the strongly sloping soils are in native grass and are used for range. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops.

Representative profile of Eltree silt loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes, in a cultivated field, 1,700 feet south and 3,800 feet east of the northwest corner of sec. 35, T.15S., R. 18 W.:

A11—0 to 10 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) silt loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; weak, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine and medium roots; many fine pores; many nests of worm casts; weakly effervescent; mildly alkaline; clear, smooth boundary,

A12—10 to 19 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; common fine and medium roots; common fine and medium pores; common nests of worm casts; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

A13—19 to 26 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) silt loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 8/2) moist; weak, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine and medium roots; common fine and medium open pores; common nests of worm casts; strongly effervescent; several spots and threads of calcium carbonate; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

B21ca—26 to 35 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) heavy silt loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak, medium, subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; few fine roots; common fine and large pores; common nests of worm casts; several spots an threads of calcium carbonate; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

B22ca—35 to 49 inches, light brownish-gray (1ovR 6/2) light silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; moderate, medium, subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; few fine roots; common fine and medium pores; many soft masses and threads and a few small concretions of lime; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

C—49 to 63 inches, pale-brown (10YR 6/3) light silty clay loam, brown (10YR 5/8) moist; structureless; hard, firm; few concretions and common soft masses and threads of lime; weakly effervescent; moderately alkaline.

The solum ranges from 35 to 60 inches in thickness but is typically 40 to 50 inches thick. The A horizon ranges from loam to silty clay loam. The color is dark grayish brown or darker to a depth of 20 to 40 inches. The B horizon ranges from loam to silty clay loam in texture and from grayish brown to very pale brown in color. The C horizon ranges from light brownish gray to very pale brown in color and is loam, silt loam, or silty clay loam. The soil is typically calcareous throughout, but it is noncalcareous to a depth of 15 inches in some places.

Eltree soils are near Armo, Holdrege, Anselmo, Wakeen, Detroit, Hord, and Roxbury soils. They are deeper to bedrock than Wakeen soils. Their dark A horizon is thicker and more silty than that of Armo soils, and they contain less gravel and sand below the solum than those soils. They are calcareous at a lesser depth than Hord or Detroit soils. They lack the B2t horizon present in Detroit soils and contain less clay than those soils. They have more evident zones of lime accumulation and less evident stratification than Roxbury soils. They lack the B2t horizon present in Holdrege soils. They are more silty than Anselmo soils.

Eltree silt loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (Ee).—This soil is on smooth, old, high terraces on valley sides along the major streams of the county. It has the profile described as representative for the series.

24 SOIL SURVEY

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Harney, Holdrege, and Armo soils. Also included were small areas of soils that are similar to Eltree soils but that have silty clay layers in the subsoil or below.

Runoff is slow. Lack of rainfall is the main limitation to the use of this soil.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated. The main crops are wheat and sorghum, but some alfalfa is also grown. Good management of crop residue through stubble mulching helps to control soil blowing, increase water infiltration, and improve tilth. This soil has a good potential for irrigation if water is available. Capability unit IIc-1; Limy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 3.

Eltree silt loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (Ef).—This soil is on old, high alluvial terraces and valley sides.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Armo, Holdrege, Harney, Anselmo, and Wakeen soils and Hilly land. Also included were small areas of soils that are similar to Eltree soils, except that the surface layer is dark grayish brown or darker and is less than 10 inches thick. There are also small eroded areas, rock outcrops, and sand spots, which are shown on the soil map by symbols.

Runoff is medium. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Terraces, waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Stubble mulching or good management of crop residue helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. The soil has a good potential for irrigation. It can be bench leveled or sprinkler irrigated if water is available. Capability unit IIe-1; Limy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 3.

Eltree silt loam, 3 to 7 percent slopes (Eg).—This soil is on old alluvial terraces and valley sides along the major streams in the county. It hag a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but the surface layer is slightly thinner.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Armo, Brownell, Wakeen, Anselmo, Roxbury, and McCook soils and Hilly land. Also included_are areas of soils that have a texture similar to that of Eltree soils but are noncaleareous to a depth of 15 to 25 inches and small areas of soils that have a surface layer 10 inches or less thick, There are also eroded areas, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is medium to rapid. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated. Wheat and grain sorghum are the main crops. A small acreage is in native grass and is used for range. Terraces, waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Stubble mulching or good management of crop residue helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. Capability unit I[Ie-1; Limy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 3.

Eltree silt loam, 7 to 15 percent slopes (Eh).—This soil is on old, high alluvial terraces and valley sides along the major streams in the county. Slopes are convex. This soil has a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but the aaa layer is thinner and the subsoil contains less clay.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Armo, McCook, Roxbury, Wakeen, Penden, Brownell, and Campus soils and Hilly land. Also included are areas of soils that are similar to Eltree soils but that have a dark surface layer less than 20 inches thick.

Runoff is rapid. Water erosion is a severe hazard in cultivated areas or if range is overgrazed or is left bare.

Nearly all the acreage of this soil is in native grass, to which it is well suited. Proper rate of stocking, deferred grazing, and rotation grazing help to improve range condition. Suitable sites for water impoundments are generally available. Capability unit VIe-1; Limy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 3.

Harney Series

The Harney series consists of deep, well-drained soils that formed in calcareous, medium-textured loess. These soils are nearly level to sloping and are on uplands.

In a representative profile the surface layer is 10 inches thick. The upper 6 inches is dark grayishbrown silt loam, and the lower 4 inches is dark grayish-brown light silty clay loam. The subsoil is about 30 inches thick. The upper 9 inches is grayishbrown, firm heavy silty clay loam; the next 11 inches is grayish-brown, firm light silty clay; and the lower 10 inches is light brownish-gray, calcareous, friable heavy silty clay loam. The underlying material is light brownish-gray light silty clay loam in the upper 19 inches and light-gray silt loam below (fig. 15).

Permeability is moderately slow, and available water capacity is high. Most areas of the nearly level and gently sloping soils are cultivated. About 60 percent of the sloping areas is cultivated, and 40 percent is in native grass and is used for range.

Representative profile of Harney silt loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes, in a cultivated field, 1,000 feet west and 150 feet south of the northeast corner of sec. 34, T. 12S, R. 18 W.:

A1—0 to 6 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; weak, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; many fine roots; few worm casts; neutral; clear, smooth boundary.

A3—6 to 10 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) light silty clay loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; moderate, medium and fine, subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; few fine roots; few worm casts; neutral; clear, smooth boundary.

B21t—10 to 19 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) heavy silty clay loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate, medium and fine, subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; few fine roots; neutral; clear, smooth boundary,

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 25

Figure 15.—Profile of Harney silt loam, 0 10 1 percent slopes.

B22t—19 to 30 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) light silty clay, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; moderate, medium and fine, blocky structure; very hard, firm; shiny surfaces on peds; neutral; clear, smooth boundary.

B8ca—-30 to 40 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) heavy silty clay loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2)

moist; moderate, medium, prismatic structure breaking to moderate, medium, blocky; hard, friable; many carbonate concretions; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

Clea—40 to 48 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) light silty clay loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) moist; weak, coarse, prismatic structure breaking to weak, medium, blocky; slightly hard, friable; many carbonate concretions; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; diffuse, smooth boundary.

C2ca—48 to 59 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) light silty clay loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) moist; weak, coarse, prismatic structure; slightly hard, friable; many carbonate concretions; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; diffuse, smooth boundary.

C8ca—59 to 74 inches, light-gray (10YR 7/2) silt loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) moist; massive; slightly hard, friable; thin films of lime and common carbonate concretions, weakly effervescent; moderately alkaline.

The solum ranges from 30 to 54 inches in thickness. The Al and A3 horizons combined range from 7 to 16 inches in thickness. The Al horizon ranges from silt loam to light silty clay loam in texture and from dark grayish brown to brown in color. The A horizon is slightly acid or neutral. The B2t horizon ranges from silty clay loam to silty clay, and the upper 20 inches is 35 to 42 percent clay. The Bt horizon ranges from neutral to moderately alkaline in reaction and from grayish brown to pale brown in color. The Ceca horizon is calcareous loess in most places, but in some places, where the loess mantle is thin, contrasting material occurs below a depth of 40 inches. Depth to free carbonates ranges from 18 to 80 inches. The C horizon ranges from neutral to moderately alkaline.

Harney soils are near Carlson, Mento, Crete, Holdrege, Corinth, and Wakeen soils. They have a less clayey Bt horizon than Crete soils and are darkened to a lesser depth. They lack the highly calcareous layers below the B2t horizon of Carlson soils. They are more clayey than Armo and Wakeen soils and have a clayey B2t horizon. They have a darker A horizon than Corinth soils and are not restricted in depth by clay shale. They have a more clayey and firm B2t horizon than Holdrege soils. They are deeper and contain less sodium than Mento soils.

Harney silt loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (Ha).—This soil is on tablelands. It has the profile described as representative for the series.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Crete, Carlson, and Wakeen soils. Also included were small depressions and eroded areas, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

This soil is limited mainly by droughtiness. Runoff is slow. There is a slight hazard of water erosion on long slopes and a hazard of soil blowing if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated, but a few small areas are in native grass. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops, but some alfalfa is also grown. Good management of crop residue through stubble mulching helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and improve tilth. This soil is well suited to leveling for flood irrigation. Capability unit IIc-2; Loamy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Harney silt loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (Hb).—This soil is on ridgetops and broad tablelands. It has a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but the surface layer is about 12 inches thick and the subsoil is about 27 inches thick.

26 SOIL SURVEY

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Carlson, Holdrege, Mento, Armo, Crete, and Wakeen soils. Also included were small areas of soils that are similar to Harney soils but are leached of carbonates to a depth of 30 to 86 inches. There are also small eroded areas, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is medium. Water erosion is a hazard, and soil blowing also is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops, but a small amount of alfalfa is also grown. Terracing, constructing waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue through stubble mulching helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. This soil is suited to land leveling for flood irrigation. Capability unit IIe-2; Loamy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Harney silt loam, 3 to 7 percent slopes (Hc).—This soil has convex slopes. It has a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but the surface layer is as much as 16 inches thick in areas of native grass where soil material washed from higher lying eroded soils has accumulated. In other areas, where this soil has been cultivated and not protected from erosion, the surface layer is as thin as 8 inches.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Carlson, Armo, Campus, Eltree, and Wakeen soils. Also included were some small areas of eroded soils and rock outerops, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is medium to rapid. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

About 60 percent of the acreage of this soil is cultivated. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. About 40 percent of the acreage of this soil is in native grass, to which it is well suited. Terracing, constructing waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue through the use of stubble mulching helps to control soil blowing, reduce evaporation, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. Proper rate of stocking, rotation grazing, deferred grazing, and cross fencing help to maintain a good range condition. The proper placement of salt and water helps to maintain a better distribution of grazing. Capability unit Ille-2; Loamy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Harney silty clay loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes, eroded (Hd).—This soil is on rounded hills along drainageways and drainheads in the uplands. It has a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but the surface layer is 2 to 6 inches thick. Tillage has mixed the material in the surface layer with that in the subsoil. In some places all of the original surface layer has been removed by erosion, and the present surface layer consists entirely of subsoil material. Depth to calcareous material is about 4 inches less than in the representative profile. In some

places the layers below the subsoil are brown or dark brown.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Armo, Mento, Wakeen, and Corinth soils and small areas of Harney silt loam and Mento silty clay loam. Also included were areas of soils that are similar to this Harney soil but are calcareous between depths of 12 and 18 inches. There are also small severely eroded spots, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is rapid. Water erosion is a severe hazard in cultivated areas, and soil blowing is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

About 70 percent of the acreage of this soil is cultivated. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. About 30 percent has been reseeded to native grass or is in native grass. Terracing, constructing waterways, contour farming, and stubble mulching help to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, reduce evaporation, and prevent surface sealing. Planting close-grown crops rather than row crops also helps to control erosion. Crops respond well to nitrogen and phosphate. Capability unit IlJe-5; Loamy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Harney-Armo complex, 3 to 7 percent slopes, eroded (He) This complex is along sloping drainageways on tablelands where thin deposits of loess cover calcareous colluvium and outwash from limestone. About 45 percent of this complex is Harney soils, 45 percent is Armo soils, and 10 percent is included soils. About 40 percent of the acreage of Harney soils is moderately eroded, Some small areas of Harney soils are underlain by chalky limestone or chalky shale at a depth of 36 to 60 inches. About 55 percent of the acreage of Armo soils is moderately eroded.

Included with these soils in mapping were small areas of Wakeen, Corinth, Bogue, and Campus soils and Roxbury silt loam, frequently flooded. Also included are small severely eroded spots and rock outcrops, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is rapid. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if these soils are left bare.

Most areas of these soils are cultivated, but a small acreage is in native grass. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Terracing, constructing waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Planting close-grown drilled crops rather than row crops where terraces cannot be used helps to contro] erosion, Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. Planting these areas to grass and keeping them in grass for a period of years also help to reduce water erosion and soil blowing. Both soils in capability unit IVe-4; Harney soils in Loamy Upland range site and windbreak suitability group 2; Armo soils in Limy Upland range site and windbreak suitability group 8.

Harney-Carlson silt loams, 0 to 1 percent slopes (Hf).— This complex is on uplands. Areas of this complex are 40 to 60 percent Harney soils, 25 to 40 percent

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 27

Carlson soils, and 5 to 15 percent Armo soils or Campus soils. The Harney soils have a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but in a few small areas they are underlain by sandy loam or are noncalcareous below a depth of 30 inches. The Carlson soils have a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series.

Included with these soils in mapping were small areas of Armo and Campus soils. Armo soils are mostly in the eastern part of the county, and Campus soils are mostly in the western part. Also included were small depressions, eroded areas, and rock outcrops, which are shown on the soil map by symbols.

Runoff is slow. These soils are limited mainly by droughtiness. Soil blowing is a hazard if these soils are left bare.

Most areas of this complex are cultivated. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase water intake, and maintain good tilth. This complex is suitable for land leveling for flood irrigation if water is available. Capability unit IIc-2; Loamy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2,

Harney-Carlson silt loams, 1 to 3 percent slopes (Hg).— This complex is on ridgetops and tablelands. Areas of this complex are about 40 to 55 percent Harney soils, 35 to 45 percent Carlson soils, and 10 to 20 percent Armo soils or Campus soils. Harney soils have a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but in some small areas the surface layer is eroded and is 4 to 6 inches thinner than that of the representative profile, and in other small areas the soils have a sandy loam layer below the subsoil and are noncalcareous to a depth of more than 30 inches. A Carlson soil in this complex has the profile described as representative for the Carlson series.

Included with these soils in mapping were small depressions, eroded areas, and rock outcrops, which are shown on the soil map by symbols. Also included were small areas of Armo and Campus soils.

Runoff ig medium. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if these soils are left bare.

Most areas of this complex are cultivated. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Terracing, constructing waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. This complex is suitable for land leveling and flood irrigation. Capability unit IIe-2; Loamy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Harney-Wakeen silt loams, 0 to 1 percent slopes (Hh).— This complex is on tablelands and ridgetops. Areas of this complex are about 40 to 50 percent Harney soils, 20 to 25 percent Wakeen soils, 20 to 30 percent soils similar to Harney soils, and 10 percent other included soils. The soils that are similar to Harney soils have a higher lime content below the subsoil and have chalky limestone or calcareous shale at a depth of 3 to 5 feet.

Included with this complex in mapping were small areas of Nibson, Mento, Corinth, and Armo soils. Also

included were small depressions and eroded spots, which are shown on the soil map by symbols.

Runoff is slow. Use of the major soils of this complex is limited mainly by droughtiness. Soil blowing is a hazard if these soils are left bare. The high content of lime in the Wakeen soils causes iron chlorosis and may affect the growth of sorghum.

Most areas of this complex are cultivated, but a small acreage is in native grass and is used for range. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to contro] soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. Both soils in capability unit IIe-2; Harney soils in Loamy Upland range site and windbreak suitability group 2; Wakeen soils in Limy Upland range site and windbreak suitability group 3.

Harney-Wakeen silt loams, 1 to 3 percent slopes (Hk).— The gently sloping or gently undulating soils in this complex are on ridgetops and tablelands. Areas of this complex are about 30 to 40 percent Harney soils, 25 to 35 percent Wakeen soils, 20 to 30 percent soils similar to Harney soils and 10 to 15 percent other included soils. The soils similar to Harney soils have a layer below the subsoil that is higher in content of lime, and they are underlain by bedded chalky limestone or calcareous shale at a depth of 8 to 5 feet. The Wakeen soils have a profile similar to the one described as representative for the Wakeen series, but in a few small areas the surface layer is 5 to 7 inches thick.

Included with these soils in mapping were small areas of Nibson, Mento, Corinth, and Armo soils. Also included were small depressions, eroded spots, and areas of rock outcrops, which are shown on the soil map by use of symbols.

Runoff is medium. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if the soils are left bare. The high content of lime in Wakeen soils causes iron chlorosis and may affect the growth of sorghum.

Most areas of this complex are cultivated, but some areas are in native grass and are used for range. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Terracing, constructing waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. Both soils in capability unit IJe-2; Harney soils in Loamy Upland range site and windbreak suitability group 2; Wakeen soils in Limy Upland range site and windbreak suitability group 3.

Heizer Series

The Heizer series consists of shallow, well-drained soils that formed in material weathered from chalky limestone, These soils are strongly sloping to moderately steep and are on uplands.

In a representative profile the surface layer is darkgray gravelly loam about 6 inches thick. The next layer is gray, friable channery loam about 8 inches thick. The underlying material is 5 inches of light brownishgray channery loam that overlies chalky limestone bedrock.

Permeability is moderate, and available water capacity is very low. The soils are well suited to the native

28 SOIL SURVEY

grasses grown in the county. Nearly all of the acreage of these soils is in native grass and is used for range.

Representative profile of Heizer gravelly loam in an area of Heizer-Armo complex, in native grass, 900 feet east and 250 feet north of the southwest corner of sec. 32, T. 11 8., R. 17 W.:

Al—0 to 6 inches, dark-gray (10YR 4/1) gravelly loam; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; many fine and medium roots; porous; strongly effervescent; mildly alkaline; clear, smooth bound-

ary.

AC—6 to 9 inches, gray (10YR 5/1) channery loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; common fine and medium roots; violently effervescent; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

C—9 to 14 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) channery loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) moist; weak, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; common to many fragments of limestone 1 to 6 inches long; violently effervescent; moderately alkaline; abrupt, smooth boundary.

R—14 to 30 inches, white (10YR 8/2) chalky limestone that has a few vertical cracks.

The Al horizon ranges from 6 to 10 inches in thickness and from dark gray to grayish brown in color. It ranges from loam to gravelly loam in texture. The AC horizon ranges from gray to light brownish gray in color and from gravelly loam to channery loam in texture. The C horizon ranges from light brownish gray to light gray in color and from gravelly loam to channery loam in texture.

Heizer soils are associated with Brownell, Armo, and Bogue soils. They have bedrock at a lesser depth than Brownell, Armo, and Bogue soils. They contain more gravel and channery fragments and less clay than Armo and Bogue soils.

Heizer-Armo complex (8 to 25 percent slopes) (HI).— This complex is on uplands. Areas are incised by downcutting drains. About 35 to 45 percent is Heizer soils, 20 to 30 percent is Armo soils, 5 to 15 percent is barren geologic material, and 15 to 25 percent is included soils. The Armo soil has a profile similar to the one described as representative for the Armo series, but the surface layer is 8 to 10 inches thinner in a few small areas.

Included with these soils in mapping were small areas of Brownell and Bogue soils and Roxbury silt loam, frequently flooded.

Runoff is rapid. Water erosion and soil blowing are hazards if the range is overgrazed.

This complex is not suited to cultivation, but it is suited to native grass. Most of the complex is in native grass and is used for range. Good range management practices include proper rate of stocking, deferred grazing, rotation grazing, cross fencing, and proper placement of salt and water. Both soils in capability unit VIIs-2; Heizer soil in Shallow Limy range site and windbreak suitability group 4; Armo soil in Limy Upland range site and windbreak suitability group 3.

Hilly Land

Hilly land (Hn) consists of loamy, well-drained soils along the valley sides of the Saline and Smoky Hill Rivers and at the mouths of tributaries. The soils have a surface layer of dark grayish-brown sandy loam to gilt loam; a subsoil of grayish-brown sand to clay loam; and underlying material of sandy loam, loamy sand, or sand (fig. 16). Slopes are 5 to 20 percent.

eae ~ te gies ——

Figure 16.

Roadside cut in Hilly land. Material below the sand is clay shale.

The soils are calcareous throughout where slopes are convex and noncalcareous to a depth of 20 inches where slopes are concave around small drains and drainheads. Hilly land contains numerous pockets and bands of sand and gravel. Many of these are excavated for sand and gravel.

Included in mapping were small areas of rock outcrop, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is medium. Soil blowing is a major hazard if the range is overgrazed, and water erosion also is a hazard.

Most of this land type is in range, to which it is well suited. Good range management includes proper rate of stocking, deferred grazing, rotation grazing, cross fencing, and proper placement of salt and water. Capability unit VIe-1; Limy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 3.

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 29

Holdrege Series

The Holdrege series consists of deep, well-drained soils that formed in calcareous silty loess. These soils are nearly level to gently sloping and are on loess-covered valley sides.

In a representative profile the surface layer is dark grayish-brown silt loam about 10 inches thick. The subsoil is 20 inches thick. The upper 4 inches is dark grayish-brown, firm light silty clay loam; the next 11 inches is grayish-brown, firm silty clay loam; and the lower 5 inches is light brownish-gray, friable silt loam. The upper 9 inches of the underlying material is palebrown silt loam, and the lower 24 inches is brown silty clay loam.

Permeability is moderate, and available water capacity is high. Most areas of these soils are cultivated, but a few small areas are in native grass.

Representative profile of Holdrege silt loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes, in a cultivated field, 2,540 feet north and 1,400 feet west of the southeast corner of sec. 17, T.1158., R. 19 W.:

A1—0O to 10 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; upper 8 inches has weak, fine, platy structure, below has moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; few open pores; neutral; clear, smooth boundary,

B1—10 to 14 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) light silty clay loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate, fine, subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; few fine roots; few open pores; common nests of worm casts; neutral; clear, smooth boundary.

B2t—14 to 25 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; moderate, fine, subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; few fine roots; few open pores; few nests of worm casts; neutral; clear, smooth boundary.

B3ca—25 to 80 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) silt loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) moist weak, medium, subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; many open pores; common semihard concretions and spots of segregated lime; weakly effervescent mildly alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

C130 to 89 inches, pale-brown (10YR 6/8) silt loam, brown (10YR 5/3) moist; weak, medium, subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable; many open pores; many spots and threads of segregated lime; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

C2—39 to 63 inches, brown (10YR 5/8) silty clay loam, darkbrown (10YR 4/3) moist; weak, coarse, prismatic structure parting to weak, medium, subangular blocky; slightly hard, friable; many open pores; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline.

The A horizon ranges from dark grayish brown to very dark grayish brown in color and from fine sandy loam to silt loam in texture. The B horizon ranges from dark grayish brown to very pale brown in color. The B2t horizon ranges from light to medium silty clay loam. Depth to carbonates ranges from 25 to 40 inches.

Holdrege soils are near Eltree, Harney, and Anselmo soils. They have a less clayey B2t horizon than Harney soils. They are more clayey than Eltree and Anselmo soils and have a B2t horizon that those soils lack.

Holdrege silt loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (Ho).—This soil is on old, high alluvial terraces that are covered by silty loess. It has the profile described as representative for the series.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Harney, Eltree, and Armo soils. Also included are areas of soils that are similar to this Holdrege soil but become calcareous at a depth of 12 to 20 inches. Small eroded spots are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is slow. The soil has little if any limitation to use except for the lack of moisture, but it is subject to soil blowing if it is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops, but some alfalfa also is grown. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. This soil is suitable for irrigation by sprinkler or flooding if water is available. Capability unit IIe-1; Loamy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Holdrege silt loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (Hp).—This soil is on loess—covered valley sides.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Eltree, Harney, Armo, Anselmo, and Wakeen soils. Also included are small areas of soils similar to Holdrege soils but become calcareous at a depth of 15 to 20 inches,

Runoff is medium. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of these soils are cultivated, but a few small areas are in native grass. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Use of terraces, waterways, and contour farming helps to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. This soil is suitable for irrigation by sprinkler or flooding if water is available. Capability unit IIe-1; Loamy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Hord Series

The Hord series consists of deep, well-drained soils that formed in calcareous silty alluvium. These soils are nearly level to gently undulating and occur on terraces along the major streams in the county.

In a representative profile the surface layer is 18 inches thick. The upper part is very dark grayishbrown silt loam about 12 inches thick, and the lower part is very dark grayish-brown heavy silt loam about 6 inches thick, The subsoil is 25 inches thick. The upper part is dark grayish-brown, friable light silty clay loam about 10 inches thick; and the lower part is light brownish-gray, calcareous, friable light silty clay loam about 15 inches thick. The underlying material is pale-brown, calcareous heavy silt loam.

Permeability is moderate, and available water capacity is high. Most areas of these soils are cultivated, but a small area is in native grass.

Representative profile of Hord silt loam, in native grass, 1,340 feet west and 2,440 feet south of the northeast corner of sec. 14, T.14S., R.18 W.:

A11—0 to 12 inches, very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) silt loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; common fine and medium roots; few fine

pores; few nests of worm casts; mildly alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

30 SOIL SURVEY

A12—12 to 18 inches, very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) heavy silt loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; moderate, fine, subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable; common fine and medium roots; common fine and medium pores; mildly alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

B2—18 to 28 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) light silty clay loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate, fine and medium, subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine and medium roots; common fine and medium pores; mildly alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

B3ca—-28 to 43 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) light silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak, fine and medium, subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; common fine and medium pores; common fine threads of segregated lime; strongly effervescent moderately alkaline; diffuse, smooth boundary.

C—48 to 65 inches, pale-brown (10YR 6/8) heavy silt loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak, coarse, prismatic structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; common fine and medium pores; coatings of lime on ped faces; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline.

The solum ranges from 85 to 55 inches in thickness, It is dark grayish brown or darker to a depth of 20 to 30 inches. The A and B horizons range from loam to light silty clay loam. Carbonates occur in the lower part of the B horizon in a few places.

Hord soils are near Roxbury, McCook, Eltree, and Detroit soils. They are leached of carbonates to a greater depth than Roxbury, McCook, or Eltree soils. They contain less clay than Detroit soils and more clay than McCook soils.

Hord silt loam (0 to 2 percent slopes) (Hr).—This nearly level and gently undulating soil is on smooth alluvial terraces along the major streams in the county.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of McCook, Roxbury, Detroit, and Eltree soils. Also included were small depressions, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is slow. This soil has no limitations to use.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated, but a few areas are in native grass. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops, but some alfalfa also is grown. This soil is among the best soils in the county for crops. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to increase the intake of water and maintain good tilth. This soil is among the best soils in the county for irrigation. Land leveling and flood irrigation or sprinkler irrigation are suitable methods of irrigation if water is available. Capability unit I-1; Loamy Terrace range site; windbreak suitabililty group 1.

Inavale Series

The Inavale series consists of deep, well-drained soils that formed in coarse-textured alluvium. These nearly level to strongly sloping soils are on flood plains and on foot slopes of terraces.

In a representative profile the surface layer is grayish-brown loamy sand about 9 inches thick. The next layer is soft, grayish-brown loamy sand about 5 inches thick. The upper part of the underlying material is light brownish-gray sand about 17 inches thick; the next 8 inches is light brownish-gray loamy sand; and the lower part is light brownish-gray loamy sand stratified with thin layers of medium sand and coarse silt loam less than 8 inches thick.

Permeability is rapid, and available water capacity is low. Most areas of these soils are in native grass and are used for range. Some areas are still cultivated, but the hazard of soil blowing is severe in these areas.

Representative profile of Inavale loamy sand, in native grass, 550 feet east and 300 feet south of the northwest corner of sec. 15, T. 11 8., R. 18 W.:

A1—0 to 9 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) loamy sand, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; single grained; soft, very friable; many fine and medium roots; mildly alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

AC—9 to 14 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) loamy sand, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; single grained; soft, loose; few fine roots; weakly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

C1—14 to 31 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) sand,

brown (10YR 5/8) moist; single grained; loose;

few fine roots; strongly effervescent; gradual, smooth boundary.

to 89 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2)

loamy sand, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist;

single grained; soft, loose; few fine roots; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

C8—89 to 63 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) loamy sand, brown (10YR 5/8) moist; single grained, stratified with medium sand and thin layers of coarse silt loam less than 3 inches thick; few fine roots; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline.

The solum ranges from 10 to 30 inches in thickness. The A horizon ranges from slightly acid to moderately alkaline in reaction and from dark grayish brown to very pale brown in color. It is typically loamy sand but ranges from silt loam to sand. The AC and C horizons range from grayish brown to very pale brown in color.

Inavale soils are near Munjor and McCook soils. They are coarser textured than Munjor or McCook soils. Their A horizon is not so dark as that of McCook soils.

Inavale loamy sand (0 to 10 percent slopes) (In).—This soil is on flood plains and on foot slopes of terraces.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Munjor, McCook, and Boel soils. Also included are small areas of soils that are coarser textured than this Inavale soil.

Runoff is slow. Soil blowing is the main hazard. Overgrazing causes soil blowing.

Most areas of this soil are in native grass and are used for range. A few small areas are cultivated. Good range management includes proper rate of stocking, deferred grazing, rotation grazing, cross fencing, and proper placement of salt and water. Capability unit VIe—4; Sands range site; windbreak suitability group 1.

McCook Series

The McCook series consists of deep, well-drained soils that formed in calcareous, medium-textured alluvium. These soils are nearly level to gently undulating and are on low terraces.

In a representative profile the surface layer is grayish-brown light silt loam about 10 inches thick. The next layer is grayish-brown, very friable light silt loam about 6 inches thick. The underlying material is lightgray coarse silt loam that is thinly stratified with fine sandy loam and very fine sandy loam.

Permeability and available water capacity are moderate. Most areas of these soils are cultivated.

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 31

Representative profile of McCook silt loam, in a cultivated field, 800 feet north and 500 feet east of the southwest corner of sec. 26, T.1158., R. 16 W.:

A1—0 to 10 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) light silt loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; upper 6 inches disturbed by cultivation, lower 4 inches weak, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, very friable; many fine and medium roots; very porous; many worm casts; slightly effervescent; mildly alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

AC—10 to 16 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) light silt loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; weak to moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, very friable; few fine roots; very porous; many worm casts; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

Ci—16 to 86 inches, light-gray (10YR 7/2) coarse silt loam, thinly stratified with very fine sandy loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) moist; weak, coarse, prismatic structure parting to weak, fine, granular; slightly hard, very friable; few fine roots; a few large pores and many medium and fine pores; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

C2—36 to 72 inches, light-gray (1lOYR 17/2) coarse silt loam thinly stratified with very fine sandy loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) moist; weak, coarse, prismatic structure parting to weak, fine, granular; slightly hard, very friable; few fine roots; very porous; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline.

The Al horizon ranges from fine sandy loam to silt loam in texture and from dark grayish brown to brown in color. The AC horizon is stratified with thin layers of loam, silt loam, very fine sandy loam, or fine sandy loam in a few places. Depth to free carbonates ranges from 0 to 10 inches.

McCook soils are near Roxbury, Hord, Detroit, Munjor, Wann, and Inavale soils. They are less clayey than Roxbury, Hord, and Detroit soils. Their dark A horizon is thinner than that of Hord soils. They lack the B2t horizon present in Detroit soils. They are more silty and are deeper to sand than Munjor and Inavale soils. They are less sandy than Wann soils and lack a water table.

McCook fine sandy loam (0 to 2 percent slopes) (Mc).— This nearly level and gently undulating soil is on low terraces and high bottom lands. This soil has a profile similar to the one described ag representative for the series, but the surface layer is about 14 inches thick.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of McCook silt loam and Munjor and Inavale soils. Also included were areas of soils similar to McCook silt loam, except that the surface layer is loamy sand 10 to 20 inches thick or sandy loam 18 to 24 inches thick. Small sand spots are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is slow. Soil blowing is the main hazard.

Most areas of these soils are in wheat and sorghum, but some alfalfa is also grown. A few small areas are in native grass. Stubble mulching and stripcropping help to control soil blowing. Stubble mulching also helps to increase the infiltration rate of water, control evaporation, and improve tilth. Some areas of this soil are irrigated. Capability unit IIe-8; Sandy Terrace range site; windbreak suitability group 1.

McCook silt loam (0 to 2 percent slopes) (Md).—This nearly level and gently undulating soil is on low terraces and high bottom lands along the major streams. It has the profile described as representative for the series.

Included with this soil in mapping were smal! areas of Roxbury silt loam, McCook fine sandy loam, and

Munjor soils. Also included were a few small depressions and sand spots, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is slow. Nothing limits the use of this soil.

Most areas of these soils are in wheat, sorghum, and alfalfa. Much of the alfalfa is irrigated. Stubble mulching helps to improve soil structure and tilth and reduce evaporation. Capability unit -1; Loamy Terrace range site; windbreak suitability group 1.

Mento Series

The Mento series consists of deep, well-drained soils that formed in thin loess deposited over chalky limestone. Some mixing of loess and material from the chalky limestone occurred at the time of the loess deposition. These nearly level to sloping soils are on ridgetops, along drainageways, and on narrow tablelands.

Figure 17.—Profile of Mento silt loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes.

32 SOIL SURVEY

In a representative profile the surface layer is dark grayish-brown silt loam about 9 inches thick. The subsoil is about 22 inches thick. The upper part is grayishbrown, very firm heavy silty clay loam about 6 inches thick; the middle part is grayish-brown, firm heavy silty clay loam about 6 inches thick; and the lower part is pale-brown, firm, calcareous silty clay loam about 10 inches thick. The underlying material is about 36 inches thick. The upper part is pale-brown, calcareous light silty clay loam about 10 inches thick; and the lower 26 inches is white, calcareous clay loam that has many fragments of chalk or limestone that are sand and gravel size. Bedrock is chalky limestone (fig. 17).

Permeability is slow, and available water capacity is high. Most areas of the nearly level to gently sloping soils are cultivated. About 65 percent of the acreage of the sloping soils is cultivated, and the rest is in native grass and is used for range.

Representative profile of Mento silt loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes, in a cultivated field, 200 feet east and 600 ie nue of the southwest corner of sec. 16, T. 13 S.,

Ap—0 to 9 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; weak, medium, platy structure parting to weak, fine, granular; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; neutral; abrupt, smooth boundary.

B21t—9 to 15 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 6/2) heavy silty clay loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate, medium, erie structure parting to moderate, medium, blocky; very hard, very firm; few fine roots; mildly alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

B22t—15 to 21 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) heavy silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; moderate, medium, blocky structure; hard, firm; few fine roots; many, soft, medium-sized carbonate concretions; calcareous, strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary,

B8ca—21 to 31 inches, pale-brown (10YR 6/3) silty clay loam, brown (10YR 4/8) moist; weak, medium, subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; few ver fine roots; few coarse root channels filled wit! darker colored soi] material; soft carbonate concretions common but fewer and smaller than in B22t horizon; calcareous, strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

Clca—31 to 41 inches, pale-brown (10YR 6/3) light silt; clay loam, brown (10YR 5/8) moist; massive; hard, friable; calcareous, violently effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, wavy boundary.;

JIC2—41 to 67 inches, white (10YR 8/2) clay loam, light gray (10YR 7/2) moist; massive; porous; hard, friable; gravelly clay loam in lower 8 inches; sand and gravel-size coarse fragments mostly chalk or limestone; calcareous; violently effervescent; moderately alkaline; abrupt, smooth boundary.

IIR—67 to 80 inches, level bedded, chalk; few joints.

The Ap horizon ranges from 5 to 10 inches in thickness. The A horizon ranges from dark grayish brown to brown. The ped faces in the lower 1 to 3 inches of the A horizon generally have gray silt coatings. The B2t horizon ranges from grayish brown to pale brown in color and from silty clay loam to light silty clay in texture. The B2t horizon ranges from 7 to 17 inches in thickness. The B3ca horizon ranges from grayish brown to very pale brown. The B horizon contains from 5 to 15 percent exchangeable sodium. The Cca horizon ranges from brown to pale brown, and the IIC horizon ranges from white to very pale brown. The C horizon contains 10 to 25 percent exchangeable sodium. The ae to chalky limestone bedrock is ically 50 to 60 inches but ranges from 40 to 70 inches. The depth to free carbonates

in the form of threads, films, or soft masses ranges from 10 to 20 inches.

Mento soils are near Harney, Wakeen, Brownell, and Carlson soils. They have textures similar to those of Harney and Carlson soils but contain 5 to 15 percent exchangeable sodium in the B horizon and have bedrock at a depth of 40 to 70 inches. They are calcareous at a lesser depth than Harney soils, They are leached of carbonates to a greater depth, are more clayey, and are deeper to bedrock than Wakeen or Brownell soils.

Mento silt loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (Me).—This soil is on narrow tablelands and smooth ridgetops. It has the profile described as representative for the series.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Harney, Wakeen, Brownell, and Carlson soils and areas of eroded Harney soils. Also included were areas of soils similar to this Mento soil, except that bedrock is at a depth of less than 40 inches. A few small depressions were mapped with this soil. Small areas of rock outcrops are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is slow to medium. Slow permeability reduces the intake of water and causes the soil to be droughty. The soil blows if it is left bare.

Most of the acreage of this soil is cultivated. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. A small acreage is in grass. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. Capability unit IIs-2; Clay Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Mento silt loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (Mf).—This soil is on ridgetops and tablelands. It has a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but chalk is at a depth of 50 to 60 inches.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Harney, Wakeen, and Brownell soils and areas of soils similar to Harney soils except that the layers below the subsoil contain more carbonates than Harney soils and bedrock is at a depth of 36 to 60 inches. Also included are small areas of soils similar to Mento soils except that bedrock is at a depth of 20 to 40 inches. Small eroded areas and rock outcrops are shown on the soil map by symbols.

Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing ae is a hazard if the soil is left bare. Runoff is me-

ium.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated, but a few small areas are in native grass and are used for range. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Terraces, waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. Capability unit IlIe-4; Clay Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Mento silty clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes, eroded (Mg).—This soil is on ridgetops, on side slopes, and along narrow, shallow drainageways in the uplands. It is moderately eroded. The surface layer has been eroded to the extent that ordinary tillage mixes the remains of the surface layer with part of the subsoil. Asa result, the surface layer is finer textured than that in the profile described as representative for the series. In some places rills and small gullies have formed.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 33

of Harney, Wakeen, Brownell, and Carlson soils. Also included were small areas of soils similar to Mento soils except that bedrock is at a depth of 20 to 40 inches. Also included were small areas of rock outcrops, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated, but some areas have been reseeded to native grass and are used for range. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops, Planting close-grown crops such as drilled sorghums and small] grains helps to control erosion. Terraces, waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and improve tilth. Plants respond well to nitrogen and phosphate fertilizers. Capability unit II1Ie-7; Clay Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Mento soils, 3 to 7 percent slopes, eroded (Mc).—This moderately eroded soil is mostly on sides of drainageways, but it is also on sides of narrow ridgetops. About 40 percent of the acreage of this soil has a surface layer 5 to 9 inches thinner than that in the profile described as representative for the series. This surface layer has been eroded to such an extent that ordinary tillage mixes the remains of the surface layer with part of the subsoil, which gives the surface layer a silty clay loam texture.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Wakeen, Brownell, and Heizer soils; Roxbury silt loam, frequently flooded; and Harney silty clay loam. Also included were areas of soils similar to Mento soils, except that bedrock is at a depth of 20 to 40 inches; and areas of Mento soils that have been so eroded that the original surface layer and most of the subsoil have been removed and the present surface layer and the underlying material are calcareous silty clay loam; and severely eroded spots and rock outcrops, which are shown on the soil map by symbols.

Runoff is rapid. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

About 65 percent of the acreage of this soil is cultivated. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. The remaining 35 percent of the acreage has been reseeded to native grass and is used for range. Close-growing crops, such as wheat and drilled sorghum, provide more residue and better cover to help to control water erosion and soil blowing than do other crops. Terraces, waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing and water erosion, increase the intake of water, and improve tilth. Proper rate of stocking, rotation grazing, deferred grazing, cross fencing, and proper placement of salt and water help to attain a good range condition. Capability unit [Ve-1; Clay Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 2.

Munjor Series

The Munjor series consists of deep, well-drained soils that formed in moderately sandy, calcareous alluvium.

These nearly level to gently undulating soils are on flood plains along the major streams in the county.

In arepresentative profile the surface layer is grayishbrown sandy loam about 7 inches thick. The upper part of the underlying material is light brownish-gray, very friable sandy loam, about 37 inches thick, that is stratified with thin layers of finer textured and coarser textured materials; and the lower part is pale-brown medium sand.

Permeability is moderately rapid, and available water capacity is moderate. Most of the acreage of these soils is cultivated, but some is in native grass and is used for range.

Representative profile of Munjor sandy loam, in native grass, 2,300 feet west and 1,200 feet north of southeast corner of sec. 29, T. 15 S., R. 16 W.:

A1—0 to 7 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) sandy loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak, medium, granular structure; soft, very friable; few fine and medium roots; calcareous, strongly effervescent; mildly alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

C1—7 to 44 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) sandy loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) moist; weak, medium, granular structure in the upper part, massive below; soft, very friable; thin, stratified layers of fine-textured and coarse-textured materials throughout the horizon; calcareous, strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

IIC2—44 to 60 inches, pale-brown (10YR 6/3) medium sand; brown (10YR 5/3) moist; single grained; loose; aac strongly effervescent; moderately alkaine,

The solum ranges from 8 to 15 inches in thickness, Depth to coarse-textured strata ranges from 28 to 50 inches. Depth to free carbonates is less than 10 inches. The A horizon ranges from grayish brown to very pale brown in color and is typically sandy loam and less commonly loamy sand or loam in texture. The C horizon ranges from grayish brown to pale brown. Texture ranges from loamy sand to heavy silt loam in thin strata and averages sandy loam. The IIC horizon is pale-brown, light-gray, or very pale brown loamy sand or medium sand. In some places faint mottles are below a depth of 20 inches and distinct mottles below a depth of 80 inches.

Munjor soils are near Inavale, McCook, and Roxbury soils. They are near Inavale soils on flood plains, but they are less sandy to a depth of 28 to 50 inches than Inavale soils. They are below McCook and Roxbury soils, but they have a sandier texture and a less dark colored surface layer than those soils.

Munjor sandy loam (0 to 2 percent slopes) (Mu).—This soil is on flood plains along major streams and on a few low terraces. It is nearly level to gently undulating.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Inavale, McCook, and Roxbury soils. Also included were small areas of soils similar to this soil, except that the surface layer is dark grayish brown or darker and is 10 to 12 inches thick.

Frequent flooding and soil blowing are the main hazards. Flooding can damage or destroy wheat or sorghum either by inundation or by silting.

Most of the acreage of this soil is cultivated, but some is in native grass and is used for range. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, reduce evaporation, and maintain good tilth. This soil is suitable for irrigation, mostly by sprinklers. The hazard of flooding must be eliminated before the soil is suitable for gravity systems. Capa-

34 SOIL SURVEY

bility unit II[w-2; Sandy Lowland range site; windbreak suitability group 1.

New Cambria Series

The New Cambria series consists of deep, moderately well drained soils that formed in clayey, calcareous alluvium. These soils are nearly level to gently sloping and are on terraces along the major streams.

In a representative profile the surface layer is darkgray heavy silty clay about 9 inches thick. The subsoil is grayish-brown, very firm silty clay about 29 inches thick. The underlying material is light brownish-gray heavy silty clay loam to a depth of about 46 inches. Below a depth of 46 inches is dark grayish-brown light silty clay loam.

Permeability is slow, and available water capacity is high. Most areas of these soils are cultivated, but a few small areas are in native grass and are used for range.

Representative profile of New Cambria silty clay, in a cultivated field, 1,640 feet north and 600 feet west of the southeast corner of sec. 14, T.1158., R. 17 W.:

A1l—0 to 9 inches, dark-gray (10YR 4/1) heavy silty clay, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; moderate, fine, subangular blocky structure; upper 3 inches disturbed by cultivation; very hard, very firm; few fine roots; few, fine, open pores; a few limestone fragments, minute to % inch in size; mildly alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

B21—9 to 25 inches, grayish-brown (2.5¥ 5/2) silty clay, very dark grayish brown (2.5¥ 3/2) moist; moderate, medium, subangular blocky structure; very hard, very firm; few fine roots; many open pores; a few limestone fragments, minute to % inch in size; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; diffuse, smooth boundary.

B22—25 to 38 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; weak to moderate; medium, subangular blocky structure; very hard, very firm; few fine roots; many, fine, open pores; few limestone fragments, minute to ¥% inch in size; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; diffuse, smooth boundary.

C—-38 to 46 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) heavy silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak, medium, subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; few fine roots; few open pores; lower 8 inches of horizon contains enough limestone fragments to make the texture gravelly clay loam; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

Alb—46 to 60 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) light silty clay loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 8/2) moist; moderate, fine, subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; few very fine roots; common threads of segregated lime and gypsum; several pores; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline.

The solum is typically 28 to 36 inches thick but ranges from 25 to 45 inches in thickness. Depth to calcareous matrix is typically less than 10 inches but ranges from 0 to 15 inches. The Al horizon ranges from very dark gray to grayish brown in color and from silty clay loam to clay in texture. The B horizon ranges from very dark gray to grayish brown. The C horizon ranges from dark gray to pale brown in color and is silty clay loam or silty clay.

New Cambria soils are near Bogue, Detroit, and Corinth soils and Alluvial land, clayey. They are on higher terraces and have a more clayey A horizon than Detroit soils, and they lack the B2t horizon of these soils. They do not flood so frequently as Alluvial land, clayey, and lack the stratifica-

tion of Alluvial land, clayey. They are deeper than Bogue and Corinth soils and are not limited by clayey bedrock.

New Cambria silty clay (0 to 2 percent slopes) (Nc).— This soil is on smooth terraces of the stream valley. The terraces are interrupted in places by small, narrow drainageways that head in the uplands above or on these terraces.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Bogue and Corinth soils and Alluvial land, clayey. Also included were areas of soils similar to New Cambria soils but noncaleareous to a depth of 15 to 25 inches. There are also small wet areas, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

This soil absorbs water slowly and gives it up slowly, causing it to be droughty. Runoff is slow to medium. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated, but a few small areas are in native grass and are used for range. Terraces, waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. Capability unit IIs-2; Clay Terrace range site; windbreak suitability group 1.

Nibson Series

The Nibson series consists of shallow, somewhat excessively drained soils that formed in material weathered from interbedded chalky shale and chalky limestone. These soils are sloping to strongly sloping and are on erosional uplands.

In a representative profile the surface layer is dark grayish-brown heavy silt loam about 7 inches thick. The subsoil is 7 inches thick. The upper 3 inches is grayish-brown, friable silty clay loam; and the lower 4 inches is light yellowish-brown, friable silty clay loam.

The underlying material is 5 inches of pale-yellow, weathered shale and limestone of silty clay loam texture. Bedrock is pale-yellow shale and limestone. Nibson soils are calcareous.

Permeability is moderate, and available water capacity is very low. Nearly all of the acreage of these soils ig in native grass and is used for range, to which it is well suited.

Representative profile of Nibson silt loam, 5 to 12 percent slopes, in native grass, 200 feet west and 50 feet north of the southeast corner of sec. 11, T. 15 S.,

A1—0 to 7 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) heavy silt loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; strong, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; many fine to coarse roots; many worm casts; many scattered 4to %-inch limestone fragments; calcareous, violently effervescent; mildly alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

B21—7 to 10 inches, grayish-brown (2.5Y 5/2) silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) moist; moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; many fine and medium roots; many worm casts; many limestone fragments 4% to % inch in size; calcareous, violently effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

B22—10 to 14 inches, light yellowish-brown (2.5Y 6/4) silty clay loam, grayish brown (2.5Y 5/3) moist; mod-

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 35

erate, very fine, subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable; many fine and medium roots; many worm casts; many limestone fragments % to 1 inch in size; calcareous, violently effervescent; abrupt, smooth boundary.

C—14 to 19 inches, pale-yellow (2.5Y 7/4) silty clay loam, light yellowish brown (2.5Y 6/4) moist; shale that has moderate, fine and medium, platy structure; few medium roots; few worm casts mainly along root channels in the shale; somewhat broken layers of limestone produce channery fragments 3 to 4 inches in length in the lower 2 inches; clear, wavy boundary.

R—19 to 80 inches, pale-yellow (2.5Y 7/4) shale, light yellowish brown (2.5Y 6/4) moist; roots are flattened and tend to follow the limestone layers and extend into fractures; layers of shale and limestone alternate with depth.

The A horizon ranges from 5 to 8 inches in thickness and from loam to heavy silt loam in texture. It ranges from dark gray to grayish brown in color. The B horizon ranges from silt loam to silty clay loam and is 18 to 35 percent clay. Coarse fragments in the A and B horizons make up less than 15 percent of the horizons. The C horizon ranges from light brownish gray to very pale brown. Reaction of the soil mass ranges from mildly alkaline to strongly alkaline.

Nibson soils are near Wakeen, Mento, Corinth, and Armo soils. They are shallower than Wakeen, Mento, Corinth and ame soils. They are less clayey than Mento and Corinth soils.

Nibson silt loam, 5 to 12 percent slopes (Nn).—This soil is on ridgetops and side slopes and along drainageways.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Wakeen and Armo soils, Roxbury silt loam, frequently flooded, and limestone outcrops.

Runoff is medium to rapid. Water erosion and soil blowing are hazards if range is overgrazed.

Most areas of this soil are in native grass and are used for range, to which it is well suited. A few small areas adjoining arable soils are cultivated. Use of a proper rate of stocking, deferred grazing, and cross fencing helps to improve range condition. Capability unit Vie-3; Limy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 4.

Penden Series

The Penden series consists of deep, well-drained soils that formed in calcareous unconsolidated outwash. These sloping to strongly sloping soils are on uplands.

In a representative profile the surface layer is about 14 inches thick. The upper 8 inches is very dark grayishbrown light clay loam, and the lower 6 inches is dark grayish-brown clay loam. The next layer is grayishbrown, friable clay loam about 138 inches thick. The underlying material is pale-brown light clay loam. The upper 15 inches of the underlying material has a carbonate content of 15 to 25 percent.

Permeability is moderate, and available water capacity is high. Most areas of these soils are in native grass and are used for range. A few small areas are cultivated.

Representative profile of Penden clay loam in an area of Campus-Penden complex, 5 to 15 percent slopes, in native grass, 600 feet south and 600 feet west of the northeast corner of sec. 22, T. 12 S., R. 20 W.:

A11—0 to 8 inches, very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) light clay loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist;

moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; many fine and medium roots; many nests of worm casts; caleareous, strongly effervescent; gradual, smooth boundary.

A12—8 to 14 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) clay loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 8/2) moist; moderate, fine and medium, granular structure; hard, friable; many fine roots; many nests of worm casts; calcareous, strongly effervescent; gradual, smooth boundary.

AC—14 to 27 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak, fine, subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; common fine and medium roots; common nests of worm casts; few %4-inch fragments of caliche and soft masses of calcium carbonate; calcareous, strongly effervescent; diffuse, smooth boundary.

Clea—27 to 42 inches, pale-brown (10YR 6/38) light clay loam, brown (10YR 5/3) moist; weak, medium, subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; few fine, medium, and large pores; common scattered nests of worm casts; calcareous, violently effervescent; many soft masses of calcium carbonate caliche fragments % to % inch in diameter; diffuse boundary.

C2—~42 to 64 inches, pale-brown (10YR 6/8) light clay loam, brown (10YR 5/3) moist; weak, coarse, prismatic structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; common fine and medium pores; few caliche fragments % to % inch in diameter; calcareous, strongly effervescent.

The Ail horizon ranges from 7 to 20 inches in thickness and from very dark grayish brown to brown in color. The A horizon is typically clay loam but is silty clay loam in places. Depth to carbonate ranges from 0 to 6 inches. The C horizon ranges from brown to light gray. The Cea horizon ranges from 15 to 25 percent carbonates.

Penden soils are near Canlon and Campus soils and Rough broken land. They are deeper to bedrock than Canlon and Campus soils and Rough broken land. They are below Canlon and Campus soils and above Rough broken land on the landscape.

In Ellis County, Penden soils are mapped only in a complex with Campus soils.

Rough Broken Land

Rough broken land (7 to 30 percent slopes) (Ro) consists of rough, broken, dissected areas of uplands. It is made up of strongly calcareous, loamy, shallow to deep soils and nearly barren chalk outcrops. Rough broken land is about 45 percent shallow soils over chalk, 12 percent moderately deep soils over chalk, 23 percent chalk outcrops, and 20 percent deep soils that formed in colluvial and alluvial sediment on the floor of drainageways. The moderately deep soils are on the narrow ridges that divide the steep, dissected areas. In most places the chalk outcrops are at the higher elevations in the area, and the shallow soils are on the slopes below.

Runoff is rapid. Water erosion is a serious hazard, mainly because of the chalk outcrops.

Most areas of Rough broken land are in native grass and are used for range. Vegetation is very sparse on the chalk outcrops. The grass cover is better on the moderately deep and deep soils than it is on the more shallow soils. Careful management of the grassland is needed. Proper rate of stocking, deferred grazing, rotation grazing, cross fencing, and proper location of salt and water help to maintain good range condition. Capability unit VIIs—3; Shallow Limy range site; windbreak suitability group 4.

36 SOIL SURVEY

Roxbury Series

The Roxbury series consists of deep, well-drained soils that formed in calcareous silty alluvium. These nearly level and gently undulating soils are on terraces along the major streams in the county.

In arepresentative profile the surface layer is grayishbrown silt loam about 24 inches thick. The next layer is grayish-brown, firm light silty clay loam about 26 inches thick. The underlying material is light brownish-gray light silty clay loam. Roxbury soils are calcareous.

Permeability is moderate, and available water capacity is high. Most areas of these soils are cultivated, but a few small areas are in native grass. These soils are among the most suitable for crops in the county.

Representative profile of Roxbury silt loam, in a cultivated field, 2,300 feet west and 1,400 feet south of the northeast corner of sec. 23, T. 13 S., R. 19 W.:

Ap—O to 11 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) silt loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; weak, very thick, platy structure parting to weak, medium, granular; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; weakly effervescent; neutral; clear, smooth bound-

ary.

A1l—11 to 24 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) silt loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate, fine, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; many worm casts; a few thin films of segregated lime in lower 8 inches; strongly effervescent; mildly alkaline; gradual, wavy boundary.

AC—24 to 50 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) light silty clay loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate, fine, subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; few fine roots; common fine threads of segregated lime; strongly effervescent; mildly alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

C—50 to 68 inches, light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) light silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak, medium, subangular blocky structure; hard, firm; films and threads thicker and more common than in AC horizon; strongly effervescent; mildly alkaline.

The Al horizon ranges from silt loam to light silty clay loam in texture and from grayish brown to dark gray in color. Depth to free carbonates ranges from 0 to 15 inches. Unconforming sandy or clayey strata or mottles, or both, are below a depth of 40 inches in places. The C horizon ranges from brown to light gray in color.

Roxbury soils are near Hord, Detroit, McCook, Eltree and Munjor soils. They have free carbonates at a lesser depth than Hord soils. They are less clayey than Detroit soils and lack the clayey B2t horizon of Detroit soils. They have a thicker and darker A horizon and are more clayey than McCook soils. They lack distinct zones of lime accumulation of Eltree soils and have more evidence of stratification than those soils. They are less sandy than Munjor soils.

Roxbury silt loam (0 to 2 percent slopes) (Rb).—This nearly level and gently undulating soil is on terraces along the major streams in the county. It is very rarely flooded. It has the profile described as representative for the series.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Hord, Detroit, McCook, and Eltree soils. Also included were small depressions and wet areas, which are shown on the soil map by symbols.

Runoff is slow. Soil blowing is a slight hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated, but a few small areas are in native grass and are used for range. This

soil has a high potential for wheat, sorghum, and alfalfa. It is one of the best soils in the county for irrigation. It is suited to flood irrigation or sprinklers. Capability unit I-1; Loamy Terrace range site; windbreak suitability group 1.

Roxbury silt loam, frequently flooded (0 to 2 percent slopes) (Rf)—This soil is on flood plains along the smaller creeks and drainageways. It has a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but it is more stratified with darker and lighter colors or with thin layers of loam, sandy loam, or silty clay loam.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Hord, McCook, and Wann soils.

Runoff is slow. The main limitation is frequent flooding and silting.

About half the acreage of this soil is cultivated, and the rest is in native grass and is used for range. Sorghum and wheat are the main crops, but a limited amount of alfalfa also is grown. Losses of wheat and alfalfa are severe in some years because of flooding and silting. Sorghum is less affected.

Proper rate of stocking, deferred grazing, rotation grazing, cross fencing, and proper location of salt and water help to improve range condition, Capability unit IIIw-1; Loamy Lowland range site; woodland suitability group 1.

Wakeen Series

The Wakeen series consists of moderately deep, welldrained soils that formed in residuum derived from chalky limestone. These gently sloping to strongly sloping soils are on uplands.

In a representative profile the surface layer is 17 inches thick. The upper 5 inches is dark grayish-brown silt loam, the next 5 inches is dark grayish-brown light silty clay loam, and the lower 7 inches is grayish-brown silty clay loam. The subsoil is very pale brown, friable silty clay loam about 12 inches thick. The underlying material is very pale brown silty clay loam about 7 inches thick over brownish-yellow, bedded chalk bedrock (fig. 18).

Permeability is moderate, and available water capacity is moderate. Most areas of the gently sloping and sloping soils are cultivated. Most areas of the strongly sloping soils are in native grass.

Representative profile of Wakeen silt loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes, in a cultivated field, 150 feet west and 1,200 feet north of the southeast corner of sec. 29, T.

Ap—0 to 5 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) silt loam, very dark brown (10YR 2/2) moist; weak, medium, granular structure; hard, friable; common fine roots; calcareous, strongly effervescent; mildly alkaline; clear, smooth boundary.

A1—5 to 10 inches, dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) light silty clay loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 8/2) moist; strong, fine and medium, granular structure; slightly hard, friable; common fine roots; many worm cast granules; few chalk fragments as much as 2 centimeters in diameter; calcareous, strongly effervescent; mildly alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

A38—10 to 17 inches, grayish-brown (10YR 5/2) silty clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist;

ELLIS COUNTY, KANSAS 37

Profile of Wakeen silt loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes.

Figure 18.

strong, medium and coarse, granular structure; hard, friable; few fine roots; many worm cast granules of pale brown (10YR 6/3) brown (10YR 5/8) moist; few fragments of chalk as much as 5 centimeters in diameter; calcareous, violently effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

B2—17 to 29 inches, very pale brown (10YR 8/4) silty clay loam, light yellowish brown (10YR 6/5) moist; moderate, medium, subangular blocky structure; very hard, friable; few fine roots; few coarse root channels filled with darker colored material; calcareous, violently effervescent; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary.

C—29 to 36 inches, very pale brown (10YR 8/4), weathered, thinly bedded chalk that crushes to silty clay loam; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/5) moist; weak, coarse, subangular blocky structure parting to weak,

fine, platy; very hard, brittle; few very fine roots; calcareous, violently effervescent; strongly alkaline; gradual, wavy boundary.

R—86 to 46 inches, brownish-yellow (10YR 6/6), thinly bedded chalk; no roots observed.

_ The Al horizon ranges from very dark gray to dark grayish brown in color and from silt loam to silty elay loam in texture. It has moderate to strong, fine to medium, granular structure. The depth to carbonates ranges from 0 to 12 inches. The B horizon ranges from grayish brown to very pale brown or reddish yellow. Depth to underlying bedded chalky deposits ranges from 20 to 40 inches. The C horizon ranges from light brownish gray to yellow.

Wakeen soils are near Harney, Nibson, Brownell, Heizer, and Carlson soils. They are shallower to bedrock and contain less clay than Harney and Carlson soils. They contain fewer coarse fragments than Brownell and Heizer soils. They are deeper to bedrock than Nibson and Heizer soils.

Wakeen silt loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (Wa).—This soil is on ridgetops and tablelands. It has a profile described as representative for the series.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Harney, Mento, Brownell, Nibson, and Armo soils. Also included are small areag of soils that are similar to Wakeen soils but are 50 to 60 inches deep to underlying bedded chalky limestone; smal] areas of eroded Wakeen soils; and small areas of rock outcrops, which are shown on the soil map by symbols.

Runoff is medium. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated, but a few areas are in native grass and are used for range. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Terracing, constructing waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. Capability unit IIIe—-8; Limy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 3.

Wakeen silt loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes, eroded (We). —tThis soil is on uplands on knolls and ridgetops and along drainageways. It has a profile similar to the one described as representative for the series, but the surface layer is 5 to 9 inches thick.

Included with this soil in mapping were small areas of Nibson, Brownell, Mento, and Armo soils. About a third of the area mapped are uneroded Wakeen silt loam. Also included were small areas of rock outcrops, which are shown on the soil map by a symbol.

Runoff is medium to rapid. Water erosion is the main hazard, but soil blowing also is a hazard if the soil is left bare.

Most areas of this soil are cultivated, but a few areas have been reseeded to native grass and are used as waterways. Wheat and sorghum are the main crops. Terracing, constructing waterways, and contour farming help to control water erosion. Good management of crop residue, such as stubble mulching, helps to control soil blowing, increase the intake of water, and maintain good tilth. Close-growing crops, such as wheat and drilled sorghum, produce a large amount of residue, which helps to control erosion, Iron chlorosis is a management concern if sorghum is grown. Capability unit IVe-5; Limy Upland range site; windbreak suitability group 3.

38 SOIL SURVEY

