No wonder that in the Middle Ages the Christian Church regarded the whole thing as very uncanny and the work of evil spirits, and those who had the gift of " scrying " — the specularii they were termed — were looked on as heretics and treated accordingly. They survived, however, till the sixteenth century, when the famous Dr. Dee (1527-1608) gave a new impetus to crystal-gazing: no doubt the seer he employed had some clairvoyant faculty; the " shew-stone " Dr. Dee used is still preserved in the British Museum. Aubrey in his Miscellanies (1696), p. 165, tells us of

" Visions in a Beryl or crystal," and remarks that learned divines connect the " Urim and Thummim " with crystal- vision. In modern times Dean Plumptre in Smith's Dictionary of the Bible takes a not unlike view; the High Priest by gazing at the bright point in the Urim passed into a state of abstraction and saw visions. The antiquity and universality of some form of crystal-gazing is, as we have said, unquestionable. We find it in ancient as well as in modern Egypt, in x4ssyria, Persia and India, in Siberia, China and Japan, among the North American Indians, the Maoris of New Zealand, and various African tribes. It was practised by the Incas of Peru, and is still used among the natives of Australia, Polynesia and Madagascar. The practice was largely in use both in England and on the Continent in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and its exponents were neither fools nor charlatans, but often learned men of note.

Now let us turn to some of the modern evidence on behalf of crystal-gazing. Students will find ample details in the Proceedings of the S.P.R., vols. V. and viii., or in Mr. A. Lang's The Making of Religion, from which we will quote the following. Mr. Lang has a friend. Miss Angus, who is a remarkable " scryer." Miss Angus states —

" A lady one day asked me to'scry'out a friend of whom she would think. Almost immediately I exclaimed,'Here is an old, old lady looking at me with a triumphant smile on her face. She has a prominent nose and

DREAMS AND CRYSTAL- VISIONS 1^

nut-cracker chin. Her face is very much wrinkled, especially at the sides of her eyes, as if she were always smiling. She is wearing a little white shawl with a black edge. But... she can't be old, as her hair is quite brown, although her face looks so very, very old.' The picture then vanished, and the lady said that I had accurately described her friend's mother instead of himself; that it was a family joke that the mother must dye her hair, it was so brown, and she was eighty-two years old. The lady asked me if the vision were distinct enough for me to recognize a Hkeness in the son's photograph; next day she laid several photographs before me, and in a moment, without the slightest hesitation, I picked him out from his wonderful likeness to my vision." The facts were verbally communicated to and corroborated by Mr. A. Lang within a week of the occurrence.

Another case, also vouched for by Mr. A. Lang, is interesting as it appears to be a telepathic transfer of the vision, seen by Miss Angus, to a friend. Miss Rose —

'' At a recent experience of gazing, for the first time I was able to make another see what I saw in the crystal ball. Miss Rose called one afternoon, and begged me to look in the ball for her. I did so, and immediately exclaimed,'Oh, here is a bed, with a man in it looking very ill [I saw he was dead, but refrained from sa^nng so], and there is a lady dressed in black sitting beside the bed.' I did not recognize the man to be any one I knew, so I told her to

\46 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

look. In a very short time she called out,'Oh, I see the bed too. But, oh, take it away, the man is dead.' She got quite a shock, and said she would never look in it again. Soon, however, curiosity prompted her to have one more look, and the scene at once came back again, and slowly, from a misty object at the side of the bed, the lady in black became quite distinct. Then she described several people in the room, and said they were carrying something all draped in black. When she saw this, she put the ball down and would not look at it again. She called again on Sunday (this had been on Friday) with her cousin, and we teased her about being afraid of the crystal, so she said she would just look at it once more. She took the ball, but immediately laid it down again, saying,'No, I won't look, as the bed with the awful man in it is there again.'

'* When they went home, they heard that the cousin's father-in-law had died that (Sunday) afternoon, but to show he had never been in our thoughts, although we all knew he had not been well, no one suggested him; his name was never mentioned in connection with the vision."

With regard to this incident. Miss Rose, independently and without consultation with Miss Angus, wrote, that on looking at the glass ball after Miss Angus had said she saw a man ill in bed, —

" I received quite a shock, for there perfectly clearly in a bright light, I saw stretched out

in bed an old man, apparently dead; for a few minutes I could not look, and on doing so once more there appeared a lady in black, etc. At the time I saw this I was stapng with cousins and it was Friday evening. On Sunday we heard of the death of the father-in-law of one of my cousins, but my thoughts were not in the least about him when looking at the crystal. I may also say I did not recognize his features."

This looks like a prophetic vision, or precognition of the death two or three days before it actually occurred; it may be only a chance coincidence, but if the evidence on behalf of precognition compels us eventually to accept it this case may well come under that designation.

The follo^ving case is given by Sir Joseph Barnby, the well-known musician, and is quoted by Mr. Myers in his Human Personality, vol. i., p. 590. Sir J. Barnby writes —

" I was invited by Lord and Lady Radnor to the wedding of their daughter. Lady Wilma Bouverie, which took place August 15, 1889.

" I was met at Salisbury by Lord and Lady Radnor and driven to Longford Castle. In the course of the drive. Lady Radnor said to me:'We have a young lady. Miss A., staying with us in whom, I think, you will be much interested. She possesses the faculty of seeing visions, and is other%vise closely connected with the spiritual world. Only last night she was looking in her crystal and described a room which she saw therein, as a kind of London

dining-room. [The room described was not in London, but at L., and Miss A. particularlyremarked that the floor was in large squares of black and white marble — as it is in the big hall at L., where family prayers are said. — ■ H. M. Radnor.] With a httle laugh,'she added,'And the family are evidently at prayers, the servants are kneeling at the chairs round the room, and the prayers are being read by a tall and distinguished-looking gentleman with a very handsome, long grey beard.' With another little laugh, she continued: * A ladyjust behind him rises from her knees and speaks to him. He puts her aside with a wave of the hand, and continues his reading.' The young lady here gave a careful description of the lady who had risen from her knees.

" Lady Radnor then said:'From the description given I cannot help thinking that the two principal personages described are Lord and Lady L., but I shall ask Lord L. this evening as they are coming by a later train, and I should like you to be present when the answer is given.'

" The same evening, after dinner, I was talking to Lord L. when Lady Radnor came up to him and said:'I want to ask you a question. I am afraid you will think it is a very silly one, but in any case I hope you will not ask me why I have put the question?'To this Lord L. courteously assented. She then said:'Were you at home last night?'He replied,'Yes.' She said:'Were you having family prayers at such a time last

DREAIMS AND CRYSTAL- VIS IONS 149

evening?'With a slight look of surprise he replied,'Yes, we were.' She then said:'During the course of the prayers did Lady L. rise from her knees and speak to you, and did you put her aside with a wave of the hand?'Much astonished, Lord L. answered:'Yes, that was so, but may I inquire why you have asked this question?'To which Lady Radnor answered:'You promised you wouldn't ask me that.' "

In commenting on the account Mr. Myers adds —

" This incident has been independently recounted to me both by Lady Radnor and by Miss A. herself. Another small point not given by Sir J. Barnby is that Miss A. did not at first understand that family prayers were going on, but exclaimed:'Here are a number of people coming into the room. Why, they're smelling their chairs.' "

Among others who have the faculty of crystal -vision may be mentioned Miss Goodrich-Freer (now Mrs. Hans Spoer) — whose papers on this subject in the Proceedings of the S.P.R. (vol. v., etc.) are of great interest.

Space will not allow the quotation of further illustrations of this strange faculty. What we find is a mingling of mere fantasy, dream, memory, telepathy, and clairvoyance; sometimes apparently even pre\4sion and traces of spirit communion. " A random glimpse," as Mr. Myers says, " into inner visions, a reflection caught at some odd angle from the imiverse, as it shines through the perturbing

medium of that special soul." This, however, is precisely what we find in other directions of psychical research. The hidden subliminal self, sensitive to telepathic impress, emerges through various " autoscopes " accompanied with a medley of normal and supernormal knowledge. In fact, all autoscopes whether sensory or mechanical (p. 28) seem at times to become heteroscopes — " other viewers " — a means whereby some distant intelligence appears able to give fragmentary glimpses of its presence. Automatic writing tells us the same story, and only by patient and long-continued labour can we unravel the tangled skein and discover the high transcendent powers that lie concealed in even the humblest human personality.

CHAPTER XI. SUPERNORMAL PERCEPTION: SEEING WITHOUT EYES

SUPERNORMAL PERCEPTION.* SEEING WITHOUT EYES

The existence of some kind of supernormal percipience possessed by certain individuals has been widely believed in, as in cases of so-called second sight. The business of psychical research is to ascertain whether there is trustworthy evidence on behalf of that belief. The preceding chapter has afforded some evidence in its support, and we must devote the present chapter to a further examination of this subject.

In the mesmeric trance, a state of " lucidity " or " clairvoyance," as it was called, was asserted by competent observers in the middle of the last century. Thus, Dr. Mayo, F.R.S. (referred to on p. 70), gives cases he himself had witnessed, which he thought could only be explained by " seeing without eyes." The entranced patient often appeared to locate his organ of transcendental vision in his hand, or pit of the stomach, or any part of the body that lent itself to the illusion. In 1826, the French Medical Commission appointed to inquire into mesmerism

relates several cases in which persons in the mesmeric trance could describe objects or read lines in a book, when their eyes were bandaged or eyelids closed by the fingers. But this may be explained by thought-transference, as we are not told whether the operators knew the thing selected.

Here, for example, is a comparatively recent case, which appears on the borderland between telepathy and so-called clairvoyance. It is attested by one of the most eminent continental physiologists now living.

Professor C. Richet states (Proc. S.P.R., vol. vi.) —

" On Monday, July 2, 1888, after having passed all the day in my laboratory, I hypnotized Leonie at 8 p.m., and while she tried to make out a diagram concealed in an envelope I said to her quite suddenly:'What has happened to M. Langlois?'Leonie know^s ^L Langlois from having seen him two or three times some time ago in my physiological laboratory, where he acts as my assistant. 'He has burnt himself,' Leonie replied.'Good,' I said,'and where has he burnt himself?''On the left hand. It is not fire: it is — I don't know its name. Why does he not take care when he pours it out?'* Of what colour,' I asked,'is the stuff which he pours out?'' It is not red, it is brown; he has hurt himself very much — the skin puffed up directly.'

" Now, this description is admirably exact. At 4 p.m. that day M. Langlois had wished to

pour some bromine into a bottle. He had done this clumsily, so that some of the bromine flowed on to his left hand, which held the funnel, and at once burnt him severely. Although he at once put his hand into water, wherever the bromine had touched it a blister was formed in a few seconds — a blister which one could not better describe than by saying,'the skin puffed up.' I need not say that Leonie had not left my house nor seen any one from my laboratory. Of this I am absolutely certain, and I am certain that I had not mentioned the incident of the burn to any one. Moreover, this was the first time for nearly a year that M. Langlois had handled bromine, and when Leonie saw him six months before at the laboratory he was engaged in experiments of quite another kind."

We may regard this either as a case of telepathy or what has been termed "travelHng clairvoyance.'' The reputed evidence on behalf of the latter is indeed more widespread and more ancient than for the former. As Mr. A. Lang says, " Evidence proves that precisely similar beliefs as to man's occasional power of'opening the gates of distance'have been entertained in a great variety of lands and ages, and by races in every condition of culture." Mr. Lang gives instances of this among the Zulus, the Lapps, the Red Indians, the Peruvians, as well as cases, ancient and modem, of Scotch " second sight." Aubrey in his Miscellanies (1696), gives '' an accurate account of second-sighted men in Scotland,

in two letters from a learned friend of mine in Scotland." His learned correspondent concludes by remarking, " They generally term such as have this second sight Taishatrin.... Others call these men Phissichin from Phis, which is properly fore-sight or foreknowledge."

Swedenborg, who was in his day one of the leading savants of Europe, is alleged to have possessed this faculty, and occasionally could " open the gates of distance." The evidence was investigated at the time by the philosopher Kant, and is given in an appendix to his book, entitled Breams of a Spirit Seer.

The three most famous cases are: —

(1) Swedenborg's communication to the Queen of Sweden of some secret information, which she had asked him for, and believed that no living human being could have told him.

(2) The widow of the Dutch ambassador at Stockholm, Madame Harteville, was called upon by a goldsmith to pay for a silver service which her deceased husband had purchased. She believed that her husband had paid for it, but could not find the receipt; so she begged Swedenborg to ask her husband where it was. Three days later he came to her house and informed her, in the presence of some visitors, that he had conversed with her husband, and had learnt from him that the debt had been paid, and the receipt was in a bureau in an up-stairs room in her house. Madame Harteville replied that the cupboard had already been searched, but to no

purpose. Swedenborg answered that the ghost of her husband had said that after pulling out the left-hand drawer a board would appear, and on drawing out this a secret compartment would be disclosed, containing his private Dutch correspondence and the receipt. The whole company went upstairs, and the papers, with the receipt, were found, as described, in the secret compartment, of which no one had known before.

(3) In September 1759, at four o'clock on a Saturday afternoon, Swedenborg arrived at Gottenburg from England, and was in\ated by a friend to his house. Two hours after he went out, and then came back and informed the company that a dangerous fire had just broken out in Stockholm (which is about fifty German miles from Gottenburg), and that it was spreading fast; he was restless and went out often. He said that the house of one of his friends, whom he named, was already in ashes, and that his own was in danger. At eight o'clock, after he had been out again, he declared with joy that the fire was extinguished at the third door from his house. This news occasioned great commotion throughout the whole city, and was announced to the Governor the same evening.

On Sunday morning, Swedenborg was summoned to the Governor, who questioned him about the disaster. He described the fire precisely, how it had begun and in what manner it had ceased, and how long it had continued. On Monday evening a messenger

arrived at Gottenburg, who had been dispatched by the Board of Trade during the time of the fire. In the letters brought by him, the fire was described precisely as stated by Swedenborg, and next morning the news was further confirmed by information brought to the Governor by the Royal Courier. As Swedenborg had said, the fire had been extinguished at eight o'clock.

Sixty or seventy years ago, when the public were profoundly interested in the novel and wonderful accounts of mesmeric phenomena, many cases of alleged clairvoyance were noted by Dr. Elliotson and others who were constantly engaged in hypnotic treatment of patients. One of the most remarkable cases was that of a girl named Ellen Dawson, who had been subject to epileptic fits as a child, for which she had been treated mesmerically and with great success by a West-end surgeon, Mr. W. Hands. The latter, observing that Ellen, when in the trance, could apparently see objects without the use of her eyes, tried to cultivate her clairvoyant faculty, and, it is asserted, she developed a power of accurately describing distant places and persons she had never seen with her normal vision. If telepathy be accepted as a vera causa no doubt it affords a partial explanation, but the frequent relation of facts afterwards confirmed, though at the time unknown to the hypnotizer and others present, as well as the vividness and accuracy of description given by the subject, imduly strain any telepathic hypothesis.

SUPERNOmiAL PERCEPTION 157

Two most remarkable communications about Ellen Dawson's clairvoyance are to be found in the Zoist for 184-5. The first is from Mr. Hands, who states that in order to satisfy himself that Ellen did not use her normal vision, he filled the covers of two pillboxes with cotton-wool and tied one over each of Ellen's eyes with a broad strip of ribbon, taking care that the edges of the boxes rested on the skin: —

" Still she read and distinguished as before. I now placed her " (Mr. Hands continues) " in a room from which I had shut out every ray of light and then presented her with some plates in Cuvier's Animal Kingdom; she described the birds and beasts and told accurately the colour of each, as I proved by going into the light to test her statements. She also distinguished the shades and hues of silks."

This incident, assuming the observations are correct, presents an interesting psychological puzzle, as the colours of objects are due to their action on light rays, by selective absorption or otherwise; in the absence of light, colour, as our eyes know it, has no existence. If IVIr. Hands knew what the particular colours and coloured plates were, a telepathic explanation removes the difficulty, but apparently he did not, and telepathy does not explain other incidents. Thus Mr. Hands asked her to visit his birthplace, Berkeley (where Mrs. Hands was staying), 140 miles from London. She accurately

described the church at Berkeley and various monuments therein, and also the house where Mrs. Hands was staying; asked what the latter was doing, Ellen said she was pla^ang a game of cards, and described the other persons present. Then she exclaimed, " Mrs. H. has won the game and is getting up from her chair." All these details turned out to be perfectly correct, for Mr. Hands adds: "At this time (9 p.m.), as I subsequently learnt, Mrs. H. did rise from her chair, saying to her adversary,'I have beaten you completely.' "

On another occasion, a lady having lost her brooch, asked INIr. Barth if Ellen, whom she had not seen before, could trace it when entranced. Accordingly she was put to sleep, whereupon

" Ellen Dawson described a former servant of Mrs. M.'s, who she said had stolen the brooch, and said that she had kept the case with some diamonds in it in her trunk, and sold the brooch for a very small sum; that it was then in a place like a cellar, with'lots of other property,' silver spoons, etc., and that the servant had moved from the place she had lived at when she first left Mrs. M. This latter point was found to be correct, and Mrs. M. (who had suspected another of her servants), on the advice of the clairvoyant, sent for the girl to come to her house and taxed her with the theft. Finally, the girl confessed that she had stolen the brooch and pawned it, keeping the case and two diamond

chains which were worn with the brooch. All the property was finally recovered."

Many other well -attested cases by good observers were published both in England and the Continent some sixty years ago. Nor is the evidence for clairvoyance confined to the older mesmerists. One of the members of the S.P.R., Mr. Dobbie, living in Australia, has in recent years had several clairvoyants among subjects whom he had hypnotized. A case like the preceding one is given by him in the Proceedings of the S.P.R. Mr. Adamson, a leading citizen in Adelaide, communicates the facts, which are briefly as follows. His daughter had lost a trinket off her watchchain, and both went to Mr. Dobbie to see if his clairvoyant could trace it. When entranced, the clairvoyant described what the trinket was, where it was lost, the person who found it, and the place where he had put it, and gave so exact a description of the house that it was readily found. Not only was the trinket thus recovered, but on questioning the finder, Mr. Adamson learnt that it was picked up on the road exactly as the clairvoyant had described.

In another case in which the clairvoyant was tested, she accurately described what a gentleman, then fifty miles away, was doing, the furniture in the room where he was, and a book he was holding. On returning home a week later, the gentleman was astonished to hear what the clairvoyant had said, and stated that she was perfectly correct in every

particular, even to the book which he had purchased on his journey from home. (Proc. S.P.R., vol. vii., p. 68 et seq.)

Some critics have objected that the evidence on behalf of clairvoyance is never written down before the facts are confirmed; this, however, has been done, as in the following case sent to us by an American naturalist, Dr. Elliot Coues, of Washington. It seems that a friend of Dr. Coues, Mrs. Conner, was going up the steps of her residence in Washington one afternoon, carrying some papers, when she stumbled and fell. About the same moment a friend of hers, Mrs. B., had a singular vision of the whole incident whilst she was in her own house a mile and a half away. The vision was so vivid that Mrs. B. wrote to IMrs. Conner the same evening about it, telling her, in a letter seen by Dr. Coues, that when sewing in her room at two o'clock that afternoon "what should I see but your own dear self... falling up the front steps in the yard. You had on your black skirt and velvet waistband, your little straw bonnet, and, in your hand, some papers. When you fell your hat went in one direction and the papers in another. It was all so plain to me that I had ten notions to one to dress and come over and see if it were true. Is there any possible truth in it? I can distinctly call to mind the house in which you live, but can't for the life of me tell whether there are any steps."

On investigation it appears that not only

was the description of the dress, bonnet, etc., perfectly correct, but also the entrance to the house and the steps up to it. Mrs. Conner had only moved to this house a

few days before and Mrs. B had never

seen it. {Journal S.P.R., vol. iv., p. 89.)

Perhaps the most extraordinary and apparently unimpeachable evidence of clairvoyance is given in a little book kindly sent to me by Dr. Heysinger, of Philadelphia, who suggests the term telegnosis, or knowing at a distance, instead of clairvoyance. The book bears the strange title of '' 'K -\- Y = Z, or the Sleeping Preacher of North Alabama." It was published in 1876, and includes statements by numerous witnesses of the supernormal knowledge possessed by the sleeping preacher, as he was called, a respected Presbyterian minister, the Rev. C. B. Sanders. Additional corroboration of the facts was obtained by Professor W. James and Dr. Hodgson. The late U.S. Chief Justice Brickell, whose home was near Mr. Sanders' residence, states that the witnesses named in the book are of the highest character, and some of considerable learning. In this case any explanation by fraud, collusion, or fabrication cannot be suggested. It seems from the evidence of the medical man, Dr. Thach, who attended Mr. Sanders, that his patient periodically went into trances, often accompanied with violent paroxysms and extreme sensitiveness to touch. It was during these trances that Mr. Sanders became conscious of events taking place at a distant spot

to which his attention was directed. On returning to his normal state, he was totally ignorant of anything that had occurred during the trance or " sleep," — which lasted from a few minutes to days. During the sleep Mr. Sanders ignored his own name, and signed himself X + Y = Z.

The Rev. G. W. Mitchell, who gives a careful record of the evidence relating to Mr. Sanders' clairvoyance, quotes sixty-nine witnesses who testify to the fact that during his sleep he described incidents afterwards verified, which could not possibly have been known to him through normal means. Among these witnesses are ten clergymen and six physicians, the evidence being corroborated by others present. We have only space to quote one or two incidents. Here, for example, is an amusing case. Mr. Sanders having been confined to his bed from a dislocated thigh, a neighbouring minister, the Rev. De Witt, one day took him over some delicacy and had to cross a fence before getting to the house. Having both hands full and the fence being very unstable, with its top rail loose, he nearly tumbled off in crossing it. On arriving at Mr. Sanders' house, more than half a mile away, he found Mr. Sanders in his so-called " sleep," but animated and laughing, saying he was greatly amused at the predicament in which De Witt had been placed in crossing the fence with his hands full. As it was impossible to see the fence from the house and no one else present had witnessed the occurrence.

Mr. De Witt was greatly astonished. A friend who was present at the time, Mr. J. W. Pruitt, writes as follows concerning this incident —,

" I certify that one day about the middle of the month of February 1866, while Brother Sanders was confined to his bed from a dislocated thigh, I was at his house, and he was lying in his bed and in one of his so-called'sleeps.' He attracted my attention by a hearty laugh. I asked him the cause of his amusement. He replied,'I was laughing at De Witt.' I asked what was De Witt doing. He said,'He was having a hard scuffle to keep from falling off the fence, for the top rail was turning with him and he was trying to keep from falling over it.' Nothing more was said on the subject until De Witt arrived, which was in ten or fifteen minutes.

" The fence where the difficulty occurred was from three-fourths to a mile distant, on the other side of a thick grove of timber and underbush, and of an intervening hill.

" And I further certify that no communication from any person or source was received in reference to De Witt until he arrived and confirmed what Mr. Sanders said.

" J. W. Pruit."

Several cases, corroborated by witnesses, are also recorded of Mr. Sanders' knowledge that a distant person was just dying or dead, of accidents occurring to friends at some

distance, of a fire taking place in a distant town, with a description of a shop in which it broke out and the extent of its ravages, much resembhng the far vision of Swedenborg already quoted. Various cases are also given of Mr. Sanders in his sleep finding lost articles, coins, a watch-chain, and specifying correctly where they would be found. Here is a striking instance, attested by three witnesses; Mr. Bentley writes —

" Some time during the summer [1867] a bunch of keys, among which was my wheatgarner key, was lost. After a lapse of about one week, I requested Mr. William White, who was employed in the store and boarded at the Rev. C. B. Sanders' in the village, on going to his dinner, to ask him to tell me where my keys were. On his return Mr. White said he made the request; but Mr. Sanders paid no attention to what he said, he being in one of his spells. However, during the same afternoon, while my younger sister, in company with other persons, was at his house, he told her that my keys were under the steps at the west door of my dwelling. In consequence of this information I returned home earlier than usual. As soon as I arrived, I told my wife what I had heard. She ran immediately and found the keys under the doorstep, just as Mr. Sanders had said; and somewhat rusty. They must have been thrown there a week before by a little child that played about the house.

'' I add that I know Mr. Sanders had not been in my house, nor on the place for at least twelve months before that time.

" A. J. Bentley."

The other witnesses present certify that " the above statements are true, as far as they relate to us personally; and that we heard all the particulars as above mentioned, at the time they occurred." Another case of the finding of a gold coin from I\Ir. Sanders' description of the exact position in which it was actually discovered is signed by four witnesses, but the details are too long to quote here.

Some may be disposed to say, if these facts are well established why does not Scotland Yard keep a professional clairvoyant? Like all other psychical phenomena such cases as we have described are rare, and frequently normal and supernormal knowledge are intermixed. At present, at any rate, they must be studied for their scientific interest rather than for their practical utility. It is said that, years ago a challenge was made to give a £1,000 bank-note, enclosed in a sealed opaque box, to any clairvoyant who could read its jiumber. A similar challenge has been made "as I write these pages, for a conclusive proof of thought-transference. Others, no doubt, would give a large multiple of this simi for a demonstrative evidence of survival after death. All such pecuniary short-cuts to gain knowledge are futile. Those who wish to

arrive at any definite conclusions with regard to either rare normal or alleged supernormal phenomena must pay due attention to the subject and study the evidence of trustworthy and independent witnesses, as the late Professor Tait said concerning the phenomenon of '* globe-lightning."

We may close this chapter by recalling Goethe's remark to Eckermann: "If any one advances anything new... people resist ^\ith all their might; they act as if they neither heard nor could comprehend; they speak of the new view with contempt, as if it were not worth the trouble of even so much as an investigation or a regard; and thus a new truth may wait a long time before it can make its way."

CHAPTER XII. THE SO-CALLED DIVINING- OR DOWSING-ROD

THE SO-CALLED DIVINING- OR DOWSING-ROD

The singular success of certain " dowsers " in locating underground water, hard by wells that had been sunk in vain, led the Council of the S.P.R. to ask me to investigate and report upon this subject some twenty years ago. Like most people, I was at that time not only sceptical but inclined to scoff at what seemed a mere relic of an ancient superstition. Scientific men as a body held that dowsers were merely clever charlatans and the twisting of the forked rod a bit of stage-play. It soon became evident that such views were absurd, — for one thing many successful dowsers were amateurs, whose good faith it was impossible to question. Men of distinction and of high rank, church dignitaries, and even the president of a geological society, informed me they were unable to restrain the motion of the forked twig and abundant water had been found at the places so indicated. Nor was their success due to the detection of surface signs of water, for ignorant country-folk and young children were no less successful as dowsers. In fact the evidence on behalf of dowsers, in

finding comparatively shallow supplies of potable water in very unlikely spots, was far more extensive and remarkable than one had imagined. Hence the collection and verification at first hand of such evidence, the experimental tests made and the hunting up the history of the subject became a formidable task and it was not until after some years that my first lengthy report was published in the Proceedings of the S.P.R. for 1895. This was followed by a second lengthy report in 1900, and abundant materials have since accumulated for a third report.

Obviously in a brief survey such as this it will be impossible to do more than relate a few cases personally investigated, and give an outline of the conclusions arrived at, referring those who wish for fuller information to the monographs mentioned above.

So far as historical researches in the British Museum and other libraries extend, the first mention of the forked rod, or virgula divina, as it was then called, appears to be in an ancient Latin folio, entitled Sebastian Munster's Cosmography published early in 1500. At that time the rod was only used in the search for metallic ores, and a quaint picture is given in this work of a diviner striding over the hilly country with his uplifted forked rod prospecting for minerals. A little later the first great treatise on Mining, Agricola's De re metallica, published in Basle in 1540, gives a more detailed account of its use for this purpose, with a couple of admirable plates showing the

diviner at work. Agricola calls the rod the virgula furcata, forked rod, to distinguish it from the virgula divina, the name attached to the ancient superstitious practice of rhabdomancy, — divining by bits of sticks, referred to by Cicero and other classical writers. Nevertheless, the word divining-rod has persisted, together with some of the superstitious notions attached to the old virgula.

The miners of Saxony and the Hartz mountains seem to have been the first to use the forked rod. Possibly they were led to its use from the belief, once universal, even among educated men like Melanchthon, that metallic ores attracted certain trees w^hich thereupon drooped over the place where those ores were to be found; the drooping no doubt being due to the soil or other causes. A branch of the tree was therefore cut and held to see where it drooped; later on a branch was held in each hand and the extremities tied together as shown in an old Italian plate; finally, for convenience, a forked branch was cut, the two ends grasped one in each hand with palms upwards, the arms of the holder were then brought to the side of the body, so that the forked rod was held in somewhat unstable equilibrium, and the " diviner " set forth on his quest with, in old time, certain solemnities and invocations.

In Queen Elizabeth's reign the exploitation of the Cornish mines was entrusted to a few notable " Merchant Venturers," who went over to Saxony to examine the best methods

of prospecting and mining ore. These merchant venturers probably brought back with them a " diviner " with his rod, for soon after we find its use common in Cornwall. Now, the colloquial German word for the rod was then schlag-ruthe or striking rod; this, translated into the Middle English, became the duschan or striking rod, and finally " deusing or dowsing rod." Locke, born under the shadow of the Mendips, where the rod early came into use in the search for lead ore, is the first writer using the word " deusing rod," in 1691. To dowse or " strike " the sail is still a common expression in Cornwall, so we get the word *' dowser " now used throughout the south-west of England. The phrase to " strike " the lode in a mine, or to " strike " oil, may thus have arisen. The esteem in which the dowsing-rod was held by old English miners is shown by a passage in Robert Boyle's famous scientific essays pubHshed in 1663, and still more by Pryce's standard work on Cornish mines published in 1778. Pryce tells us that nearly all the Cornish mines were located by the dowsing-rod and to the present day it is widely used for this purpose.

It was not until near the end of the eighteenth century that the rod was used in England for "finding underground water, and as might be expected it first came into use for this purpose in the south-west of England. Two centuries earlier it was employed for this purpose in the south of Europe. For in a recent admirable Life of St. Teresa of Spain, the

following incident is narrated: Teresa in 1568 was offered the site for a convent to which there was only one objection, there was no water supply; happily, a Friar Antonio came up with a twig in his hand, stopped at a certain spot and appeared to be making the sign of the cross; but Teresa says, " Really I cannot be sure if it were the sign he made, at any rate he made some movement with the Uvig and then he said,'Dig just here '; they dug, and lo! a plentiful fount of water gushed forth, excellent for'drinking, copious for washing, and it never ran dry.' " As the writer of this Life remarks: " Teresa, not having heard of dowsing, has no explanation for this event," and regarded it as a miracle. This, I beheve, is the first historical reference to dowsing for water. In a Httle book published at Lyons in 1693, entitled La verge de Jacob (it should be called, as Sir Thomas Browne remarks, " theMosaical rod," not Jacob's rod), pictures are given showing different kinds of rod, or baguette, different ways of holding it, and the success attending those who can use it in discovering springs. Other and more learned \sTiters of that date, such as the Abbe de Vallemont (1695) and Father le Brun (1702), deal with the mystery of the baguette and afford e\adence of its widespread use in water-finding throughout arid districts in the south of France.

As stated in a previous chapter, the use of the baguette in the seventeenth century, especially in the south of France, spread to many

other hidden things, such as the finding of buried treasure and even the tracking of criminals! Jacques Aymar, a poor mason of Dauphiny, obtained great reputation as a soiircier in 1692, and when a terrible murder was committed in a wine- shop in Lyons he was sent for to track the criminals with his baguette, as no trace of them could be found. The whole details of this famous case have been preserved in contemporar}- documents. Arriving at the scene of the murder with his rod, Aymar started off in pursuit of the murderers like a bloodhound on the scent: he tracked them to the river Rhone, followed them from place to place, discovered there were three engaged in the crime, traced two of them till they crossed the frontier, finally ran down the other one, a hunchback, who w^as arrested, confessed the crime, and was executed: the last person in Europe who suffered that terrible penalty of being " broken at the wheel." Strangely enough the depositions made at the trial showed that Aymar was correct in every detail, witnesses testifying to the flight and halting-places of the culprits in the very places Aymar had indicated. The keen interest this case excited, and the critical examination it underwent, is sho\Mi by the large amount of literature it called forth for some years afterwards, and Aymar became notorious throughout Europe. He was, however, subsequently somewhat discredited owing to his failure in some tests devised by the Prince de Conde.

The often fallacious and mischievous results which followed the indiscriminate use of the baguette for all sorts of purposes rightly led to its use being prohibited in the moral world early in the eighteenth century. Its widespread use in finding underground water nevertheless continued throughout France and many other parts of Europe. One of the physicians of Louis XVI, Dr. Thouvenel, published able and lengthy reports in 1781 and 1784 of the results of his critical tests of a sourcier named Bleton, a charity boy, who was perhaps the most remarkable dowser known in history. According to contemporary evidence, Bleton by his discovery of numerous underground springs in an arid province in France " converted a desert into a fruitful country." Nor must we suppose, as we are apt to do, that the critical and sceptical spirit belongs exclusively to ourselves or to our own age; such startling results as were achieved by Bleton led to the most searching inquiry, the severest tests were applied, and many of the most sceptical were convinced.

Later on, in our own country, De Quincey tells us of the wonderful success of the " jowsers," as he calls them, in Somerset, where in certain parts underground water is very hard to locate, and where scientific skill is frequently at fault. At the present day landowners and well-sinkers in the south-west of England, when in difficulty where to sink a well, almost invariably employ a dowser; usually an uneducated man who has discovered that he possesses this peculiar "gift," as he terms it. The use of the dowsing-rod has also spread to America, where it is employed not only in the search for underground ores and water, but also for finding oil-springs. Here, however, as mentioned on p. 22, a sort of plumb-bob, suspended by a wire or chain, is frequently employed, as it is also in some parts of France. A recent number of the Journal of the American S.P.R. gives some striking results of numerous successful tests made with a dowser using this ancient magic pendulum.

During the latter half of the nineteenth century in England, among other notable dowsers, John Mullins, of Wiltshire, achieved extraordinary success in locating underground water, especially when all other means had failed. In some districts, of course, underground water can be found anywhere upon digging down a few feet, e. g. where a bed of gravel rests upon an impermeable bed of clay; but these are places where the dowser is rarely called in. It is in what may be called " fissure water," which is the geologist's difficulty, that the dowser's opportunity occurs. At first it seemed to me probable that the successful results were merely due to the dowser having a shrewd eye for the ground, experience having taught him the surface signs of underground water. But this hypothesis broke down; then it seemed likely his success was due to lucky hits, which were remembered and the failures forgotten: this theory also had to be given up.

Finally, and with reluctance, I was driven to the conclusion that certain persons really possessed an instinct or faculty new to science, of which the muscular spasm, that causes the twisting of the forked rod, is the outward and visible sign. It is impossible to give here even an outline of the evidence on which this conclusion rests; a brief summary of a few remarkable cases, w^hich I have personally investigated, is all that can be attempted.

The late Sir Henry Harben had built a mansion, water towers, etc., on his fine estate near Horsham, in Sussex. He then had a well, 90 feet deep, sunk, hoping to get water, but the well was dry. Acting upon expert advice, he next had a well, 55 feet deep, sunk in another place, with no result. Then he was advised to sink a third well at another spot; this was done, and a huge well, 100 feet deep, was sunk in the Horsham clay; alas! little or no water was found. Scientific experts then advised him to run adits in different directions at the bottom of this big well. This he did at the cost of £1,000, but the result was a complete failure. Finally in despair, he reluctantly sent for the dowser John Mullins. Sir Henry met him at the station, drove him to his place, and gave him no information. Mullins perambulated the estate holding his forked twig, and, after searching for some time in vain, at last the dowsing-rod turned violently, and he asserted an abundant supply of water would be obtained at that spot at a depth of under 20 feet; another spot was found close

by, and both were on a small elevation. Two wells were dug at these spots, through a sandstone rock, and an immense perennial supply of excellent water was found at about 15 feet deep. It is true, shallow wells are generally objectionable, but this happens to be an excellent potable water, as it comes from the hill -top. This sandstone cap pver the Horsham clay was unsuspected, being covered with surface soil and grass. The explanation of the dow^ser's success might possibly have been attributed to a sharp eye for the ground, had it not been for the fact that the dowser was no geologist, was a stranger to the locality, and the spot had been passed over by the scientific experts previously engaged.

' The next case is still more remarkable, and here J. Mullins was also concerned. In 1887 the proprietors of an extensive bacon factory at Waterford, Messrs. Richardson & Co., needed a larger water supply than they possessed; accordingly, they had a well 62 feet deep sunk at the most promising spot, but no water was found. They then obtained professional advice, and, based on geological considerations, determined to have a boring made at another spot. This was carried out and a bore-hole 292 feet deep was sunk, and, as only a trifling quantity of water was obtained, the bore-hole was widened; but it was no use, the jrield of water was so insignificant that the bore-hole was abandoned. The next year, acting upon other skilled advice,

they had a bore-hole, 7 inches diameter, sunk at the bottom of the 62-feet well. The work was undertaken by the Diamond-drill Rockboring Company. With difficulty, 612 feet were bored through a very hard silurian rock, but no water was obtained. The boring was, however, continued 838 feet deeper, or a total of 950 feet, which — added to the depth of the well — made 1,012 feet in all from the surface. The result was a complete failure, and this borehole, which cost nearly £1,000, was abandoned. Then, acting upon the best geological advice, another spot was selected, and a bore-hole 52 feet deep was made. The strata encountered were, however, identically the same, and geologists advised the firm to go no farther, as the quest was hopeless. They were considering the advisability of moving their factory elsewhere when they were urged to try John Mullins, the English dowser. Mullins was sent for from Wiltshire. He came over, was told nothing of what had been done, he walked over the premises, about 700 by 300 feet in area, asked no questions, but traversed the ground silently, holding his dowsing-rod. Suddenly, at one spot, only a few yards from the deep bore-hole, the forked twig twisted so violently that it broke in his hands. Here Mullins declared there was an abundant supply of water, which he estimated would be found at 80 or 90 feet below the surface. At two or three other places hard by the rod also twisted as he walked in and out of the sheds. Boring was begun at

the spot indicated by Mullins, where the rod broke. It was considered a waste of money, and a local geologist was asked to report progress to an officer of the Irish Geological Survey. His letters, written at the time, I have been allowed to copy, and the result reads like a fairy tale. At a depth of rather less than 90 feet water suddenly rushed up the bore-hole, pumping was begun, and so great was the yield that the bore-hole was enlarged to a well, and from that time (1889) to the present an unfailing supply of excellent water, of from 3,000 to 5,000 gallons an hour, has been obtained from the dowser's well. ]Mr. Kilroe, of H.M. Geological Survey, has kindly investigated the whole matter for me, and his report shows that Mullins must have struck a line of fault or narrow fissure in the hard " ordovician rock," as the water-bearing points he fixed on all lie in a straight line. Through this fissure the water, no doubt, streamed from the adjacent high ground, but there were no surface indications of this fissure, as the rock was covered by 40 feet of boulder clay.

Here, again, are the results of some severe tests to which an amateur dowser, ]\Ir. J. H. Jones, of Waterford, was submitted by an experienced lawyer, my friend Sir John Franks, C.B., the former Secretary to the Irish Land Commission. Sir John wanted a water supply on some property of his in West Kilkenny, and, being very sceptical as to dowsing, tested Mr. Jones as follows. It

seems there are some old long-disused wells on the property with nothing on the surface to show where they were. Sir John writes to me that Mr. Jones, who was a stranger to him and to thelocahty, " had never been over the ground before and knew nothing of these wells, which were only apparent when quite close, with no paths leading to them; he (Mr. Jones) quartered the ground backwards and forwards like a dog looking for game... found the direction of flow of the water, followed it steadily until he hit off the place where the concealed wells are. The last test was quite wonderful, as I brought him quite half a mile away to the top of the watershed, to a place from which he could not have had an idea where the well opened, in a spot quite out of sight until one got within two yards of it, but he hit it off with absolute accuracy. In the place where he indicated a site to sink for a new well, there were no surface indications at all, and it was quite half a mile away from any of the old wells. We had to cut and blast principally through solid rock, 38 feet down before we hit the spring. There are now 20 feet of water in this well."

I was anxious to put the dowser to the test of comparing his indications with those of another independent dowser, and ascertaining whether both would indicate the same spots where water would be found, and also where it would not be found. A site was therefore selected on a mountain slope in Co. Wicklow which no dowser had ever visited,

and where the most shrewd observer could not possibly predict beforehand the presence or absence of underground water at any particular spot. The rock is sandstone and quartzite, and water springs only occur in a few places. I sent for a good English dowser, Mr. W. Stone, who came over specially from Lincolnshire, where he hved. The field was covered with grass, and the bed-rock was believed to be only a few feet below the surface. The dowser marched to and fro, and fixed on two spots where he said plenty of water would be found within 20 feet from the surface, and another adjacent spot where he said no w^ater would be found. Then I took him to another field on the other side of the mountain, here he declared no water would be found anywhere, the forked twig refusing to move in his hands.

A second dowser, a successful amateur, was then tried a few weeks later; he knew nothing of the previous dowser's visit. His indications exactly coincided with those of the first dowser. Boring apparatus was obtained and a set of bore-holes were made, first in one field, then in the other. The bed-rock was deeper than we thought, and after boring through 16 feet of hard, dry boulder clay, at the spot where the dowser said water would be found, a splendid spring of water was encountered. At the spot, a few yards distant, where the dowser said there was no water, we bored down to the solid rock, and spent a week boring into the rock, but no water was

found. At the third place where he predicted water we found on boring a splendid supply at 18 feet below the surface. The first and third borings showed that a bed of sand and gravel, through which the underground water streamed, lay above the bedrock and below the surface boulder clay. But how had the dowser hit upon this permeable water-line, when there was nothing whatever to indicate its presence? In the other field, on the other side of the mountain, which seemed much more likely to be water-bearing, but where both the dowsers said no water would be found, we bored in several places down to the solid rock, spending nearly a month making bore-holes, but not a drop of water was found.

It was in consequence of the unexpected and plentiful supply of water found in the first mountain field, that I secured the land for the purpose of a country cottage, which was subsequently built, and a well sunk in place of the bore-hole; even in times of great drought — when most springs have run dry — this well at Carrigoona has never failed.

These cases are only illustrations (though striking ones) of upwards of a hundred other cases I have investigated of the dowser's success when other means had failed. No doubt there are rogues who pretend to be dowsers, and who hopelessly fail when underground water is difficult to locate; and, no doubt also, when a large water supply to a town is needed, it would be far better to seek

skilled geological advice than trust to even the best dowser.

The twisting of the forked twig occurs with many persons who are not good dowsers; with such any subconscious suggestion will start its motion. A dowser requires to be tested before he can be relied upon, and it is always better before sinking a well to have the independent evidence of more than one water-finder: for the dowser is by no means infallible, though he generally thinks he is.

What is the explanation of this peculiar gift, or instinct, if such it be, that is possessed by a good dowser? The dowser himself usually thinks it is electricity, but that is only a convenient, and to the ignorant a meaningless, word, used to account for any mysterious occurrence. If the dowser knows that he himself or his forked twig is insulated from the ground, it is true the rod will not work, but if he doesnH know it, although good insulation has secretly been effected, the rod works as well as ever, and vice versa. Precisely the same effect of suggestion occurs, if the dowser be tried with' radio-active substances and is disposed to believe that is the cause: or if he believes the rod moves upward for approaching underground water and downward on receding from it; or if it turns, for minerals when he holds a piece of ore in his hand, or for water if he holds a wet rag, or just the reverse of this, as is actually the case in some parts. All these are well-known

effects of suggestion, and the dowser is a verysuggestible subject.

The sudden twisting of the twig, even the violent breaking of one branch of it, upon attempting to restrain its gyration, is an involuntary act, and probably only a remarkable instance of unconscious muscular action, as explained in Chapter II. It is true that cultured men of scientific tastes who are dowsers, like Dean Ovenden, utterly deny this explanation of its sudden motion and believe an unknown force of some kind is the true cause; but if so, it must be an external force of which we have not the remotest conception. The chief question, however, is the nature of the faculty which leads a good dowser to discover the hidden spring or metallic ore when other means have failed.

The explanation, I believe, is not physical, but psychical. All the evidence points to the fact that the good dowser subconsciously possesses the faculty of clairvoyance, a supersensuous perceptive power such as we have described in a previous chapter. This gives rise to an instinctive, but not conscious, detection of the hidden object for which he is in search. This obscure and hitherto unrecognized human faculty reveals itself by creating an automatic or involuntary muscular spasm that twists the forked rod. Sometimes it produces a curious malaise or transient discomfort, which furnishes some dowsers with a sufficient indication to enable them to dispense with the use of a forked

twig, or loop of wire, used by some. This hypothesis I have put to the test of experiment with a good amateur dowser and found he really possessed this kind of second sight. If so dowsers ought to be able to find other hidden things, besides water and minerals, and this is the case. Long ago the divining-rod was used in the search for buried treasure and hidden coins, and although we may smile at such credulity, nevertheless there is in recent times good evidence of the dowser John Mullins repeatedly finding carefully hidden coins. With two amateur dowsers, Mr. J. F. Young and Miss Miles, I have made numerous experiments to ascertain their powers in this respect. The experiments were in all cases arranged so as to exclude the possibility of their gaining any knowledge, from unconscious indications given by myself, of the position of the coin, hidden in their absence. To get rid of possible telepathy was more difficult; the person who alone knew where the coin was hidden was excluded from the room and unaw^are when the trial was begun; this made no difference in the results, w^hich, though not invariably successful, were far beyond any success that could be achieved by mere chance.

There is, therefore, very strong presumptive evidence that a good dowser is one who possesses a supernormal perceptive power, seeing as it were without eyes. Like other supernormal faculties it resides in the subliminal self and usually reveals itself through

some involuntary muscular action. Possibly a like faculty of discernment beyond the power of vision may exist in certain animals and birds, and afford an explanation of the mystery of many otherwise inexplicable cases of homing and migratory instincts.

If the case of Jacques Aymar, narrated on a previous page, can be relied on, it might be accounted for by an extension of the clairvoyant faculty to the supernormal detection of traces of scent or footprints left by the criminals. Records exist of certain old Indian tribes in Mexico, among whom were certain persons possessing a like faculty, and from the Indian word for these men came the name Zahoris (meaning gifted with second sight or clairvoyant) applied to wandering individuals in Spain in the sixteenth century, of whom are related (as early as 1515) wonderful stories of their strange occult gifts of vision, etc.

Whatever truth there may be in these old stories, we are less inclined to ridicule them as fables after the conclusions to which we have been led as regards dowsing. These conclusions are: (1) that those w^ho really possess this curious faculty are rare, and many pretenders exist; the good dowser is a case of nascitur non fit; (2) the involuntary motion of the forked twig which occurs with certain persons, is due to a muscular spasm that may be excited in different ways; (3) the explanation of the success of good dowsers, after prolonged and crucial tests, is — like that of

any other obscure human faculty or instinct — a matter for further physiological and ps3^chological research, though provisionally we may entertain the working hypothesis suggested, viz. unconscious clairvoyance, an aspect of w^hat Mr. Myers terms tekesthesiat " perception at a distance."

CHAPTER XIII. HAUNTINGS AND POLTERGEISTS

HAUNTINGS AND POLTERGEISTS

Among the most popular of traditional "ghost-stories" are those of haunted houses and places. Cases of reputed hauntings are to be found in the literature of all countries, both ancient and modern, the types remaining alike throughout.

This inveterate persistency of species in I ghost-stories appears rather curiously in a 'letter of the younger Pliny to his friend Sura, ([containing three stories of three still well-marked types: a premonitory vision, a haunted house, and a " poltergeist." Of these the first, about Curtius Rufus, an eminent public man, is also told, more briefly, by Pliny's friend Tacitus in the eleventh book of his Annals. The second has the most orthodox features of conventional fiction. A commodious residence in Athens had long stood empty, its tenants routed by the nightly visits of a spectral old man of extremely emaciated and squalid appearance, with long beard and dishevelled hair, rattling the chains on his feet and hands, who so alarmed the beholders that some of them died. The

philosopher Athenodorus, seeing the house for sale on extraordinarily low terms, resolved to investigate the spectre and took up his abode there — a pioneer among psychical researchers. As he sat alone at midnight, the inevitable ghost appeared, and with beckoning hand and clanking chains led him to a place in the area of the house, where it vanished. Marking the place, Athenodorus next day induced the magistrates to order excavations, which disclosed a fettered skeleton. Whereupon the bones being publicly interred, with propitiatory rites, the house was haunted no more! In conclusion, Pliny begs his friend to consider the subject carefully; "and though," he adds, "you should as usual balance between two opinions, yet I hope that you will lean more to one side than the other, lest you should dismiss me in the same suspense and indecision that occasions you the present application." Pliny was neither the first nor the last of puzzled psychical researchers.

A century later, Lucian, in his Philopseudis, characteristically ridicules a similar story about a house in Corinth. The poltergeist related by Pliny was of a very simple type, merely an account of how " supernatural " visitants cut off the hair of certain of Pliny's servants, when they were asleep, and strewed it about the room.

Ancient and widespread as is the belief in hauntings, the evidence for the most part is open to suspicion, hence few educated

persons have been disposed to accept a supernormal origin for the stories, believing that some simple explanation would be found to cover the ground, such as rats, or owls, or practical joking. The subject cannot, however, be so easily dismissed, for the careful investigations made by the S.P.R. have shown that amid much that is absurd and exaggerated certain cases remain which cannot be explained away by illusion or practical jokes. At the same time we rarely find anything corresponding to the traditional ghost-story, like that of Pliny, which connects some tragedy in a particular house or place, with the vague and often confused accounts of sights or sounds which perplex or terrify the observer. We often wonder w^hy the numerous cases carefully investigated by the S.P.R. and recorded in its publications have not been used by writers to furnish the mystery-loving public with ghost-stories more in accordance with fact. Here, for instance, is a remarkable case, which has stood the test of long and searching inquiry. The accoimt was first received in 1884 through Mr. J. W. Graham, Principal of Dalton Hall, Manchester, and the case subsequently investigated by Mr. Myers. To avoid injury to the owner of the house the locahty is not stated, and also the name " Morton " is substituted for the real family name, but the initials are the true ones. Miss " Morton " — a brief outline of whose account is given below — is a lady of scientific training and an exceptionally good witness.

" In April 1882 Captain Morton and his family moved into a detached house at the corner of two cross roads, with a lawn and a short carriage-drive in front, and a garden and small orchard at the back. It was built in 1860, and occupied by Mr. S. and his family for sixteen years. His wife died there one August (year uncertain), whereupon Mr. S. took to drink, and when, two years afterw^ards, he married again his second wife contracted the same habit. They quarrelled continually, and a few months before his death, which occurred in July 1876, she left him, and lived at Clifton, till, in September 1878, she died of dipsomania, and was buried about a quarter of a mile from the house in question. After Mr. S.'s death it was occupied for six months by Mr. L. and his family. He died there, and it then remained empty for about four years, during which time the grounds are said to have been haunted by the figure of a lady, but the Mortons had heard no rumours. From June 1882 until 1889 there was frequently seen moving about within and without the house, by day and night, the apparition of a tall lady in widow's weeds, holding a handkerchief to her face, and seemingly weeping. The figure was believed to resemble the second Mrs. S., but in what degree the concealment of the face makes doubtful. It often went into the drawing-room, taking up a position in a window, where the second IVIrs. S. used to sit.

The wraith was first, and most frequently,

seen by the eldest Miss M., who followed it, spoke to it, when it would stop as if about to speak, but never did so; tried to touch it, but found it elude her grasp, vanishing when cornered, though in full view a moment before. Then with scientific care, she tested its immateriality by stretching lightly across the stairs fine threads, at various heights from the ground; twice, at least, she saw the figure pass through the threads, yet its passage left them undisturbed. Its footsteps were faintly audible. Later on it was seen by Miss M.'s sisters and brother, to whom she had not mentioned it, and by visitors and servants, in all about twenty persons. Neither her father nor her mother, who was an invalid, ever saw it. Miss M. sometimes saw it when other persons present did not. It often vanished at a door leading into the garden. Once it was seen by Miss M. and her sister to i)ass from the drawing-room along the passage, and disappear at this door, while their sister E., coming in from the garden, said she had seen it emerge from the steps outside: the three sisters then went into the garden, when a fourth sister called from an upper window that she had just seen it pass across the front lawn and along the carriage-drive to the orchard. This is a noticeable feature in the case, since it seems probable that the figure was traced by independent observers through the successive points in space which a material body would have occupied in going from the drawingroom to the orchard; and this, prima facie.

implies some spatial relations. Mrs. Sidgwick observes {Proc. S.P.R.y vol. iii., p. 146) that, in the absence of accurate notes of the time, we cannot be certain that the appearances zvere successive, or in the order assumed, as a phantom might possibly appear in several places at once — which is doubtless true; but we seem to have no records of such an occurrence.

The figure was seen most frequently in the months of July, August and September, which include the anniversaries of the deaths of Mr. S. and his wives. The frequency was at its maximum in the summer of 1884, after which time the appearances became fewer, and finally ceased in 1889. Towards the end of this period, the figure, which had at first looked life-like and substantial, became shadowy and semi-transparent. There was also a gradual cessation of the phenomena which had occurred during these years, namely footsteps, soft and slow — unlike those of any in the house, — thumps on bedroom doors and turning of the door-handles, sounds of the dragging about of heavy weights, and unaccountable lights.

Miss M., who investigated the apparition quite fearlessly, describes herself as having had at first " a feeling of awe, as at something unknowm, mixed with a strong desire to know more about it." Subsequently she became conscious of a feeling of loss, as if she had " lost power to the figure." Most of the other percipients were greatly alarmed, and felt

chilled as if by a cold wind. Two dogs in the house were at times much terrified. Full details of this case, which Mr. Myers considered " in some respects one of the most remarkable and best authenticated instances of'haunting'on record," will be found in the S.P.R. Proceedings, vol. viii. Mr. Myers took much trouble in the investigation of this case, personally examined several of the witnesses, and was convinced of the genuineness of the whole story, which, however, loses much of its impressiveness in the brief siunmary which is all that it is possible to give in these pages.

A remarkable case of haunting occurred some years ago in a manor-house in the midland counties of England. I was invited to investigate the case and was offered hospitality. Though the ghost did not appear to me, whilst I slept in the haunted room, yet I heard certain mysterious knockings and some other disturbances which accompanied it; nor could I find any satisfactory explanation of these sounds. The first-hand evidence on behalf of the ghostly figure was, however, abundant and surprising. It was seen in the house independently by nearly a dozen different persons, who at first believing it to be a practical joke, tried to catch it, but it was uncatchable and impalpable; the latter was proved by a young officer, who when staying in the house saw the phantom one night, rose from his bed, followed it and shot through the figure, which moved on unconcerned. The children of my host, from whom the story of

G

the ghost had been carefully concealed, described the same figure, which did not frighten, but rather amused, them, as they said " they could see the wall of the schoolroom through its body."

Another case of haunting investigated by myself and also by Professor Sidgwick, occurred not far from my own residence in Kingstown. Here the phantom of a woman wrapped in a grey shawl was seen on the stairs and in a particular bedroom of a house tenanted by a lady and her brother. The figure was seen by different occupants of the room and by a child of five years old, though none were previously aware of the ghostly visitant: the door of the room was locked, yet still the figure made its appearance to the occupier of the room. All attempts at a normal explanation failed and the occupiers had at last to leave the house. Subsequently it was found that some previous tenants of the house had been troubled by inexplicable disturbances of various kinds, details of which they gave. {Proc, S.P.R., vol. ii., p. 141.)

In all these cases one is naturally very sceptical that really similar phantoms have been seen quite independently. Even if the ghost be actually seen by the investigator, it is easier to assume that the figure is a pure hallucination, or some real person playing a trick. I confess, however, that a careful consideration of first-hand evidence has led me to the same conclusion at which Mrs. Sidgwick, one of the most critical and able of investigators, arrived so far back as 1885, namely, that in spite of all reasonable scepticism, it is difficult " to avoid accepting, at least provisionally, the conclusion that there are, in a certain sense, haunted houses, ^. e. that there are houses in which similar quasi -human apparitions have occurred at different times to different inhabitants, under circumstances which exclude the hypothesis of suggestion or expectation" (Proc. S.P.R., vol. iii., p. 142).

Here is a typical case of haunting, resting on the evidence of educated persons who tried in vain to account for what was seen: full details are given in the Journal of theS.P.R., vols. vi. and ix. In 1892, Miss Scott, living at St. Boswells, Roxburghshire, upon walking home one afternoon in May, saw a tall man dressed in black a few yards in front of her. He turned a corner of the road, being still in view when he suddenly disappeared, although no exit seemed possible. Hurrying on to find what had become of him she met her sister, who was looking round bewildered; she too had seen the same figure, whom she took to be a clergyman, but the figure suddenly vanished and search yielded no clue.

In the July following, at the same place. Miss Scott again saw the same figure, the upper part of which was also seen by another sister who was walking with her; it was dressed like an old clergyman in knee-breeches, silk stockings, buckled shoes, white cravat and low-crowned hat. Resolved not to lose sight of him this time Miss Scott kept her eyes fixed

G 2

on the figure, but both sisters saw it gradually fade away before their eyes. Again in June, the next year, Miss Scott, walking one morning near the same place, saw the same apparition. Determined to solve the mystery she rushed to overtake it, but it seemed to glide away in front of her, then it stopped, turned round and faced her, enabling her to note in minute detail the features and dress, that of a Scotch clergyman of a century ago. Finally the figure again faded away by the roadside.

Other persons also independently testified to having seen the same figure at the same place. One lady, Miss Irvine, was attracted by the quaint dress of the old clerg^Tnan, and watched him walking to and fro by the hedgeside, when, to her astonishment, the figure vanished when she was about three yards off. The various witnesses gave separate written and concordant reports of what they had seen. The figure was not further seen until 1897, when Miss Scott and one of her sisters again saw it, noting the thin white features and dress of the phantom; they had not been thinking of it and are sure it was no morbid hallucination or illusion of their senses, or practical joke. A plan was sent of the road and locality, with the positions marked where different persons had seen the apparition. In July 1900 Miss Scott saw the figure again on two occasions near the same spot, and wrote an account to the S.P.R. the next day. Persons employed on that particular road have been interrogated, but have never seen the phantom.

nor has a man who passes up and do^^n the road to the village every morning and evening.

It is very difficult to believe Miss Scott and the other percipients were all mistaken, and it is equally difficult to frame any theory to account for the persistence of the phantom in this spot, except by the hypothesis given below.

The case of the " haunted house at Willington " has been a familiar theme on T^Tieside for half a century, and accounts of it have appeared in various publications. The best report will be found in vol. v. of the Journal of the S.P.R., where Mr. J. Proctor, a member of the Society of Friends, who was born in the house, gives a vivid account of his experience of the hauntings and of their wholly inexplicable character.

Other cases might be quoted, which, like the two preceding ones, suggest that some kind of local imprint, on material structures or places, has been left by some past events occurring to certain persons, who, when on earth, lived or were closely connected with that particular locality; an echo or phantom of these events becoming perceptible to those now living who happen to be endowed with some special psychic sensitiveness. Although this theory seems extravagant and incredible, there are not wanting analogies to it both in the domain of physics and psychical research. A coin left on a pane of glass and after some time removed, leaves a local imprint which may be revealed by breathing on the glass;

pieces of wood, coal, and many other materials laid on a photographic plate and then removed, leave a " local imprint " so that the very structure of the materials is revealed when the plate is developed, it may be long after. The causes of these and other curious phenomena are now known, but this cannot be said of somewhat analogous phenomena in psychical research.

Certain sensitives are said to be able to detect, or '' psychometrize " as they call it, the influence left on material objects worn by an absent or deceased person. Whether this be the case or not, there are some startling and well -attested phenomena related by the older mesmerists which apparently indicate that some specific influence is left on a material object by the passes of a mesmerizer. The scientific objections to a specific effluence are perhaps not so formidable now that we are acquainted with certain physical and psychical facts that would have been deemed utterly incredible a century ago.

In the early years of the S.P.R., Mr. Gumey was present with me when certain hypnotic experiments were made, in the rooms of the Society and under our direction. The results of these experiments seemed so incredible that I believe they were never published. Any particular book or coin or other object over which the hypnotizer had made a few passes, or even pointed his fingers, could be detected by a sensitive subject, who was subsequently brought by us into the room,

from which the hypnotizer had in the meanwhile been excluded and the positions of the objects then changed by us. In fact, every precaution was taken to avoid collusion or any direct knowledge being gained by the subject, who was not entranced at the time. Finally, we were driven to telepathy as a possible explanation; but even this seemed unlikely, for our presence in the room made no difference, nor was any difference found when i£e did not know which object had been treated by the hypnotist. Here, as in many other problems of psychical research, we have no solution to offer, and must leave future investigators to confirm or disprove the results we obtained.

To return to the subject of hauntings, different theories have been suggested —

(1) The popular view that the apparition belongs to the external world like ordinary matter, and would be there whether the percipient was present or not. Some cases appear to support this view, such as the one to which I have already referred (p. 191), in which the phantom was followed from place to place and seen by different independent observers at successive points. This theory, however, has insuperable difficulties, among others that of accounting for the clothes of the ghost, and it m.ay be dismissed. (2) That the phantom was projected from the mind of the percipient, and was, therefore, a hallucination; not a baseless one, but created by a telepathic impact from the mind of a deceased person.

Here we have the difficulty of explaining why the phantasm should be dependent on a particular locality, although with our present knowledge this theory appears the most plausible. (3) That the phantom was due merely to expectancy and telepathically transferred from one mind to another. This may account for some cases such as the two that will be cited immediately. (4) That some subtle physical influence is left in the building or locality which affects certain brains and creates the hallucination. This, Mrs. Sidgwick remarks, " one can hardly expect to appear plausible," albeit it corresponds best to a certain part of the evidence, and from what has been said on a previous page cannot be hastily rejected. To these we may add an extension of the second theory that hauntings are due to dreams of the deceased, telepathically projecting scenes of their life on earth to some persons there present. Finally, those who have not made a study of the subject will have their own theory that all the alleged phenomena are due to delusion or fraud.

A lively imagination stimulated by expectancy probably accounts for the two following cases. Early in 1911 a book entitled An Adventure was published in London, giving an account of the experiences of two ladies on visiting Versailles some ten years ago, when they appeared to be transported into the times of Marie Antoinette. On more than one visit they thought they saw the surroundings of the place and the people therein, as their

subsequent investigations showed might have been the case had they been present during the hfe of Marie Antoinette. This narrative, however, when examined for the S.P.R., appears to be based on slender evidence and trivial incidents, undesignedly amplified by the authors, and cannot be accepted as of any real evidential value. In some points it resembles a story of apparent obsession by Marie Antoinette, sent to the S.P.R, Journal by Mrs. Stapleton, and published in June 1907, but the stories have no connection with one another. Both are instances of several dream romances inspired by the history of the ill-fated Queen, the best known of them being the case of Helene Smith, who regarded herself as a reincarnation of Marie Antoinette. This interesting romance of a '* secondary personality " is described in an able book by Professor Flournoy, a summary of which is given by Mr. Myers in Human Personality, vol. ii., p. 130 et seq.

The other case is as follows: About 9 p.m. on May 8, 1885, a gardener named Bard, returning from work, passed through Hinxton churchyard, in Essex, and thought he saw his former employer, Mrs. de Freville, leaning on the railings round her husband's tomb, five or six yards distant. He recognized her black mantle and poke-bonnet, and her face, which was paler than usual. He supposed her to be, as was her habit, visiting the tomb, and he kept his eye on her as he walked round the railings to see if the gate into the vault were

open, but stumbled over a grass -tussock, and when he looked again the figure had disappeared. He found the gate locked, and could see her nowhere in the churchyard. Looking at the clock, he saw that it was 9.20. On reaching home, he told his wife, as she testifies, that he had seen ^Irs. de Freville. On that afternoon, about seven hours earlier, Mrs. de Freville had died very suddenly in London, but this was unknown in Hinxton until the next day. This case, which was carefully investigated for the S.P.R., rests on strong evidence with respect to the character of the percipient, a highly intelligent and trustworthy man, and the closeness of the coincidence. Its weak points are: (1) that he might have already heard of the death — this, however, is very improbable; (2) he saw the figiu'e two hours after sunset on a moonless evening, when, unless there was unusually bright starlight, or an unusually prolonged after-glow, it must have been very dark; (3) he said himself that he half thought he had imagined it; (4) churchyards suggest fancies of the kind.

The term "haunting '? is usually restricted to those cases where quasi-human phantoms are seen at different times by different persons in a particular locality. Neither the last case nor the next are haimtings in this sense, but the following is interesting theoretically, for the supposed ghost was alive at the time; this case rests upon excellent evidence.

In December 1896, Mrs. Blaikie was sta>ang

away from home in Edinburgh, where, on December 10, she fell ill with an attack of acute laryngitis. About 11 p.m. on December 11, her three women servants were sitting by the kitchen fire in her house, when they heard steps exactly like hers coming from the hall toAvards the nursery door. They all went to the door leading from the kitchen to the nursery passage, but saw nothing. At the same time her daughter Frances, while undressing in her room, heard coming along the passage to the door footsteps heavy and rather quick, exactly like her mother's, and unlike any of the servants', though she supposed it must be one of them until they all came in alarm to ask if it had been she. The other daughter, Jeanie, in her room up-stairs, had also heard steps exactly like her mother's, but conjectured burglars; however, on the house being searched, nothing was found to account for the sounds.

Mrs. Blaikie writes: " On the evening of December 11, about eleven o'clock, I had such a sensation of being suffocated that I felt as if I were dying, and would never see my home again. I was suddenly filled with an overpowering longing to be at home, and whether I fell asleep for a few moments and dreamed I do not know, but it seemed the next minute as if my desire was granted, and I felt I was actually there. I was conscious of walking along the passage past the dressingroom door, and towards the room we call the nursery, but I had hardly time to realize my

own joy and relief when I found myself still lying in bed, and the feeling of suffocation, from which I had had such a happy respite for a few momxcnts, again tormenting me. When I returned home a week later I was told of the curious occurrence on the evening of Friday, the 11th" {Journal S.P.R., vol. viii., p. 320).

How are we to account for this collective hallucination? Had it some normal explanation, or was it a telepathic impression conveyed to one of the daughters, and did this start a similar impression on the other percipients, or was it simultaneously impressed on all? We have no experimental evidence on behalf of either of these latter hypotheses. Mr. Myers, from this and several similar cases, was led to adopt the idea of a temporary excursion* of the spirit to the place where it desired to be, in some unknown way being able to make its presence perceptible. It is improbable that any physical instrument could detect and record the sounds heard, though the experiment is w^orth trying. Would a sensitive flame, for instance, which is affected by the feeblest sounds, have detected the footsteps or rusthng of Mrs. Blaikie's phantasmal dress? Would a photographic plate record an apparition? I am inclined to think not in either case.

In passing, it may here be remarked that the evidence for so-called spirit photography is wholly inconclusive, most alleged cases are pure fraud. The impression in all phantasms, I believe, is made directly on

the mind of the percipients and not through their organs of hearing or sight. The mind then projects the impression outside itself, and hears sounds and sees visions apparently in external space. But why this particular impression? Why should Mrs. Blaikie's spirit have been able to conjure up only the sound of her footsteps and the rustling of her dress? Were the details of her presence fashioned by the transmitting or receiving mind, or by both? Possibly the result was due to the subconscious and sjTnbolical manner in which the personality of a friend is conceived, whose presence is suggested telepathically. But telepathy is only a provisional explanation, and is completely out of court in the still more puzzling phenomena of poltergeists, to which we must now turn.

Poltergeists

We have no exact English equivalent for the German word " Poltergeist," usually translated " hobgoblin "; a " polterer " in German is a noisy or boisterous fellow, and a *' poltergeist " is therefore a boisterous ghost. The phenomena are sporadic, breaking out suddenly in some place and disappearing after a few weeks or months of annoyance to those concerned. Unlike hauntings, the disturbances appear to gather round a particular, usually young, person in a particular place. All kinds of mischievous pranks are played, objects are thrown about, bells rimg, furniture

moved, noises made, all utterly meaningless. And the closest scrutiny fails, in genuine cases, to discover any conceivable explanation, except some unseen agency.

Similar phenomena are recorded in different countries throughout the world, and go back to a remote period of time. No doubt in part they gave rise, as Mr. A. Lang suggests, to fetishism among savage races, i. e. a belief that an inanimate object may be tenanted by what is thought to be a spirit. One of the best-attested English cases of poltergeists occurred in 1661, and is known as the " Demon, or drummer, of Ted worth." This was minutely investigated and described by one of the most critical among the early Fellows of the Royal Society, the Rev. J. Glanvil, who published a full account of this case in his well-known book, Saducismus Triumphatiis. Briefly, the facts are as follows. A Mr. Mompesson, a magistrate in Tedworth, Wilts, ordered the arrest of a vagrant drummer in 1661. Shortly afterwards at Mr. Mompesson's house began an amazing series of unaccountable noises and disturbances w^hich continued for two years. The drummer was tried for witchcraft but acquitted, and the disturbances went on when he was far off in jail. The evidence as to these disturbances was given on oath at this trial and the eyewitnesses were numerous. Glanvil himself came to investigate, and relates that he saw chairs move about without any one touching them, shoes thrown by invisible hands, tnat

he heard scratchings on the bed, etc., all the phenomena apparently clustering round Mr. Mompesson's two young children. They were naturally suspected, but Glanvil relates how he convinced himself, as others had been convinced, that it was quite impossible for the children to have played these tricks, which often occurred in daylight before the eyes of numerous sceptical inquirers.

Omitting many other similar cases in Scotland and different parts of England, we come to the famous case of the disturbances at Ep worth vicarage during the Rev. S. Wesley's residence there in 1716. These formed the subject of a long investigation and careful record by his son, John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, who came to the conclusion that their origin was " Satanic," a not unnatural conclusion as the following entries in the journal of Mr. Wesley, senr., show —

" December 25. — The noises were so violent it was vain to think of going to sleep. December 27. — They [the disturbances] were so boisterous I did not care to leave my family." Again he writes: " I have been thrice pushed by an invisible power, once against my desk in the study, a second time against the door of the matted chamber, a third against the frame of my study door as I was going in." Their mastiff seemed more afraid than the (Children, as it came whining to them when the disturbances arose. Southey, in his Life of Wesley, states that " the testimony... is

far too strong to be set aside because of the strangeness of the relation."

Then, in 1834, we have the remarkable case of *' Bealing bells," investigated and related by Major Moor, F.R.S. Here, day after day for nearly two months, the bells of the house were continually ringing in broad daylight, no known cause being discovered; the bellwires were in full view and a careful watch kept, until at last Major Moor was thoroughly convinced the ringing was by no human agency; the inmates were driven from the house and the mystery never cleared up.

Similar inexplicable cases of bell-ringing have occurred elsewhere. One such case, associated with other poltergeist phenomena, was critically investigated in Massachusetts in 1868. Not only were the bell-wires detached and the bells suspended near a lofty ceiling, but they continued to ring and were seen ringing in daylight whilst observers kept watch. The phenomena began after the arrival of a maidservant, who, of course, was suspected, but it was soon found impossible for her to be the culprit, as the bell-ringing and violent pitching about of furniture occurred when she was observed to be quietly at her work in another room. The investigation appears to have been a very thorough and careful one, yet no explanation could be found.

Perhaps the most conclusive evidence for poltergeist phenomena is that given on oath in connection with Cideville parsonage, a

place some thirty miles from Havre. Here, in 1850-51, knockings, movements of furniture, noises of all kinds occurred in daylight, and every would-be exposer of the mystery was baffled.

In 1877 I investigated a remarkable poltergeist occurring in an Irish farmer's cabin a few miles from Enniskillen. I was aided in the inquiry by two sceptical scientific friends, but we were all convinced that the phenomena could not be accounted for by any known agency. In an article published in the Dublin University Magazine for 1877, I gave a detailed account of these occurrences and the precautions taken to avoid the possibility of trickery. Here, in my presence, violent knockings and scratchings were heard, but the closest scrutiny on the part of three critical observers failed to account for them.

More recently in Enniscorthy, a town in Co. Wexford, I have investigated a case of poltergeist that occurred in July 1910. Here the disturbances centred round a young carpenter, and, though they had ceased when I visited the spot, the testimony of various witnesses convinced me that it was practically impossible to attribute them to the lad or to any other human being. For two sceptical and intelligent investigators were present one night when unaccountable knockings and amazing disturbances took place. The bedclothes were pulled off the bed on which the lad was sleeping, the bed itself was pulled into the middle of the room and the lad lifted off

the bed and deposited gently on the floor. The light was sufficient to enable them to see that no practical jokes were being played. The reader who may be interested will find a full report of this and other cases in my paper on Poltergeists, in the Proceedings of the S.P.R., vol. XXV. In earlier volumes and in the Journal of that Society will be found other well-attested cases of poltergeist occurring in England and on the Continent.

What are we to say to these mysterious and bizarre phenomena? The witnesses had certainly nothing to gain by narrating them, for, as Glanvil remarks of Mr. Mompesson, " he suffered in his name, his estate, and all his affairs, and in the general peace of his family and loss of his servants and of his health," through the occurrences. Fraud, mal-observation, misdescription, illusion, etc., doubtless explain some cases, but are, in my opinion, inadequate to account for all the cases. Imitation of some of the phenomena by children and others may, and does sometimes, occur, but is likely to be, and indeed in some such cases has been, quickly detected.

Confronted by these perplexing phenomena, all we can do is to continue collecting and sifting the evidence with scrupulous care, hoping that in time patient inquiry will throw some light on these investigations as it has done on some of the sporadic and puzzling phenomena of meteorology.

CHAPTER XIV. THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUALISM

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUALISM

