" In many other ways I convinced myself that the existence of a distinct idea in my own mind gave rise to an image of the idea in the subject's mind; not always a clear image, but one that could not fail to be recognized as a more or less distorted reflection of my own thought. The important point is that every care was taken to prevent any unconscious movement of the lips, or otherwise giving any indication to the subject, although one could hardly reveal the contents of an optician's shop by facial indications" {Proc. S.P.R,, vol. i.^, p. 243).

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 75

In these early experiments I noticed that the hypnotized subject responded to thought-transference even when a considerable distance and opaque objects intervened. Later on, in 1882, some careful experiments on this point svere made b}^ me in my own house at Kingsto^vn, Co. Dublin. Here the subject was a lad named Fearnley, and the hypnotizer, a complete stranger to him, was a friend, Mr. G. A. Smith. On one of two precisely similar cards I wrote the word " Yes," and on the other "No." Placing the hypnotized subject or percipient so that he could not see the cards I held, a request was made that he would open his hand if the card " Yes " was shown to the agent, Mr. Smith, or not open it if "No " was pointed to. In this way Mr. Smith, who was not in contact with the percipient, silently willed in accordance with the card shown to him. Twenty experiments were made, under the strictest conditions to avoid any possibility of information being gained by the ordinary channels of sense, and only three failures resulted. Then the subject was requested to answer aloud whether he heard me or not. When " Yes " was handed to Mr. Smith he silently willed the subject should hear,' when "No" that he should not hear. The object was to reduce the experiment to the simplest form to try the effect of increasing distance. In all except the first few experiments, the cards were shuffled by me with their face downwards, and then the unknown card handed by me to Mr. Smith, who looked

at it and willed accordingly. This precaution was taken to avoid any possible indication being gained by the percijDient from the tone in which I asked the question. After I had noted the reply, and not till then, was the card looked at by me. The percipient remained throughout motionless, with eyes closed and apparently asleep in an arm-chair in one corner of my study; it is needless to repeat that even had he been wide awake he had no means whatever of seeing which card was selected by me. Here are the results, \\dth varying distances between the agent, IVIr. Smith, and the percipient, Fearnley. It must be borne in mind that not a single word was spoken, nor any sound made by IVIr. Smith.

" At 3 feet apart, twenty-five trials were successively made, and in every case the subject responded, or did not respond, in exact accordance with the silent will of Mr. Smith, as directed by the card selected. At 6 feet apart six similar trials were made without a single failure. At 12 feet apart six more trials were made without a single failure. At 17 feet apart six more trials were made without a single failure. In this last case Mr. Smith had to be placed outside the study door, which was then closed with the exception of a narrow chink just wide enough to admit of passing a card in or out, whilst I remained in the study observing the subject.

** A final experiment was made when Mr. Smith was taken across the hall and placed in

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 77

the dining-room, at a distance of about 30 feet from the subject, two doors, both quite closed, intervening. Under these conditions three trials were made with success, the'Yes'response being, however, very faint and hardly audible to me when I returned to the study to ask the usual question after handing the card to the distant operator. At this point, the subject fell into a deep sleep and made no further replies to the questions addressed to him" {Proc. S.P.R., vol. ii., p. 14).

Subsequently other trials were made under different conditions with the percipient in total darkness, with successful results. Altogether about one hundred trials were made, during which there were only four wrong answers and one doubtful one, and for these Mr. Smith blamed himself rather than the percipient. Pure chance would have given about one-half right instead of the ninety-five right actually obtained.

When the subject was awakened he said he had heard the question each time, but when he gave no answer he felt unable to control his muscles so as to frame the word.

In 1883 Mr. Ed. Gumey made a number of excellent experiments on the mental transference of pains, between the hypnotizer, IVir. Smith, and the subject, in this case a lad named Wells. I was present at many of these experiments, and can testify that it was quite impossible for the subject to have obtained any information through the ordinary

channels of sense. Wells was blindfolded and Mr. Smith stood behind his chair. Mr. Gurney, or one of us, then silently pricked or pinched Mr. Smith in different parts of his body. The only words spoken were " Do you feel anything? " addressed to Wells. Out of twentyfour experiments made in this way, the exact spot was correctly indicated by the subject twenty times. W^'ith another subject also in a light hypnotic trance similar results were obtained, together with the transference of tastes. Whenever Mr. Smith was given a substance to put in his mouth, the subject, in nearly all cases, correctly indicated the taste. These and other experiments abundantly confirmed the results already described.

In France Professor Pierre Janet obtained similar results with a hypnotized subject in 1885 and 1886. Professor Janet and Dr. Gibert also made a series of experiments with a sensitive subject at distances varying from a quarter of a mile to a mile. Here the test was the production of hypnotic trance in the subject w^henever the distant operator willed it to occur, at some unexpected time. Out of twenty-five trials eighteen were completely successful, and the remainder partially so. It is needless to refer to the numerous other experiments of a similar kind made by able and critical observers abroad.

Perhaps the most carefully conducted and extensive series of experiments upon thought-transference with a subject in the hypnotic state were those made at Brighton in 1889

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 79

I by Professor and Mrs. Sidgwick. As usual, 'the most provoking and inexplicable variations of success occurred on different days, when the conditions appeared to be exactly ahke; thus on August 16 and 17 the experiments were a brilliant success, whereas on August 19, 20 and 21 they were total failures. These differences could not be accounted for on grounds of health, etc., for sometimes a run of success would begin and then abruptly cease.

The percipient was a clerk, about nineteen years old, designated as P. To avoid any bias in the selection of the numbers to be guessed, the wooden counters of the game of Lotto, which had the numbers from 10 to 90 stamped on them, were put into a bag and one drawn out; as there were thus eighty-one different numbers, mere chance guessing would give only one right in eighty-one trials. After the fu-st few trials. Professor Sidgwick drew the number from the bag, placed it in a little box, and handed it, unseen by the percipient, to Mr. Smith, who kept strict silence; Mrs. Sidgwick recorded the answer in entire ignorance of the number drawn. It made no difference whether the percipient P. was blindfolded or not, as in the hypnotic state, during these experiments, his eyeballs were turned upward, his eyelids closed, and normal vision was impossible; even so, every precaution was taken to prevent any information being derived through the ordinary channels of sense. The percipient speaks of " seeing " the numbers,

but this is purely a mental visualization. Here is a summary of one set of experiments so made, giving the number drawn in ordinary type, the number guessed in italics: —

87, almost immediately P. said 87; 19, P. 18; 24, P. I see an 8 and a 4—84; 35, P. a ^ and a S—SS; 28, P. 88; 20, P. '2S ("not so plain, I saw the 2 best "); 27, P. I see a 7 and I think a <^ in front of it, I can see the 7; 48, P. I see an 8. Told to look again, P. said he saw a 4- — the 4 to the left,,f 9; 20, P. 2 and 0; 71, P. 7i; 38, P. ^... 38; 75, P. I see a 7 and a 5 — 75; 17, P. after seeing a ^, said, I see a 1 first and 7 second; 52, P. o2, I saw that at once; 76, P. 76.

This is a record of a continuous set of experiments; the total number of trials made when the agent and percipient were in the same room was 644, of which 131 were complete successes, both digits being given correctly, and in fourteen trials the digits were given in the reverse order. Pure guesswork would have given about eight right, so that mere chance coincidence cannot account for the success obtained. In a later series of experiments, carried on from 1890 to 1892, by Mrs. Sidgwick and Miss Johnson, the agent and percipient were in different rooms and strict silence was preserved. I was invited to be present at some of these trials, and can therefore say from personal observation that the possibility of any information being gained by the percipient, through unconscious whispering of the number, seemed to me to be quite

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE 81

excluded, however acute his sense of hearing. The transference of mental pictures, also with jmore or less success, was subsequently tried under the same conditions, and by the same experimenters with different percipients.

/-

CHAPTER VII. MESMERISM — HYPNOTISM — SUGGESTION

MESMERISM — HYPNOTISM — SUGGESTION

To most people, any acquaintance with mesmerism they possess is confined to those public exhibitions — common enough a generation ago, and usually called by the barbarous word " electro-biology " — where some of the audience are invited to the platform and made to look at a small object placed in their hands, whilst passes are repeatedly made by the operator down the body of the subject. Presently two or three fall into a sleep and readily obey any suggestions, however ridiculous, made by the operator. In this way the subject can be made to believe he is another person, or any bird or animal suggested, often exhibiting a wonderful dramatic power in carrying out the suggestion. Other curious phenomena were occasionally shown by the subject when in a deeper entranced state, such as complete insensibility to pain in any part of or over the whole bod}^ while, on the other hand, he would sometimes exhibit an amazing exaltation of any special sense; feeling or detecting things impossible for him to perceive in his ordinary waking state. On returning to his normal state, to

MESMERISM— HYPNOTISM 83

which he was restored by upward passes and a command from the operator to "wake up," he was utterly oblivious of everything that had occurred during his entranced condition and was incredulous when informed of what he had said or done. To the general public such performances only excited speculation as to their genuineness, and little regard was paid to the far-reaching psychological problems involved. Let us briefly recall the history of the subject.

The remarkable phenomena of mesmerism originated with a Viennese doctor, Friedrich Mesmer, a Swiss, born in 1733. Mesmer claimed to have discovered a new vital fluid or effluence, which could be transmitted from one person to another and which, he asserted, had wonderful curative power. At that time the physical forces of electricity, magnetism, heat, etc., were attributed to various impalpable fluids, and Mesmer believed he had found a new fluid or force associated with life, resembling magnetism: hence he called it " animal magnetism." Whether such an effluence exists or not, it certainly has nothing to do with magnetism as the latter is known to physical science; nevertheless, the misnomer still widely exists.

In 1778 Mesmer came to Paris to demonstrate his new system of therapeutics. The use of drugs and other prevalent medical remedies were abandoned and the patients submitted to a treatment which looked very like quackery. Seated round a mysterious

tub of water, in which were rows of bottles, the patients, rich and poor, were linked together by a rope from the tub, and iron rods proceeding therefrom were brought into contact with the diseased part, whilst Mesmer and his assistants stroked or massaged the patient. Partial darkness and the subdued strains of music added to the mystery. But the results were extraordinary, numerous amazing cures were effected, and Paris rang with the fame of Mesmer. The patients were mostly of high standing and included some physicians of note, one of whom, a " doctor regent," became Mesmer's enthusiastic advocate and helper. In one year it is said that 8,000 persons were so treated, and the record of the cures wrought could neither be explained, nor explained away, by the medical profession. A medical commission was appointed in 1784 to report on the whole subject. This commission, which included some famous members of the Paris Academy of Sciences, was unfavourable to Mesmer and his fluid theory, attributing the cures to imagination. But the commission was much prejudiced against Mesmer, owing to the secrecy and charlatanism with which he had surrounded his system. Mesmer thereupon left Paris, followed by numerous patients, and subsequently died in obscurity in Switzerland.

Among Mesmer's disciples was the Marquis de Puysegur, who brought a more critical and scientific spirit to bear upon the subject. Puysegur ultimately believed the secret of the

MESMERISM— HYPNOTISM S5

cures — which could not be gainsaid, though they were practically ignored by the medical commission — to be, as he states, in " belief and will " or " the action of thought upon the vital principle of the body." This, in fact, is generally recognized, and lies at the foundation of Faith Cures, Christian Science, and the cures wrought in ancient Greece and Rome by what is now termed Suggestive treatment. Puysegur also discovered the state of somnambulism induced in susceptible patients by Mesmer's system. Such patients were thrown into a state of trance wherein another personality with clearer vision and higher faculties appeared to emerge, able to diagnose their own illness, even prescribe for its treatment, and foresee the date of cure. On returning to their normal state, not the slightest memory of what had passed in the trance state remained. Though unquestionable evidence exists of this " lucidity " of the entranced patient, it is impossible to say how far the results were merely due to a heightened but normal sensitiveness, i. e. hyperaesthesia, or to so-called clairvoyance, which we shall discuss in another chapter.

A later French Medical Commission, appointed in 1826, reported in favour of this clairvoyant faculty and of the remarkable cures effected by mesmerism. This report was, however, suppressed by the medical faculty and issued informally. Meanwhile the subject had been lifted into a different and modern line of thought by the investigations of an

able French physician, Dr. A. Bertrand, who in 1820 published a treatise on artificial somnambulism, in which he sweeps away the idea of animal magnetism and a vital fluid, and attributes the extraordinary mesmeric cures to the influence of suggestion on the patient, who, by the treatment, is made preternaturally alive to the faintest suggestion expressed, or even unexpressed, by the operator. Bertrand, however, records that in the trance state the subjects have unquestionably a marked exaltation of their intellectual powers, apparently enabling them to gain a knowledge and prevision of their malady, often a marvellous appreciation of time, and a community of sensation between operator and subject. It is also alleged that a state of clairvoyance, or seeing without eyes, was sometimes exhibited. Moreover, and this had been largely overlooked before, complete anaesthesia, or absence of sensation, was induced in the entranced subject.

These were marvels enough and testified to by weighty authority, albeit they were in general discredited by the medical profession. Up to this time England had held aloof from the subject, regarding it with extreme disfavour. But, in 1838, an eminent London medical man. Dr. Elliotson — then professor at, and senior physician to. University College Hospital— having been convinced by some mesmeric experiments he had witnessed, took up the subject with characteristic energy and enthusiasm. He founded a mesmeric hospital

MESIMERISM— HYPNOTISM 87

in London, and also a journal called the Zoist, which for thirteen years was the organ of the medical mesmerists — its pages recording not only the extraordinary cures wrought by mesmerism, but also many of the more startling phenomena, such as the community of sensation between the operator and his subject, and the clairvoyance noticed by the early French investigators. In spite of his high standing, Elliotson's advocacy of mesmerism caused him to be ostracized by the medical profession, led to the loss of his practice, and compelled him to resign the high official positions he held. The same fate followed Dr. Esdaile, an able surgeon in India, appointed, by the Governor- General, Presidency Surgeon at Calcutta. In his six years' practice in India, and in the mesmeric hospital he opened in Calcutta, Esdaile performed no less than 261 serious operations on patients when under the mesmeric trance, some 200 tumours were removed, varying from 10 to 103 pounds in weight! Not the slightest pain was felt in any case, and nearly all made a good recovery, the mortality under such operations being reduced from 50 to 8 per cent. The discovery of chloroform was made about this period; the ease of administering and the certainty of the operation of this anaesthetic, compared with the tedious and often uncertain induction of the mesmeric trance, led to its general adoption, though cases undoubtedly arise where it would be far safer to employ the mesmeric trance. The profession, however, would have

nothing to do with mesmerism, and hounded out of its ranks any practitioner, however eminent, who ventured to use what the Lancet, in 1848, called " this odious fraud."

Hitherto the mesmerists were possessed by the idea of a peculiar fluid, commimicated to the patient by the passes they employed. Dr. Braid, a Manchester physician, in 1843 showed that a patient could be entranced simply by gazing at a bright object. Braid called" this process hypnotism, from the Greek word for sleep, and this term has now replaced the word mesmerism, which connotes a special theory. As was the case with the older mesmerists. Braid found at first surprising support for the doctrine of phrenology, when his patients were entranced; slight pressure on different parts of the head giving rise to the exhibition of mental characteristics in the subject, corresponding with the location of the so-called organs of language, laughter, etc., with which phrenologists had mapped out the skull! Though the results, which I myself have repeated, are very curious, the cause is obscure and may arise from telepathy or some unconscious suggestion (as Braid subsequently believed) conveyed to the subject by the operator.

On the Continent, somewhat later, distinguished physiologists, like Professor C. Richet, and physicians of note, such as Dr. Charcot, Liebault, Bernheim and others, took up the investigation, added largely to our knowledge, and founded schools for the

MESMERISM— HYPNOTISM 89

study and practice of hypnotism. At Nancy and elsewhere hypnotic treatment is used in the hospitals, and the value of this remedial agent is now generally recognized. In England, we owe to Dr. Milne Bramwell and Dr. Lloyd Tuckey the publication of standard medical works on hypnotism, or treatment by suggestion. This is not the place to pursue the medical side of the question any further; it will be sufficient to say that the popular aversion to hypnotism as a dangerous process is entirely baseless. Its practice as a remedial agent should, however, be restricted wholly to qualified medical men, just as is the use of chloroform or other powerful narcotics.

Moreover, the incontestable cures effected by hypnotism, often when other means had failed, do not always require the subject to be entranced; monotonous and repeated suggestion can produce the effect even when the patient remains fully conscious.

In fact, an American practitioner {Proc, S.P.R., vol. xii.) treats his patients by silent suggestion, and has published a record of remarkable cures effected in this way, which closely resembles the Christian Science " treatment at a distance," by their healers.

History is full of the miracles of healing wrought by suggestion. Greatrakes in the seventeenth century, Gasner in the eighteenth, Prince Hohenlohe, and other notable faithhealers, in the nineteenth, all accompHshed wonderful cures without medical skill. To

say they were due to " suggestion " is merely to conceal our ignorance of the processes involved. Suggestion no more explains the results than the crack of the starting pistol explains a race. Both are simply signals for a new departure. The suggestion given by the operator liberates the subconscious, recuperative, and formative forces within the organism of the patient. Success consists in overcoming the difficulty of setting these forces at work, and often the most effective way is, as it were, by a flank movement, an indirect suggestion, and not a direct assault. That there is a hidden self below the threshold of consciousness, the subliminal self, has, we think, been abundantly proved: medical and psychological research in the future will doubtless throw more light on this strange and silent partner of our life.

Some of the most remarkable cures effected by hypnotic treatment have been in the region of habits and morals. The drunkard has been made sober, the idle industrious, and insidious drug habits overcome. In the dissolution of self-respect, pecuhar to the victims of such habits, there seems to be, as Mr. Myers remarks, '' nothing on which sage or evangelist can lay hold. Yet we have seen hypnotic suggestion effect the magical change and restore the degraded outcast to a safe and honourable position among his fellow men."

The investigation of hypnotism from the point of view of psychical research was begun

MESMERISM— HYPNOTISM 91

by Mr. Gurney soon after the foundation of the S.P.R., and his brilliant work in this direction is of enduring value. Gurney distinguished three stages in hypnosis — first, the alert stage, when the subject will, when requested, open his eyes, answer questions but cannot originate remarks, is generally sensitive to pain and will respond to any suggestion, even when he is half conscious he is making a fool of himself; next, the deep stage, into which he will pass with eyeballs rolled upwards, insensitive to pain, but mentally active; this stage quickly lapses into a profound sleep and irresponsiveness.

One of the most curious phenomena — the appreciation of time by the hypnotized subject — was tested by Gurney, and also by myself, nearly thirty years ago. A subject was hypnotized and told to wake up in a certain number of minutes and then write his name. There was no timepiece in the room and the subject had no watch. At the precise minute he woke and mechanically wrote his name, wholly ignorant why he did so, nothing being remembered of the command when the subject was awake. Again and again we tried, with periods of longer duration, sucji as thirty-two, fifty-five, and ninety-six minutes; there was not the least mistake and no means of his gaining any knowledge of the time by ordinary perception. Dr. Milne Bramwell has, in recent years, carried this experiment much further. It is simply necessary to give the command when the patient is in the

\

trance, tell him to vrrite his name, or do any simple thing, at a given time, and then wake him up. When questioned he knows nothing of what he has been ordered to do, but nevertheless fulfils it exactly at the required time. Thus Dr. Bramwell told a female patient when entranced to mxake a cross on a piece of paper at the end of 7,200 minutes, and mark down the time she then thought it w^as without looking at the timepiece. The time fell due when the patient was teaching a Sundayschool class. She suddenly felt an impulse to make a cross and mark the time. It was only on looking round at a clock behind her that she found the time was right; the number of minutes had also been estimated with perfect correctness. Another time she w^as told, when entranced, to make a cross in 10,070 minutes. This suggestion fell due when she w^as subsequently hypnotized by Dr. Bramwell and had no means of seeing the time. Nevertheless, exactly at the assigned moment she made a cross and wrote down the correct time. Out of fifty-five similar experiments, forty-five were perfectly successful and only two not fulfilled. Dr. Mitchell, a Fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine, and a member of the Council of the S.P.R., has since corroborated these results by a large number of well-conducted experiments which were uniformly successful, though the time interval was sometimes over 200,000 minutes, and sometimes given in many thousand seconds.

How are these results to be explained?

MESMERISM— HYPNOTISM 93

There is no question of fraud, continental observers having obtained the same remarkable results under test conditions. If hypnotized before the command is fulfilled, the subject will remember the order given and tell the precise number of days, hours and minutes required to fulfil it. Thus, during hypnosis, being told to make a cross in 4,580 m.inutes and asked how long this was, a subject replied immediately, three days four hours and twenty minutes, which is correct, but could not say how she made the calculation; the order was accurately fulfilled at the stated time. The whole process goes on through the operation of a subconscious intelligence. Possibly the stated time is reckoned, and the time as it passes is noted, unconsciously. On the other hand, the time of fulfilment sometimes falls due when the patient is asleep, nevertheless, she awakes at the correct moment and carries out the command. In the few experiments I made long ago, the hypnotized subject, when entranced, told me he watched the time by a large clock he saw. There was no clock in the room, nor any clock visible from the window; on asking which clock, he said that on the tower of the Houses of Parliament — about a quarter of a mile away and impossible to see from the rooms we were in. This suggests that some clairvoyant faculty is unconsciously exercised by the subject, and this may possibly be the case. IVIr ]\Iyers quotes a case where a person, in his ordinary waking state, occasionally had a similar vision

of an invisible clock face and saw the exact time thereon.

Some people have the faculty of awaking exactly at the definite time they have agreed upon overnight; here the time-sense, when not due to a habit, must be a subconscious estimate of the efflux of time.

The singular exaltation of the intellectual powers in particular directions is characteristic of many subjects when hypnotized. Thus a rather dull lad, during hypnosis, was asked, in my presence, how many times the letter c occurred on a page of print suddenly placed before him, and answered correctly after a shorter interval than one could count the number of times that that letter occiu-red in a couple of lines. Other experiments were long sums in arithmetic, correctly and swiftly done, during hypnosis, which the subject had failed to do in a longer time in the normal state. Again (and these were all private experiments, no question of trickery coming in), another subject was asked by me to add up a long row of figures I had jotted down at random and, at the same time, to count aloud the odd numbers up to 100. Both acts were correctly, quickly, and simultaneously performed; many other similar experiments were made, illustrating the wonderful exaltation and even dual activity of the mind in the hypnotized subject. These experiments remind us of the case of the calculating boys, to which reference has been made in a previous chapter.

MESMERISM— HYPNOTISM 95

Another remarkable feature in the hypnotic trance is that hallucinations can be provoked either during the trance, or subsequently to it, by a command from the operator. Thus an entranced subject, on being told he would see

his friend B at a certain time after he

woke up, when the time came actually believed he had met and clearly seen the person named, and related the fact to others,

though fully aware B was at that time in

America or elsewhere. These " post-hypnotic " hallucinations are of great theoretical interest in psychical research, as showing that lifelike phantasms can be created by pure suggestion.

CHAPTER VIII. EXPERIMENTAL AND SPONTANEOUS TELEPATHY OVER LONG DISTANCES

EXPERIMENTAL AND SPONTANEOUS TELEPATHY OVER LONG DISTANCES

The next question that presents itself is, how far can telepathic impressions be conveyed? We have already referred to numerous successful trials in the hypnotic state when considerable distances separated the operator and the subject. In the waking state, experiments have been quoted showing that success has attended trials when the agent and percipient have been separated by closed doors and were some yards apart.

A few successful experiments were made in 1892 between two ladies, Miss Despard and Miss Campbell, when the distance w^as much greater. The trials were made not only a mile or two apart in London, but also when the former was at Surbiton and the latter in London: the experiments were published by the S.P.R., but must be omitted here from want of space. The Rev. A. Glardon in Switzerland also made similar experiments between himself in the Canton Vaud and a friend in Florence. These are described in vol. i. of Human Personality, with illustrations of some of the diagrams thus mentally transferred, many of

TELEPATHY 97

the correspondences being singularly good. But the most systematic and carefully conducted series of experiments, when the agent and percipient are widely separated, have been made by my friends. Miss H. Ramsden and Miss C. Miles. Full details of these experiments were published in the Journal and in the Proceedings of the S.P.R. for 1906, 1907 and 1908. Miss Miles consulted me about the best method of conducting the experiments when they began, and both she and Miss Ramsden have been scrupulously careful throughout in following out the suggestions made. Both ladies are members or associates of the S.P.R., and are energetic and excellent investigators. The following is from the introduction to the first of their joint papers —

" Miss Ramsden, having met with a certain amount of success in experiments in thought-transference with two other friends of hers, asked Miss Miles to try a systematic series with her. It was then arranged that Miss Miles, living at Egerton Gardens, London, S.W., should play the part of'agent,' while Miss Ramsden, at her home, Bulstrode, Gerard's Cross, Buckinghamshire (about twenty miles from London), acted as'percipient,' the times of the experiments being fixed by pre-arrangement.

** Miss Miles, at the time of each experiment, noted in a book kept for the purpose the idea or image which she wished to convey, while Miss Ramsden wrote down each day

the impressions that had come into her mind, and sent the record to Miss Miles before knowing what she (Miss M.) had attempted on her side. Miss Miles then pasted this record into her book opposite her own notes, and in some cases added a further note explanatory of her circumstances at the time, to which it will be seen that Miss Ramsden's impressions often corresponded. Whenever it was possible, Miss Miles obtained confirmatory evidence from other persons as to the circumstances that had not been noted at the time, and the corroboration of these persons was written in her book and is pubHshed."

Having examined the documents, I can vouch for the conclusive evidence they afford of the frequent and often surprising transmission of telepathic impressions across the wide distances that separated the agent and percipient. The best results appeared to be obtained when there was no special effort made by the transmitter — confirming our previous inference, that it is the subconscious, the subHminal activities, and not the conscious intelligence, which is operative in these and other supernormal psychical phenomena. In fact, Miss Miles writes that she found it was much easier to impress an idea without specially concentrating her mind on it at a fixed time.

Here, for example, is a singularly successful experiment of this kind. Miss Miles was attending a meeting of the S.P.R. on the afternoon of October 27, 1905, and noticed

TELEPATHY 99

the curious pair of spectacles worn by a gentleman near her. This, she thought, would be a good subject for her experiment with Miss Ramsden, and so, on returning home, she wrote down the word, but did not attempt to visualize it: " October 27. Spectacles. — C. M." Miss Ramsden, in Buckinghamshire, that evening wrote: " October 27. 7 p.m. Spectacles. This was the only idea that came to me, after waiting a long time. — H. R." It is difficult to imagine this to have been a lucky guess, for Miss Miles does not wear spectacles. If telepathy be denied, the objector can only explain the results by collusion. ^

Here is another experiment. Miss Miles noted in her book as the idea she wished to transmit: " November 2. Hands. — C. 3f." Miss Ramsden, twenty miles away at hei' own home, wrote: " November 2. 7 p.m. I began to visualize a little black hand, well formed.^ ^ (Some other impressions were also noted, but Miss Ramsden adds), " the hand was the most vivid.^^ Miss Miles is an artist and was drawing in charcoal that afternoon the hands of a portrait; Lady Guendolen Ramsden was staying with her at the time and confirms this as follows: " Miss Miles was drawing the hands of the model in the afternoon.— Guendolen Ramsden." Two other witnesses also confirm this statement.

Many other experiments were more or less successful, others, however, were failures; and a series tried early in 1906, when Miss Ramsden

D 2

was in Norway and Miss Miles in London, were almost all failures. But here there were disturbing circumstances, which might possibly have accounted for the disappointing results.

Another series of experiments was tried later the same year. Throughout this second series, which lasted for about a month, from October 19 to November 14, 1906, inclusive, Miss Miles was again agent and Miss Ramsden percipient. Miss Miles w^as staying first near Bristol and afterwards near Malmesbury, Wiltshire. Miss Ramsden was living all the time near Kingussie, Inverness-shire, a distance of about four hundred miles, as the crow flies, from Bristol.

The general' plan of action was that Miss Ramsden should keep her mind free from distraction*about 7 p.m. each day the experiment was tried and think of Miss Miles, then write down on a postcard any impression that she received, and post the card to Miss Miles the next morning. Miss Miles, on her side, noted briefly on a postcard the principal impressions made on her during the day and posted it to Miss Ramsden. In this series copies of many of the postcards were also posted simultaneously to me. The postcards were afterwards pasted together in a book with notes, the postmarks showing the date of posting. It should be added that, beyond knowing that her friend v.as staying at a country house near Bristol, Miss Ramsden was quite ignorant of Miss Miles' doings and

TELEPATHY 101

surroundings, never having been in that part of England. The results are thus summed up by the S.P.R. research officer —

" Out of a total of fifteen days' experiments, the idea that Miss Miles was attempting to convey, as recorded on her postcards, appeared on six occasions in a complete or partial form among Miss Ramsden's impressions on the same date. But it also happened that almost every day some of Miss Ramsden's impressions represented pretty closely som.ething that Miss Miles had been seeing or talking about on the same day. In other words, while the agent only succeeded occasionally in transferring the ideas deliberately chosen by her for the purpose, the percipient seemed often to have some sort of supernormal knowledge of her friend's surroundings, irrespective of what that friend had specially wished her to see....

" It has to be considered how many of the successes might be mere guesses, whose correctness was due to chance and not to telepathy. After studying all the records, however, it appears to us that while some of the coincidences of thought between the two experimenters are probably accidental, the total amount of correspondence is more than can be thus accounted for and points distinctly to the action of telepathy between them."

This is the opinion of a skilled and severe critic, and it is fully borne out by a careful perusal of the published records. The reader should note that all the experiments were given in full, not a favourable selection, and

that Miss Miles' record was always made before she heard what Miss Ramsden's impressions were. When one thinks of the thousands of things that might be selected for the purpose of the experiment, the fact of any agreement between the two records is suggestive, but when we find frequent remarkable agreements, the only inference is that one mind must in some way have communicated its impression to the other, four hundred miles away.

Further, and occasionally, very striking evidence of long-distance telepathy is given in a series of experiments between the same two ladies during the summer of 1907. Miss Miles was then on a sketching tour with Lady Ramsden in the Ardennes, and Miss Ramsden was staying at her father's country house in the Highlands of Scotland.

On returning to England Miss Miles went to Newbury in Berkshire for some painting lessons, and stayed in lodgings, her landlady having a delicate little girl in whom Miss Miles was much interested. Unaware of the existence of this child. Miss Ramsden writes from the Highlands on a postcard to Miss ^Miles —

" October 31, 1907. I think you wish me to see a little girl with brown hair down her back, tied with a ribbon in the usual way. She is sitting at a table with her back turned and seems busy... cutting out scraps with a pair of scissors. She has on a white pinafore, and I should guess her age to be between eight and twelve. — H. R."

TELEPATHY 103

Here is the description of the child written by Miss Miles' landlady, Mrs. Lovegrove: "I have a little girl, aged eleven, with brown hair tied with a ribbon; she wears a pinafore and, being ill, amuses herself by cutting out scraps. I had along talk [about her?] with Miss Miles on October 31. — L. Lovegrove."

During the latter part of 1908, Miss Ramsden made numerous similar experiments on telepathy at a distance between herself, who now acted as " agent," and another lady who acted as " percipient." These experiments are described in the Journal of the S.P.R. for December 1910, and contain additional evidence of the telepathic transmission of ideas and mental impressions over considerable distances. We may, therefore, take it as experimentally proved, beyond reasonable doubt, that telepathy can bridge great distances of space. Shakespeare, in one of his sonnets, anticipated this —

'^ If the dull substance of my flesh was thought, Injurious distance would not stop the way."

This is a delightful anticipation for parted friends if telepathy became more widespread.

Now let us pass from these direct experiments to spontaneous cases: that is to say, to the evidence afforded by numerous trustworthy witnesses of the occurrence of some event, painful or otherwise, to one person, and the simultaneous perception of it by another person some distance away. Here, for instance,

is a case of a trivial occurrence, but interesting as illustrating how a passive state in the percipient, especially the transition between sleeping and waking, favours the reception and emergence into consciousness of a telepathic impact, as this appears to be. Note also that the incident is well attested, that the coincidence in time was evidently very close, and the account itself was sent to the S.P.R. on the very day that the incident occurred, accompanied by a letter from Mr. Harrison stating that " Everything happened exactly as stated."

" Februari/ 7 J IS91.

" I reside with my husband at 15 Lupton Street, N.W. This afternoon I was lying on the sofa, sound asleep, when I suddenly awoke, thinking I heard my husband sigh as if in pain. I arose immediately, expecting to find him in the room. He was not there, and, looking at my watch, I found it was halfpast three. At six o'clock my husband came in. He called my attention to a bruise on his forehead, which was caused by his having knocked it against the stone steps in a Turkish bath. I said to him,'I know when it happened — it was at half-past three, for I heard you sigh as if in pain at the time.' He replied,'Yes, that was the exact time, for I remember noticing the clock directly after.'

" The gentleman who appends his name as

TELEPATHY 105

witness was present when this conversation took place.

** Louisa E. Harrison.

" Witness: Henry Hooton, 23 Bunhill Row, E.G."

A very similar case was sent to the S.P.R. by 'Mr. Ruskin. The percipient was Mrs. Arthur Severn, the wdfe of the well-known landscape painter, who, writing from Brantwood, Coniston, states that one morning she woke up with a start, feeling that she had had a hard blow on her mouth, and with a distinct sense that she had been cut and her upper lip bleeding. She held her pocket handkerchief to the place, and was surprised when she removed it not to see any blood. Then she realized that nothing could have struck her as she lay asleep in bed and that it must have been a dream. Looking at her watch, she found it was seven o'clock, and hence, as her husband was not in the room, concluded he must have gone for an early sail on the lake.

At breakfast-time, about 9.30, Mr. Severn came in, holding his handkerchief to his lip, and on iDcing questioned told his ^ife that a sudden squall came on whilst he was in the boat, causing the tiller to swing round and hit him a severe blow on the upper lip, which was cut rather badly and would not stop bleeding. When asked when this occurred, he replied it must have been about seven o'clock. ^Mr. Severn corroborates this account, the fuller

lO'o PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

details of which are given in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i., p. 188.

Many other similar cases resting on firsthand evidence might be quoted. Even more common than the telepathic transmission of pain are the niunerous well-attested records where some auditory or visual impression has been transferred to great distances. Here is one such case, quoted not only for its brevity, but also because a written record of the incident was made and sent off by the percipient before anything was known of what had really occurred.

Miss King, at Exeter, one Sunday morning at four o'clock, was awakened by hearing the words, "Come to me, Trix; I'm so ill." She stated to the S.P.R. research officer. Miss Johnson, who investigated the case, that it was just like a real person speaking, and she recognized the voice as that of her friend ^liss Ridd, who was the only person that called her " Trix," and she felt it could be no one else. She was so much impressed that the same day she wrote to Miss Ridd — who was then in London, two hundred miles away — and related the incident. Miss Ridd, by return of post, replied as follows, in a letter which had been kept and was shown: '' I didn't mean to tell you about it, but the coincidence is so strange I must. Sunday morning about four o'clock I had an awfully bad pain, and thought I was going to die for a few minutes; when I could speak, I stretched out my arms to your photo and said, * My Trix, come to me; I'm so ill.

TELEPATHY 107

come to me!'Wasn't it strange? " It should be added that there was no expectation of Miss Ridd's sudden illness (angina pectoris) at the time it occurred, as she had not had an attack for some time {Proc. S.P.R., x. 290).

It would be tiresome, even if space allowed, to quote the large number of similar cases, supported by first-hand evidence, which are published in the records of the S.P.R. The body of evidence is like a faggot — a single stick may be broken, but the whole bundle has a strength which resists fracture. Year by year this bundle is gaining in volume and solidity, and the most captious critic, though he may find a weak case here and there, cannot break down the accumulated evidence afforded by the whole.

How telepathy is propagated we have not the remotest idea. Certainly it is not likely to be through any material medium or by any physical agency known to us. The existence of wireless telegraphy and the bridging of vast spaces by messages transmitted in this way naturally suggest that thought might like^vise be transmitted by a similar system of ether waves, which some have called " brain waves." And there is no doubt the fact of wireless telegraphy has made telepathy more widely credible and popular. As remarked on a previous page, hostility to a new idea arises largely from its being unrelated to existing knowledge. As soon as we see, or think we see, some relation or resemblance to what we

already know, hostility of mind changes to hospitality, and we have no further doubt of the truth of the new idea. It is not so much evidence that convinces men of something entirely foreign to their habit of thought, as the discovery of a link between the new and the old.

Let us, therefore, for a moment examine this analogy of telepathy to wireless telegraphy. Even if we assume the so-called " brain waves " to be infinitely minute waves in the ether that fills all space, they would still obey what is called " the law of inverse squares," that is to say, spreading on every side in ever expanding waves, they would decay in proportion to the square of the distance from their source. Thus, at a thousand yards away from the source, the effect produced on any receiver would be a million times less than the effect upon the same receiver a yard away from the originating source. Hence, to transmit waves over great distances through free space requires tremendous energy in the originating source of these waves, otherwise the waves would be so enfeebled when they reached the receiver that it could not detect them. Now we have no evidence to show that any tremendous mental effort is required on the part of the agent w^hen experiments on thought transference — such as between Miss Miles and Miss Ramsden — are conducted at great distances apart. And what, on the brain-wave theory, must be the mental energy emanating from a dying person to transmit a mental impression from himself

TELEPATHY 109

to a friend on the other side of the globe? for such cases are on record.

There are several other reasons that could be urged against any physical mode of transmitting telepathy, thus the incidence of " brain waves," if such existed, would be felt by great numbers of people and not by one or two percipients, as is the case, and they would only create a faint, but exact, image of their source, which is not the case in telepathy.

The fact is, in my opinion, the supernormal phenomena we are discussing in this little book do not belong to the material plane, and therefore the laws of the physical universe are inapplicable to them. It is hopeless to attempt thus to explain telepathy and other phenomena which transcend knowledge derived from our sense perceptions, — though these latter are the foundation of physical science and the proper guide for our daily business here on earth.

It is highly probable that the conscious waking self of those concerned takes no part in the actual telepathic transmission. The idea or object tnought of in some way impresses the subliminal self of the agent, and this impression is transferred, doubtless instantaneously across space, to the inner subconscious self of the percipient. Here, however, a favourable moment may have to be awaited before the outer or conscious self can be stimulated into activity; for delay in the emergence of the impression is often

noted. It is quite possible, therefore, that if we knew how to efect this transfer, unfailingly and accurately, from the outer to the inner self and vice versa, telepathy would become a universal and common method of communicating thought. This may be the case in the unseen world, when —

" As star to star vibrates light, may soul to soul Strike thro' a finer element of her o\vn."

In the next chapter we must examine the subject of apparitions, and shall find in many of these cases additional evidence of telepathy.

CHAPTER IX. VISUAL HALLUCINATIONS: PHANTASMS OF THE LIVING AND DEAD

VISUAL HALLUCINATIONS: PHANTASMS OF THE LIVING AND DEAD

To most people the word " hallucination " means some delusion, or error of the mind, and nothing more. There are, of course, hallucinations of the insane and in delirium, where there is no objective reality whatever underlying the phantasm conjured up by the diseased mind. There are also hallucinations experienced by sane and healthy minds; some person is seen, or something is felt, or words are heard, for which there is no material cause. The mind receives the hallucination as if it came through the channels of sense, and accordingly externalizes the impression, seeking its source in the world outside itself, whereas in all hallucinations the source is within the mind and is not derived from an impression received through the recognized organ of sense.

Many hallucinations are due to some slight morbid affection of the brain, and their origin is a pathological study; but some hallucinations correspond with an appropriate real event occurring to another person; some accident,

illness, emotion or death happening at that time to a distant friend. Such hallucinations are termed veridical or truth-telling; their study is a branch of psychology, and is an important part of psychical research. There may be no more substantiality about such visual hallucinations than there is about the reflection of oneself in a looking-glass. The image in the mirror is veridical and caused by a neighbouring objective reality; a "veridical hallucination," in like manner, is a mental image coinciding with some distant unseen real occurrence; but the mental image is 7iot derived through the organs of sense, as is the reflection seen in a mirror. It is in fact due to some impression made, otherwise than through the channels of sense, on the higher tracts of the brain, which then projects the impression into the outer world. In this it differs from an illusion where a slight external cause, perceived by the senses, may start an imaginary phantom.

Now there is unquestionable evidence that visual hallucinations can be produced telepathically. Thus a friend, and member of the Council of the S.P.R., the late Rev. W. S. Moses — more widely known only as'M. A. Oxon'— one night desired to appear to a friend some miles distant, who was not informed beforehand of the intended experiment. At the very time his friend saw Mr. Moses appear before him, and as he gazed in astonishment, the figure faded away. A second time the experiment was repeated, with equal success.

A year or two later, Mr. S. H. Beard (well known to myself and others then on the Council of the S.P.R.) made a series of similar experiments, with equal success. The facts were investigated by Mr. Gurney, and fresh experiments made with success under his direction; full details of the evidence will be found in vol. i. of Phantasms of the Living. On one occasion, the phantom of Mr. Beard was seen and recognized by two persons in the room, simultaneously, who were unaware of the fact that Mr. Beard, some miles away, was then trying, by an effort of will, to appear to them. These results seemed at first almost incredible, but complete confirmation of them has been obtained from independent experiments made by others. In such cases the " agent " whose phantasm is seen is usually about to sleep, or is asleep, at the time of the apparition, although the wish to appear may have been formed earlier in the waking state.

Unless we reject all testimony, or attribute the numerous cases investigated to some illusion, there can be no doubt that a distant person can, by his directed thought, or by dream, create a phantom of himself in the mind of a distant percipient. This suggests a general explanation of those visual hallucinations, or apparitions, at the moment of death, which are supported by abundant fu-st-hand evidence.

Now if a sane and healthy person sees a phantom of his friend B. at the moment when

B., a hundred miles away, was unexpectedly dying, we should rightly conclude, if this case stood alone, that it was simply a chance coincidence. Many hallucinations occur, which do not coincide with any particular event, and one which does do so is more likely to be remembered and talked of than the others. But what if investigation shows that there are hundreds of cases, well substantiated, where an apparition of B. is seen (or hallucination of some kind suggesting B. is perceived), and that this closely coincides with the time when the distant friend B. was dying, or suffering from a mental shock. When, moreover, before the hallucination there was no knowledge of B.'s state, nor anything to suggest B. Now this is precisely what has been ascertained by the S.P.R. Over two hundred cases of apparitions at or about the time of death, resting upon first-hand and unimpeachable evidence, have been collected and published in the two large volumes entitled Phantasms of the Living, the chief author of which was that brilliant and able man, Edmund Gurney. What conclusion can we draw from this except that some connection exists between the phantasm and the distant person who is dying? And in many cases the simplest explanation of this connection is that afforded by telepathy, though other cases lead us to infer what Mr. Myers calls an excursive action of the spirit, which in some way renders its presence manifest to the percipient.

In physical science we also meet with the problem of coincidences. Thus in the spectrum

of the sun it was noticed long ago that there were hundreds of transverse fine black lines running across the spectrum from the red end to the violet. These were for many years a mystery. Then it was discovered that in the spectrum of terrestrial metals there were numerous fine bright lines. It was found that the two bright yellow lines of sodium exactly coincided with two black lines in the yellow of the solar spectrum. That may have been a chance coincidence. But it was soon discovered that the hundreds of fine bright lines in the spectrum of iron vapour exactly coincided in position with hundreds of fine black hues in the solar spectrum. This could not possibly be due to chance, as the " law of probability " demonstrates; so there must be some causal, not casual, connection between the two; this was confirmed when many other exact correspondences were discovered between terrestrial and solar spectra. These facts, coupled with the known reciprocity of radiation and absorption, established the existence of the vapour of numerous terrestrial elements in the atmosphere enveloping the sun and fixed stars.

Science, by a study of coincidences, has annihilated space and definitely arrived at the knowledge of the composition of heavenly bodies, millions upon millions of miles distant from the earth.

Can we do for psychical science what has been done for physical science? Are the coincidences in time of hallucinations with

some distant event suggested by them, — sufficiently numerous and exact to warrant a conclusion with a confidence such as the coincidences in space, in the lines of terrestrial and stellar spectra, has afforded to physical science?

The problem which Edmund Gurney first attempted to solve was to obtain a numerical comparison of veridical hallucinations with those which were purely accidental. When the relative frequency of these two classes is ascertained, the probability of mere chance coincidence being the cause of the former can be calculated. By a " census of hallucinations," begun in 1884, Edmund Gurney obtained from nearly six thousand adults replies to the question " whether during the preceding ten years they had experienced, when in good health and wide awake, a vivid impression of seeing or being touched by a human being, or hearing a voice which suggested a human presence, when no one was there." After his death, a similar but more elaborate census was undertaken (with the approval of the International Congress of Experimental Psychology) by a committee of the S.P.R., over which Professor H. Sidg^vick presided. This committee, in answer to a question similar to the above, except that no time limit was named, received written replies from seventeen thousand adults.

Careful and critical investigation of the affirmative replies led both Edmund Gurney and the committee to conclude that pure

chance could not account for the number of cases which showed a close coincidence between the time of death and the apparition of a dying person recognized by the distant percipient. The committee found that, making amplest allowance for various sources of error, the proportion of veridical (i. e. coincidental cases) to the meaningless (i. e. non-coincidental cases) is 440 times greater than pure chance would give; a result which they stated in the following cautious words: " Between deaths and apparitions of the dying person a connection exists which is not due to chance alone. This we hold as a proved fact. The discussion of its full implications cannot be attempted in this paper;— nor perhaps exhausted in this age." (Report in S.P.R. Proceedings, vol. x., p. 394; the reader should consult this volume, which is devoted to a critical discussion of this important census.)

Such a result disposes once for all of the common explanation: " It was just an odd chance that the apparition happened to coincide with the death of that particular person; " the hits being remembered, and the misses forgotten. In fact, before arriving at the calculation above given, the committee made an almost extravagant allowance for forgetfulness in the latter case, and exaggeration in the former.

The statistical evidence is not, however, the argument that appeals most to the general public. Any person who has seen for himself an apparition, which he recognized as that of

a distant friend, and who afterwards found the time of the appearance to have coincided with the unexpected death of his friend, would be far more impressed by that single fact than by any statistics. This is also true of those who merely hear of such a case from intimate friends. It is much to be desired that every percipient of any hallucination should, before he knows whether it has any significance, make and show to some other person a wTitten memorandum; thus precluding the objection often raised by sceptics, that there is no documentary evidence of his previous ignorance of the crisis through which his friend was passing when he experienced the hallucination. Unfortunately, people do not as a rule write down these experiences and send them to friends; but as communications of the kind are now taken more seriously, we may hope that this will become more common. Even as it is, there are not wanting cases authenticated by evidence of this very kind. The committee, for instance, gives seventeen evidential cases which were noted at the time by the percipient.

In the following case a note of the apparition seen shortly before death was made at the time, and preserved by the percipient, when she had no knowledge of the brief, fatal illness of the deceased. The percipient, Miss Hervey, then staying in Tasmania with Lady H., had just come in from a ride in excellent health and spirits, and was leaving her room up-stairs to have tea with Ladv H., when she saw

coming up the stairs the figure of her cousin, a nurse in Dublin, to whom she was much attached. She at once recognized the figure, which was dressed in grey, and without waiting to see it disappear, she hurried to Lady H., whom she told what she had seen. Lady H. laughed at her, but told her to note it down in her diary, which she did. Diary and note were seen by the critical Mr. Podmore, who investigated the case on behalf of the S.P.R. The note ran as follows: " Saturday, April 21, 1888, 6 p.m. Vision of (giving her cousin's nickname) on landing in grey dress." In June news of this cousin's unexpected death reached Miss Hervey in Tasmania. She died in a Dublin hospital from typhus fever on April 22, 1888. A letter, written the same day, giving an account of Miss Ethel B.'s death, was sent to Miss Hervey, preserved by her, and seen by Mr. Podmore. It states that the crisis of the illness began at 4 a.m. on the 22nd, but that Miss B. lingered on for twelve hours, dying at 4.30 p.m. As the difference of time between Tasmania and Dublin is about ten hours, the apparition preceded the actual death by some thirty-two hours. The kind of dress worn by the nurses in the hospital was unknown to Miss Hervey, and was found to be of a greyish tone when seen from a little distance. The phantom made so vivid an impression on Miss Hervey that, on the evening she saw it, she wrote a long letter to her cousin in Dublin telling her about it. This letter arrived some six weeks

after her death, and was returned to the writer. {Proc, S.P.R., vol. x., p. 282.)

The next case is of high evidential value, the impression, which was unique in the percipient's experience, having been at once communicated to a third person, whose testimony to that point we have obtained; the coincidence in time was certainly close to within a very few minutes, and perhaps exact. Mr. S., the percipient, who was personally known to Mr. Gurney, and occupied a position of considerable responsibility, did not wish his name to be published, but permitted it to be given to inquirers, and offered to answer any questions personally. (See Phantasms of the Living, vol. i., p. 210.)

Mr. S. and Mr. F. L. had been colleagues in an office and intimate friends for about eight years, entertaining for one another a very great regard and esteem. On Monday, March 19, 1883, Mr. F. L., on coming to the office, complained of having suffered from indigestion. On Saturday he was absent, and, as j\Ir. S. afterwards learned, was seen by a medical man, who thought he wanted a day or two of rest, but expressed no opinion that anything was seriously amiss.

On Saturday evening, March 24, Mr. S., who had a headache, was at home, sitting on a couch at the shaded side of the room lit by a gas chandelier, under which, in the middle of the room, his wife sat reading. Having remarked to her that for the first time for months he felt rather too warm, he leaned

back on the couch, and the next minute saw Mr. F. L. standing before him, dressed as usual. IVIr. S. noticed that he was wearing his black-banded hat, his overcoat unbuttoned, and carried a stick. He looked fixedly at Mr. S., and then passed away. At the moment Mr. S. felt an icy chill, and his hair bristled. He quoted to himself from Job: " And lo, a spirit passed before me, and the hair of my flesh stood up."

Turning then to his wife, who had been looking in another direction, and had seen nothing, he asked her the time. She said, " Twelve minutes to nine." He said, " I asked because F. L. is dead. I have just seen him." She tried to persuade him that it was fancy; but he persisted that he had seen Mr. F. L., and was sure of his death. She noticed that he looked much agitated and very pale. He was afterwards struck by his own instant certainty, with nothing to suggest the idea, of his friend's death, and by his acceptance of the incident as a matter of course, without feeling surprise.

On Sunday afternoon, about three o'clock, Mr. F. L.'s brother, A., called with the news at Mr. S.'s house. It had occurred to him on the way that Mr. S. would probably have a presentiment of F. L.'s death owing to the strong sympathy between them. Seeing that this was the case, when Mr. S. met him at the door, he said: "I suppose you know what I have come to tell you? " Mr. S. replied: " Yes, your brother is dead," and told of his vision on the previous evening.

Mr. A. L. on Saturday about 8 p.m. had visited his brother F., whom he found sitting up in his room. Leaving him about 8.40, apparently much better, Mr. A. L. went down to the diningroom, where he stayed with his sister for about half-an-hour, and then left, upon which his sister immediately went up-stairs, and found her brother F. lying dead on his bed from rupture of the aorta. His death must therefore have occurred either a few minutes before or after 9 p.m.

There had never been any thought-transference between him and jNIt. S., who had never seen an apparition before, nor believed in them. Mr. A. L. describes himself as " no believer in visions." Mr. Gurney calculates the odds against such an event being due to mere chance coincidence as 208,000,000 to 1.

Sometimes the phantom is not only seen but heard, and may be regarded as an auditory as well as visual hallucination. The follow^ing striking case, though remote in point of time, is so well attested as to be worth quoting. It is from Mrs. Richardson of Combe Down, Bath, who gave Mr. Gurney a viva voce account precisely as here recorded. (See Phantasms of the Living, vol. i., p. 443.) Mrs. Richardson described herself as a matter-of-fact person, and not given to frequent or vivid dreams.

" August 26, 1882.

" On September 9, 1848, at the siege of Mooltan, my husband, Major-General Richardsi3n, C.B., then adjutant of his regiment, was most severely and dangerously wounded, and supposing himself dying, asked one of the officers with him to take the ring off his finger and send it to his wife, who, at that time, was fully 150 miles distant, at Ferozepore. On the night of September 9, 1848, I was lying on my bed, between sleeping and waking, A'l^hen I distinctly saw my husband being carried off the field, seriously wounded, and heard his voice saying,'Take this ring off my finger, and send it to my wife.' All the next day I could not get the sight or the voice (mt of my mind. In due time I heard of (general Richardson having been severely ^ mounded in the assault on Mooltan. He sur-"^rived, however, and is still living. It was not for some time after the siege that I heard from (Colonel L., the officer who helped to carry (general Richardson off the field, that the request as to the ring was actually made to him, just as I had heard it at Ferozepore at that very time

" M. A. Richardson."

General Richardson, in answer to Mr. Guruey's inquiries, stated that he distinctly remembered the incident. He was wounded in the evening of September 9, and taking the ring off his finger, said to the late Major Lloyd, who was supporting him: " Send this to my wife," or words to that effect. He had not promised before leaving home to send her the ring, nor had he expressed any presentiment

of being hurt. As Mr. Myers remarks, " The detail about the ring seems fairly to raise the case out of the category of mere visions of absent persons who are known to be in danger, and with whom the percipient's thoughts have been anxiously engaged."

In the following case the percipient appeared to be transported to the actual scene of the event, and observed some minute details (afterwards verified) of inanimate objects around, somewhat as in a crystal vision. Such cases suggest the phenomena of clairvoyance, when the percipient's powers of vision extend far beyond the range of their organs of sight, the information so obtained being independent of the thought passing in the minds of others. Here, however, it seems possible that the phenomena may have been due to an " excursive action " on the part of the decedent's spirit.

"On October 24, 1889, Edmund Dunn, brother of Mrs. Agnes Paquet, was serving as fireman on the tug Wolf, a small steamer engaged in to^ving vessels in Chicago Harbour. At about 3 o'clock a.m. the tug fastened to a vessel, inside the piers, to tow her up the river. While adjusting the tow-line. Mr. Dunn fell or was thrown overboard by the tow-line, and drowTied."

Mrs. Paquet's Statement

" I arose about the usual hour on the morning of the accident, probably about six o'clock.

I had slept well throughout the night, had no dreams or sudden awakenings. I awoke feeling gloomy and depressed, which feeling I could not shake off. After breakfast my husband went to his work, and, at the proper time, the children were gotten ready and sent to school, leaving me alone in the house. Soon after this I decided to steep and drink some tea, hoping it would relieve me of the gloomy feelings afore-mentioned. I went into the pantry, took down the tea-canister, and as I turned around my brother Edmund — or his exact image — stood before me and only a few feet away. The apparition stood with back towards me, or, rather, partially so, and was in the act of falling forward — away from me — seemingly impelled by two ropes or a loop of rope dra^\ing against his legs. The vision lasted but a moment, disappearing over a low railing or bulwark, but was very distinct. I dropped the tea, clasped my hands to my face and exclaimed,'My God! Ed. is drowned! '

" At about 10.30 a.m. my husband received a telegram from Chicago, announcing the drowning of my brother. When he arrived home he said to me,'Ed. is sick in hospital at Chicago; I have just received a telegram,' to which I replied,'Ed. is drowned; I saw him go overboard.' I then gave him a minute description of what I had seen. I stated that my brother, as I saw him, was bareheaded, had on a heavyblue sailor's shirt, no coat, and that he went over the rail or bulwark. I noticed that his

pants' legs were rolled up enough to show the white lining inside. I also described the appearance of the boat at the point where my brother went overboard.

" I am not nervous, and neither before nor since have I had any experience in the least degree similar to that above related.

" My brother was not subject to fainting or vertigo.

" Agnes Paquet."

IMr. Paquet corroborates his wife's statement on all points. He went at once to Chicago, where he found that the appearance of the vessel, which his wife had never seen, was exactly as she had described it; while the crew confirmed her accounts of her brother's dress, " except that they thought he had had his hat on at the time of the accident. They said that he had purchased a pair of pants a few days before, and as they were a trifle long, wrinkling at the knees, had worn them rolled up, showing the white lining, as seen by my wife."

Upon this case (see Proc. S.P.R., vol. vii., p. 34) Mrs. Sidgwick remarks —

" Here Mrs. Paquet not only had a vivid impression of her brother within a few hours of his death — not only knew that he was dead — but saw a more or less accurate representation of the scene of his death.

" It will have been noticed that her impression was not contemporaneous with the event to which it related, but occurred some six hours

afterwards. It was preceded by a feeling of depression with which she had awoken in the morning, and one is at first tempted to suppose that she had dreamed of the event and forgotten it, and that her subsequent vision was the result of a sudden revivification of the dream in her memory. But we do not know enough to justify us in assuming this, and against such a hypothesis may be urged the experience of Mrs. Storie, related in Phantasms of the Living (voL i., p. 370), which somewhat resembles Mrs. Paquet's. Mrs. Storie tells us that all the evening she felt unusually nervous, and then, when she went to bed, she had a remarkable dream, in which she saw a series of scenes which afterwards turned out to have a clear relation to the death of her brother, who had been killed by a passing train four hours earlier. In her case the nervousness cannot be regarded as telepathic, as it is stated to have begun before the accident, but it seems quite possible that the nervousness and depression may have had to do with some condition in the percipient which rendered the vision possible."

A curious case, also involving the production of a kind of picture, which, having been seen by several people simultaneously, comes under the head of a " collective hallucination," is related by Mr. C. A. W. Lett (Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii., p. 213): —

" On the 5th April, 1873, my wife's father, Captain Towns, died at his residence, Cranbrook, Rose Bay, near Sydney, N.S. Wales.

About six weeks after his death my wife had occasion, one evening about nine o'clock, to go to one of the bedrooms in the [above] house. She was accompanied by a young lady, Miss Berthon, and as they entered the room — the gas was burning ail the time — they were amazed to see, reflected as it were on the polished surface of the wardrobe, the image of Captain Towns. It was barely half-figure, the head, shoulders, and part of the arms only showing — in fact, it was like an ordinary medallion portrait, but life-size. The face appeared wan and pale, as it did before his death, and he wore a kind of grey flannel jacket, in which he had been accustomed to sleep. Surprised and half alarmed at what they saw, their first idea was that a portrait had been hung in the room, and that what they saw was its reflection; but there was no picture of the kind....

" C. A. W. Lett."

The phantom portrait was immediately afterwards seen and recognized by Captain Towns' unmarried daughter, by his old bodyservant, by the butler, by the nurse, by a housemaid, and finally by his widow, who passed her hand over the panel of the wardrobe, whereupon the figure gradually faded away, and never reappeared. The recognition of the appearance on the part of each was independent, and not due to any suggestion from the others. The case is attested by Mrs. Lett and Miss Towns, and much resembles

the vivid and sometimes collective hallucination seen in crystal-vision (p. 141).

In the foregoing cases, no purpose on the part of the agent can be inferred, beyond that of self-manifestation or announcement of death. There are, however, a considerable group of cases where the apparition communicates some definite information, hitherto unknown to the percipient. Only a brief message seems possible, and it is one probably felt by the deceased person to be of urgent importance. The evidence upon which such cases rest of course needs to be sifted with the utmost care, and this has been done in the following well-attested instance, of which we can only give a bare outline; the case is corroborated by different witnesses, and is fully reported and discussed in the S.P.R. Proceedings, vol. viii., p. 200 et seq.

In February 1891, Michael Conley, a farmer living in Iowa, U.S.A., died suddenly at Dubuque, about 100 miles from his home. After the inquest at Dubuque the old clothes which he had been wearing were thrown away, and his son brought home the body. On hearing of her father's death, his daughter Lizzie fell into a swoon, in which she remained for several hours. When she recovered consciousness she said: " Where are father's old clothes? He has just appeared to me dressed in a white shirt, black clothes, and satin slippers, and told me that after leaving home he sewed a large roll of bills inside his grey shirt with a piece of my red dress, and the money

E

is still there." This description of her father's burial clothes, which she had not seen, was quite correct; but neither she, nor anybody else, had known anything of the pocket and money in the shirt. To pacify her, her brother went back the 100 miles to Dubuque, where he found the old clothes were lying in a shed. In the shirt was found a large roll of bills, amounting to thirty-five dollars, sewed with a piece of red cloth, exactly like Lizzie's dress, the stitches being large and irregular, as if made by a man. Telepathy from living minds might account for her accurate knowledge about the unseen burial garments, but not for her statement about the secreted money, of which all the family were ignorant. It is a curious fact that children are not infrequently impressed with some veridical hallucination. In the following case a little girl seems to have been utilized as an automatic machine, so to speak, and caused to utter words which for her can hardly have had any meaning: —

" King's Ferry, New York.

" On the afternoon of January 2nd, 1867, my little daughter, Augusta, aged three years, was playing with her dolly, sitting near her aunt, who was spending the day at my house in New York. Her little cousins, Darius and David Adams, aged eleven and nine years, to the younger of whom she was tenderly attached, were living in Penn Yan, New York,

250 miles away. The cousins had not met since the preceding summer or early autumn.

" While busy with her play, the child suddenly spoke, and said,'Auntie, Davie is drowned.' Her father, who was present, and I, heard her distinctly. I answered,'Gussie, what did you say?'She repeated the words,'Davie is drowned.' Her aunt, who was not familiar with the childish accent, said,'Gussie, I do not understand you '; when the child repeated for the third time,'Auntie, Davie is drowned,' I chanced to look at the clock, and saw it was just four. I immediately turned the conversation, as I did not wish such a painful thought fastened on the child's mind.

" I cannot recall that any allusion had been made to the boys that day; neither was I aware that my daughter even knew the meaning of the word drowned. She simply uttered the words without apparent knowledge of their import.

" That evening a telegram came from my brother, saying,'My little boys, Darius and Davie, were drowned at four o'clock to-day while skating on Kenks Lake.'

" E. M. Ogden."

The foregoing statement is corroborated by Mr. Curtis, brother-in-law to Mrs. Ogden. This case is interesting because a very young child is not likely to have nervous apprehensions or forebodings of disaster concerning young playmates, of whose whereabouts and

£ 2

occupation at the time she had not the remotest notion. {Journal S.P.R., vol. i., p. 435.)

If we could discover some underlying reason for these sporadic occurrences few would doubt the evidence. But nearly all the cases seem so meaningless and often trivial that we are disposed to reject the evidence on that account. This, however, is an unscientific and irrational attitude, and if adopted would be fatal to all scientific inquiry: how trivial and meaningless once seemed the attraction of light bodies to rubbed amber, and yet the science and very name of electricity arose therefrom. Here, as elsewhere, we must exercise patience and scrupulous care in collecting all available evidence, and leave the solution to the future.

CHAPTER X. DREAMS AND CRYSTAL-VISIONS

DREAMS AND CRYSTAL-VISIONS

From the earliest times, the mystery attaching to the world of dream has been a fruitful subject of speculation. The swift and dramatic portrayal of scenes, the recovery of lapsed memories, the occasional glimpses of things beyond the range of vision during sleep; the illusions " hypnagogiques," or vivid images which sometimes arise between sleep and waking, all these and other points have often been discussed. Only a brief account can first be given of a few cases wherein the discovery of lost articles has been effected by a dream. In the consideration of such cases, we must, however, bear in mind not only the possibility of the emergence of a lapsed memory during sleep, but also that the dreamer may have unconsciously perceived the lost article and in sleep this fact may have floated into consciousness. There are, however, cases w^here the evidence appears to go beyond the border line between normal and supernormal percipience. During hypnotic trance — which may be regarded as a deeper form of sleep — there sometimes also 13a

occurs clairvoyance, or telcesthesia, " perception at a distance."

The following case, sent by Mrs. Bickford-Smith immediately after its occurrence, may be taken as an illustration of the revival of memory during sleep —

" On reaching Morley's Hotel at 5 o'clock on Tuesday, 29th January, 1889, I missed a gold brooch, which I supposed I had left in a fittingroom at Swan & Edgar's. I sent there at once, but was very disappointed to hear that after a diligent search they could not find the brooch. I was very vexed, and worried about the brooch, and that night dreamed that I should find it shut up in a number of the Queen newspaper that had been on the table, and in my dream I saw the very page where it would be, and noticed one of the plates on that page. Directly after breakfast I went to Swan & Edgar's and asked to see the papers, at the same time telling the young ladies about the dream, and where I had seen the brooch. The papers had been moved from that room, but were found, and to the astonishment of the young ladies, I said,'This is the one that contains my brooch;'and there at the very page I expected I found it.

" A. M. Bickford-Smith."

We received a substantially similar account from Mrs. Bickford-Smith's brother-in-law, Mr. H. A. Smith, the Hon. Treasurer of the S.P.R., who was a witness of the trouble taken to find the brooch.

A somewhat similar experience was communicated to us by Mrs. Crellin, known to Mr. Gumey —

" When a school-girl I one day foolishly removed from my French teacher's hand a ring, which I, in fun, transferred to my own. On removing it from my finger just before going to bed, I found that a stone had fallen out of the ring, and I w^as much troubled about it, especially as the ring had been given to my teacher. We had four class-rooms, and as I had been mo\ing from one to another in the course of the evening, I could not hope to find the lost stone. However, in my dreams that night I saw the stone lying on a certain plank on the floor of our'drillingroom,' and on awaking I dressed hastily and went direct to the spot marked in my dream, and recovered the lost stone. This narrative has nothing thrilling in it, but its simplicity and exactness may commend it to your notice."

Mr. Gurney adds: "In conversation with me, Mrs. Crellin described the four class-rooms as good-sized rooms, which it would have taken a long time to search over. She is positive that she went quite straight to the spot. She is an excellent witness."

Another similar dream was contributed by Mrs. Stuart, of Foley House, Rothesay, N.B., a lady well known to Mr. Myers. Here a friend lost, out of doors, an opal stone from his ring which he valued as it belonged to his father. All set to work to search for it on the

lawn and under the surrounding trees, but without success. The following night Mrs. Stuart dreamt she saw the lost opal, glistening with dew, lying by a leaf beneath a certain tree which she recognized as at the edge of the lawn. She was so much impressed with the vividness of the dream, that in the early morning she dressed and went out straight to the tree she had seen in her dream; there, sure enough, she found the stone exactly in the position she had seen it in her dream.

A corresponding case, which has the advantage of having been written down at the time by the witness and corroborated by the dreamer, is given by Miss Hunt, of Yeovil, who states that at 6 p.m., having paid her gardener his wages wrapped in a piece of paper, she gave him some letters to post on his way home. An hour later the gardener returned saying he had lost the paper containing his wages. He was told to retrace his steps and make a careful search; this he did, but to no avail. During the night he dreamt that upon crossing the road his foot struck a mud heap, and there was the lost paper containing his wages. He told his wife the dream, and falling asleep again dreamt the same dream. He got up early, went to the spot he had seen in his dream, and there found his wages and all exactly as he had dreamt. The gardener, who is described as a most intelligent, truthful man, corroborates the facts. Here, again, is another useful dream which, like the last, appears to lie on the border line between lapsed memory

DREAMS AND CRYSTAL- VISIONS 137

and some supernormal percipience during sleep.

From Mr. Herbert J. Lewis, 19, Park Place, Cardiff—

" In September 1880, I lost the landing order of a large steamer containing a cargo of iron ore, which had arrived in the port of Cardiff. She had to commence discharging at six o'clock the next morning. I received the landing order at four o'clock in the afternoon, and when I arrived at the office at six I found that I had lost it. During all the evening I was doing my utmost to find the officials at the Custom House to get a permit, as the loss was of the greatest importance, preventing the ship from discharging. I came home in a great degree of trouble about the matter, as I feared that I should lose my situation in consequence.

" That night I dreamed that I saw the lost landing order lying in a crack in the wall under a desk in the Long Room of the Custom House. At five the next morning I went down to the Custom House and got the keeper to get up and open it. I went to the spot of which I had dreamed, and found the paper in the very place. The ship was not ready to discharge at her proper time, and I went on board at seven and delivered the landing order, saving her from all delay. " Herbert J. Lewis."

The truth of the foregoing is certified by

two witnesses, and further inquiry on the spot also corroborated Mr. Lewis' statement.

It is, of course, possible that in all these cases the lost object might originally have come within the range of vision of the owner but only subconsciously noted; in sleep the faint impression may have emerged in a dream sufficiently vivid to be remembered upon awaking. There are, however, other cases wherein this explanation does not apply, showing that a higher perceptive faculty than ordinary vision appears sometimes to emerge in dream.

Several cases of this kind are cited in detail by Mr. Myers in Human Personality, vol. i., chap, iv., and in the appendix to that chapter. The narrow limits of our space will only allow a very brief reference to some of these cases.

A well-known instance is that of Canon Warburton, who states that when waiting up one night for his brother, who had gone to a dance, he fell asleep and dreamt he saw his brother " coming out of a drawing-room with a brightly illuminated landing, catching his foot in the edge of the top stair and falling headlong, just saving himself by his elbows and hands."

Soon after his brother returned and exclaimed—

" I have just had a narrow escape of breaking my neck. Coming out of the ball-room, I caught my foot and tmnbled full length do\^'n the stairs."

DREAMS AND CRYSTAL-VISIONS 1S9

Canon Warburton states he had never seen the house where the accident occurred, but the vivid impression he had of the details of the scene was corroborated by questions he put to his brother.

A case singularly like the foregoing occurred with the late Bishop of Iowa (Dr. Lee) and his son, between whom there was a tender and sympathetic affection. One night the son — living in a city three hundred miles distant from where his father was in Iowa — had a vivid dream of his father falling down-stairs; he jumped to catch the Bishop and awoke both himself and his wife, to whom he related his dream: looking at the time he found it to be 2.15. Unable to sleep further, he rose early and telegraphed to his father to know if all was well. The letter in reply informed him that on the night and almost to the minute of his dream, the Bishop had fallen down a flight of stairs and was very seriously injured. An independent confirmation of the incident was sent to Dr. Hodgson by the Bishop of Algowa. {Proc, S.P.R., vol. vii., p. 38.)

Another instance, which had the advantage of being noted in a diary before the verification of the dream was known, is given by Mr. (now Sir Edward) Hamilton, who states: '' On March 20th, 1888, I woke up with the impression of a very vivid dream. I had dreamt that my brother, who had long been in Austraha and of whom I had heard nothing for several months, had come home, and that something had gone wrong with one of his

arms — it looked horribly red near the wrist, his hand being bent back." The dream vision recurred so persistently on getting up that, notwithstanding his prejudice against attaching any importance to dreams, he noted it down that day in his diary, the only time he had ever done such a thing; this entry Mr. Gurney saw. A week later a letter was received from the brother saying he was on his way home, and that he was suffering from a bad arm. On his arrival in London on i\Iarch 29th, it turned out that his arm was suffering from blood-poisoning and that he had a bad abscess over the \vrist-joint. On inquiry it was found that the letter received by Sir Edward Hamilton was written by his brother and posted at Naples on the morning of the dream in London.

These cases and several others we might cite may be attributed to telepathy, of the conditions and range of which we know so little. In fact, *' telepathic clairvoyance " is considered by some investigators an adequate explanation of nearly all the phenomena which appear to indicate supernormal percipience, or " independent clairvoyance." Certainly it may account for much of the mystery of the visions seen in " crystalgazing," which we must now consider. But it cannot, in my opinion, account for all the phenomena described in the next chapter, nor for the success of the " dowser " described in Chapter XII. Here, however, we must take into account the possibility of mis-DREAMS AND CRYSTAL- VISIONS 141

description and of chance-coincidence, of this the reader must judge for himself.

Crystal-gazing

We now come to a class of phenomena resembling day-dreams; vivid images of scenes and persons induced by abstracting the mind from the normal sensory impressions, through intently gazing upon some lucent object, such as a glass sphere or polished crystal. Hallucinations are thus evoked resembling those in dream pictures or in hypnotic trance. The percipient, or '' scryer," is no doubt in a state of incipient hypnosis: detached from the surrounding impressions of the external world and aw^ake to the impressions arising from his hidden or subliminal self. The crystal is a form of autoscope. not mechanical, like the penduie or dowsing-rod, but sensory. As w^ith other autoscopes, the subconscious contents of the percipient's mind come into play. Forgotten memories of events or scenes are sometimes revived; a latent mental impression is developed into consciousness; very like the emergence of a picture on some photographic plate exposed years ago, then put aside and forgotten, until accidentally developed to-day. Yet mingled with these latent memories there sometimes come scenes of distant events then occurring, and afterwards verified, which the seer could not have known through any normal means. Thus the crystal -gazer, if evidence be worth

anything, is not infrequently clairvoyant without being entranced.

" In one point nearly all observers concur. These visions imply a visualizing power, greater than the seer can exercise by voluntary effort. The distinctness, artistic quality and illumination of these crystal pictures of the figures, often cause great surprise." This observation by Mr. Myers is very true. In fact, the vision is described with the vividness and sense of reality of an eye-witness of the actual scene, and resembles similar descriptions given by the clairvoyant in the hypnotic trance; as if the soul in both cases temporarily transcended its corporeal limitations.

Historically, crystal-gazing is one of the most ancient and interesting means of inducing hallucinations for the purpose of seeking information that could not be gained by the observer through any normal means. After all there was something to be said for the oracles in ancient Greece and Rome, where various forms of crystal-gazing were employed, known as crystallomancy or hydromancy, according as the seer gazed at polished crystals or a mirror, or at a still pool of water.

In India we find similar methods have been employed from a remote period, and also in Arabia, where visions are seen in a mirror by certain men. Mr. A. Lang tells us that an Arabian writer of the thirteenth century, one Ibn Khaldoun, gives practically the same account of how visions appear in the crystal

DREAMS AND CRYSTAL- VISIONS 143

as is given to-day. Certain men, Khaldoun says, " look into mirrors, or vessels filled with water... intently, until they perceive what they announce. The object gazed at disappears, and a sort of curtain, like a fog, interposes between the observer and the mirror. Upon this the things they wish to perceive are depicted and they recount what they see. When in this state the diviner sees things not with his ordinary eyesight, but with his soul. A new mode of perception has taken place. And yet the perceptions of the soul are so like those given by the senses as to deceive the observer, a fact which is well known."

One can hardly believe this was written seven centuries ago, so admirably does it describe the facts and probably the true explanation of crystal vision, a transcendental, or spiritual perception rather than the normal sense perception.

