This then is passed peradventure, if there be some one thing, at which as the mark and end all the Doctrine of Christianity doth aim, whatever thing being known conduceth nothing to the attainment of that end, all questioning about that thing will be vain. Wherefore it concerns us to see, if there be any such end; what it is, and what those things be which may conduce thereunto. Now John testi es that such an end there is, and what it is, in these words Many other signs also Jesus did, which are not contained in this Book, but these are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Messiah the Son of God, and that believing ye may obtain life by him. By which words we are plainly taught, that the end & scope of Christian Doctrine is eternal life, whereupon it follows, that whatsoever may be of any use for the attaining of eternal life, that thing may be accounted pro table to be known, and whatsoever can confer nothing to that end ought not to be regarded. How now! (may some man say) not a word of the honour and glory of God in this consideration? I answer; whatsoever things make for the glory of God, without doubt, the knowledge of all such things further our salvation, neither is the glory of God in any thing more manifested then in the salvation of man. If so be then there be any thing that we are obliged to do to the end we may attain eternal life, for as much as we cannot do that thing, unless we shall understand that it is our duty so to do the same, it is necessary that we know so much. And for as much as God hath made a Law which who so keeps not exactly, hath imposed upon him the punishment of eternal destruction; which Law because a man cannot keep, and there is some other thing, which if he do he shall notwithstanding obtain salvation; he ought to understand both that he cannot satisfy the Law, and what that other thing is which if he shall do will be a means to save him. And seeing that same other thing is; if he shall be persuaded, that the Son of God being made man satis ed his Father in respect of the punishment due unto his sins, and that he is by his blood made clean from all the de lement of sin; howbeit holiness of life and innocency of conversation is required, not that in con dence thereof we should promise ourselves salvation; but that our manners may be such as becomes the children and servants of God, bought with so great a price: These things (I say) being so, it is necessary both that a man know the promises which are made concerning Christ, and that he be not ignorant wherein holiness and innocency of life and conversation do consist. And for as much as there are many things which may either induce us to place all hope of our salvation in Christ and (according to our power) to keep the commands of God, or hinder us from so doing and delay us, it is very pro table to know what those things are which may either help or hinder. Now we are persuaded to place all our con dence in God and in amed to love him, by which love we are drawn to endeavour obedience to his Commandments, by the knowledge of his nature, not as Philosophers desire to know it that they may subtly argue about it, but so as to understand how he is beyond all conceit wise, good, gentle, merciful, how exact and punctual he is in keeping his promises. That his nature is such his works witness, viz. The Creation of the world and all things therein contained, but especially examples of his care for such as have worshipped him with a pious and holy fear, how he hath helped them in times of exigency, how he is wont to defend them from the lying in wait of the Devil and the world; also how great and grievous sinners he hath upon their repentance comforted and saved; how great a hater nevertheless of sin he is wont to show himself; and the like. To the knowledge of his nature, the remembrance of his frequently repeated promises being joined, doth exceedingly con rm and strengthen faith, and forcibly puts men upon a serious resolution of amendment of life. Hereunto may be added the explication of Prophecies, especially such as concern the present times, which being a clear testimony of the providence of God, make exceedingly to the con rmation of men's minds. Whatsoever matters of this nature are very pro table to be known and discoursed of by all men at home and abroad in private and in public. And because we can perform none of those things lately mentioned, unless assisted by the help and spirit of God, and God will have us ask this spirit and assistance of him, we must both know that God would have us so to do, and keep in mind the promises that he will give us these things upon our ask, in a word, we must in no case be ignorant in what manner we ought to call upon God and how we ought to render to him thanks for bene ts received. Contrariwise, we shall be much hindered concerning the premises, if we shall judge otherwise concerning the nature of God, concerning his will and whatever may come to pass, than his Word directs us. A great hindrance too is the corruption of our nature, which very forcibly withdraws our mind and thoughts, yea ravishes us to contrary intentions. Whereupon we being necessitated to wage perpetual war with our inbred pravity, to the end we may render our nature subject to the divine will, it is in like manner very necessary that we know our natural sinfulness and whatever the Scripture shows us for the mitigation and subduing thereof. And for as much as it is not su cient that a man care for himself alone, but every man is bound according to the measure of the spirit he hath received and the course of life whereunto he is called to seek the good of the whole Church, not only of the Members thereof now living, but likewise of posterity; whatsoever is of that tendency as to make any doctrine pro table to life hard to be attained, or may give occasion either to forsake or lightly to esteem the same, it is of great consequence that we be not ignorant thereof. And in as much as the Scriptures admonish us that we have a great and most cunning adversary (who is named from his enmity) who without ceasing plots against us whereby to ruin us and divert us from God; who can doubt but that it willbe very pro table, well to understand his arts and by what wis am they are to be avoided? in a word, no doctrine can be pro table unless it have some use; if it consist only in speculation & tend to no action, it is to be accounted vain and foolish. Yea verily, every doctrine that may any wise refer to the attainment of salvation is not to be counted pro table, to as that it should be requisite to han● e 〈◊〉 curiously, o●, di erence ●●ne, that 〈…〉 mu●● labour to assure our selus what to hold but this condition must be adjoined, that there be not other points that will easily supply the defect thereof. That this is so, appears, because it being necessary that we should believe that Jesus is the Messiah the Saviour foretold by the Prophets, and to this end all the miracles which he did were directed, that thereby it might be known who he was, yet were they not all committed to writing, but such and so many as were su cient that men might readily know who he was. So that if so be any should content that our Lord wrought some miracle not mentioned in those books which we have of his life and do, it would not be worth the while to search out the truth of that matter, or to make Controversy thereabout, forasmuch as though it should be found to be true, there could be no other pro t reaped thereby, but that Jesus should be proved to come from God, and to be the man he pretended himself to be, which thing many other miracles do so fully witness, which are out of question, that greater certainty cannot be desired: on the contrary, though we had no assurance of any such miracle, the Authority of other miracles recorded in Scripture by the holy penmen thereof, is not a jot thereby diminished. Whereby it would come to pass, that whether we shall believe that miracle or believe it not, we should neither win nor lose by the means. And forasmuch as, in case Christian Doctrine should seem to contain any absurdity, or to maintain contradictions, it would hinder those that are unconverted from embracing the same; whatever tends to the removing of such absurdities, and to reconcile such contradictions, cannot but be pro table, Unless happily such reconciliations cannot be accomplished without great stirs, Controversies, and dissensions. By such like ways then, it seems easy to know pro table questions from vain and unpro table, provided that men's judgements be not before hand disturbed with partiality and the heat of contention; and before they have already begun to contend about the point in question, as about some weighty matter: but when men are once bewitched as it were with the opinion hereof, their inbred pride, hatred, indignation, custom in Error, and Satan su er not their judgement to execute its o ce. Who amongst us at this day doth not admire, that the ancient professors of Christianity did contend with such heat and earnestness of mind, about the day on which Easter (as they call it) was to be celebrated, and about other matters of very light concernment; whereas in those times, they were thought very weighty points: we looking upon them with unbiassed judgements, plainly perceive, what an unworthy thing it was for the Church of God to be divided into sects, upon so slight occasions. My advice therefore is, that as soon as thou shalt perceive somewhat untrue to be taught, before thou set thyself to contradict it, thou consider if it be not a matter of little or no weight, and if it be, that thou make no contention about it; or, according to that opportunity which the time, place thine own person, and his thou shalt deal with, may a ord, that thou do only exhort the man to leave such speculations and apply himself to more weighty matters, and I would have thee do it as arti cially as may be, so as not to put him into any passion. But the true way of bringing men from vain questions is this; if those whose place it is either to teach the people, or to read divinity in the Schools, and those that apply themselves to write, omitting curious questions, and abandoning vain ostentation of wit, would insist upon and urge only such points as tend to the con rmation of faith, to the exptirpation of vice, to instil the fear of God, cherish piety, comfort the a icted, and keep them from desperation, to keep such as would be counted Christian brethren, in brotherly love, with a sweet harmony of a ections, and the like. Neither are these Subjects such as are to be slighted for their commonness. For in the rst place, though the heads themselves of such Doctrine are not very many, yet they are of very large extent, and then, all weary somness in the auditor may be taken away by the variety of handling them; especially if the preachers of the Gospel shall mark, what Doctrines at every season the people most stand in need of. As in case they be lift up by prosperity, and give the rein to luxury, let them fear them by the prophetical threatenings, and so reduce them into order. If a iction lie heavy upon them, let them be comforted: If they languish with sluggishness, let them be stirred up to honest employments. If they seem too intent upon the world, let them be admonished of the shortness of this life and diverted from too much care for worldly things, and thus let them insist upon such Doctrines as are most suitable to every season. Neither see I cause why we should count those arguments too common, which can never su ciently be imprinted in our minds. So that time will always be wanting for such arguments, so far shall we be from wanting matter to take up the time, though we keep within the bounds prescribed. Now this is that which may often give occasion to start vain questions, if in expounding the holy Scriptures to the people, a man shall as it were make a Law to himself to dwell long upon every word without distinction; which seems now to be the common practice. For when they cannot always nd pro table matter to discourse of, they are forced to give way to curiosity. Such men there be haply, who being ful of matter and abundant in wit, and therefore able to take an occasion of discoursing upon what Subject they please, from any text or word; may handle largely any Scripture, without just cause of reprehension. But this is not every man's Lot (as it is in the Proverb) Non omnibus datum est adire Corinthum. They that are not so well stored, shall do much more discreetly, if they will suit their endeavours to their abilities. Where many things pro table to be heard suggest themselves, let them insist long, if the text a ord not many things, let them not be ashamed to put a little shoo on a little foot, and to proceed in their explication the faster. For what matters it, if having made twenty Sermons upon some one Chapter of the Gospel, thou shalt go over the next in one discourse? The holy Ghost would not teach all things in every place, but one in one place, another in another. Neither let they knowledge be all poured forth upon one place, though thou mightest do it handsomely enough, much less be thou so absurd and unreasonable, as to desire rather to descend to foolish commentations, or to inculcate such matters as all thy auditors ears are already full of, then to be thought not to have made many Sermons upon the explication of every word. Some o end in this kind to make foolish ostentation of their fullness, others o end by giving more heed to the example of some preachers, then to what is necessary to be done. Yea and much greater occasion there is of such curiosity in respect of those which expound the Scriptures in Universities. For since there be already many commentaries upon them in print, which the Students themselves may read, and the professors are loath that their labour should be thought vain or of small necessity; that they should only repeat other men's expositions, meditations, arguments, and their very words; but desire still to have somewhat which the Scholars shall not nd in their books: besides that they are compelled to make things change their places, bringing what hath been fore-alleadged upon one place to the explication of another; that they may set forth their own acuteness, they do either invent objections that they might answer them; or they coin new words and new manner of expressions, or they raise new Controversies. Better it were in truth, that there were no professors at all, than any such as these. For what other thing will they e ect, then to reduce the study of Religion into sophistical vanities? What would you have them do, may some men say? What! truly any thing rather than thus to misspend their leisure. What should I desire them to do, but not to deprave, not to pervert such things as have been said to the purpose, and in t place, not to darken and obscure them by idle questions. And if any thing hath slipped former Expositors, if they see any thing which they did not, herein let them make proof of their own diligence. But there is yet a worse fault than this; many think it not enough to teach thus by word of mouth, but they will have their commentaries in print, setting out large volumes, that matter of wrangling doth every day increase. How many Commentaries have we already upon Paul's Epistle to the Romans? Every day some or other new one comes forth. For every man that with some applause expounds it in the Schools must needs set forth a Commentary. Howbeit should you collect what he explains more aptly than others, or what he brings wholly of his own; your glean will be very slender. The rest will be what other former writers either upon the same or some other place had formerly discoursed. And whereas our later Expositors do of purpose abstain from the words of the former, and they for the most part had prepossessed the most t forms of speaking, which relished more of the spirit and were most apt to move a ection; these must of necessity use less tting phrases, such as savour only of a vain ostentation of wit, but leave no sting of a ection in the minds of the Readers. Those who err in this kind through defect of judgement, supposing themselves not unpro tably thus employed, may with admonition be in some sort excused. But as for such as are spurred to write by ostentation and ambition, I shall not stick to count such men among the prime plagues of the Church, as persons most wickedly hireing themselves out to do the Devil's work. But let us now proceed. 2. Satan's Cabinet Counsel. The ## BOOK II The Argument. WHen upon serious examination we have found that a point in question is an Error of weighty concernment, what course we are to take. Satan's aim is rst to make a man embrace an erroneous doctrine: If he cannot do that, his next endeavour will be to in ame him with an inordinate, turbulent, passionate spirit of opposition against the said Error, whereby whiles he thinks to suppress it he shall exceedingly assist Satan in the propagation thereof. He that spreads and teaches an Error may be a dear, child of God, though left for a time. A pious person may and aught to be exceedingly moved to see the Name and Truth of God blasphemed by a spreader of erroneous tenets, but it must be with a zeal rightly quali ed, and which comes not from Satan, but the Spirit of God. The nature of a right zeal against a Seducer. Great di erence to be made between him that being deceived himself deceives others, and him that willingly, wittingly and maliciously seduceth. How a malicious seducer ought to be dealt with that he may desist from seducing. Reproaches and criminations, not only unpro table but hurtful both in respect of the seducer, the seduced, and those whom we would preserve from infection. If any good do come by reproaches and revile, it may be otherwise and by better and safer ways obtained. To brand any man with tokens of infamy, belongs to none but the Magistrate: It ill becomes any private Christian, especially those that are teachers of others. They must be free from all appearance of evil, and rather Gods than Men, that shall work any good upon seducers and seduced persons by reproaches. Two things of greatest importance to reclaim a seducer, viz. to produce such demonstrations as may have greatest power to convince him of his Error; and to provide that he may consider the same with a calm, quiet, untroubled spirit. We must therefore carefully avoid any words or behaviour that may move him to passion. We must avoid cavilling at words and drawing absurdities from his assertions. Many men delighted by misinterpreting their adversaries words, to infer some great absurdity. Many oppose their own imaginations in stead of their adversaries errors. If our adversary assert any thing which seems very absurd, we ought to suspect that we do not rightly understand him, and rather to desire him to explain himself then to triumph over the supposed absurdity. God reveals matters divine to babes and sucklings. Our adversary is much wrought upon when he sees we perfectly understand his meaning. Our chief endeavour ought to be perfectly to know what and how he holds. A great fault to charge our adversaries with holding such things as to our understandings seem to follow from their tenets. We ought barely to report their say without addition, detraction or alteration. All desire of victory to be banished from Christian debates. We must take heed we be not ashamed to acknowledge what we were before ignorant of; nor to learn the truth by the meanest instrument. We must not be over con dent in our assertions. A rm or deny without exclaiming, was ever the like heard, will any man say so or so etc. We must use our adversary not contemptuously but with civility and humanity. Our endeavour in every controversy must be that Christ may overcome, being willing to be accounted the of scouring of the world, so truth may be advanced. In every Controversy a double combat, between us and our dissenting opposite, and between us and Satan. For a man to give ground in disputation's, is not so shameful in the sight of others as in his own Account. What a man loses in reputation of learning and knowledge, he gains in the estimation of candour, ingenuity, sincerity when he lays down an Error. What meditations we ought to be conversant in before we begin a dispute, to the end we may neither ourselves be moved, nor move our adversary to passion. A man's nobility, Wealth, Authority, Reputations are the weapons wherewith Satan. ghts against him. The grand combat in all disputes is with Satan. The main quarrel, is not so much the point in question, as the Peace and Tranquillity, and safety of the Church of Christ. A disputant must take heed of being too wise in his own eyes. No vice so hardly rooted out of a man's spirit as Arrogance. A medicine against arrogance. The top of humane wisdom to suspect a man's own wisdom and seek Counsel. We cannot dispute with any person so despicable, but look how much we think ourselves wiser than him, by so much he takes himself to be wiser than Us. The use of this Observation.

IN the former book we have discoursed concerning unpro table questions, how they may be distinguished from pro table ones, and how they ought to be avoided; it follows now that we should declare what may be t a godly man to do, if it shall appear that the business in Controversy be a matter of great weight. And here doubtless, if thou wilt give ear to Satan, he will endeavour to advance his designs exceedingly by thy means. So that, some error shall not be extirpated, but spread abroad far and near, yea and become as it were the seed of many other errors; so that contentions, discords, variance, sects, devastations, and mighty hurliburlies shall thence arise; and to the end he will labour might and main, that no moderate, circumspect, grave counsel may take place; but that all things be transacted rashly, without advice, confusedly. What now shall a Christian and prudent spirit do in this case? Shall he think of obeying Satan and furthering his counsels? Will he make him his Counsellor and Captain? Will he not rather with all diligence of mind provide that all things be managed with the greatest discretion possible? So that not a word, as near as may be, shall pass which is not exactly tted by reason and polished? Will he not weigh with himself again and again what is needful to be done? Here, here indeed is need of prudence, resist the beginnings whiles the ame is yet small, if thou shalt let it alone a little while and give fuel to it likewise, who shall be able to quench the Fire? These things I say are to be foreseen in time. If thou shalt hear any impious Doctrine, what thinkest thou will the speech of Satan be in thy heart? He will try peradventure, if he can bring the Error in credit with thee also: but if he nd the doors shut on this side, and shall thee another way; O abominable wickedness! (will he say) O this fellow deserves that the Earth should open its mouth and swallow him up quick, that durst once speak such abominable words; 'tis pity he were not burnt with re from Heaven: The basest and wickedest fellow that ever the Earth bare! Is it possible that any man should so much as once think of such things, much less account them true? If thou give way to such thoughts as these, what canst thou do or say which will not occasion a thousand mischiefs? Persuade thyself, that the Spirit of God is not author of such counsels but Satan. Such thoughts are not t to take away the evil, but to increase it more and more, and render it uncapable of all cure. Somewhat else there is to be done to remedy this evil. And rst, how knowest thou, but that this man haply (what ever he may seem to be) is one of Gods elect, whom God indeed hath su ered to fall, out of some secret but most wise and loving purpose of his own, that he may raise him again with much more glory? whom didst thou but know to be such an one, couldst thou entertain any inhuman thoughts against him, who is ordained to the possession of the glory of the Elect, and to be an inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, against thy brother, against a member of Christ, against a servant, yea and a son of God? But (thou wilt say) by this reason the Magistrate must su er thieves, robbers, cutthroats and other criminal o enders, for as much as all such may be of the number of the elect, such as may in time be reclaimed. I answer; a godly and wise Magistrate when he punishes such like o enders, he doth it not to satisfy his own hatred, but executes that o ce whereunto he is called of God, knowing that he is bound to obey Gods revealed will whatever his own reason may notwithstanding prompt him unto. Even as Abraham was ready at Gods command to o er his most beloved and most innocent son Isaac. And in the mean time he omits no o ce of humanity towards such as are to be put to death. But thou wilt say further: Can the ears than of that man which loves God hear accursed speeches against God, and be no more moved than if they nothing concerned him? I answer and grant, that a man ought to be moved and vehemently moved in such a case, but would not allow that motion to be a rash headlong zeal, but a zeal guided by the most accurate reason, not of Satan's but of the Spirit of Gods begetting. If thou hadst a brother or a son rather, whom thou exceedingly lovedst; thou couldst not see him catch a dangerous fall, but (especially in case he were therewith grievously wounded) thou wouldst be much moved, but with what kind of motion or a ection? So as to inveigh against him with harsh language, to overwhelm him with revile and reproaches? Yea rather thou wouldst run to him and raise him up as gingerly as thou canst. Thou wouldst bid him be of good cheer, and leave nothing undone which might free him from, or at least mitigate his pain. Thou wouldst spare no pains and watch with him whole nights together. And in case the anguish of his wound shall make him froward, thou wilt nevertheless remit nothing of thy great tenderness over him. Such would I have the motion of thy mind to be, to be grieved at the fall of thy brother; to be grieved that God is o ended; to be grieved for their sakes whom he hath mis- taught so a that they are in danger to lose their salvation. But let the e ects of thy griefs be, that thou endeavour with all thy might either wholly to remove or to lessen the evil; and that thou take heed again and again (as in a business wherein thou canst not err without great danger) that thou neither do or speak any thing which may increase the same, nor of which thou canst not foresee some certain hope of pro t; and that thou wilt so order thyself, that in case thou shalt at any time observe, that what thou didst to a good end had a bad issue, thou wilt be content with the hazard of thy reputation to correct thine Error.

Furthermore, three things seem to require our consideration: what course is to be taken concerning him that sows Errors; what is to be done concerning such as have assented unto Errors; and what concerning such as are in danger to be infected. Concerning the Author of the Error, thou must be exceeding careful, what end and scope all thy counsels aim at. Many weighing what a destructive thing Error in Religion is, and consequently what damage he brings to the Church of God who disperseth Errors, they think nothing can be enacted too severely against him. Whereupon at every rst word they break out into rail and reproaches, and ll the world with out-cries, and a man would wonder how they please themselves in so doing, and how rarely they conceive they have defended the cause of Christ. Neither do these men much regard, whether a man teach false out of ignorance, or to serve his own lust. Yea rather as though they were assured that never any such thing is done but out of malice, they deal with every one as with a malicious seducer. Hence come these kind of expressions: The lthy beast was not ashamed to speak so and so. The most cunning impostor hath left nothing unattempted whereby he might poison simple people, with the like expressions; and a man would wonder to see how uent some men are and copious in such kind of Rhetoric. Now if so be a man shall think that he teacheth true and godly doctrines and that he is well and holily employed, for this cause, by all the reasons he can he will endeavour to cause his Errors to be received and conceive that he deserves much praise for so doing. If therefore thou shalt fall foul upon him, averring that he deals maliciously, impudently and wickedly, he will think himself to be exceedingly injured. Whereupon he will be moved and in amed with anger and determine with himself to maintain his Error come what will come, and to bandy back the injuries with a large requital. Then will the people also take several sides, and all places will be disquieted with contentions, scold, exclamations; So that no good, much hurt will follow. Wherefore, as thy aim ought to be, that he which sows Errors may not escape a just and deserved censure; so oughtest thou to deal much otherwise with him that being deceived himself deceiveth others, then with him that doth it maliciously, and not to punish any for malice till that malice appear manifest, and it is the part of a well-disposed mind in a doubtful case to incline to the more favorable construction, so as rather to make supposition of Error than malice. Furthermore, those men are wont to incur great hatred and to bring great calamities upon themselves who labour to broach new Tenets, so that he which should take any pleasure to stir up the hate of men against himself and to make himself to be inveighed against, must be a strange kind of man. Wherefore no man ought to suppose such a thing of any man, unless upon very great probability. And if it be a matter of Error and not of malice, verily thus I think, that if there be any thing in which clemency is to be used, here it ought to take place. Suppose a man fearing God, that look what himself accounts true and saving doctrine, would fain (if it were possible) that all the world might know and approve the same: in such a case, if you consider the mind of the man, will not any harsh dealing towards him appear to be inhumanity and cruelty. God hath not endowed him with more wit or judgement, neither hath he imparted to him a greater measure of his Spirit: if then thou shalt be angry with him, thou wilt seem to be angry not so much with him as with God that hath given him no greater ability. Now if so be thou look at the issue and fruit, nothing is more unpro table than anger, indignations and invectives full of criminations and reproaches. But if so be there be knavery in the matter, I shall readily grant, no censure can be grievous enough, no punishment can be invented so severe, but to be many degrees short of so horrible wickedness: That there should be any man whom neither the fear of God nor the salvation of men could any ways move, but whiles he satis es his own lust he sets all at six and seven. Howbeit, in case a man be worthy of great censure, it may not be expedient forthwith to deal with him according to his deserts. All things (saith the Apostle) are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. So that we must consider again and again, what is most expedient, what regard is to be had of the person, what the time, what the place calls for, which things a mind disturbed with anger or any other passion cannot discern. For anger darkens a man's sight, dulls, troubles and corrupts the judgement, is the worst counsellor that can be at all times and in all a airs. Be it that a man deserve to be stoned to death, to be torn in pieces limb from limb, this may be done by the sentence of the Magistrate, without wrath, without insultation, without railing. For what need is there of these a ections, the enemies of all sound judgement? So shall it be done with greater gravity and pro t, and the punishment will seem to have proceeded not from the lust of man but from right reason itself. So likewise shall the example of such severity take much stronger impression in the minds of men. Now these are the things we ought to have a care of, that he which hath seduced the people, seduce them no more, but may su er truth to take place; that those which have been seduced may be brought back again to the truth; that such who are yet sound may be armed against the contagion of Error. Whether or no it be also requisite that by some tting punishment, as with a bridle, the daring of extravagant wits, should be kerbed from blurting out whatever comes into their pates, we shall hereafter take into consideration. It may so fall out, that God wils that some should be sharply reproved, that at the last day they may have the less excuse and undergo the more severe punishment: Yet, as no man living can say who those persons be, so no man ought to be moved with the consideration of such; if there be any such whom God would have so severely chidden, he will stir up such as shall do it, only let us take heed that Satan deceive us not, and that we permit not his instigations to be obtruded upon us, as if they were the breathe of the holy Ghost.

Now that thou mayst know by what means thou mayst withdraw a malicious seducer from seducing the people; thou must understand and consider, that he which shall set himself to commit so great a wickedness, must be a person extraordinarily Impious and void of all fear of God; concerning him therefore, whether present or absent, if thou shalt speak according to his merit, if thou shalt paint him out in his colours, and he forthwith shall abstain, what think you his meaning is? Will he not seem openly to confess himself guilty of those crimes which thou hast charged him with? Is it possible thou shouldst promise thyself so much moderation, so much relenting in a man void of the fear of God? Mayst thou not with much more reason expect, that he will endeavour to clear himself of all crimes objected against him, and lay many more to thy charge? Will he not beat his brains night and day to invent calumnies wherewith to defame thee? And what is there so far from Truth, which a craftily-composed discourse cannot make to appear probable? And when as Angers and Hatreds shall increase here and there, when as daily vehement accusations shall be heard on both sides, the people shall be divided into contrary factions, what shalt thou gain thereby, which a man of a sound judgement would not much repent him of? If then there be any hope (which is very small) to withdraw such a person from his enterprise, it doth not herein consist, in discovering and laying to his charge his malice; but herein rather, if forbearing to speak of his fraud and malice, thou shalt in the rst place so defend the truth, and render it so clear that it may be almost felt: if thou shalt do this with the greatest dexterity and gentleness that may be: for as it is hard to procure from a wicked nefarious person, a willingness to appear vanquished by argument, and to have been in an Error; so shouldest thou foolishly hope, that he would be content to have it thought that wittingly and willingly he hath, through excess of wickedness cheated the people. In like manner, towards the reducing of such as have been seduced, I cannot see what good can be wrought by reproaching the Author. For it is commonly seen, that he which assents to any man's tenets, doth reverence that man and count him worthy of honour and praise; so that if you shall go about to disgrace him with reproaches, he will say thou dost him great wrong, and will be displeased with thee therefore. Now who knows not that good will and hatred, and other passions of the mind have great power to sway the judgement this way or that way? Nor can I understand of what greater use it will be towards the preservation of those that are as yet untainted. For it's almost impossible that a speech full of revile and accusations, should not ow from Anger, or some vehement motion of mind; now where such motions are, it's a wonder, if all things be said with due circumspection, and not rather frequent oversights be committed, either by not rightly repeating the Seducers words, or not tly answering his Arguments, whereby (as we have showed) many inconveniences arise. And many men there are who are o ended with all bad language, be there just cause, or be there not, for so speaking: and they will think ill of, and disa ect that man, in whom they see a propensity to revile. Which, what else is it but to be the readier to assent unto those whom thou labourest, with all thy might, to disparage with reproaches? Especially if they shall have the Art, slily and craftily to counterfeit some kind of modesty and patience. I confess indeed with some, Criminations are of that force, that they cannot hear so much as the name of those that are reproached, without trembling; so far will they be from su ering themselves to be by such persons seduced; but this falls out only then for the most part, when the persons criminating are in high repute for their uprightness, holiness and innocency, so that it may seem impossible that they should be drawn by any means to do injuriously towards any; which opinion settled in the minds of the people concerning thee, thou mayst with much more ease falsely ascribe and arrogate, then procure unto thyself. For even we our selus oftentimes do not su ciently know, by what spirit we are led; and be a man never so innocent, he shall never be able to hinder, but that many things designed with all possible sanctity, shall be misinterpreted by the common people. And those persons themselves who by means of crimes alleged, have withdrawn all credit from the parties accused, would in all likelihood have done the like, when they had heard their tenets related, and without crimination, by sure and certain arguments and testimonies, candidly and civilly refuted.

Hitherto (I conceive) we have cleared, how that from bad language, very many and great evils arise, and that the pro t from thence arising is either none at all or very little, and that it may more certainly by other ways be attained. It remains only that we speak of that same reason which is alleged, why such language should be used, viz. because by such kind of censures, the Authors of new tenets are kerbed. And in the rst place I desire it may be noted, that we do not in this place treat of the o ce of the Magistrate; it is the duty of private men which we handle in this place, and of such to whose care the instruction of the people in piety is committed. Concerning the Magistrate we shall speak hereafter. Now then, forasmuch as it is not in the power of any one, save the Magistrate, to censure or punish malefactors; other men must take heed they put not their sickle into that eld which belongs not to them. There is to this purpose, an excellent passage of Cicero in his fourth book of Commonwealths: Our twelve tables (quoth he) contrariwise, enacting very few faults punishable by Death, made this for one; if by any practising or libelling a man should defame any one, or charge him with any heinous o ence. A gallant law! forasmuch as the lives and conversations of men, aught to be subject to the Law, and the legal decisions and inquisition of Magistrates, not to the wits of Poets and pamphleteers; neither ought any thing to be reproachfully charged upon any one, save with condition, that he may have liberty to answer and make his defence in open Court. Is a man's reputation so slight a matter, that it should he open to every body's lust? If the supreme Magistrate of the Common wealth should set himself to disgrace and defame whomsoever he pleased (though there might be reason enough so to do) without process of law, who would not say he played the part of a Tyrant rather than a King? That therefore which the chief Magistrate cannot do but by manifest tyranny, shall any private man be su ered to do the same, shall it be permitted to him to do it, whose o ce it is, not so much by words as his own example to train the people in all Honesty and Moderation of mind? It is indeed the part of a Pastor, to reprehend, to chide, to rebuke, but he ought to do it not as an enemy, but as a father; so far forth as may be necessary and pro table for the amendment of those he hath to deal with. And he ought to remember, that it is not his, but the Magistrates o ce to censure or punish any one. And in case he shall plead that it belongs to him; let us consider with what success he shall use such a power in respect of the end proposed. I shall not deny, but that many men, terri ed by the example of such persons as they see by such dealing, brought into great disgrace and hatred, may become thereby less, daring to vent such things, as curious studies frequently suggest: howbeit, unless the lives of such who are the Censurers, be void not only of vice but suspicion too, and unless their holiness and innocency be in all things apparent, so that they shall rather show themselves to be certain divine creatures then of Mankind; I conceive they shall advance very little by such a course. For it will just so fall out, as when a man shall stop the passage of a river with dams: the waters will seem for a while to be restrained of their course, yet will they seek a passage on all sides, and to be sure, swelling higher and higher, they will over ow the bay, and at length having eat through and throwndown the dams, with mighty violence will they break forth, and make, by many degrees, greater waste, then if their course had never been restrained: for the man whose liberty is kerbed by such a bridle, for a time indeed he keeps himself quiet, but it is much against his will, and he collects poison by little and little, wherewith being lled he must of necessity pour it forth, and it proves so much the more deadly, by how much the longer he kept it in: forasmuch as hatred against such as he conceives tyrannically to rule over him, is the cause, that, he is averse unto, and abhors their opinions. Hereupon he endeavours by all the cunning ways possible, rst, to draw away, now one, than another to his side; and so the evil grows by little and little and gathers strength, till at length the sect fears not to discover itself, and to disquiet the Commonwealth; which is plainly seen, among many other instances, in the so late sedition at Munster. And a wonderful thing it is, with what arts Satan furnishes these kind of men, and with what success he furthers their designs: which if those men would more advisedly weigh, who judge reproaches to be of such force to preserve the purity of doctrine, they would, haply, be less delighted with them than they are. In a word, as I deny not, but that sometime, sharp reproofs ought to take place, so I Avouch, that all those conditions do very seldom concur which are requisite, that they may be in the least measure bene cial. And to pass over the consideration of their pro t, a great and wonderful is that, which Jude in his Epistle mentions, that Michael the Archangel contending about the body of Moses, durst not rail upon Satan himself, but desired God to rebuke him. What harebrained men are we! how much greater things dare we not only against Satan (which yet were a great arrogance, to take more liberty than the Archangel thought t to use) but against men, it may be no less dear to God than we ourselves are. Would we but weigh this one example, and then consider, what liberty we use in mutual reproaches; verily, that man must be very blind, that sees not, how that this same custom of evil-speaking comes from no other spirit, but that of the Devil. But, forasmuch as we have declared, that what ever we do upon the report of some Error spread abroad, we ought to consider the end we ought to aim at in every thing, and that we ought among other things, to endeavour that the party erring may be drawn from his Error; to which purpose bad language and insultations pro t not, but rather do very much hurt; let us now make enquiry, what is most t to be done in such a case.

Now there are two things requisite to reduce a person erring from his Error; rst, such demonstrations as may be of force with one of his judgement, to discover his error unto him; secondly, that he may weigh such demonstrations with a perfect and sound judgement. But if so be the demonstrations shall not be suited to a man's understanding, or he shall not weigh them, or in case he do, it shall be with a prejudiced and corrupted judgement, we shall miss of our intended scope. Further, his judgement shall then become sound and uncorrupt, when God shall have healed it with his spirit, and have rendered it capable of the truth; as also when it is not vexed with any jealousies or passions. Here therefore nothing is more to be avoided, then that we speak or do any thing which may wound his mind and estrange his a ections; such are all words that may imply our bearing any ill-wil towards him, such as may gall and accuse him of deceit, ignorance, impudence; or, in a word, any ways blast his reputation. We ought rather by all kind of humanity and respects, invite him to gentleness, moderation and goodwill; whereunto charity will best instruct us, provided it be sincere, void of ostentation; which virtue whosoever is not assured that he is furnished with, let him not once meddle in this design till he have attained it. And if so be thou canst see nothing in the party that may deserve thy love, consider what there is in God and his only begotten son, whose workmanship he is, that may command thy a ection. Were it not the pleasure of God that this man should live, either he should never have been born, or presently expired upon his birth, or at least never have lived till this time: whereas now thou seest how God nourishes him, how he causes his sun to shine upon him as much as upon thyself, and how thousands of ways he makes him partaker of his liberality and goodness. Shall it then become thee who art the servant of this God, to be otherwise a ected towards such an one? How knowest thou (as we said before) but this man may be a sheep of the Lords fold, which, how ever at present he wanders from the ock as one distracted, shall at length be found by that best of the shepherds, healed & brought back to the ock? And if the case be such, dost thou not discern our Lord himself, in the person of such an one, coming to the weak and sick to make trial of thy love, which he intends to commemorate at the last day? And forasmuch as thou art not able to judge whether it be thus or no, it is enough for thee, that possibly he may be such an one; so that what ever kindness thou shalt show him, the Lord may reckon it as done unto himself. Thou oughtest not therefore to look upon his person, but upon the person of Christ whom he represents, and to remember how great his love hath been to thee: insomuch as he refused not, being himself just and innocent, to die for thee an unjust person, and the greatest of sinners, especially by so cruel and bloody a death. Oh, had we but the least suspicion concerning any man, that he should hereafter be a King, yea the best of Kings; suppose his present condition to be never so mean and obscure, how far would we be from contemning such a man? And what I pray you, is the dignity and sovereignty of a King, compared with that dgnity and lustre which is laid up for Gods elect? And shall we account that man unworthy of our humanity and good will, who, for aught we know, is born to this glory? Again, it will be very e ectual to move thee to a gentle opinion concerning such a man, if entering into thine own heart, thou shalt take a diligent and strict survey of all thy actions, of thy whole life and cogitations, and examine them by the Law of God. And if so be thou shalt nd thyself tainted in the presence of God with many and great sins, and yet dost comfort thyself, that he will not deal severely with thee, nor punish thee according to thy deserts, but rather carry himself towards thee, as a tender God and Father: why mayst thou not hope, that he shall be partaker of the like gentleness? And since, in regard of this hope of thine, thou lookest upon thyself, as one no way to be despised; what reason is there, thou shouldest not judge the same of another? Further, with such meditations as these, we must join frequent and fervent prayers to God, that he would soften our heart, and would plant therein, with his own hand, a true and living charity, which will direct us unto such apt and convenient ways of dealing with our brother, that it will be a miracle if we do not shortly reclaim him. And whereas no man can understand the things of God but by the spirit of God; before we begin any dispute, let us wrestle with God by prayer, taking to our assistance some other godly persons, that he by his spirit would be present with the person erring, and open his heart and eyes, that he may acknowledge the truth; yea, and we ought to exhort him to make the like prayer to God in his own behalf.

As for demonstrations, they will be then available to manifest the truth, when God is their Author, as it is written; I will instruct you with such a tongue and such wisdom, that no body shall be able to resist you. And again, as the rain and snow descend from heaven, and return not thither again, but do moisten and soften the earth, making it to bud, and bring forth, and yield bread to sustain the life of man; so my word that proceeds out of my mouth, shall not return to me fruitless, but shall accomplish all my will, & shall prosper towards those to whom I shall send it. Here than we see that prayers are again necessary unto the Lord, that he would not only open the heart of the person erring, but also suggest unto us such words as maybe most tting to demonstrate the truth. And if it shall not seem absurd to allow some place for such arts, which though they be termed humane; yet if a man shall no other ways use them, then as knowing that while he plants and waters, it must be God that can give the increase, and putting all his con dence in him; no man can deny but they are the gifts of God: I shall further add, that those demonstrations have power to persuade, which taking their rise from things evidently known, and from such places of Scripture as are most clear and uncapable of di erent interpretations, in a due order, and with a perpetual connexion; no medium being overpast or misplaced, do arrive unto the point in controversy; or else which shall begin at the Tenet to be disproved, and some other point out of all question, inferring by degrees, until such time as the party erring shall be brought to some great absurdity; which when by no means it can be maintained, it is impossible but the party dealt with shall confess; that somewhat untrue hath been laid down, especially if this shall be done with words and expressions, noways obscure, doubtful, or intricate, but plain, clear and familiar. Howbeit (to say the truth) few there are, that can thus do, and the reason is, because there are very few, that had not far rather be writers and speakers than Meditators. Now it is not enough, if the argument which thou shalt bring, shalt seem unto thee to the purpose, but it ought to be accommodated to the wit and judgement of him that is to be persuaded therewith. As for example: if thou haply shalt so prise the Authority of Origen, as to think thou oughtest to credit what ever he says, and shalt allege some place of his writings wherein he seems to take thy part, this may seem to thee, to make much on thy side; but if he with whom thou hast to deal, shall give little or no credit to Origen, this Testimony will stand thee in no stead, and as little shalt thou prevail, if having to deal with a Turk or some other enemy to Christianity, thou shalt make use of Testimonies of Scripture. Thus likewise it will come to pass, if dealing with reasons, thou shalt take such things for grant, which, howbeit to thee they seem out of question, yet thy Adversary is not persuaded of their truth. For thou oughtest to assume such things as are true, not only in thine own, but in his account also. As if thou shalt say, we must not confess our sins to a Priest, because God hath not commanded it; and there stop: for he which doth not as yet know, or at least for the present remembers not, that we ought to observe nothing but what God himself shall command, will not a whit be moved with that reason. There is a like, but more obscure passage in Tully's book called Laelius; the words are these. Scipio denied that any speech could be more contrary to friendship, than his that said, a man ought so to love, as remembering that he may hate where he loves; neither could he persuade himself, that (as it is believed) Bias should utter any such thing, who was accounted one of the seven wise men, but that it came from some base ambitious spirit, from a man that would reduce all things to his own power. For how is it possible any man should be his friend, to whom he conceives he may become an enemy? Yea, he must of necessity desire and wish that his friend may frequently oﬀend; that he may give him the more occasions to reprehend him. Again, he must of necessity be vexed, grieved and moved to envy, by the well-doing and proﬁt of his friends. So far Loelius. Now a man will wonder how these absurdities should follow from the speech of Bias; whereas haply had the Argumentation been complete, all occasion of marvel would have been taken away. And that thou mayst understand, what the way of prevailing in this case is, what reasons will move thine Adversary, and what not, thou must be very well acquainted with what he says and thinks; as also (beside the Controversy in hand) what other opinions he holds, what those things be whereof he is most certainly persuaded, and what his judgmnet is. Now there is nothing so usual in disputes, as for to cavil at one another's words, and to collect absurdities. Whence, for the most part, it comes to pass, that opposition is made, no: so much against what is a rmed, but against what thou by a false interpretation hast feigned to thyself. Which kind of practice whereunto can it tend, but (as we have said) to provoke thine adversary to choler, to con rm his con dence and peremptoryness; and to open to thyself a window whereout to cast a thousand follies, not a jot to the matter in hand? Thus to do, is to imitate unskilful physicians, who little examine the nature of the disease; appoint remydies, nothing to the purpose, and in stead of curing kill their Patients. Yet some men are exceedingly conceited of themselves, if misinterpreting their adversaries words, they can infer some great absurdity therefrom. Howbeit, this custom ought to be left to vain Sophisters. In matters of this nature, of such weight and concernment, let it not be thy aim, that thou mayst seem to have confuted the error by hook or by crook, on any fashion; but let thy endeavour be to confute it indeed, and in truth, so as thine adversary may not have a word to say for himself, which thou shalt never accomplish unless thou give diligent heed, rightly to understand thine opposites words. And if so be he seem to utter somewhat that is very absurd, thou oughtest to be the more fearful, lest thou mis-understand him, and rather to desire him to explain his meaning; then to fall upon the bones of the absurdity, when thou art not yet certain, that it is thine adversaries meaning. And when the controversy is managed face to face, herein commonly is the grand miscarriage, that a man persuades himself he can at the rst word, divine what his adversary would say, before he hear him out, and would be presently at the Answer: whence it comes to pass that clamours are raised, choler is moved, and all the labour is lost. Away then with this rash forecasting, and let us stay till our time come to Answer. Others when they have produced an Argument, will needs triumph before the Victory, not able to stay till the other reply. Because they can see no way to avoid the dint of their Argument, they think surely, no body else can. Out upon such lightness! we cannot every man know all things. For supposing thou knowest more than I in all other matters, what wonder is it, if I haply know more than thou in this one point? What shalt thou get by this thine eagerness, saving to lay naked, like a fool, thine own Arrogance, Insolence and crabbed condition? If in worldly matters, Experience hath taught this proverbial Lesson.

— Et quandoquè bonus dormitat Homerus Even honest Homer's sometimes napping took. And this

Saepe etiam est st lt s aldè oport na loc t s: A fool oft times to purpose speaks. what shall we think in matters divine, of which the truth itself thus speaks; That it hath pleased his heavenly father, to hid his secrets from the wise, and to reveal them to babes and sucking Children? Now we nd by experience, that if thine adversary observe that thou understandest his meaning, what he holds, and by what reasons he is induced so to think, and shall see thee notwithstanding, ready to contradict and oppose him; it will be almost impossible, but he will abate much of his con dence. He was formerly persuaded, that in case his fancies were rightly understood, every one would assent unto them; but now when he sees him that understands them, refusing to give his assent, he cannot choose, but wonder. Which what else is it, but to make some kind of doubt, lest his Tenets be not so sound as they ought to be? Hereupon likewise he is in amed with a desire to know what it is thou hast to object, which desire hath made him t to understand thee, and being come so far, the business is welnear accomplished. My judgement therefore is in overthrowing an Error, that the chief labour ought to be rightly, to understand what is a rmed, according to the meaning of him that spoke the words; not how thou by a crafty cavil mayst interpret the speech: yea rather, if any violence should be o ered to the words, I would much rather they should be drawn to serve the purpose of the speaker, then to any other intent. Among other faults committed by misunderstanding our adversaries words; this is a frequent one, when we thus reason with ourselves; if it were as that man a rms, this and that would thereof follow, and then look what inferences we make in our own understandings, we attribute them unto our Adversaries, and waste away the time in confuting such things, as they peradventure never once so much as thought of, whereby we do both provoke them, and render ourselves ridiculous; which the better to understand, this example may be of use. Because the Papists say, that sins committed after baptism, must either be expiated with good works by us wrought, or after death, by the re of Purgatory; if we shall thus infer; If it be necessary that any sins be expiated, either by our do or su erings, than Christ hath not taken them away, and then he hath not performed what he came into the world for, viz. to abolish the works of the Devil, and therefore shall say that the Papists deny that Christ did that he came into the world to do: we shall so far say true, inasmuch as they do in some sort deny that Christ hath done, what he came into the world for, because it follows from what they hold; yet shall not our saying be punctually true, inasmuch as they do not expressly say so, and it may be, think not so neither. So that if we shall proceed with many words to blame them for such collections, as if they were their positions, they will say that we are mad. What shall we do then in this Case? Report what they say without addition, diminution or alteration. And if so be absurdities shall follow from their words, they are to be collected only to this end, that it may appear, that what they hold is false. Such ingenuity is amiable what ever thing be controverted; as for the Disciples of Christ reasoning about matters Divine, no ornament in the world can more become them.

Furthermore, Desire of Conquest ought to be banished from all Christian disputes: let all thy care be, that truth may overcome; neither let it concern thee, whether she be discovered by thee or some other man; persuade thyself that thy reputation shall be su ciently provided for, in case God may have that honour which is due to him; which is much advanced, when Truth is rescued and vindicated from Imposture. Wherefore, in case it fall out, that by means of the dispute, thou come to know that thou wast ignorant of before, beware thou shame not to acknowledge it; never care who it is thou must give way unto. Know thou, that it is a most honourable thing to be taught of God, be it by what instrument soever. Let them be ashamed that will not learn. If thou art ashamed of him, whom God shall use as his instrument, assure thyself, it is not man but God whom thou contemnest, whose severe vengeance thou shalt not escape, unless with a reverend mind thou embrace his pro ered favour. And to the end thou mayst do this the more easily, when occasion shall require, it will be much to the purpose, if thou shalt avoid such things as increase the di culty to practise the same; such as these: to aver any thing with great con dence, so as often to protest that thou wilt account it a great o ence, an heinous crime, yea mere madness for any man to contradict thee; to call him a block that cannot understand it, and the like. For it will afterward seem very grievous, to appear to have shot so wide of the mark; so that it is far better to speak warily at all times, not so as to seem always to doubt (for that were not commendable) but barely to a rm what thou conceivest to be the truth, and in like manner to deny such things, as thou conceivest to be false, and to allege Arguments and Testimonies, on the one side or on the other: only abstain from such expressions as these; what an impious thing is this? What rashness? What impudence to a rm so or so, and the like. The Mathematicians use most sure demonstrations and infallible, yet shall you never hear them utter such a word; for such speeches add nothing to the certainty and clearness of the demonstrations. If it may be free for us to assent unto the Truth, when ever it shall be made known unto us, and to embrace a more true opinion, than what for the present we hold, why should we by means of such rash speeches bind ourselves, as it were by a Law, with great obstinacy to adhere unto a false one? Pertinent hereunto seems that advice of Solomon. Take heed thou entangle not thyself in contention, least proving over weak thou be ashamed, and at a nonplus. And forasmuch as we cannot know what things those are wherein we err, that in speaking of them our discourse may be circumspect, as it ought to be in such matters, we shall never use this caution when there is need, unless we shall accustom ourselves, what ever matter we reason about, to avoid such kind of expressions, as most dangerous rocks. Again, the aforesaid di culty is much increased, if we shall greatly despise our Adversary; so that it will be much more civil and discreet, with whomsoever we have to deal, to contain ourselves within the bounds of modesty; and to abstain from all signi cation of contempt. And forasmuch, as do what we can, we shall hardly obtain the power, to seem vanquished without great reluctation, we ought to arm our minds against this assault, as rmly as we can, with some prevalent reason, by frequent meditation, deeply imprinted in our mind; nor do I know any more forcible than this; to call to mind, that this whole life, of ours, lasts but for a moment, being like a stage-play, where Princes, Kings, Servingmen, Ladies, Waiting- women are brought upon the stage; when the play is done, the players casting aside those persons they acted, are either all equals; or he peradventure which was King of the play, is now of a more base condition, than he that played the part of a servant. Now in case some one of the players should nd himself much aggrieved to act that part which seems dishonourable, and had rather o end him, by whose favour he shall be raised out of the dust, and by whose displeasure he shall become miserable all his life time; will not all men account him out of his wits, who shall prise more the vain ostentation of an hour, then so many commodities of life? And is there not here the same or far greater madness? Be thou the Conqueror or Conquered, how long will the glory or the disgrace endure? And in case thou shalt wittingly oppose the Truth, and by so doing shalt make God thine Enemy, what will become of thee, wretched man that thou art? By thy obstinacy it may fall out, that the Truth shall remain oppressed, and an innumerable company of people by this means perish; which will be so many accusers against thee at the last day. Who would not tremble every joint to think of this? Away then with all such kind of peremptoriness, and let every man resolve with himself, to make no account of his own reputation in this case, but to make it his whole desire that in all disputes Christ may have the better: neither let him care to become the o scouring of the world, so that in all things the name of God may be honoured. Thou art nettled perhaps, that he should get the victory, whom peradventure thou didst ere while lightly esteem in comparison of thyself. And is it so indeed? Hast not thou another much greater combat with Satan? He hath singled thee out, as it were a certain Fort, which by all engines and endeavours he will endeavour to Conquer: and thou standest upon thy guard. Now if so be thou shalt oppose the Truth known, through the pride of thy mind; Shalt thou not dishonourably surrender thyself unto thine enemy, to such an enemy? Shalt thou not betray thy Fort: And this in the sight of thy general, from whom nothing is hid? Is there nothing in this case, that may vex and a ict thy mind? Consider again and again the choice thou art put unto. There is a double ght in which thou art engaged, thou canst not in both be Conqueror. If thou art resolved to become victor on that side, by the oppression of Truth, most sure it is, thou shalt be overcome in this other duel with Satan. But if so be thou canst not be content to be vanquished here, of necessity thou must strike sail, and submit thyself in the former. Which, that thou mayst do with a more contented mind, consider with thyself, that thy giving way, will not seem so shameful to others, as it doth unto thyself: for who knows not, that nothing is more proper to mankind then to err? And that in every Controversy it is expected, that the one side will be vanquished? So that it will not be much wondered at, if thou shalt be overcome rather than thy adversary: and though it be a disgrace to be vanquished, yet is it a thing very praiseworthy, and that which is apt to procure great good will from all good persons, if thou shalt be so ingenious, as willingly to give place to the Truth, being once manifested. So that in case any loss be sustained in respect of thy fame and reputation, in point of learning, it shall be abundantly recompensed with the commendation of thy goodness; which thou mayst easily understand to be of more worth of the two; forasmuch as every man abhors a wicked person, how learned soever he seems to be; whereas all men account a good man, though void of all learning, worthy both of Love and Honour. Neither oughtest thou to persuade thyself, that it will not be known thou art vanquished, unless thou thyself give ground: yea rather, by how much the more thou shalt struggle, by so much the more wilt thou discover thy stifneckedness and baseness, and give thine adversary the more occasion to publish the same, and give the more occasion to many speeches, which will not make much for thy reputation. So that in the Conclusion, thou shalt neither be able to maintain the reputation of thy- learning, nor choose but to undergo the hateful censure of perverseness and obstinacy. If thou shalt frequently meditate on such things as these; it will be a miracle if the inbred impotency of thy mind be not much abated; So as thou shalt be able to su er the Truth to overcome, with a contented mind, when occasion shall require. And forasmuch as it is very hard in disputes, both not to be provoked, and not to provoke; we must labour by such meditations as these, like as it were by certain medicines, to prepare our mind, that we may not be overtaken withsuch miscarriages. Wherefore when thou art to enter into a dispute, thou oughtest to imitate a valiant and wary Champion, that is to ght insingle combat: for he will bethink himself of all the several Arts of striking & thrusting, and will study how to defend himself against every one. He will likewise consider what parts of his body are worst armed, and in which parts a wound will prove most dangerous, thereby to use the greater care in their defence. Moreover, he will whet his mind to the combat, and resolve either to vanquish his adversary, or valiantly to lose his life. So oughtest thou to think with thyself, and set before thine eyes what ever may happen at thy dispute, which may in ame thy mind with anger, darken thine understanding, and ll thee with perturbations; as that thine adversary may reproach thee, that he may charge thee to deal impiously, impudently or wickedly; that he may term thee a silly ignorant fellow, a block, a sot; that he may basely deride thee; that he will cavil and wrest thy words; in brief, that he will use thee with all kind of insolence, and yet must thou resolve with thyself, not to be moved at any thing, but rather with all gentleness and patience to persist to the end. Hast thou Nobility or wealth, Authority or Reputation, or any other thing which may mak● thee think highly of thyself, make account that on that part thou art unarmed, liable to injury; and that there, if thou takest not heed, thou shalt be wounded. And thy way of defending thyself, is to understand that these are no other than Satan's weapons, wherewith he will ght against thee; which will then want all power of hurting thee, when thou shalt perfectly understand what vain and empty things they are. This one thing ought to be engraven in thine heart, that thou hast not to deal with the man, with whom thou must dispute, but with Satan himself, and that the main quarrel is not that point about which thou shalt argue, but many more matters, and of greater concernment. How that Satan's aim is from one contention to raise in nite, to in ame men's minds with wrath, to rend the Church into Sects, to stir up seditions, and erect Tyrannies: in a word that he aims at nothing but mighty combustions and devastations. And that therefore, he will not bring upon the stage one contentious person or two, but very many, each more wayward than other more obstinate, more seditious. And that the top of his design, is not to darken the point in question (for that is the smallest thing he aims at) but much more to vanquish thy patience, which being vanquished, he may easily obtain his other ends. Go to then, what is the duty of a good Soldier in this case? To be white-livered? To be wearied out? To give ground to the Enemy? By no means in the world: but by how much the more eagerly and ercely he sets upon thee, by so much the more do thou call thy wits about thee, and buckle thyself to ght against him. Which thou oughtest to do with the more alacrity, forasmuch as the Apostle James gives us most certain hope of victory; where he says, if we shall resist the Devil, he will ﬂy from us. Oh that this one thing were well rooted in our minds, that what ever Controversy be agitated, we have not to do with him that moves it, and that the Controversy is not about one point of Religion, but that thereby Satan seeks occasion to raise contentions, sects, brawls, combustions, and the subversion of the Kingdom of Christ, of the Commonwealth of Christians. Of what force would this one consideration be towards the molli ing our minds, and the composing us more and more to gentleness, and a quiet and circumspect manner of disputation! Now among other things which make a disputant very froward, Arrogance challenges the rst place, if thou shalt think thou knowest all things, and contemn every body else in comparison of thyself. Which humour is often augmented by wealth, Magistracy, great bene ces, reputation, and other things of like Nature. With which persuasion, if thy mind shall be besotted, thou shalt not be able to su er any man to speak one whole sentence, ere his mouth be well open; thou wilt suppose thou su ciently understandest what he was about to say, and what he might have further added. And with one word, with one word say I? Yea rather with one laugh, one wry look, one gesture or other, thou wilt imagine thou hast abundantly confuted him: and whatsoever thou shalt a rm or deny, if any one shall be so hardy, as to mutter any thing to the contrary, he shall be accounted guilty of high Treason and Sacrilege. Thy Adversary in the mean time, will be so far from being reclaimed from his Error, that thereunto great indignation will be joined, and a rm purpose to maintain his Tenets with whomsoever he can, since he cannot in thy presence; and if he may not openly, at least privily, to divulge them far and near: which disease is exceeding hard to be prevented. For as any man is high in Authority, and speaks from a more elevated place, he conceives he ought to seem in like manner wiser than others, and would commonly, that his Authority should serve in stead of Reason. Howbeit, we must oppose this mischief, from whence almost in nite evils arise, and they very destructive. And rst of all, thou must often think, how silly a thing it is, if either thou wallow in wealth, from thy riches; if thou art a Magistrate from thy Magistracy; if thou hast Bene ce from thy Living; or if thou art a Gentleman from thy Gentility, to Arrogate unto thyself any wisdom or knowledge. Of what kin is wisdom to any of these things? The whole world will tell thee, that unless thou hast Wit, unless thou hast had Teachers, unless thou hast undergone long and diligent pains, those things cannot avail thee. And for reputation, what is it but the Testimony of the Multitude? A goodly witness of thy su ciency, which sometimes itself, is little less than stark mad! But if thou wilt give ear to him that only cannot deceive, nor be deceived, thou wilt nd neither wit nor study, nor teachers to be any thing, but that all rests in the Spirit of God alone. So that if he only shall a ord thee plentiful assistance, though thou shalt have no help besides, thou canst not but be exactly wise; if he alone shall be wanting, thou canst not choose but be an Arrant fool, however furnished with abundance of all other assistance. Why then should these empty names blow thee up? Verily, inasmuch as nature without any external assistance, atters every man more then enough, and makes him think himself very wise, we must take heed, lest that by a foolish relying upon such things, our natural in rmity be increased. And whereas if we consider the other faults of man's nature, we shall nd them all to be deep- rooted, and hard to be, I will not say rooted up, but even in part lopped o , and diminished. I am yet of opinion, that if Arrogance be compared with the rest, they will appear to be very lose, and removable in comparison; for if thou shalt be in amed with anger, if thou conceive hatred, if thou steal, if thou kill; thou canst not but know that thou committest these crimes: so that if thou shalt often commit such acts, thou canst not but know, that thy mind is inclined to hatred, theft, bloodshed; and mayst try the mastery with thyself, and by little and little, endeavour to attain to better dispositions and manners: but in case thou shalt be possessed with too great a conceit of thine own wisdom, it will be as hard for thee to be persuaded, that thou dost so err. For if in any point thou shalt err, it will be as hard a thing while thou errest, to make thee understand that thou dost err, as to make thee live and not to live, at one and the same instant; for to err, and to acknowledge thine Error, were the same, as to err, and not to err. It may come to pass indeed, that after thou hast remained for a time in thine Error, thou mayst repent and acknowledge the same. But God knows how few Errors come to be acknowledged by those that err. And concerning those few Errors which we acknowledge, that self-love which is bred in our bone, is never wanting of an excuse; so that every man will lay the fault any where, rather than in his own judgement, whence it comes to pass, that he cannot discern how he Arrogates unto himself, more than is meet: and forasmuch as the disease is hidden, the medicine is not so much as sought after. And truly in this case, I cannot see what other way any good is to be done, but by that course we formerly mentioned, which, because it ought to be deeply imprinted in our minds, it must not seem irksome to make repetition thereof in this place: And that was this. Since we see, that all the a airs of man's life are full of dissensions, in things divine and profane, public and private, in peace and war, at home and abroad, and yet there is but one Truth in all things; of necessity, very many must err. And forasmuch as for the most part, those that are judged to excel others in wisdom, are at di erence among themselves; it must be concluded, that many also of those that are accounted wise, do err. And inasmuch as one man errs in one thing, another in another, and therefore those things in which every man errs, must needs be many; and because none so excels in wisdom, but he may be subject to humane frailty, when he lest suspects himself; Reason thus with thyself; all other men err, and that frequently; and it cannot betid a very wise man of exact judgement to err often: there is not therefore, a man who hath attained to so great wisdom, but that he comes far short of the top, and yet there is no man but attributes very much unto himself, and in so doing, is exceedingly mistaken in his opinion. What therefore wilt thou judge of thyself? Wilt thou not thus think? I am a man too; that therefore which is so proper to man, must of necessity be in me too, though I observe it not, that so thou mayst labour to weaken the force of thine Arrogance. But there is in man a kind, of I know not what spirit, an egregious atterer, and very crafty, which in the midst of such meditations as these, mutters I know not what in his heart, which he doth in such a manner, as that his speech is more moving, a ecting, and intoxicating, then discernible. Yet if thou canst reach his meaning, thou shalt nd he speaks to this e ect: true indeed it is, there is no man but is deceived in attributing too much unto himself, howbeit this Arrogance is far from thee, thy case is far di erent, who art led by a special instinct, which will not su er thee to mistake in judging. And so great is the force of this enchantment, that though thou shalt strive long and earnestly with thyself, yet shalt thou hardly be able to lay down any little portion of this vain persuasion. But of this thou oughtest to be certainly persuaded, that by how much the less thou suspectest thy self of Arrogance, by so much the more Arrogant thou art, for whilst thou thinkest well of thyself, the wise King Solomon reckons thee amongst the number of fools. A fool (says he) is pleased with his own reasonings, but a wise man seeks Council. So that the top of humane wisdom seems to be, for a man to suspect his own wisdom, and to know that he stands in need of the Counsel of another. Which Text verily ought continually to be opposed against that most wicked spirit, that he may not estrange thy mind from modesty.

And that thou mayst the better understand, that modesty is altogether necessary in disputes; I will add one thing, which at the rst view, may seem very absurd, though nothing in the world is more certainly true: whosoever thou art, thou canst not maintain a Controversy with any man about any point, but that, look by how much thou thinkest thyself wiser than he, by so much on the other side, will he think himself to be wiser than thou. The reason is at hand; for if thou consider the point in Controversy, did but he think that thou couldst judge better than himself, he would assent unto thee, and there would remain no di erence. But inasmuch as he dissents from thee, he must needs conceive himself to judge better, in other things haply, he may seem to prefer thee before himself; but he doth not do it indeed, and in Truth: for if each of you shall reckon up his opinions, in such points wherein you shall both agree, he will approve his own judgement as much as thine, and in such, wherein he shall di er from thee, he will questionless prefer his own judgement before thine, and so will take himself to be the wiser of the two. This is most manifest in our passing of our judgement concerning writers. For, so far thou wilt praise any Author, as he shall satisfy thy judgement, and so far thou wilt dislike him, as he shall not content thee, so that every man's rule, whereby he measures what is right or wrong, is his own judgement. Which being so, who ever the Controversy be with, suppose he be the most ignorant fellow in the world, and suppose thou takest thyself to be one that can speak Oracles; look how ill thou canst bear it, to be contemned by him, as ill will he take it, to be contemned by thee; and peradventure he will take it so much the worse, by how much he hath been less ingenuously brought up. Shall I tell thee in a word, how thou oughtest to deal with him, so as to avoid bitterness? Imagine the case to be quite contrary; suppose him to be such an one as thou takest thyself to be; thyself to be such as thou deemest him, and then look what behaviour of thine would become each of you, if the case so stood, endeavour with all thy might to express. If thou shalt not thus do, a thousand to one, thou shalt not avoid, insolently to carry thyself. Whosoever shall daily meditate of these things, and carefully exercise his mind in the practice of them; he doubtless (if I am not mistaken) shall become an excellent disputant, very t by way of reasoning, to resist the growth of Errors. Of which way of resistance by Reason, seeing we have su ciently treated; we are in the next place to speak of Authority. 3. Satan's Cabinet Counsel. The ## BOOK III The Argument. WHat Course a Church of Christ may take, to resist the spreading of false Doctrine. Great care to be had, no person or Doctrine be unjustly condemned. Small Errors ought not to be so severely censured as greater. Most men account him a patron of Errors, that will not make a Mountain of a Molehill. Of what ill Consequence it is to account a point to be fundamental, and necessary to be known to salvation, when it is not such. The truth of a point one thing, the weight and consequence thereof another. Scriptures asserting the truth, do not consequently assert the weight of a point. The Scriptures can only declare the weight of a point, and how we are to improve them to that end. Whether in case it appear, that such or such a thing must needs be so or so, it follow, that that thing must needs be known to salvation? In Case it appear from Scripture, that a Point aught of necessity be known to salvation, whether are all truths following therefrom, of like necessity to be known and acknowledged? A man may rmly hold a position, and deny such things as necessarily follow therefrom, so long as be shall not discover the necessity of such Consequences. What Points are in the Scriptures held forth, as of necessity to be known and believed to salvation? Men may be saved, though they mis-understand some points, and hold some Errors. It is very remarkable, that our Lord gave the tokens of his body and blood to his Disciples, when as yet they knew not that his Kingdom was a spiritual Kingdom, nor yet that the Gentiles should be saved by him, and that in a peculiar sort before the Jews. An enumeration of such points as the Scriptures account needful to be known and believed to salvation, and of such as to the ignorance whereof damnation is threatened. What points they be which following from the former, by way of consequence, are like wise needful to be known. In all other di erences, we are to hold a brotherly peace and union. It is needless, and endless to reckon up such points as are not necessarily to be known to salvation. To believe a point, is not to repeat the words, but to embrace the sense of them. Of what moment that Controversy is, between the Lutherans and Calvinists (as they are termed) about the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, whether the erring party, err damnably. Before we condemn any man for an Error, we must be very well assured, that it is such an Error, as deprives of salvation. Many points held necessary to be known to salvation, which cannot by any Text of Scripture beproved to be such. What did the believing thief, the Eunuch baptised by Philip, the harlot that washed our Lords feet, the Palsied person that was healed, know and believe concerning Christ? A person that errs damnably, and cannot be reclaimed, aught to be excluded a Christian Congregation, whether he promise not to seduce, or do not so promise. He that errs in a point not fundamental, if after admonition he cease not by spreading his Error to trouble the Church, he ought to be cast out. He that errs an Error not damnable, and makes no stir by seducing, must be retained in Communion. All means must be used to reduce a person that errs fundamentally, before he be cut o from Communion of the Church. Care must be taken, that they Arrogate not unto themselves the judgement of any doctrine or person, to whom it belongs not in such cases to judge. It belongs to the whale Church to judge in such a Case. What the Magistrate may do to resist Errors. When it is once grown in use, to determine Controversies by the sword, what ever Doctrine comes to be the Doctrine of the major part, and stronger side, who ever shall oppose the same, will be counted an Heretic, and all his Arguments and Scriptures produced, shall be answered by none but the Hangman. Better never any Heretic be punished by the sword, than such a door set open to the bloodshed of professors of the Truth. Putting Heretics to death, in stead of suppressing, oft times increases them. Pastors are thereby made lazy and unlearned, and to lose the use of their spiritual weapons. A icting Heretics, hardens them in their Errors, because a icting is the portion of those that profess the Truth. Of putting a seducer to death under the old Testament, and of the beating down the City that falls to Idolatry. Of the reason of that Law, that all Israel may fear, and do no more so. The Parable of the Tares discussed. It cannot be understood of Adulterers, Thiefs and such like o enders. It must be understood of false Teachers. We cannot justify the breach of a manifest Universal Law against bloodshed, by our interpretations of an obscure, particular Command. Great di erence between an Heretic and an Apostate, from the true God and true Religion. The Magistrate cannot doubt of a man's being an Apostate, in case he be, but of his being an Heretic, he may well doubt. Few Magistrates able to judge of an Heretic. Who ever bears the sword, will be thought to hold the Truth, and all that are contrary-minded must be Heretics. The Magistrate greatly concerned to examine what his duty is in this point. Wherein the danger lies, that if the tares be plucked up, the wheat also should be plucked up. He that cannot judge who is an Heretic, cannot determine what Doctrine is Heresy.

HAving divided the Authority, whereby false Tenets are opposed into that of the Church, and that other of the civil Magistrate: we shall rst speak of the Church. If therefore any one shall teach such things as are not agreeable to the Word of God, to the end such Doctrines may not prevail; two things the Church may do; damn the Doctrine as erroneous and impious; and cut o the person from the body of the Church, as a withered branch; in which proceed there may be a triple Error committed. First, if any Doctrine or person be unjustly condemned; secondly, if they be otherwise condemned then stands with justice; thirdly, if they be condemned by other persons than they ought to be. In the rst place, any thing is unjustly condemned, if it be not false; which Error how to avoid, may be known by what hath been said in our rst book. Again, a matter is unjustly condemned, if the sentence be more grievous than the matter requires, which is in Controversy. For all points of true Doctrine are not of one kind. Some are so necessary to be known, as that all aught to hold them rm and undoubted. Others there are which being controverted between Church and Church, do not break the unity of Faith. Now in case an Error of this kind shall be so sentenced, as if it bereft the persons erring of all hope of salvation, the judgement will not be right. Here we are to consider, whether it make any matter in such Cases, to give just or unjust sentence. Most men, if thou shalt not account every Error to be of the largest size, they will say thou maintainest Errors, that thou art a patron of erroneous persons; whose godly care to preserve the purity of Doctrine, truly I commend: notwithstanding, I conceive it will be labour well bestowed, to examine more surely, whether in so doing a man be indeed a patronizer of Errors. Doubtless, concerning any point, every man inclines either to the negative or a rmative, to the one side or other, or he is in doubt concerning that point. Now he that doubts, if he shall be persuaded, that in case of Error, there is certain danger of damnation, though there be not, he will be dejected in his mind. which dejection is so far from assisting his mind in right judging, that it exceedingly hinders the same. For every perturbation of mind, weakens the judgement, and casts a mist before the Soul, and is ever joined with a distrust of God's mercy to the party, than which, what can less conduce to salvation? Yea rather, what doth more hinder? What a door is thereby opened for Satan, to overthrow all the miserable man's hope, and cast very many pernicious thoughts into his mind? I confess, it is possible that a mind so dejected, may lift itself up to God, and both implore and obtain his assistance, for to come to a sure knowledge of the Truth. But though this may befall some, who can deny but that it may betid some, as we said before. Touching those that have attained to know the Truth, the point being (as we make the supposition) not of necessity to be known, they are not delivered from any very great danger; but those that have occasion to distrust the mercy of God towards them, their salvation is in very great danger. Whence it follows, that such as doubt of any point, are more harmed, in case they shall judge that necessary to be known, which is not; then if they shall esteem it to be of no greater weight than indeed it is. And he which is persuaded of the Truth of such appoint, though he take the false part; he conceives he shall o end God, if he shall not endeavour, as much as in him lies, to persuade all others of the Truth of that which he conceives himself to understand; and therefore he will endeavour to do it publicly, if he may be su ered, at least, he cannot but do his best privately, which he would never go about, or to be sure, not with so much earnestness, if he did esteem the thing to be of less moment. Now, for such in whom an Error hath taken root; what is there that can so hinder them from being reclaimed, as to think that they cannot change their judgement without loss of their Salvation. Therefore it is, that they dare not hear him that would teach them better. And refusing so to do, what way is left to reduce them? Such as think aright, I confess, by how much greater weight they conceive any point to be of, will so much the more unwillingly give ear to any that shall call their judgement into question. But in case the matter shall be of less consequence than they suppose, herein their mistake will be very hurtful; in that they will separate the parties so erring, from the rest of the body of Christ, to wit the Church; will contemn them, will hold them accursed: and they will be forced to make a sect by themselves, than which nothing can be more destructive: For we see what deadly enmity is between sects. And hatred is the cause, that what ever is a rmed by one sect, is apt to be suspected by the opposite sect, and to be contradicted. And whatsoever hath rashly been uttered, base pride, and a ectation of Contrariety, will not su er it to be retracted, but will have it, with all pertinacy, maintained. And when once it is grown into a custom, that for every di erence of judgement, one man will condemn another, you shall see sects spring out of sects daily; which multitude of sects, out of a despair to nd the Truth, hath occasioned very many men to throw aside all thought of Religion. So that if any man do seriously weigh, how much the multitude of sects do hinder the course of the Gospel, together with the hatreds and dissensions that are between them; he will easily understand, that nothing can be more accommodated to the Counsels of Satan, than such rash judgements, from whence the sects arise. It is far better to esteem everything by its just value, and neither to increase nor diminish the same. Which resolution is the more to be prized, inasmuch as Christ himself, being the only maintainer of pure Doctrine, needs not the assistance of any false persuasion to that e ect: for what defence can a lie a ord? The matter then thus standing, we must in the next place inquire after some way, so to balance and poise the weight and consequence of matters, as that we may not err in this case.

