SATAN'S STRATAGEMS — THE COMPLETE EIGHT BOOKS

By Jacobus Acontius (d. 1566)

Books I–IV Englished at London, 1648 · Books V–VIII here Englished for the first time

Rare & Obscure Books · Tilford Edition


* * *



The Boneyard (An Editor's Opening, 2026)

(Robert Tilford, Hays, Kansas, 8 October 2026)

Son of Man can these bones live?

That is the question posed to the prophet Ezekiel (37:3) when he is confronted with a ghastly scene..bones human bones scattered as far as the eye can see, everywhere.

I want to tell you about a place I found online that I call the Boneyard — a vast, quiet field of books that never made it. As far as the eye can see. Works by men who died mid-sentence. Manuscripts left in drawers.

Translations half-finished, then abandoned for a hundred years, two hundred, more. As far as the eye can see, it goes on. Dry bones, everywhere you look.

Let me tell you about two such men who died tragically.

In 1565, an Italian named Jacobus Acontius published a book called Satan's Stratagems — the devil's oldest trick, he said, was getting God's own people to devour each other over opinions. In 1648 an Englishman translated the first four books and promised the world the rest. He died with the promise unkept. For 378 years, half of Acontius's book had no English.

In 1854, the great French chemist Chevreul published the experiments that explained how the divining rod and the pendulum really move — by the trembling of the human hand itself. The pendulum world has quoted him ever since, without ever being able to read him. One hundred seventy-one years.

This week, both men got their books back. Complete. In English. Under their own names — and Acontius's 1648 translator stands honored on the dedication page of the book he never lived to finish. They're up on archive.org, free to anyone on earth, forever.

That's what you do in the Boneyard. You don't curse the darkness of it. You prophesy over the bones, and watch them stand.

— R.T.


* * *



DEDICATION

In the year 1648, in a London torn by civil war, an English translator — whose name his own title page does not give us, and whom later catalogues have sometimes called John Goodwin — took up the first four books of Jacobus Acontius's Stratagematum Satanae and rendered them into English as Satan's Stratagems, or the Devil's Cabinet-Counsel Discovered. In his own day the undertaking stopped halfway: he announced that he would finish if the work found favour, and no more of it was ever published. The last four books of Acontius have waited three hundred and seventy-eight years for an English voice.

This edition is therefore dedicated to the anonymous translator of 1648, sometimes attributed to John Goodwin: to his monumental, half-finished labour, completed here in his spirit and after his manner — the mountain his, the finishing rope ours. May the favour he asked of his first readers be granted him at last by ours.


* * *



THE BASIS OF THIS EDITION

What this book is, in plain words:

Books I–IV reproduce the English translation printed at London in 1648 (Satans stratagems, John Macock for G. Calvert; Wing A443A), in the text of the Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership keyed transcription. The spelling has been lightly modernised to ease reading; the translator's words, renderings, arguments, and order are otherwise untouched. His front matter of 1648 — the dedication to the Lords and Commons, the epistles of John Goodwin and of John Dury to Samuel Hartlib, and the testimonies to Acontius's worth — is printed as he issued it. Jacobus Acontius died in 1566; his birth year is unsettled and is not asserted here.

Books V–VIII are here translated into English from the Latin of the Oxford edition of 1631 (Stratagematum Satanae libri octo, for W. Webb; 426 pages), the last four books left untranslated in 1648. After research, no complete English translation of these books has been found; this is, so far as that research reaches, the first Englishing of the second half of Satan's Stratagems. The translation is a workman's rendering, paragraph for paragraph, from a difficult 17th-century scan; where the scan's impression is too broken for certainty, bracketed editorial bridges are supplied and are marked as such. The 1631 volume's printed index of chapters, and the marginal heads of the Latin, are noted in the text. One leaf of the Latin copy (pp. 193–194, in Book IV) is wanting in the scan; it does not touch the translation, which rests on Books V–VIII complete.

Acontius, an Italian exile for the Gospel's sake in Elizabeth's England, wrote this book to show how Satan makes his surest war not by open unbelief but by turning Christians' zeal, fear, pride, and love of being right into the walls of his own kingdom. Books V–VIII contain his searching anatomy of self-deception, of feigned sanctity and the censorious spirit; his plea for a modest liberty of opinions in religion; his counsel that errors once detected need not make truth hateful; his proposed common symbol of faith built of Scripture's own words; and his closing portrait of Satan himself, with the charge to shake off security and stand armed. The argument was hot in 1565. It has not cooled.

The edition stands or falls on that argument, not on the editors. What the 1648 translator left unfinished, this edition finishes; what he printed, it keeps.


* * *



PART I — BOOKS I–IV (LONDON, 1648)

SATAN'S STRATAGEMS, OR THE DEVIL'S Cabinet-Counsel DISCOVERED.

Whereby he endeavours to hinder the Knowledge of the Truth, through many Delusions.

Wherein is laid open an easy way to end Controversies in Matters of Conscience, by setting down the right order of Disputation in Points of Religion, that so Truth may be known from Error.

Worthy to be perused by all Christians of di erent Judgements, in this juncture of time.

Together with Arguments to each Book, for the ease of the Reader.

By Jacobus Acontius, a Learned and Godly Divine banished for the Gospel.

As also the Testimonies of some Ancient Divines, Together with an Epistle written by Mr John Goodwin. And Mr. Durte Letter touching the same.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, and are to be sold by G. Calvert, 1648. To the Right Honourable The Lords and Commons of England, in the High Court of Parliament assembled. THis Discourse (Lords and Commons of England) deserves, and desires your perusal and Patronage: It deserves the former, forasmuch as the wellbeing of the Common wealth, is therein much concerned; it desires the latter, as being like to meet with such measure as he met with, who found cause to say to the reverend and learnned sons of Abraham, that sat in Moses Chair; Ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God. If it seem in some places knotty; be pleased to remember, the Author was an Italian, to which Nation, subtlety in reasoning, seems natural, and let the goodness of the Kernel, excuse the hardness of the Shell. If any particular persons, or any sort of men now upon the Stage, shall seem to be pointed at herein, be pleased to take notice, that it is now eighty four years since this Treatise was penned. It hath been twice or thrice Printed beyond the Seas in the Original Latin, and once in this Kingdom. This is the rst time it hath endeavoured to speak English. If this essay shall nd acceptance, the Translator intends to go in hand with the remaining Books, God a ording life and opportunity. In the mean time and ever, his humble and hearty suit, to the mighty Councillor and Prince of Peace, shall be; that he will be pleased by his Spirit, to be present at all your Consultations, and to grant, That forasmuch as you have hitherto prudently steered the Ship of the Commonwealth through tempestuous Seas, and magnanimously defended the same against the Assaults of many cunning, strong and furious Pirates; You may not come to let her split upon the shore, but that she may be by you safely landed in the fair Haven of Righteousness and Peace.

Your Honour's humble servant, in reference to the Public, The Translator. To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Capt. General, And the Right Honourable Oliver Cromwell, Leiut. General of all the Forces in ENGLAND, raised by Authority of Parliament, for defence of the Commonwealth. Far renowned Commanders, COnsidering the Honourable use which divine Providence hath made of your High Valour and Prudencies, in perserving the Liberties of this Nation; and how much it concerns the Commonwealth, that Personages of such eminency be rightly informed in Matters wherein the Common good is so highly interessed; The Translator of this Discourse thought it his duty, in reference to his end in this Work (which was only common pro t, and which he thought he might better advance by translating an Excellent, then making a bad or mean Book) to present the same to your serious perusal; and withal, to testify his thankfulness for some favours formerly received upon occasion of a particular address. This is all he hath to say, save, that he is

Your Excellencies and your Honour's most humble servant, in reference to his Country's good, The Translator. To the R t. Honourable John Warner, Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON. Right Honourable. THe bene t which the City of London, and consequently the Nation hath reaped, and is like yet farther to enjoy, by your Lordship's prudent and weltempered Government, hath encouraged the Translator of this pro table Discourse, to commend the same unto your Honour's perusal, whereby your Lordship may be con rmed in that same Christian Moderation which is so commended in you, and be directed how to steer your course, in respect of di erent opinions in point of Religion; so as may be most for the general good of the City, committed to your care, for your Lordship's honour, with peace of conscience here, and the facilitating of your account at the day of Christ; which is the prayer of

Your Honour's most humble servant in reference to the public good. The Translator. TO THE READER. Good Reader, AMongst the many strains of that unreasonableness in men, which renders the days we live in, so calamitous and sad, there is scarce any more deplorable or comporting with our misery, then for men to have their mouths wide open in declaiming against what they are pleased to call Errors and Heresies, and their ears fast shut against all Christian means and directions, either for the discovery and eviction of them to be such, or for the suppression of them, being so evicted. There is no question to be made, but that there are many vile imaginations of men, which exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, walking up and down amongst us, which their fathers and friends have baptised by the names of New Lights: On the other hand, as little question there is, but that there are many ancient Truths, also pleading restitution after a long and injurious ejectment, unto their native Honours; which because they plead in form a pauperis, & paucorum, are not only denied Christian audience to their Pleas, but reproached also with the opprobrious terms, of old accursed Errors and Heresies. Now when men make no scruple or Conscience to bind up God and Belial, Christ and the Devil together in one and the same bundle of condemnation, because they are both alike troublesome and o ensive unto them, do they not provoke both the powers of Heaven, and the powers of Hell, at once against them? Or are such men like to prosper in their days? In vain do they blow a Trumpet to prepare the Magistrate to battle against Errors and Heresies, whilst they leave the judgements and Consciences of men armed with con dence of Truth in them. If men would call more for light, and less for ﬁre from Heaven, their warfare against such enemies would be much sooner accomplished. For he that denied the one, hath promised the other, (Prov. 2.3, 4, 5. Jam. 1.5. ) And amongst all Weapons, there is none like unto light to ght against darkness. But whilst men arm themselves against Satan, with the material sword, they do but insure his victory and triumph. They that desire to serve as good soldiers of Jesus Christ, against Errors and Heresies, must rst conscientiously study the Christian Art, and Method of this Warfare; otherwise, they may easily build up what they go about to pull down, and make Balaams' expedition (yet upon worse terms) who was sent to curse, and yet in conclusion, blessed altogether, Numb. 24.10. It is hard to say, whether that hand which desires to be lifted up against Error and Heresy, with success, had more need of softness or strength. Few men's Errors nd access to their judgements, but by the way of their a ections,

He that will the Judgement win, With th' A ections must begin. Nor will it be easy for men to come at them to dethrone them, but by making their approaches the same way; I mean, by making friends of their a ections, that they may not side with their Judgements against them.

I have not met with any Author comparable to this now in thine hand, for a Christian genius and dexterity, in teaching that desireable and happy Art, as well of composing di erences in matters of Judgement, as far as a composure in this kind may with the honour of Truth be admitted; as of opposing that which is not meet to be admitted to composition. He entitleth his Book Stratagemata Sathanae, Satan's Stratagems: He might as properly with respect to the matter of it, have styled it Stratagemata Christi, the Stratagems of Christ, inasmuch as the wisdom which is revealed from Heaven, for the countermining of Satan in his attempts upon the precious souls of men by errors and heresies, is here drawn out in such happy directions and instructions for that purpose, that had they their weight and worth in practice and due obedience, the Kingdom of Error and Heresy would soon be shaken.

If any man listed in this warfare, being of Iehu's complexion, cannot endure to march against his Enemy with a sober pace, and had rather be tossing Firebals of Granado's, then wielding the Sword of the Spirit; this Author is like to nd small thanks from such a person; ten to one but he will  smite him with the tongue. To such an one I would make no other               jer. 8.18 Answer, but that of the man that had been healed of blindness, to the Pharisees concerning our Lord; Whether he be a sinner or no, I know not: one thing I know, that whereas I was blind now I see. Whereas I was ignorant in many things which it concerned me to know, about opposing Errors and Heresies, I now understand them.

Reader, though I am none of those that are facile  to  Prov. 6.22 26. strike hands, or become surety for debt, yet thus far I dare engage for the Treatise in thy hand, that if thou wilt diligently peruse it, it shall recompense thee with a better thing than Repentance for thy pains. The Father of lights and God of Truth according to the unsearchable riches of his Grace in Christ, break up at last all the fountains of the great deep of Truth and open the windows of Heaven, that knowledge may ﬁll the Earth as waters cover the Sea; keep thee and me from the danger and de lement of Error and Heresy; and vouchsafe us the honour of being instruments in his hand, for the preservation of others also from the same misery.

Thine, to serve thee in the Faith and Love of Jesus Christ. J. GOODWIN. From my Study Colemanstreet, LONDON, Feb. 9 1647. The Testimonies of the famously learned Petrus Ramus, a French Protestant Martyr, slain in the Massacre of Paris for the witness of jesus; and of Mr Comm●nius (a learned and godly Germane Writer, now living and of great fame for his labours in the Reformation of Learning) concerning the Worth of our AUTHOR. THe name of Jacobus Acontius hath now of a long time been fameously known to the world by the excellent Monuments of his Wit.

I took great content to hear tell of the Humanity and Grace, together with the various and profound Arts of Jacobus Acontius. P. Ramus in an Epistle to our Author being in England, which is extant in a Collection of Epistles and Orations of P. Ramus & Aud. Talaeus in 8o.

Scripturientis nostri aevi cacoethe o ensus Jacobus Acontius, Vir excellentissimus provideri posse optabat, etc. that is, Jacobus Acontius, a most excellent man, o ended at the scribbling sickness of our Age, wished that order might be taken, etc. Johan. And Commenius in the Preface to his Idea or Epitome of Nat. Philosophy, at the beginning. The Testimony of certain most eminent French Divines concerning this Treatise. WIth the reading of Acontius his Book of the Stratagems of Satan, I was not only myself exceedingly refreshed, but having commended the same to the reading of some of our Divines of greatest Reputation and Learning, they exceedingly approved both the modesty of the language and the Prudence of the Discourse itself. I am possessed with an earnest longing to know and peruse all Acontius his writings: Pet. Ramus in Epistola ante citatâ. A Letter of the learned and judicious Mr DURY (one of the Assembly of Ministers) to Mr SAMUEL HARTLIB touching the Author.

Dear Friend, I Am hearty glad that some body hath taken the pains to translate into English Acontii Stratagemata in these times of strife and confusion: The Author was an excellent man, and throughly knowing in many Sciences; his excellency did lie in the depth and solidity of his Judgement in every thing; and in the Piety and Moderation of his spirit in Matters of Religion. At the breaking forth of the Gospel, when he did live, many that were convicted of the errors of the Church of Rome, were staggered at the Truth, and the profession thereof by the Reformed Churches, because of the manifold disputes and the disorders found amongst them, and ever since continued by the subtlety of Satan, who not being able to hinder the breaking in of more light, doth endeavour to make it either ine ectual or hurtful to the salvation of men's souls. As it was then, so it is now, at every Period of our Reformation; he doth make every Truth a Matter of Strife; and what he cannot suppress by the power of ignorance, he endeavours to pervert by the evil use that men make of knowledge, to disappoint them of the end for which God hath given it. This wise man in his time did discover Satan's aim, and warned his Generation faithfully, and chief the Watchmen, of the grand adversaries design against them: But how much this Admonition is laid to heart, doth appear by the Distempers of all places, whereof both the Causes and Remedies are here discovered and o ered to the Churches, but minded almost by none. However some there are, at all times, & will be, who will be a ected herewith; and God is able by their means to qualify the spirits of others, and to cast Satan under the feet of his Elect and Faithful servants, in his own time. Therefore it is very useful that such Testimonies as these should be extant; and now to us, they are very seasonable, although perhaps in haste we shall see no great fruit thereof. But our comfort is, that although the Kingdom of Heaven is as a grain of mustard seed, yet it groweth at last to be a mighty great tree, so that the fowls of heaven lodge in the branches thereof. Therefore we must not be weary in well doing; for we are sure that in sowing this seed we shall not lose our labour; because the promise is, that in due time we shall reap, if we Gal. 6.9. faint not. To be carried along with the stream, or to be silent when matters are not carried according to our mind, is no hard matter to any that hath any measure of discretion; but to row against the stream, to labour against wind and tide, and the whole current of an age, and that without o ence unto any, and that strongly and irresistibly (as in his Age Acontius did) is not the work of an ordinary Courage; therefore such as own him in his way are the more to be commended. I shall therefore entreat you to remember my love and service to your friend who hath taken this pro table pains to translate this excellent piece of Learning, and thank him from me for it. I make no doubt but it will be convincing su ciently to such as are free from hardness of Heart in the ways of factiousness; and are not blinded with carnal ends, in the prosecution of Religious Controversies.

The Grace of God be with you, and bless your Friends Endeavours. I rest,

Your Faithful Servant in CHRIST, John Dury. From S. James' Feb. 9 1648. The Author's Preface. IF any man shall haply wonder at the rashness or fool-hardiness of him, who hath hoped to accomplish so endless a work, as to collect and commit to writing the Sratagems of Satan, which is all one, as if he would undertake to draw the Ocean dry. I would have that man consider with himself a little, whether or no, by how much the Arts of this cunning old cheater, are more numerous, various and mysterious; we ought not to take the greater heed to save ourselves from him? This I suppose he will confess: But how shall we take heed, if those Arts of Satan be unknown? Might we not justly fear, that there might be most danger, where we lest suspected any? That where we did think to escape, there we should fall into some hidden snare? Which is too often seen in many persons, and they none of the simpler sort, but even the most eminent in the Church of God. Since then it lies us in hand to look to ourselves, which we cannot do without this knowledge, we are necessitated to try, if by any means we may attain the same; and to beg of God (to whom every thing is easy) to be our assistant herein. Whose help having frequently implored, we hope we have not lost our labour, but that all good men shall bless God with us, for putting this thought into our mind, and graciously prospering our endeavours. One thing there is, which of a long time, hath much a icted my Spirit: for every man is sensible, how much the welfare of the Churches depends upon those that are of eminent authority, so that if they stand, all things cannot but go well; if they fall, every man almost will be overwhelmed in their ruin: Whence it is, that Satan aims chief, and almost solely at them, leaving nothing unattempted which may de le, mar and corrupt them. And in case he do not always lose his labour, but sometimes gains the victory over them; those Stratagems, whereby he doth it, cannot be laid open, but the failings of the vanquished must likewise be discovered, which discovery, how hateful a thing it is any man may easily conceive: For as any reprehension is ever displeasing to the nature of man: so is it then especially distasteful, when it is unusual and beside expectation. Now what is there can be done more unwonted and less expected, then for a man to reprehend those whom all good men do admire and very much reverence; to whom it seems to appertain to prescribe Laws to others, rather than to have Laws set to them: to teach all men rather than to learn of any one? Yea, but (you will say) such men will be so far from taking any o ence, that if you shall show them any failings, out of their humanity and prudence they will give you many thanks; indeed that is my hope. Yet is it a matter of greater moment than men are lightly aware of, to incur the il-wil of persons of such authority and reputation. Howbeit, I am much more troubled to consider the over eager inclinations of some men, who account such as they have once begun to admire, to be no longer men but gods, against whom, if a man speak but a word, he is looked upon as if he blasphemed God himself. What should I do in this case? Should I, to avoid ill will, forbear to discover such snares, as Satan sets to catch men in, not only to their own, but the whole Church of God's ruin? What were this less in me, then to hold confederacy with Satan, and to conspire their destruction? I have showed all the favour I could, which was, to use as much gentleness as I could possible: I have spared men's names, and mentioned only the things themselves, wherein I perceived the snares of Satan to lie hid. Now, if so be any man shall interpret himself injured, by the reprehension of such things wherein he may be some ways concerned, let him but think with himself how justly and honestly he shall make any such interpretation: Verily, he may with as much reason, justify the complaints of Drunkards, Adulterers, Homicides, and all other agitious persons, against those whose duty it is to inveigh against the bad manners and wickednesses of men; than which what could be more absurd? But (thou mayst say) what if those things thou speakest against, deserved not such a reproof? Surely, if any such thing be, when I shall know as much, I shall be very sorry for my oversight. For I am no such man as to think that I cannot err. Sure I am, it hath been none of mine intent, either openly or closely, to provoke or o end any man. I take him to witness that knoweth all things: so that who ever he be, that hath any the least drop of Christian clemency, ought easily be moved to pardon me in such a case. Howbeit, just it is, that he that shall be touched by the things we handle, do not make himself judge, but refer the matter to the judgement of such, who are herein, in respect of their own particular, nothing concerned. And far better it is for us, amongst ourselves, to note the slips one of another, and lovingly to labour for an amendment, then to wait till our Enemies shall thereby take occasion to rail against us and our profession with a venomous tongue. Yet will the Papists, into whose hands this discourse shall come, laugh to see our wounds laid open. But, it is better they should laugh at our wounds, whiles in the mean time they are curable, then that we should su er them, for want of medicines, to exulcerate and become incurable, and so make them laugh at our destruction. I would only say thus much to them, that when they have su ciently lamented their own maladies, I will give them free leave to recreate themselves with laughing at ours. Let them turn over the ancient histories, and see if the Church of God were ever in so good an estate, but that there were therein many things which might deserve the grief of every good man; and nding the condition of the Church to have been always such, what cause is there for them to wonder, if we are not in every part sound. But let them laugh that list. Our endeavour should be, by removing all just cause of reprehension, not so much to suppress their laughter, as by all excellency of examples, to invite them, together with us, to come unto Christ. And that thou mayst not fear any sharpness of language in this Discourse, know, that we endeavour no other thing so much, in all this work of ours, as to reduce all those which handle any points in the Church, whether by word or writing, to the greatest mildeness and gentleness that may be. How unseemly therefore, and how unjust a thing would it have been, if I had refused to be subject to that Law which I had set to others? How justly might that proverb be laid in my dish, Physician heal thyself? But to come to the pain: In this Treatise (Reader) we present thee with those Stratagems whereby Satan lies in wait to overthrow the Kingdom of Christ, and in such sort, to root it up, as it were, out of the world, that it might never be again repaired; and to set up a Kingdom of his own and to maintain the same, if not all of them (for that were an impossible thing) yet I am persuaded the most principal. And, that thou mayst wonder (shall I say, or rejoice) the more thou shalt nd them marshaled in such order and method; that thou shalt nd them to make a certain kind of Art. We have added cautions for the avoiding of them, and they are such as (if I am not mistaken) whosoever shall not slight them, may have good ground to hope, that though Satan plot never so much, yet he shall but lose his labour. In some cases peradventure, when the caution seemed manifest enough of itself by the rule of contraries, we have forborn to put ourselves to unnecessary labour. Some things indeed there are which for want of examples may seem somewhat obscure: which exam les were therefore omitted, because, such as we found ready to our hand, could not (as we conceived) be alleged without the o ence of some men. Which thing (lest our labour might be fruitless to them ward) we were carefully to shun; in some cases we could not conveniently feign examples; in others, though we might have done it, yet we feared, lest they might occasion new contentions; which I wish we have not too much occasioned, notwithstanding all our care to the contrary. But if thou shalt read the Discourse frequently and attentively, there will be nothing, which thou shalt not at length understand, even without examples. Some will wish that this Argument had been handled more largely, and that not without just cause; to such, all that I shall answer is this, that I have done what the time would permit me; if I would have deferred the impression, the work might have appeared to the world, at least more polished and exact; but forasmuch as I conceived that it greatly concerned the common good of all Christians, that these Stratagems should see the light with all possible speed, I was wiling rather to set at nought mine own reputation, then to defer the Edition the least moment. If the Lord shall a ord me any leisure, I shall endeavour that they may hereafter come forth more complete and better adorned: In the mean time (gentle Reader) take in good part this abortive birth, and join thy godly prayers to mine, that the Lord would be pleased to furnish me with somewhat beter and more pro table, then what, for the present, I am able to present. 1. Satan's Stratagems: The ﬁrst Book.



BOOK I

The Argument. THe end Satan aims at in all his Stratagems. The Nature of Man since the fall, how t for Satan to work upon. The ways and means Satan uses to attain his end. How true opinions concerning religion come to be changed into false. Deceitful and invalid Arguments, Passions and A ections of the mind, A good opinion of those that are erroneous, An evil opinion of those that hold the truth, lying signs and wonders what force they have to change men's Judgements from truth to Error. Satan's devices to make disputes and debates, intended for the clearing of truth, to serve his own ends in the advancement of Error. Many prime persons, Pillars of the Church, whiles they Zealously as they think maintain the cause of Christ, do drive on and advance Satan's designs. A passionate indiscreet opposition, a great increaser of Sects. No unnecessary Controversy ought to be raised. An opinion ought not to be condemned for appearing new, but must be examined by the word. A very hard thing to embrace Truth when it hath the appearance of an Error. To reject what ever savours of Novelty, will cause, that remaining errors shall never be purged out of the Church. How erroneous persons are to be prepared to receive a sight of their errors. What caution is to be used that we oppose not truth under the name of error. What ought to be accounted knowledge, what opinion. What Man is most like to nd the Truth. Most men suppose they are led by the word and spirit to think as they do in matters of Religion, whiles their Judgements are biased by Antiquity, estimation of men's learning, Multitudes of those that judge so or so etc. He that would have his Judgement swayed by God's spirit, must pray earnestly for the spirit, and cast out of his consideration whatsoever is not of God nor his word, as if there were no such thing in the world. He that hath attained to a clear and perfect knowledge, cannot suspect himself of error in that point. Before a man oppose a tenet as erroneous and impious, he ought seriously to consider, what assurance he hath of the error and impiety of the said point. A man may pray long for the knowledge of the Truth before the wisdom of God may think t to discover the same unto him. God is free to discover the truth to a man when and by whom he pleases, yea by him whom he opposes as a seducer. In controversies of religion Satan can play the part both of opponent and defendant in respect of one and the same tenet. We must rst hear and examine a point before we condemn it, and never say it is an old Error and hath been oft confuted, for it may have been an old truth ill defended. Controversies soon raised, hardly laid. Before we oppose an error we must consider of what moment it is. Vain questions and tenets not to be confuted, but avoided. Satan labours to persuade a man, that every opinion he takes up, is a most serious and weighty point, without the knowledge whereof there can be no salvation. Rules to distinguish curious unpro table questions that are to be avoided, from sober, serious, and pro table ones that aught to be handled. The End of all Christian Doctrine. What ever is pro table to that end is useful to be known. An enumeration of useful Doctrines. A Doctrine that reaches no further than speculation, is vain. Every Doctrine that any ways makes for the attainment of the aforesaid end, is not of such moment, as that a controversy should be raised thereabout, forasmuch as some other Doctrines unquestioned may perform the same service. Passion in the Persons dissenting makes a point in controversy seem far weightier than in truth it is, which may be seen in the eager bickering of the Ancient Christians about Easter day and other matters of small moment. The right way to bring men from vain and unpro table questions. What Ministers, Professors in Universities, Writers of books ought to do to that end. To stand long upon and to a ect to make many Sermons upon one text, a great occasion of starting curious and unpro table questions. Large Commentaries guilty in the like kind.

THe best way to nd out the devil's Stratagems, is to ta●e into serious consideration, what the end is at which all his consultations aim, which is not Very hard to tell. For, seeing that he is de ned in Scripture A MAN-SLAYER from the very BEGINNING, what can we think he should rather aim at then the DEATH of MAN and that ETERNAL. Being therefore as the oldest so the craftiest fox in the world, we may assure ourselves that nothing can escape his endeavours which may prove pernicious to mankind to be put upon; and as certain it is that he endeavours to divert them from, whatsoever may prove conducible to their Salvation. Now the Salvation of Man consists in obeying God, as his death and misery in disobedience. Wouldst thou obtain life (said our Lord) keep the Commandments (by Commandments or Law in this place we understand, whatsoever we are commanded not only to do or not to do, but to believe) whence it follows that the MANKILLERS grand design is to keep us from obeying the commands of God. Now the Commands of God may be violated as soon by those that know them not as by those that know them, for though he be much the greater delinquent who disobeys that command of God known, than he that through ignorance transgresseth; yet shall not ignorance make any one guiltless, for it is almost impossible that any one should be ignorant without his own fault. Howsoever, certain it is, the ignorance of God's Law and the violation thereof are so nearly allied, that the one is mutually the others cause. By not knowing the mind of God, thou dost that which moves his anger oft times when thou thinkest highly to please him, for which cause amongst the rest, thou art deprived of all light of sound judgement, and daily overwhelmed with more gross and palpable darkness. If thou knowest his law and dost not obey it, it will by the just judgement of God come to pass, that thou shalt fall from the knowledge thereof and slip into some great errors.

This then being the end of all Satan's Counsels, forasmuch as it is MANKIND he labours to undo, that we way more easily understand his deceits, let us diligently consider the nature of MAN. Though MAN at the rst was created of a good, right and every ways perfect Nature and disposition, yet breaking the command of God, he became of another NATURE quite contrary, exceedingly corrupt and liable to all manner of vice. Hence it is, that (1) he loves himself immeasurably, but with a kind of blind and intemperate a ection, wherewith being led, he loathes his true good, and seeks his own hurt and damage. (2) As our rst Parents credited the Serpent when he said, as soon as ye shall taste the fruit ye shall be as it were Gods knowing good and evil; so hath there ever since stuck such a persuasion in Mankind, that every man takes himself to be a kind of Deity. which disposition upon the least occasion, presently discovers itself. For as soon as he is a little advanced in dignity, or hath but scraped together some considerable heap of Earth, he judges every body bound to give him all the respect that may be, yea to seek his commodity with their own loss. If he get a little Learning, presently he imagines he knows all things, and he alone; so that the whole world ought to be governed by his wisdom, leaving nothing undone which may beget such an opinion of him, not knowing or little caring how unjust he is in so doing. (3) He is wonderfully addicted to bodily pleasures and exceeding intemperate in the use of such things as are thereunto conducing. (4) He loves this life and thereabout spends all his thoughts, not so much as thinking of the life to come. He dreams this life will last for ever, and though he see daily millions of men fall before his eyes, he cannot be brought seriously to be persuaded, that himself came into the world upon like terms of mortality. (5) And since he sees that riches will furnish him with what ever he desires, and while they do so they must needs waste, and that an in nite quantity is requisite towards the expense of an endless life, hence it is that he hath an insatiable desire to gather wealth. Some such conceit it was together with a strange weakness of mind, that made the Sovereignty of the whole world seem too too little for Alexander the great. (6) In reference to the knowledge of God and his will, of his own proper good and evil which consists wholly in the favour or o ence of God, he is altogether blind, thinking himself in the mean time as quicksighted as an Eagle. To give assent unto truths of this nature, and to reject the contrary errors is as repugnant to his disposition, as it is for heavy things to fall Heaven-ward. Not that he hates truth as truth, or is delighted with lies as lies, but because of the corruption of his Judgement in things of this nature taking truth for falsehood, and falsehood for truth itself. (7) And look how he himself is disposed, though he perceive it not, so he imagines the blessed God to be, worshipping him accordingly with Gold, Silver, Precious stones and Jewels; with great, costly and magni cent buildings; yea and sometimes with such things, as should one man honour another with, it would be interpreted a great reproach and mockery. He will needs have him to be a visible God, and therefore paints him and shapes him out according to his own fancy. He cannot in good earnest persuade himself that God knows, cares for, or moderates the a airs of mankind, that he will give rewards or in ict punishments: whence it is, that neither by pious a ection to God, nor through fear or punishment, can he be drawn to forbear such practices, as are declared o ensive to him. (8) Each man's sight fails him when he should see these faults in himself, but he needs no spectacles to spy them in another. Other men's do he is apt to misconstrue, being exceeding suspicious; yet if a man once begin to think highly of, and attribute much to another man (especially in matters of religion) therein he will over-shoot all bounds of reason, and make that man a kind of a God. Other ways he wishes well to none but himself, and would have no body else excel in glory. Whereupon if any pro t or praise accrue to another, he becomes envious and hinders what he can the increase thereof. He diminishes the praises and augments the failings of another, using calumniation. (9) If in any matter he be never so little opposed he is exceeding prone to wrath and hatred, neither can he easily remit his stomach, but rather whets himself more and more to blood, slaughter and all kinds of cruel revenge. Thus is man of his own nature above measure arrogant, high-conceited, intemperate, covetous, unsatiable, desirous of what is another man's, a supplanter, liar, contentious, envious, revengeful, murderous, blind, rash, obstinate, ungodly, and born to all mischief. In a word, the nature of man; such as now it is, is not much unlike the Nature of the unclean Spirits. True it is, notwithstanding, that such vices as we have or might have named, do not all alike appear in all men, but some show themselves more in some men then in others, and some are not at all seen in some men, by reason they want means or opportunity to practise them. Constitution of body, education, custom, study, and such like are of great moment, both to render a man prone unto, and to withdraw him from vices, yet is there not any man in whom the seeds of all vices are not found. Howbeit there are yet remaining in man some footsteps and prints of his rst nature, as a kind of obscure knowledge of what is just and unjust, honest and dishonest, that good deeds deserve praise, and ill deeds punishment. He seems to have a natural desire of knowledge and understanding. He has in him a certain kind of ability, from things, perceived by the sense to arrive to the knowledge of insensible things and so to raise himself to a certain kind of knowledge of the divine Nature itself. He hath some suspicion that there shall be a life after this, which shall ever last, attended with happiness to the good, with misery and torments to the wicked. This is manifest by the Poet's fables, whose discourses being accommodated to the opinions of the People, make frequent mention of such things. With this slight opinion of another life goes hand in hand some little desire of Salvation, wherewith provoked he inquires after the means of worshipping and procuring the favour of God. But the truth is, these remainders of man's pristine goodness, are kept under by so great and manifold oppositions of depraved nature, that in most men they wholly vanish and come to nought, and though in some they strongly resist the corruption of nature, as may be seen in Socrates, Seneca and others, yet in their strength never so great, as without the assistance of God to be of any moment to procure Salvation. Rather by the event it appears, Man is thereby led into greater darkness. Now this is that which vexes Satan, that God of his in nite goodness bearing an extraordinary a ection to mankind, chooses himself out of Mankind servants, ever and anon, on whom he bestows the knowledge of his Law, and whom he sends to instruct the Nations of the world.

Man's Nature, then being such as we have shown, and the End of all Satan's consultations discovered, the next thing we have to consider, is by what way he seeks to attain unto this end. Two conditions there are, in the one of which the people are always found, in the Light of truth, or in the Dark of errors and Ignorance. Neither is there ever so much light, but that some mists of ignorance remain (which we thought necessary to give warning of, least in speaking of that lightful condition of men, and making mention of error, we might be thought to handle things out of their place) Now when the people enjoy the Light of Truth, Satan endeavours to overwhelm them with darkness; if they be already in the darkness of Error, his scope is that that darkness may for ever remain. Now a man may walk in the darkness of ignorance, either exercising no Religion, or a corrupt and false one. Again, a man may be without Religion, either having never heard of such a thing as we call Religion, and never having once thought of such a thing; or understanding the notion, but denying that there is any such matter, as do those monsters of men, who either deny that there is a God, or that he cares for the a airs of Mankind, Yet that there should be any Nation so brutish, as not to think of God, seems incredible; but that there is never wanting a parcel of desperate fellows, that persuade themselves it is a vain and silly thing to think of God, is more manifest then to need any proof, these are the Devil's drudges he makes use of for the accomplishment of any, the most abominable wickednesses.

After that the true Religion hath been extant in a Nation, to the end that Nation fall therefrom into Errors, it is necessary their judgements alter. Now this change is either observed by the people, or not observed. If they observe it, there must needs be some cause, why they should leave that Doctrine they had approved, to embrace some other false and impious. Now the causes that true opinions in matter of Religion are changed for false, are false arguments, passions and a ections of mind, such as are desire, wrath, hatred; a good opinion of such as err, a bad opinion of such as teach the truth, and lying signs or wonders. False arguments we account such, from which untruth is any way inferred, which may come to pass divers ways. For either all that is alleged is false, as in this inference: the Mass ought to be retained, because the Church of Rome hath used it ever since the times of the Apostles, and what ever hath been of ancient use in the Church of Rome, aught to be retained: or that which is alleged is in part true, and partly false: as in this inference, because the Apostles ordinances are to be practised [which is true] and confession of a man's sins in the ears of a Priest is an ordinance of the Apostles institution [which is false] therefore this custom of confessing sins in the Priest's ear, aught to be retained. Again, all that is brought for proof may be true, and yet nothing to the purpose; as if a man should say, we are bound to observe di erence of meats according to the prescriptions of the Church of Rome, because shes, herbs, Roots, and the like do nourish less than esh and eggs. Or lastly, the arguments may be such, as may seem to prove much, when indeed they prove just nothing, such as the Arguments of Sophisters use to be. As if a man should thus reason, No Christian man ought to marry a Christian woman, because every Christian woman is his sister, and for a man to marry his sister, is utterly unlawful. Now the motions of men's minds, which give occasion to change true opinions into false are divers; whereof some are referred to the teachers of truth, some to the teachers of error, and the rest to the Doctrine itself, whether true or false. The doctrine of truth is apt to be hated, because it accuses a man, forbids him such things as he is delighted with, and commands such things as he must do against his wil. Now that doctrine which a man hates he will easily forsake. Contrarily, men are apt to love false doctrine, because it gives reins to their sinful pleasures. It begets an ill opinion of the professors of the truth, when they appear to give little credit to what themselves teach, which comes to pass, when their life opposes their Doctrine, and they seem to be acted rather by their own commodity and false interests, than any love to Religion itself. Likewise the teachers of truth lose their credit, when God seems not to like of their doctrine by loading them with calamities and a ictions, but this is only with such as estimate things rather by their own natural judgement, than the rule of God's Word. The Contrary to these, beget a good opinion of erroneous teachers. As for false signs they are such as are either reported falsely, or being the contrivances and juggle of men or devils, are thought to be wrought by God himself.

Furthermore such considerations as make men alter their opinions, must either come into men's minds of their own accord, or there must be some few seducers which propound them to the rest, as it usually falls out; otherwise impossible it is any notable change should happen. Now seducers do either teach openly against the doctrine received, or privately; with, or without any opposition. But that any should be able publicly to contradict the doctrine received, without any resistance, it is requisite that there be no di erence of wits among the people, which is impossible. And if so be that those which oppose such a teacher prove more potent than the favourers, they willbe an hindrance to the seducer. Neither is it to be doubted, but that, when as the true worship of God is amongst a People, if any one shall spread false tenets, there will be more opposers than favourers; unless haply the whole multitude be very illa ected, and the seducer use much cunning to that e ect, as if he shall rst gain a great opinion of his own wisdom or holiness, or shall abuse the Authority of such as are so accounted of, which was the practice of those of old, who brought unto the Church's letters pretended to be sent by the Apostles, or thrust upon them other writings with lying titles, and by such impostures seduced the simple. Of this sort was the Gospel of Nicodemus, the Travels of S. Peter and the like. Nor were whole books alone fathered upon those that had no hand in them, but many were occasioned to complain, that their own proper writings were depraved. So among the writings of Augustine, and many famous men besides, many bastard tracts are foisted in, and many places of their own works are corrupted. Yea such was the impudence of some, that even whilst the Authors were living, they inserted into their works, such tenants as themselves would have to be believed, which was origen's Lot, as himself complains. Otherwise, it appears not how errors can be spread abroad at rst, save among a few, and that privately. And though some seducer may privily turn away a few from the Doctrine received, yet can he not so do by many without being discovered; whence it comes to pass that a sensible mutation cannot be made without Controversies. Now they that oppose a seducer, do it either by Reason or by Authority; by Reason, when a man by word of mouth or writing, maintains the doctrine received, and resists the new, using to that end either arguments or testimonies; by Authority, when those that are the overseers of the Churches, or the Churches themselves, do by common vote condemn that same new doctrine as impious and repugnant to the word of God, and when the Magistrate shall under penalty forbidden the same to be taught or maintained.

Now look as if seducers be in a right way resisted, all the Counsels of Satan are frustrate; so most like it is that hereabout Satan imploies all his crafts, and makes use of his utmost subtlety, to cause, that whatsoever shall be done by way of opposition, shall not only not hinder his designs, but help forward and promote them exceedingly. Wherefore it will be labour well bestowed, to understand by what stratagems he endeavours to bring this to pass. First, therefore in regard of Reason which uses to be opposed to seducers, by way of disputation, either face to face, or by writing; certain it is, that such reasoning is then of force to resist the false doctrine, when it doth aptly lay open both the weakness of those foundations upon which it is built, and the strength of the grounds which uphold the Doctrine received: as also when those who are dealt with, shall with a quiet mind and uncorrupted judgement diligently weigh the same. Unless, therefore the Reasons be such as we have said, and the speech of the Arguers shall have power to reduce the adversaries to that same tranquillity of mind, and soundness (that I may so speak) of judgement aforesaid; if it be such as shall rather work the contrary e ects; so far shall such reasoning prove from resisting, that it will in a wonderful manner favour the designs of Satan. Now to weigh and measure out, what kind of reasoning is suitable to the adversaries genius and judgement, and what not, no man is able, unless he himself have his mind composed and serene, remembering withal, that he is bound and that withal diligence to make such enquiry. Since therefore it is requisite to this purpose that the opponent be calm and composed in his spirit, we must not omit to show what things they be that use to trouble the mind of such an one. And for the most part, he will be in a passion, if it stand with his private interest, that there be no change made in the doctrine received, which is true concerning all that execute the o ce of Teachers. For a change of Doctrine cannot be e ected, but their dignity and estimation must su er an eclipse, as though they had taught falsities, yea and their pro t will be much impaired. Again his love to his own doctrine will make him scarce of ability patiently to endure a contradictor; and look how likeness of manners, studies, opinions prevail much to beget love, so all dissimilitude is apt to procure hatred. To all which if reproaches and accusations from the Adversary shall be added, of necessity the minds of the opponents will be moved much more.

Neither shalt thou be ever able to any purpose to weaken a false assertion, unless thou rst understand what it is; now he that does not with attention and patience listen, that does not suspend his judgement till the defendant have nished his discourse, cannot su ciently understand what it is which he a rms, but whiles at every word spoke, he will be divining at the others meaning, and su ers his judgement to outrun his adversaries words, he shall not confute his arguments, but those which by his own rashness and false interpretation he hath feigned to himself. And these miscarriages than fall out when we hate our adversary, and when we contemn him especially. Now the principal and almost only cause of contempt is when we take too much delight in our own abilities, and arrogate unto ourselves, a greater share of science or judgement than is t. And if there be any vice unto which a man is naturally inclined, it is arrogance, which gathers strength and growth by divers means. As rst, if many men have a very great opinion of any one, and few there be that think otherwise of him, and they of very mean account. Of kin hereunto is, when a man conceits himself to have given some great and certain proof of his own wisdom and judgement, which thing befalls them who always or very often have appeared conquerors in disputation, and who frequently speaking in public before the people, seldom or never meet with any that do contradict them; for unless such men watch themselves with a great deal of prudence, it can hardly come to pass but that they will think themselves to be the only wise men, and slight, and set at nought all others in comparison. That Proverb is su ciently known, Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit, Flattery gains friends, Truth makes foes: whence it comes to pass that those whose condition is such, that they seem able to do a man good or hurt, to procure his commodity or hindrance, his honour or disgrace, scarce any body will contradict such men, rather multitudes will atter them. Neither would I have thee think (reader) that it is necessary that thou become the Pope of Rome, that thou mayst be attered. For in as much as now a days not very many study Religion, saving such as have resolved to become Churchmen, more mindful of their belly for the most part than any thing else; those men by whose vote or recommendation, Church-imployments are obtained (viz. the Ministers of every Parish of most note) though otherwise they are of no great wealth, yet shall you see them no less clawed and attered by most men, then if they were to deal with that Idol of Rome, gaping after the fattest Bene ces. What think you they would do, if some great revenues were joined with the power, such men have to prefer to live or places in the Church. Neither is it a light matter, that (as now the case stands in many places) every man's life and reputation, lies open to the lash of those they call Preachers; so that if a man displease them, and so come under their censure, he shall quite lose his credit: whence it is that every man had rather have them his friends then his Enemies, and scarce shall you nd any one that will oppose them, unless by some very urgent occasion thereunto induced. To all which occasions, if any considerable learning be concurring, which of itself alone, as Paul testi es, though not by its own fault (for it is a great gift of God) but through the corruptness of man's nature, is wont to pu a man up; without doubt Arrogance and Insolence will be very much augmented. Whereupon, if such a man as one of these, shall be set to oppose a seducer, unless he warily consider with himself, what operations, Authority, Learning, Wealth (if he be rich) and reputation use to have, it will be little less than a miracle, if he behave not himself insolently and arrogantly, charging his adversary with what ever shall come to his tongue's end, and yet exceedingly taken with his own discourse, so that he alone must speak, oft times triumphing before he hath gotten the victory, whence it may fall out that a good cause having got a bad champion, shall lose somewhat of its reputation. Yea and we nd by experience, that when a man is certainly persuaded of a thing, and hath reason so to think, he cannot but stand as it were in admiration, that there should be any one that cannot see what he sees, whereupon unless as soon as he hath in a word hinted his reason, his opposite grants him his saying, as though it were manifest that he refused out of perverseness and obstinacy, he grows all in a choler, and ten to one if he come not to reproach and railing. Now for as much as a mind moved and disturbed with passion can neither understand nor rightly judge of what is said; if the erroneous person, over and besides the weak, un t confutation of his Error, shall have his mind disturbed with evil language (which is frequently done by those that nd themselves to have the advantage of the ground) much less will he be able to acknowledge his Error. Such also is the disposition of man, naturally prone to pride and over great haughtiness of mind, that, if it were possible, he would be thought in every thing to go beyond others. So that much against his will it is to give the pre-eminence to any, or to confess his failings, & look what thing a man hath least mind to do, it will be most di cult to make him understand that it is his duty to do the same. This may be seen in those that go to law about any matter; how hard a thing is it to persuade him that makes an unjust claim to what is not his own, or that will not part with what is another man's, that he deals unjustly? And look how much greater the heat of his mind is grown by contending, by so much the more hard it will be to make him give place to reason and equity. So that if so be, over and besides, that thou shalt unaptly and darkly lay open and prove his error to the person erring, that thou shalt disturb his mind by cutting language, this inconvenience shall be added, namely, that thou shalt unseasonably aggravate the greatness and foulness of his Error, wondering that any man could ever be so blockish and sottish as to be so foully overseen, with such like expressions; by thus doing thou shalt deprive him of the remainder of his judgement and make him stark mad. So that he shall be able to do nothing less than so much as suspect, much less acknowledge and confess his Error.

If therefore such things as these shall be allowed in our debates: that, he which being in an Error himself hath seduced others, shall not have his Error clearly demonstrated unto him; he which takes upon him to oppose shall not understand what the seducer a rms and so shall not refute it, but what himself by a false suspicion hath imagined, and shall defend the doctrine received not with such reasons as he ought to do, but with such silly ones as rashness and a mind madded with anger could collect, which may be easily refelled; and the erroneous person shall have cause to think himself not vanquished, but with many and grievous injuries after an insolent manner abused: such disputes, however they may seem intended to resist the Devil, yet are they so far from frustrating any of his plots, as that nothing could be invented more expedient to promote his designs. For they do not ght against Errors but make them invincible; they do not pluck them up but spread them abroad; they do not destroy, but propagate them, and that in a wonderful manner. They render Errors invincible, because when the person erring nds it easy to avoid the dint of such arguments as are brought to oppose him, it gives him great occasion to think that there cannot any thing more strong be objected against him; and when he shall see confuted, not his own reasons, but I know not what other arguments, such as he never so much as once thought of, he may very well think the cause to be, that not having any thing they could oppose against his arguments, and yet desirous to seem to have answered them, they have cavilled at and misinterpreted his words. Hereupon he is altogether compelled to conclude with himself, that not he, but his opposites are in the Error. And if there be joined sharp, insolent, and injurious language, yea and, it may be, threats too and such like, what can he do other but strongly persuade himself that his adversaries being unable to defend their cause by dint of Argument, have guarded and forti ed themselves merely with force and insolence. And since hatred is bred of injuries, what is there that can settle Errors with greater pertinacy? And when a man shall leave his posterity, heirs both of his Errors and his Hate; it comes to pass that they can never be rooted up out of the minds of men. Thus is the people divided into Sects which hate one another with deadly feud, abstaining from no kind of injuries, and taking the more liberty unto themselves in this kind, in that men do not observe how in so doing they obey their own passions, but think they very much please God; whereas, in the mean time, by this means they incur the wrath of God daily more and more, and become enveloped with thicker clouds of darkness. Such disputes do spread Errors abroad, because the clamours there made, the brawls thence arising a ord much occasion of discourse to many people, and according to the diversity of men's minds and Judgements matters are very variously both reported and resented. And it is wont to fall out, that if many dislike the Error, yet some will approve of it, yea and some will as much disapprove of the means used to resist the Error, viz. insolence, reproaches and the like, as of the Error itself, and will thereupon begin less to like of those that set themselves to oppose the Error, whence it may come to pass that they may the more easily admit some other Error afterwards. He that likes the Error, can hardly refrain in his narrations to favour that part he approves, so as to add, leave out, change many passages at his pleasure, and thus by a kind of Contagion the evil is spread far and near. In a word, by controversies ill-managed, errors are propagated and bred divers ways. For rst, he that opposes himself against an Error, can hardly avoid but that he himself shall fall into some Error, either because (as the Proverb speaks) while he shuns Charybdis, he slips into Scylla, ignorant to keep the mean, as that man should do, who in opposing those that attribute all to the Word of God, and the reading thereof, not marking the necessity of the Spirit of God to be their guide and interpreter, to the right understanding; should endeavour to reduce the minds of such men to the mere inspirations of the holy Ghost; whereas the spirit is so far to be looked at, as that the written word be not contemned and lose its dignity, as if it were a matter of humane invention, and not of divine tradition; or because he will grant somewhat to the Adversary not to be granted, which some of the ancient Fathers peradventure did, who in such a manner resisted the Philosophers, as that they de led the purity of Christian tenets, with Philosophical ratiocinations. Likewise it may fall out, that whiles thou thinkest to express that Doctrine which thou holdest for truth, with more signi cant and clear expressions, than it is in Scripture expressed, and better to shun occasion of cavil (for the wit of man will ever be more wary and wiser than God) thou wilt use such words or forms of expression, as from whence another less true and godly tenet may sometimes be collected. Furthermore, whereas on both sides they are wont to produce many allegations, each for his own judgement as the case requires: if it fall out that striving shall sharpen and in ame their minds, you shall soon see on both sides many matters a rmed and denied, which in a calm mood they would never have a rmed or denied; as the Poet spoke, Furor arma ministrat, Rage weapons doth a ord. Every dart accidentally o ered is caught hold on, fury su ers not a man to mark what an one it is: and what ever hath rashly 'scaped a man, especially in the interim of the dispute, Pride will have it rati ed and rm, and thereupon new controversies arise, and new errors in like manner without end. Yea it is seen that by disputes both the matters themselves and men's wits are confounded, truth is lost, and many are brought to that pass, as to persuade themselves that nothing can be certainly concluded, and so to cast away all care of Religion. Yea and it seems impossible to fall out, but that whiles men are perpetually wrangling about some one point of Religion, they will slight and forget many others, and they perhaps of the chiefest note; and it will grow to a custom, that a godly man shall be distinguished from an ungodly by this one thing (be his life what it will) in that he seems to abhor, and exceedingly loath that Doctrine, which in some one or two points is accounted heretical. O that we could but see at one view, how many and how great overthrows Satan hath given to the Kingdom of Christ, what desolations he hath made by this one weapon of Controversies; he must be a man of iron that could choose to weep. Nor do I now complain of those fanatical spirits, the emissaries of Satan, who never cease sowing curious, vain, and impious controversies: (for from them, what other could a man expect) but of those rather, who being such as love the true worship of God, deal unadvisedly in point of Controversy, and never observe how through a certain care of God's glory, and the preservation of sound Doctrine, though very rash and headlong, they do many things, whereby whiles they think they do bravely advance the cause of Christ, they so far notwithstanding do the work of the Devil, as that he can hardly tell what to desire more. Neither do I speak verily of a sort of common unexperienced pastors, but of some prime ones, the pillars of the Church, and they not only of this present age but of all, the Prophets and Apostles excepted. For I desire to take leave sometime to bewail the Church's condition, and to bestow my tears upon the common calamities. He that shares not in this fault, let him know we meddle not with him in this place, we accuse none by name; yea and whoever they be that are thus faulty, whatsoever we say, therefore we say it, not to inveigh against them or to cause them to be censured; but that we might take away that corruption from out the Church, than which there cannot be a more deadly plague. We have not here denounced war against the persons of men whom we desire to be both saved and as much as may be honoured, but against Satan. We prosecute only the things themselves (as we have said) which cannot be let alone without the certain ruin of the Church. Now if any shall suppose that this cannot be done, but they must be pointed at, as it were, with the nger; I would fain know of such men, whether of the two be more just and tting, for me to regard their credit and estimation or the common good and preservation of the Church: without all question if they be such indeed, as they would be taken for, lovers of God and of his honour, they will not only take in good part this service of ours, but also render great thanks to God, that by some one at length (whoever he be) he hath manifested, that those counsels are not from him, which they would have judged so exceeding necessary for the Church's welfare. But if they be such (which I in no wise suspect) as esteem of their own dignity above all things else, it could not stand with my duty to prefer their reputation before the honour of God and the safety and good estate of the Commonwealth. Neither verily was there any cause for me to prise their favour and good will above the favour of God himself. O the sottishness and stupidity of man! The Gospel had gotten possession of the whole world almost; so many contentions arose, so many strifes, so many brawls concerning the punctilios of Religion and matters for the most part of small moment, that by little and little it hath been almost lost, only a certain few remainders were in a corner with much di culty reserved. In our Age likewise, by the incredible goodness of God, some light arose upon us: What do we? Frighted by the example of our Ancestors do we diligently inquire how it came to pass, that the professors of Christianity were rst torn into Sects, than lost both all regulation of manners and their pious holy doctrine together, so that the most part of them retained not so much as the name of the Gospel? O unheard of sluggishness never to be enough lamented with tears of sorrow! As if we had no example whereby to beware, we go on with our eyes shut in the very same steps to overthrow all. Neither do we slip any practice whereby we may make greater desolation than ever. How many sects arose there of old, and grew to a vast greatness, at whose beginning, if the Controversies had been managed with some mildness and gentleness, with patience, modesty, and Peacefulness, we should never have heard of so much as their very names? But we, as soon as any one seems to set his foot beside the Path, we think there is no other course to be taken, but straightway to sound a de ance, to ll the world with rail, reproaches, clamours; what ever comes to our tongue's end, that we deem most t to resist the Error, whereas oft time's nothing can be less to the purpose: likewise men of Goatham, we bring oil to quench the re. Whereas now or never, when we stand most in need of sober advisement, let us abandon wrath, away with Arrogance, away with clamours, and let Reason alone bear sway in this business, neither let Satan, but the spirit of God guide our Reason.

And in the rst place let us beware again and again, that no unnecessary Controversy be raised. What if somewhat o end thy ear as strange and uncouth? The apprehension of thine own abilities, must it presently set thee a work to oppose it? An un tting Master, by whose persuasion and the Devil's instigation upon every the least occasion, thou shouldst rashly turn all topsie turvie. I tell thee it is a small matter, it's a dangerous business, there is more need of Council than temerity in such a case. For what if so be, that which thou hast heard, have some appearance of novelty, when as there is indeed no such matter, because thou interpretedst the words of him that spoke it, di erent from his meaning? What a madness than would it be, when there is agreement in the things themselves, to make contentions about words, and to play at fty-cu s with the Clouds. If thou hadst but gone to the man, and asked him friendly and courteously what was his meaning, he explaining his own words, all occasion of Controversy had been taken away. Yea if so be there be somewhat which is indeed new, it is not presently the most advised course, to give ear to that same crafty sour of contentions, sounding to battle; but since as we have said, a people is never in so great light, but that there are some mists of darkness; we must rst diligently examine, whether it agree with that Doctrine which is comprehended in the Scriptures, lest it should fall out, that whiles we shall think to resist an Error, we become resisters of the truth. Now there is no man but will willingly confess, that the truth ought never to be opposed, whatsoever show of Eror it may seem to have, howbeit to avoid so doing when occasion shall require is the hardest thing in the world. For whatsoever Doctrine any man hath once drunk down, he cannot persuade himself that it is untrue, but that what ever di ers therefrom is false, and such as he is bound to oppose that it may not be believed. Now if all men shall be thus disposed, as to reject what ever savours of novelty, whatsoever Error shall be in the Church, it can by no means be extirpated, but rather, out of that one, many will by little and little sprout forth. What is there then to be done? Certainly this is undeniable, that if they which err were so a ected, that they would patiently with quiet and composed minds hear such as di er from them, and diligently examine the force of their Reasons, as those that (whatsoever they think of themselves) may possibly be in an Error; it will fall out that the greater part will be withdrawn from their Errors: and that therefore it is that they abide so obstinate in them, because they cannot so much as suspect any Error; so that whosoever would teach contrary to their judgement, they judge him to be presently suppressed, not once having his cause heard. Who sees not therefore, that it is good advice for such men, not presently to reject what ever they hear di erent from their own persuasions; but to pause a while and think every man with himself; to me indeed such things seem true which I have hitherto with the multitude believed; but what if that befall me which betides very many, that I should most err in that whereof I seem to be most certain. Why may I not hear the man rst? why should I not weigh what he says. Paul's precept is, Despise not Prophecies, prove all things, hold fast that which is good. Now I would very fain know of thee who ever 1 Thes. 5. thou art, that certainly thinkest thyself free from all Error; do I say thinkest, yea rather who seest and feelest as much; which way thinkest thou may persons erring be brought to suspect that they are in an Error, that so they may be more attentive to such as would deal with them? I suppose thou wilt grant by this Reason, that very many men do err, and they not only of the unlearned vulgar sort, but very learned persons (which the almost in nite number of Controversies agitated amongst them witness) so that while they think themselves to be undoubtedly in the right, they may be notwithstanding involved in greatest Errors; & that they are wise, who remembering that they are men, and may be deceived as soon as any others (though they know not themselves to err) yet as being in a possibility of Error, do give diligent ear to such as profess to teach them better, and that so, as not to allow of any thing without diligent search, and imploring the help of Cod to that e ect. Go to then; with whom wouldst thou that this Reason and instance should be of force? with them that think aright? I suppose thou wilt not say so, but with them that err. But this is that I would know, viz. how thou canst make this Reason more prevalent with those that err, then with such as err not? canst thou do it by alleging that they are in an error? they cannot think it possible that they should err; and that is it which the Reason produced aims at, to bring them into some suspicion of Error. if so be then, that those who err, do think themselves to be as far from Error, as they that think aright, yea verily for the most part are more con dent of the two, for a fool (as the wise mean speaks) is delighted with his own reasonings, but a wise man asks counsel; truly, I can see no other way, in case Error be in the Church, to make it to be acknowledged, then to make this general conclusion: that forasmuch as it is a property of Mankind to err, no one person that is but a mere man ought to be so con dent, as to persuade himself he cannot err, and that what ever come into Controversy, he should but in vain give ear to what any man shall say concerning the same. But we must not (wilt thou say) doubt in the Doctrine of Religion, but know assuredly what to hold. So say I too, and therefore this knot is very hard to untie. To resist the Truth, and not to acknowledge and reject an Error, if there be any that can make it appear, is a very great evil. But impossible it is, that he which errs should acknowledge his Error, before he come to think it possible that he may err, whereby he should be content to give ear to any that would convince him; and yet a man must not waver in the Doctrine of Religion: which way now, and by what third shall we get out of such an intricate labyrinth? Let us not despair yet, we must, and will nd a way out. Thus much we have concluded upon, that truth is never to be opposed, and that he which errs, whiles he is in an Error, cannot understand he errs; likewise that it hinders much the acknowledgement of the truth, for any one to persuade himself strongly that he is in no Error, and that the right way, and rst step to the acknowledgement of an Error, is to have a suspicion thereof. Shall we then allow a perpetual hesitation in matters of Faith? That we will not neither. I conceive it rather our duty to endeavour, to attain to the most certain knowledge that may be had. What other course shall we take? For as much as a man may, concerning a point, be either well persuaded, believing as the thing is, or ill, believing otherwise then the thing is; and for as much as he that is well persuaded may be either perfectly persuaded, which befalls him that hath obtained a certain and clear knowledge, or imperfectly persuaded, which is seen in them who embrace the truth indeed, but are led only by opinion, not being able to give a sure reason why they so think: certain it is, that man who hath so sure a knowledge, as to be able to render true, constant, and infallible causes of his judgement, cannot be brought to doubt, or to be seduced concerning the point. Whence it follows that whatever counsel you can give him, that he suspect himself of error, it can noway hinder him in respect of those things whereof he hath such knowledge; much less can it hurt him that is tainted with ill opinions. For he that so errs, as to suspect himself of error, doth not now altogether err, but inclines partly to error partly to truth. It remains then that we consider, what we may think of such, as embracing true opinions, have not however attained to the perfect science of the things themselves. In such persons truly suspicion of error is no other than a certain approach to error, which in itself we cannot but judge naught: howbeit for a man falsely to arrogate unto himself knowledge, when he hath only an opinion, is an error. Now as error cannot be good, so it is an evil thing to be in danger of any pernicious error. But he that is led by opinions only, and is not sure of what he holds, may possibly be led into error. He is then in danger lest it may so fall out, whereas the best way is to be free from all danger. Whereupon, like a●, though all pain be reckoned among evils, yet if it be undergone for the removing of some grievous disease, it appears in the notion of a great good; so, opinion being an in rm & feeble knowledge, and if not a disease yet a constitution of the mind near approaching to a disease, he that shall cast into a man's mind a suspicion of error, by instancing in so many men, that while they dreamed of nothing less, did yet walk in greatest darkness; to the end he may show him the way to attain to a sure and steadfast knowledge: we ought to judge this man, not to give pernicious but healthful and very necessary counsel. To the end therefore that thou mayst not oppose at any time, and trouble a man that would teach the Truth, either thou must of necessity attain unto a certain rm knowledge of what ever may at any come time into Controversy in the Church, which what a piece of work it will be any man may judge; or certainly if at any time thou shalt hear any matter which sounds new in thine ear, before thou condemnest it, thou must pause a while and think with thyself what kind of knowledge thou hast of that thing. And lest thou be deceived, taking a vehement persuasion for certain science, let us consider what we are to account science and what opinion; and this it becomes us to do, not as Philosophers, but as the Disciples of Christ. There is nothing more certain than that we (in point of Religion) can hold nothing for certain but from the testimony of God's Word. This many texts of Scripture witness: let these few serve in stead of many. David himself King of Israel and a famous Prophet, when he had resolved to build a Temple to the Lord; yet could he not divine the mind of God in that point: Neither did Nathan a great Prophet likewise come nearer the mind of God, in his exhorting David to perform his purpose; for by him God forbade David to build any Temple, which is a considerable instance. Now of Joshua the successor of Moses, it is written that he was endued with the spirit of wisdom, and that God promised to be with him perpetually, yet is he commanded to have regard to fulﬁl the Law which he had received from Moses, and not to turn from it to the right hand or to the left; and the reason why is added; that thou mayst know (saith the Lord) what thou oughtest to do. Whence we may understand, that then we are sure of thing if we have a Word of God for it. But how plainly have we this in another place? My thoughts are not like your thoughts, saith the Lord: neither are my reasons like       Isaiah. your reasons; but look how much the Heaven is higher than the Earth, so much are my thoughts above your thoughts, and my reasons above your reasons. Neither is it su cient in any sort to build upon the divine Scriptures on any fashion; but it is needful that we attain the knowledge of them by the interpretation of the holy spirit; for as much as we see so many di ering judgements in matter of Religion, even amongst the most learned and most exercised in the reading of holy Scriptures. For Paul testi es; that only the Spirit of God knows the things of God, neither doth 1 Cor. 2. man's sense understand the things of the Spirit; neither can he understand them, for they seem to be foolishness unto him: but the spiritual man judgeth all things. Whereupon James exhorts him that wants wisdom to ask it of God. From all which it is gathered, that he hath the knowledge of divine things, who both depends only on the Word of God, and hath attained the true understanding thereof by help of no other interpreter but the Spirit of God himself. And all this will they willingly grant to whom we now address our speech. But here is couched a great di culty. For many persuade themselves that they can prove what they hold from testimony of God's Word, & that the spirit of God is their guide and teacher to furnish them with the understanding thereof, who notwithstanding err monstrously. They suppose they begged of God for his Spirit and that they have placed all their con dence in his assistance, who are not aware in the mean while that their trust hath been in any thing rather than in him. But before thou canst conclude of a surety that thou hast obtained his Spirit and learned any thing by the guidance thereof, what ever thing there is which might move thee to think so or so, or con rm a persuasion taken up, such as is an opinion of thine own or another's knowledge, judgement, spirit, holiness; likewise the multitude of those that think as thou thinkest, or of those which praise thee, admire thee, depend upon thy judgement; also the long while that the opinion opposed hath been in repute; nally, whatsoever is not God or his Word, from it thou oughtest to withdraw thine eyes, thy mind, and all thy thoughts, no less then if there were no such thing in the world; and then all other hope and con dence being cast away, to x thine eyes and mind on God alone, to depend only upon him, and thus a ected in this posture to ask his Spirit. Thus if thou shalt do, if frequently, if seriously, if believingly thou shalt do it; then mayst thou with good reason conclude, that thou art not possessed with any pernicious Error, or in case thou art possessed with any, that it shall be made known to thee. But these things are such as we can with much more facility express them in words then in deeds, so liable is the disposition of man to Error; yea so apt naturally is he to put trust in any thing rather then God. In a word, so sly, so industrious, so well furnished is Satan with divers Arts to deceive: that when thou hast done all thou canst, it will be an hard matter in some point or other not to be overseen. Which I would not have any man think, I therefore speak, as supposing there can be no certainty in divine matters, which conceit I am as far from as he that is farthest. But this is that which I would by no means su er, that he which as yet is arrived unto no certainty, and is peradventure plunged as yet in false opinions, should arrogate unto himself knowledge; but I would have him endeavour to get it indeed, and endeavour as he ought to do. He that hath once attained clear and certain knowledge, exhort him as long as you will, and let him endeavour as much as he can to suspect himself of Error, yet shall he never be able to entertain any such suspicion of himself. Such kind of exhortations then, can move suspicion only in them, who either err or have not yet attained rm and constant knowledge, but may attain the same as yet: to whom whiles the right way of attaining thereto is shown, and they are admonished of what blocks and traps in their way they ought to take heed, truly I cannot see but that the counsel we give them is very safe and pro table. Wherefore that a man may not any ways o end by opposing the Truth either in public or private, by word of mouth or by writing, I would persuade him by all means possible, that whatever his judgement be concerning Religion, he would examine particularly by what Reasons he hath been moved to be so persuaded, with what diligence, with what assurance of the spirits assistance, he hath searched the Scriptures, with what circumspection and prudence, he hath withdrawn his eyes from whatever is neither God nor his Word, also with what con dence he hath poured forth his prayers to God, in a word, how far he is assured of whatever he holds. How be it, when thou shalt have done all this with as much care as possible thou canst (modesty being always pleasing to God and he of such a nature as that he cannot despise the prayers of that man, who begs a daily increase of the certainty of his faith) if yet somewhat appearing new and therefore false and impious shall wound thine ears, as yet I conceive it the best way, that before thou oppose, thou pause a while and think with thyself again and again, what assurance thou hast, that such a speech is false and impious: and that again thou wrestle with God by most fervent prayers, that if thou be'st in the right, he would con rm thee therein more and more; if humane frailty have overtaken thee, that he would open thine eyes and give thee so much light, as to acknowledge and renounce thine Error. For if we who are evil (as our Lord said) are so aﬀected, that we give good things to our children, so as when they ask bread we give them not a stone; nor a serpent when they ask a ﬁsh: What shall we think of our heavenly Father? Shall we think that he, while we never leave ask of him the certainty of the truth, being in amed with a desire of obeying his will, and fearing lest by Error we should wage War against the Truth; shall we (I say) think, that in stead of assurance of the truth he will give us errors, in stead of light he will send us darkness? How far were this both from his in nite goodness and his most faithful promises? Again, since (as we have said) we can be assured of nothing unless we be taught of God, neither can we in our prayers limit God a time within which he should teach us, though we have turned away our sight from all things besides God, though we have placed all our con dence in God, it may notwithstanding come to pass, that we are not as yet taught by God, but that he is about to teach us by him, whom we account to be a seducer; for if he had already taught us, he would have added so much light and certainty, that we should have had no reason to doubt; only let us beware lest Satan put a trick upon us; we must remember what a crafty fox he is, how old an impostor, how plausibly (to use the Apostles phrase) he can deceive in the person of an Angel of light: and let us make sure account that no body can beware of him too much. Let us abandon that same expression, it's an old Error frequently confuted, long since confuted; what if so be the point have been hitherto ill-maintained, what if hitherto Satan hath played the part of Opposer and Maintainer himself alone. But be it so, suppose it to be an Error; if it be but to draw the persons erring by thine example unto that same gentleness and readiness to hear which is requisite, that they may not be obstinate towards such as would inform them, be thou thyself so gentle, as rst to hear and understand before thou condemn them. If it be but that they may not have reason to complain, that their cause hath been condemned before it was heard. What? will the Truth become less apparent by the often discussion, and not rather every day more certain & clear? Nothing verily is more easy then to begin a contention, but when it is once begun it is far more hard to end it, So that Solomon spoke to this purpose most tly, when he compared the beginner of strife to him that opens a way to water (suppose collected into some great and vast lake) for at rst indeed the matter may seem small & contemptible, but the water makes itself a larger & deeper passage, grows stronger and stronger, bears away the banks, lays waste all it meets with, eats itself channels, covers the elds with sand and mud, plucks trees up by the roots, throws down buildings and makes a rueful spectacle where ever it comes; just so from small and contemptible beginnings of Controversy & strife, we see at last the whole world lled with dissensions, calumnies and clamours. So that he which conceives not himself bound to shun the moving of a controversy, as being one of the greatest evils, unless he be merely compelled thereunto, shows himself to be either a man of no judgement, or one that cares not a rush for the Church's welfare. Wherefore though it be apparent that it is a false Tenet which is spread abroad, yet before thou begin to contend in the least measure about it, thou must consider of what moment and weight the thing is. For concerning vain questions we have a command of Paul, not to refute whatever shall be falsely asserted, but to avoid the questions themselves. So that I conceive our duty only is to endeavour that men's minds may be diverted from such curious unpro table questions, not so much in regard they may be false, but rather lest they vainly consume precious time, besides that it often falls out that while men strive about the slightest matter that can be, while men's wits are disturbed by the heat of contention, such things may be rashly alleged on both sides, as being of greater weight, may not a little impair the purity of Doctrine. Add herunto that men fall as soon to reproaching, railing, scolding when they contend about a tale of Robin-hood, as when the controversy is concerning the most weighty subject, which are faults that a Christian heart ought exceedingly to abhor. But here you will say is the great di culty, the great labour to distinguish between questions unpro table and questions that contain matter of damnable Error. For whatever a man shall pitch his mind upon, presently Satan endeavours to persuade him that it is a weighty point, so that unless he know assuredly what to hold, he cannot assure himself of any hope of salvation. Verily this is my judgement, that he, who not out of vain curiosity or ambition to become a subtle disputant in matters divine, but out of true piety towards God and an earnest desire of his own salvation is exercised in the reading of the Word of God, will easily know what questions are foolish & vain, and which are unworthy to be handled. But for as much as many are much to seek in this point, not without the Churches great detriment; it will not be impertinent, to make enquiry after some sure way whereby a man may without mistake discern the one sort of questions from the other.

