Now in the rst place, this aught to be laid down for a sure rule; that if we shall departed from the Divine Oracles, contained in the holy Scriptures, there is nothing whereto we may safely trust; there is nothing but what is liable, either to fraud or Error: Gods Testimonies are only sure, they only are of that worth, that the Conscience of a man may rest upon them, and quiet itself. And doubtless, if there shall be such a Cuntroversy about any point of Religion, as that some shall say, it is a point so necessary to be resolved about, and to know the Truth of, as that he which shall not understand and close with it, cannot be saved possibly; others, though they are of the same judgement, for the point itself, shall yet deny, that it is of such weight, and rather conceive that such as judge amiss thereabout, may attain salvation: and ought notwithstanding to be reputed members of the Church: In case (I say) such a Controversy arise, when both sides cannot be said to judge according to Truth, the one or other must of necessity err. Wherefore, to be certainly informed, which part thinks aright, will be to know some what; even as, to be at a stand and doubt herein, will be to be ignorant of somewhat; whence it must be concluded, that we cannot come to certain knowledge in this point, unless there be some word of God extant to guide us. Now we must be sure to mark in this place, that a point of Religion, and the judgement which is made concerning the weight and consequence of that point, are very di erent things. As it is one thing to say; A Christian ought not to be Circumcised; another thing to say, if ye be Circumcised, Christ shall pro t you nothing. For he which had heard, how that a Christian must not be Circumcised; might yet think, that though a Christian should not be Circumcised, yet if a man judge that he ought to be Circumcised, it were not much material. But having heard that other word; If you be Circumcised, Christ shall pro t you nothing, he will now understand the matter to be of fargreater importance. And inasmuch as a Doctrine is one thing, and the judgement and estimation of the weight of that Doctrine is another: if it shall be put to the question, concerning any Tenet, whether or no it be a point which ought of necessity to be known; as for example, that it is lawful to swear before the Judge; it will be nothing to the purpose, for a man to bring many Texts to prove, that an oath in point of judicature, ought not to be refused; for it will be said by one or other, that I grant, neither do I any ways make scruple thereof, but I would be resolved concerning the weight of the thing, whether it be a matter of such consequence, as that, in case any man shall be persuaded, that he ought not in any case to swear, and shall remain in that Error, there is no hope of his salvation. So that such proofs are in this case requisite, not which evince, that a man ought to swear before the Bench (for that is not the thing in question) but which prove, that he which is persuaded he ought not to swear, shall be damned, such as there is concerning the not retaining of Circumcision.

Now a point is then to be accounted proved by divine Testimony, when the Testimony or Text cannot be true, unless the point in question be true, which may come to pass, both when the Text shall contain the very thing, which it is brought to prove, as also when it shall lay down that, which being granted, the other must of necessity follow; as for example: we are to prove that a man is accounted just by believing, and not by the works of the Law, we allege the words of Paul; We judge therefore, that by faith, a man is justiﬁed without the works of the Law. This Testimony expresses the very thing which we would prove. But suppose it were to be proved, that a man is justiﬁed only by faith, and one did thus reason: Unless there were only one way of Justi cation, and that by Faith; the Apostle had foolishly inferred, that forasmuch as the just should live by faith, and that works were not faith, therefore no man living is just by the works of the Law; but it cannot without great wickedness be charged upon the Apostle, that he reasoned foolishly; there is therefore righteousness in faith alone, and so a man is justi ed only by faith. Now this Testimony of Scripture, cannot be said to contain that which it is brought to prove, but yet it a rms such things as being granted, the point in question must needs follow. But if so be, that which is brought as a Testimony may be true, while the thing it is brought to prove may be false, that thing cannot be said to be proved, by such a Testimony; so that, if a man to show that the Pope hath Authority to make new Laws, wherewith to bind the Consciences of men, shall cite that place, what ever thou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; it will be therefore denied, that that place proves the point in question, because power of binding might be given to Peter, and yet no power be given to the Pope to make new Laws.

Now a thing may be expressed, either by comprehension under general terms, or word for word; for when as the general term [Law] comprehends, as well those Laws concerning Conversation, as those concerning religious Ceremonies; as well Divine Laws, as Humane; that Christ shall not pro t him, who shall place his Righteousness in keeping the moral Law; is in general terms comprehended in that speech of the Apostle, where he denys that they have any share in Christ, who place their Righteousness in the works of the Law. And that a man is justi ed by Faith, is in so many words comprehended, in that passage of the same Apostle. We judge therefore, that a man is justiﬁed by Faith, without the works of the Law.

Furthermore, as concerning our present occasion; I nd that one thing may follow from another, two manner of ways. One is, when a matter is laid down as necessary to be known, which cannot yet be understood and believed, unless some other thing shall be rst understood and believed; for in such a case, the latter is to be reckoned among such things as are of necessity to be known. Thus; inasmuch as it is necessary, that we believe that Christ is risen from the dead, and we cannot believe that, unless we shall likewise believe that he died, it is altogether necessary that we believe he died. The other way is this; if we nd expressly set down, that a matter more doubtful than the point in question, whether it ought of necessity to be known, is to be known necessarily, yea if it be notless doubtful; for that which is less doubtful, or at least, not more doubtful, must be as necessary as the other.

But some may demand; whether in case it be apparent, that such a thing must needs be, or such a thing ought to have been done, it ought therefore to be j dged, that such a thing must necessarily be known by us. I will explain my meaning by a comparison. Physicians cure him that is sick of an hot disease, by cooling medicines; neither is it any matter, though the Patient be ignorant of the faculties of such medicines, provided he make use of them. We in like manner were sick of a certain disease, being liable to death by sin; many things may be reckoned up, which that we might be saved, ought both to be, and to be performed; As that our sins were to be abolished, and that by a Man void of all sin, and of in nite virtue and power, and he therefore to be the son of God, yea God himself, and the like. But let us lay down among the rest, that it was altogether necessary that he should be accused, and in a judicial way, sentenced to su er death. Some man (I say) may demand; whether or no, that, look how necessary it was, that our Lord should die, being condemned to death by a Judge; it should be as necessary for a man to know, not only that he died of any fashion, but as one accused, and judicially condemned: or whether we may not as well be ignorant of that circumstance, as a man sick of an hot disease, may, without prejudice, be ignorant of the faculty of such medicines as are administered unto him; as also whence, and how they were provided. Doubtless, that it may evidently appear to us, that these things are likewise necessarily to be known, either we must have a plain Text of Scripture that shall pronounce, whatsoever is necessary to be done, that also (to attain salvation) must necessarily be believed; or we must conclude, that because it is said in Scripture, that such a thing was necessarily to be done; it therefore follows, that it must necessarily be known. But there is no Testimony of Scripture, that I know, which pronounces, that what ever ought to be done, aught to be believed; and whether or no, because a thing is pronounced necessary to be done; it therefore follows, that it must necessarily be believed, we may thus resolve ourselves; suppose it is thus written in Scripture, It was altogether necessary for the taking away of the sins of men, that Christ should be condemned by the Judge, and so suﬀer death; if he had died otherwise, then in a judicial way, his death would not have proﬁted mankind. Now some man would by this Testimony prove, that unless one believed that Christ su ered death, being condemned to die, he cannot be saved. The question therefore is, whether that Testimony do prove any such thing, or no. But it is apparent, that no such thing is by this Testimony proved; forasmuch as the Testimony may be true, while that which it is brought to prove it, is false; that speech which is contradictory to that which is to be proved, being not contradictory to that which is used as a Testimony. For, since it is one thing, that Christ ought to die in a judicial way; another thing to believe, that he ought so to die; he that says, that man may be saved, who was ignorant that Christ's death was in a judicial way, contradicts not him that says, it was necessary that Christ should die, being condemned; and there is nothing to hinder, but that both those propositions may be true. Which being so, we cannot conceive that this Testimony proves, that he which shall not believe that Christ died, being condemned in judgement, cannot be saved. Whence it follows, that to prove that something ought of necessity to be done, or to be, is no Argument that such a thing ought of necessity to be believed.

Some may further demand; whether in case it appear from Scripture, that a Doctrine ought of necessity to be known, we should account whatsoever may be collected from that Doctrine by necessary inference, to be in like manner needful to be known; in which ease we must observe, that look how (as we said before) a Tenet is one thing, and the estimation of that Tenet is another thing; so it is one thing for a point or Doctrine to follow from another point, another thing for a speech to follow expressing the weight of that Doctrine; now this latter kind of consequence, ought not to be doubted of. For since it is written, Christ shall proﬁt you nothing, who place your Righteousness in the Law, and Circumcision is an Ordinance of that Law; if any one should say, that it is possible for him who places his Righteousness in Circumcision, to receive pro t by Christ, he should contradict the very words of Paul. But our question is concerning such inferences as are the Consequences of some Doctrine itself, which ought of necessity to be known. Inasmuch therefore, as to grant the Antecedent and deny the Consequent, is to a rm contradictions; he which denys, that which necessarily follows from a Doctrine that ought to be known, he may not seem truly to believe the said Doctrine; and therefore not in a possibility of salvation. But I answer; seeing that I grant the Antecedent point which is necessary to be known, though I deny that which seemeth unto thee necessarily to follow therefrom, why shouldest thou not as well say, that I do not in truth deny, that which I seem to deny? Since (I say) to grant the Antecedent and deny the Consequent, cannot stand together; why should the denying of the Consequent rather seem, a denying of the Antecedent, which I confess to be true, than the a rming of the Antecedent should seem to be an a rming of the Consequent, which I a rm to be false? for it is as true, that the a rming of the Antecedent a rms the Consequent, as it is, that the denial of the Consequent denies the Antecedent. Now it is cicar, that he which understands that such a thing follows from such a thing, cannot possibly a rm the one, and deny the other. And if so be any man conceiving the Antecedent to be true, will not admit of the Consequence; the reason hereof is, that he doth not discern, that the one follows from the other; for, to see that this follows from that, and to account that true, and this false, were no other than to see it, and not to see it, which is impossible. Now that it may fall out, that what necessarily follows from some Tenet, may not by some man be discerned so to follow, is so certain as nothing more; for how many things are there, both in the Methematicks, and other Arts, which being undeniably demonstrated to be true, are yet both unknown, and unbelieved by many men, which understand not their Demonstrations. As for example, that the body of the Sun, is by many parts greater than the whole Earth. And if so be any man shall a rm things contrary to what are demonstrated, as that the Sun is greater than the Earth, he shall a rm things contrary to propositions, so evident and certain, as it is impossible any man should not understand them to be true, to wit, those maxims out of which the said things are demonstrated. But therefore it is, that those maxims to some men are evident and rm, who will not believe such things as follow from them by necessary consequence; because they are not aware of that straight tie and ●m connexion, which is between the said maxims and such things as follow therefrom; otherwise, since no man is ignorant of the truth of those principles, from whence the Demonstrations are raised, every body would know the truth of such things as might be demonstrated, and so we should have all men Geometricians, Arithmeticians, all men Musicians and Astrologers. And because it may fall out, that what follows from some other thing, may not be discerned by some man to follow the same; and he may therefore believe the former and not the latter; doubtless it is no proof, that because a man denies a necessary Consequence, he must therefore deny the Antecedent, being a point which ought of necessity to be known; especially, if he shall be so strongly persuaded of the truth of the Antecedent, that rather than he will deny the same, he will allow of the Consequent for Truth. But in case he would rather deny the Antecedent, then allow of the Consequent, the case is di erent: So to do, were at least not rmly to believe the Antecedent. It is manifest therefore, that such Testimonies of Scripture as prove, a point ought necessarily to be known, do not prove, that such things as necessarily follow, are of like necessity to be known. This part of our discourse is subtle and acute, requiring that the reader give great heed, to the end he may understand the same: howbeit, it is very necessary to be known, for the taking away of rash judgements, by means whereof the Church is torn in pieces into Sects.

These things being thus cleared, we are in the next place to inquire, what those points be, which are propounded unto us in the Scripture, as so necessary to be known and believed, that he which shall not know and throughly understand them, ought not to be accounted one of God's servants, or a member of his Church; and whosoever shall believe them, all may be judged capable of Salvation, though he very much err in all other points. Concerning which question, I would much rather hear the judgements of other men, then propound mine own to the rash, and haply, irreligious censures of many: howbeit, the hope of procuring the Tranquillity and peace of the Churches of Christ, hath more prevailed with me, than any private respect of mine own. We do not prescribe any thing to any man, as a decree, from which he may not descent; but look what the Lord hath vouchsafed to discover unto us, we thought good in such wise to propound; as to be ready with a very good will, to give credit, and place to him that shall propound matters of greater certainty. Our endeavour, truly, is not by all means possible, to obtrude our own judgement upon men, and to make, that it may be of authority; but rather that Truth itself may be brought to Light. For look as it often comes to pass, that a musician that could not be entreated by any means to play a lesson; if some unskilful person shall be his untoward ngering of some in-it-self, excellent instrument, grate and vex his ears with his rude scraping, will take the instruments in hand and begin to play: even so, our hope is, that in case we shall seem to have said little to the purpose, in a matter which, without all Controversy, is of the greatest moment that can be; we shall at the least, provoke some man of greater spirit and wisdom, to accomplish with good success, what we had unhappily undertaken. In the mean time, we do again & again beseech all pious and good men, that what ever they shall think of our judgement here delivered: they will notwithstanding, take in good part our care to preserve peace and concord: and that not of any kind, but such as may become Christians, and that they will join with me by fervent prayers, to beg of him who is the only Author, as of all other good things, so likewise of peace, that he would at the length bestow the same upon his Churches, to the praise and glory of his own name. Let us weigh then, and examine such places of Scripture, wherein Salvation is either promised or denied, because of believing, or not believing.

Our Lord says: Be ye sure of this, he that hears my words, and believes in him that sent me, he shall enjoy eternal life, and      John 5. shall not come into Judgement, but is passed from death to life. Again, This is the will of him that sent me, that John 6. whosoever hath seen the son, and hath believed on him, shall obtain eternal life. And again, Go ye through the whole world preaching the Gospel unto all: be that shall believe and be baptised, shall he saved, he that believes not shall be condemned. Which places, and their like, it may be questioned, how they ought to be understood: For some man will a k, what it is to believe in the Son of God or his Apostles: for even he doubtless believes, who is persuaded, that the person speaking aught to be credited, as one that speaks only the Truth, although he understand not what it is he says. In which sense there is no Christian, not one, but so far believes the word of God, as not to doubt, but whatsoever is contained therein is true: there is not, in the mean time, one perhaps, there never was, who understands the true sense of every place. Much more may that man be said to believe, who being persuaded of the Truth of the speaker, doth likewise understand that which he speaks. Now I conceive it is out of Controversy, that every man ought to hold for Truth, whatsoever the Son of God hath taught, either by himself or by his Apostles. For these things cannot stand together, that any man should believe, that Jesus is the son of God; and nor persuade himself, that what ever he says is true, and that he is adorned with all kinds of virtue. But whether or no it be likewise necessary to Salvation, to know what ever our Lord commanded as well in person, as by his Apostles, and rightly to understand the same; so as to embrace the same, not only with a confused, that is to say, a general, but with a distinct and particular faith; this is that which may be questioned.

Now it is altogether necessary; that, either whatsoever things are set down in Scripture, are all necessary to be known; so that a man may not be ignorant of, or mis-understand any of them under pain of damnation; or that such things are of a di erent nature; so that some of them are altogether necessary to be known, and highly to be accounted of others; howbeit pro table to be understood, and such as are no ways to be slighted, yet are they not altogether so necessary; yea rather, although there happen to be some Error concerning them, the person so erring may notwithstanding be saved. And our Lord himself professes, that he teaches nothing, but such things as he John 17. had received from his father; and look what he had received from his Father, that he delivered to his Disciples, and that they embraced it, and did believe that he was sent from his Father: and therefore he prays for their salvation, and for the salvation of all those likewise, who should believe through their preaching. And to the Apostles, this command was given; Go ye through the whole world, declaring the Gospel to all persons, and teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you; he that shall believe, and shall be baptised, shall be saved: he that shall not believe, shall be condemned. In which words is implied, that unless a man shall understand and believe all these things, he shall not be saved; so Paul, when to the jailer, ask what he should do, he bade him believe in the Lord jesus, and so he should be saved, and his family; is afterward said to have instructed him in the Doctrine of the Lord: So that the meaning of those words, believe in the Lord jesus and thou shalt be saved, must be this; embrace the faith and Doctrine of Christ and thou shalt be saved. And that this is so, seems especially proved, by what the same Apostle elsewhere writes: If any one shall teach you otherwise then we have taught, let him be accursed. For he teacheth otherwise, who mis-interprets any part of that Doctrine. On the contrary, even as Paul, to prove that righteousness was not by the Law, among others, uses this Argument: If so be the inheritance belonged to them that kept the Law: since no man could keep the same, no body could be saved: wherefore since the promise must not be void, there must needs be another righteousness then that by the Law: In the very self same manner we may reason in this place: that, forasmuch as no man can rightly understand all that the Lord hath commanded; and it is necessary to salvation, that a man understand all things rightly, and err in nothing, therefore no man shall be saved: But certain it is, a very great and innumerable company shall be            Rev. 7. saved: it must needs therefore follow, that men may be saved, though they do not rightly understand some part of that which the Lord hath delivered, and be possessed with some Error. And Paul witnesseth that in this life we know things, but in part, and not fully, and we prophesy but in part. But what could we desire more plain than          1 Cor. 13. this? Our Lord before his death testi ed, that his Disciples had embraced all those things, which, he having received of his Father, had declared unto them, and prayer for them: howbeit they did not as yet understand, that Christ's Kingdom was spiritual, not worldly: neither did they know, that the bene ts purchased by Christ, did belong unto the other nations of the world as well as to the jews. Which things notwithstanding, he had taught them, and they were matters of very great concernment. It is manifest therefore, that when our Lord said, his Disciples had received such things as he had taught them: his meaning was, such of them as were of necessity to salvation; not that they had wholly attained to the knowledge of all that he had taught them. Hence it must be concluded, that all things which Christ taught, were not so necessary to salvation, as that, if a man were ignorant of some part of them, he could not be saved. And it is very well worth our observation, that, when as the Disciples did not as yet understand that Christ's Kingdom was spiritual, and that the Gentiles were in a special manner to be shaters in the salvation purchased by him: he did notwithstanding distribute unto them the representative gures of his body and blood.

Inasmuch therefore, as it is out of all question, that every Truth of God is not of like condition and rank, but that some must of necessity be known and perfectly understood, some may be without inevitable damnation unknown; doubtless it is necessary, either that we should have some mark of di erence whereby to distinguish the one from the other, or we must take it for granted, that those points of Christian doctrine are only necessary to be known, concerning which there are special and particular testimonies of Scripture signifying the necessity of their knowledge. As for any general note or di erence, though I have diligently enquired into the matter, yet have I not been able to nd one. For, if any man shall say that all the principal heads of doctrine are to be reckoned among the necessary points; his saying will be very true, yet not a whit satisfactory. For I shall presently demand, which are those principal points? And if any doctrine be called into question, I shall desire to know whether it be one of those principal ones: I shall ask him by what note or mark I may know, whether it be to be reckoned among the principal or not: So that we are still as far to seek as ever. For it is all one to be in doubt which are those points of doctrine that ought of necessity to be known, and to doubt which are the chief heads of Religion, both are alike obscure, so that the one cannot receive light from the other. We must therefore make diligent enquiry, what things they are by name which must be of necessity known and believed.

Our Lord says: Herein consists life eternal, if they shall know thee the only true God, and him whom thou hast sent, Jesus Christ. And John 17. joel 2. the Prophet says, Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. And the Apostle; This is that doctrine of Faith which we publish abroad, that if thou shalt both confess with thy mouth, that Jesus is the Lord, and shalt believe with thy heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. But that place of John is very remarkable: and many other miracles did Jesus in the presence of his Disciples, which are not contained in this Book: But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Messiah the Son of God, and that believing ye might obtain I foe by his name. In which place we may observe: First, That whatsoever things are written of Jesus, are written to this end, that men might believe that jesus is the Messiah the Son of God: Secondly, That if any man shall believe, that through him he shall obtain salvation, that man shall not be frustrated of his hope: john 11. So that, when Peter had confessed that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of the living God, he was pronounced Blessed, forasmuch as that knowledge of his was not from Man, but from God. So Martha, after that our Lord had told her, that he was the Resurrection and the Life, and that if any man believed in him, though he were dead, yet he should live; and all that should live, and believe in him should never die: She made answer, I believe that thou art the Messiah the Son of God, who were't to come into the world. And to the Thief, who begged of Lord, that he would remember him when he came into his Kingdom, he gave this answer; This I promise thee, that thou shalt Luke 23. be with me this day in Paradise. And the Eunuch after he had confessed, that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, Acts 8. he was baptised. Likewise, when four men carrying the pulsied man, and endeavouring to bring him to be cured, were not able to come near for the press, but let him down in his bed through the roof into the midst before Jesus: Jesus knowing their so great faith, said unto the man: Son, thy sins are forgiven thee. By which place we may conjecture what was the faith of that palsied person. For he believed (in all probability) that that same man, whose name was Jesus, came from God and was in favour with God; and therefore he hoped that by his means he might recover his health. But that he knew all those things which the Church hath for a long time accounted as articles of Faith necessary to be believed to Salvation, how likely a matter it is, I leave it to every man to judge. There are likewise many other texts to the very same purpose. For to that same unclean woman, that washed our Lords feet with her tears, it was said: Thy Faith hath saved thee The same was spoken to that other woman having the ux of blood, who hoped, If she might touch the hem of his garment, she should be healed. The same was done to that one of the ten cleansed lepers, who returned thanks to God. And john says, Hereby ye shall know the Spirit of God; whatever spirit shall confess that jesus Christ is come, and that he is made man, that Spirit is of God; and again; Whosoever shall confess that jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him and he in God. Also Paul denies, That any can say that jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Spirit. And forasmuch as Abraham is called the Father of Believers, and we are taught chief by his example, that Righteousness consists in Faith: Truly it will be labour well bestowed to consider, what that was, which when he believed, it was counted unto him for righteousness. He was promised that he should be the Father of many Nations; he was promised that happiness should betid to all the Nations of the world by his seed: Finally, he had the Land of Canaan promised to him, and very great prosperity: But of those points of Religion, which it is judged every body is bound to know upon pain of damnation, we read not a word. Yea, and the mystery of Salvation itself by his seed is very closely and obscurely promised. And, truly these are the only points which I nd in the Scriptures, recorded as necessary to be believed for the attainment of Salvation. Let us now consider who they be, unto whom in Scripture Salvation is denied in respect of unbelief.

Unto the Apostles it was said in general terms; Go ye through the whole earth, publishing the Gospel to all persons, he that shall believe and be baptised, shall be saved; but he that shall not believe, shall be condemned. Which words, as is manifest by what we formerly said, are not so to be understood, as if he had said: He that shall not rightly understand whatever you shall teach, but shall in some point misinterpret your words, shall be condemned: but by the word [Gospel] we must understand, that same blessed message of redemption by the name of Christ. He that shall believe, that by the name of Christ he shall be saved, he shall be saved; he that shall not so believe shall be condemned. In the same manner are those words of Paul to be expounded, If any shall teach you diﬀerent from what you have learned, let him be                Gal. accursed: as if he should have said: If any shall teach you, that you must obtain salvation by any other way, then by faith in the name of Christ, let him be accursed. Howbeit, whosoever shall teach any thing otherwise then the Apostles taught, although it be none of the principal heads of Religion, yet is he so far forth to be accursed, in as much as all false doctrine comes from none but the Devil, the father of lies. But it is not presently to be concluded that such a person is quite out of the way of Salvation; for our Lord rebuking Peter himself because he dehorted him from su ering death, calls him Satan. More particularly, our Lord says, Unless you            john 6. shall both eat the ﬂesh and drink the blood of the Son of man, ye shall not obtain life. Which imports as much as if he had said, Unless ye shall believe that I am the Son of God, and that I am sent from God my Father, and that you shall obtain Salvation by my Name, you shall not obtain life. And again, Unless ye shall believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. And John says, Who is a liar, but he that denies Jesus to be the Son:         2 john 2. 1 john 4. And, hereby shall you know the Spirit of God; whatever spirit confesseth that jesus Christ is come in the ﬂesh, is of God; But whatever spirit shall deny that jesus Christ is come in the ﬂesh, the          Gal. 5. same is not of God. Paul adds; If you be circumcised, Christ shall proﬁt you nothing. And a little after, Ye have no part in Christ, who lace your righteousness in the Law, ye are fallen from Grace. And Peter, there is no other name among men under heaven, by which we can Acts 4. be saved. By which testimonies of Scripture we are taught, that such places as witness that he which believes that Jesus Christ is the Son of God shall be saved, are not so to be understood, as that if a man shall so believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, as he believes that julius Caesar was the rst who brought the Roman Commonwealth into bondage, and made himself Emperor of Rome, or any other matter wherein himself is not concerned, that he shall be saved: but that he truly believes that Jesus is the Son of God, who believes it as a thing that concerns himself; that is to say, who believes that he, whom we call Jesus, is the Son of God, his Jesus and his Christ, that is, his Saviour and his King, in whom alone he places all the hope of his Salvation: Unless we shall admit of this interpretation, neither Paul's nor Peter's words will hang together.

These very few points are all that we can nd expressed in Scripture, as being necessary for every man to believe, to the end he may be saved: viz. That he acknowledge the one only true God, and him whom he hath sent, jesus Christ his Son, being made man: and that he believe that God hath raised him from the dead, and that by his name he shall obtain salvation, and that he place not his righteousness in the works of the Law: But that he be verily persuaded, that there is no other name under heaven, whereby we can be saved. Now let us make enquiry, what other thing there is, that being inferred from these, may be in like manner necessary to be known. And forasmuch as the Scriptures teach, that every man is liable to the severe judgement of God, as being, by reason of the fall of Adam, born in sin, and of such a natural constitution, that he continually o ends God, and consequently guilty of eternal punishment; and since they further teach, that this world at length coming to an end, all persons shall be raised at the last day: the just unto eternal happiness, the unjust and wicked unto eternal torments: No man can understand what it is to be saved, neither consequently what it is he should believe, unless he have some tolerable knowledge, both of his own condition, of the Law of God, and of God's purpose to judge the quick and the dead. For the Apostle declares, that from the Law springs the knowledge of Sin, and he should not have known Sin but by the Law. But it follows not, from what we have laid down, that such a degree of knowledge, either of the Law of God, or of man's natural condition, is necessary: as that, if any man shall err in the interpretation of some Commandment of God, or in judging of the nature of man, and the abilities thereof, he cannot be saved. Thus much only follows, that a man ought to believe, that he is liable to eternal condemnation, and to trust he is freed therefrom, by Christ, and by his bene ts ordained unto eternal blessedness. Again, seeing Paul says, that they have no title to Christ, who place their righteousness in the Law, in the Law, I say of God; What shall we say of them who place their righteousness in the Laws, mandates and inventions of men? They may doubtless much rather be said to have fallen from the righteousness and bene ts of Christ. Semblably, since the Scriptures teach, that by the name of Christ alone, we must hope for salvation: it follows, that he that shall hope for salvation by the name of the blessed Virgin, or Peter, or Paul, or any Saint whatsoever, hath no share in Christ. Likewise, it being a thing necessarily to be believed to salvation, that Christ was raised from the dead: and it cannot be understood, that any is raised to life that was not rst dead; it follows, that it ought of necessity to be believed that he died. In a word, forasmuch as our Lord hath commanded, that all be taught the Gospel and baptised in the name of the Father, Son and holy Spirit whose work this Faith is; inasmuch as he opens our hearts, and reveals unto us this goodness of God towards us; both this command ought to be known, and that it is the holy Spirit by whom we believe, and by whom God dwells in us: and whom, we ought by incessant prayers to beg of God, that he would bestow him upon us. I confess ingeniously, I cannot nd any other points, that I can from Scripture demonstrate, and prove to be of necessary knowledge to the attainment of salvation. If any man can show any more, there is nothing that I would sooner wish, then to understand what ever other points there are, over and above what we have laid down; and to hear those Texts by whose authority we are obliged to acknowledge them for matters that ought of necessity to be known. Now for us to reckon up particularly all such points as we judge not necessary to be known, to the end a man may be saved: there is no necessity, neither were it convenient, and it would be an endless work. A right line is the measure both of right and crooked. Only to the end, that it may be the better understood, when any points comes into question, how it may be manifest, to be either of necessity to be known, or not of necessity, we will examine and couple of Doctrines, to the end, that as we shall try these, all other may be tried.

Sabellius (as Vigilius Martyr Bishop of Trent relates) did so acknowledge the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, as that he would not have it to be understood, that the Father was one person, the Son another. But he said, that he who was the Father lled the womb of the Virgin, and in that man whom he assumed, is termed the Son: when as not two persons, but one Father is understood by both terms. And he that thus understands the matter worships but one God. Some man may therefore inquire, whether or no this point be of such concernment, as that it is necessary for him that would be saved, not to err therein: that is to say, whether Sabellius, holding such an Error could be saved: or whether he ought absolutely to be reckoned for an Heretic, as hitherto he hath been ever accounted. We have already proved, that it is necessary, that men should believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. But to believe, that he is the Son of God, is not to pronounce these words, nor yet in thought to give unto Christ the title of Son of God: but rather by a sincere faith, to attribute unto him that which these words signify. Now the word Son, signi es not any such thing: I say, the notion of that word is not such, as that any person may be understood to be his own Son; neither can the term [Father] be so understood, as that any one should be his own Father; but he is called a Son, who hath for Father, not himself, but some other person; and he a Father who hath for Son, not himself but some other. Forasmuch then as Sabellius did confound the Father and the Son, and denied that they were two distinct persons; it is very plain, that he did not believe that Jesus was the Son of God, which it was altogether necessary for him to believe. By which example we are taught, that concerning such points as are propounded unto us by God, as necessary to be believed; we ought diligently to examine what the words signify, least retaining only a certain vain shadow of words, we come to deny the things themselves by those words intimated; let us labour to understand the words, that we may sincerely embrace the things themselves. Having examined this Tenet, let us consider another point, which, as these times go, is perhaps, no less worthy of our knowledge.

There hath been a long and very Tragical controversy about the interpretation of those words, Take, this is my Body. Let us consider therefore whether this be a matter of such consequence, that therefore men should rend themselves one from another, vex, disgrace and account one another as enemies. Howbeit, it is not necessary that I should in this place discover myself of what side I am: only I shall so far profess myself to be of both parts, inasmuch as I make no question, but that both belong to the true Church of God. Now I shall deal with each side by itself apart, and though I may grant that both parties do otherwise say right, and truly interpret the words of Christ: yet I shall show, that neither party ought to condemn the other, or account it guilty of an Heresy? Come on then, to begin with you, who admit of no Trope in our Lords words, but judge, they ought to be understood according to their plain natural meaning: you do not only say, that such as account our Lords words tropical, do misinterpret the same: but you seem to judge of them, as of persons, the most erroneous in point of Religion that can be: you think you cannot nd words bad enough, to express your hatred against them according to their deserts. Put the case, that with this their so great Error, they may notwithstanding obtain Salvation, and belong to the Church of God? How can they (will you say) who account the Son of God himself, either to be a liar, or a vain speaker, foolishly uttering contradictions, and such things as are quite contrary to all sense and reason? Alas, miserable men that we are, how far doth hatred, springing from our di erences, transport us? If men question the interpretation of some words, must they needs make Christ a liar? Which of those men, whom you account Adversaries in this point, did ever deny, that either in these or any other words Christ should be believed? Did such a conceit ever enter into any of their minds, as once to suspect such a thing? Can they fear that he should be a liar, for whose name they would su er the most grievous torments which Tyrants could in ict? Away with such a peevish and altogether unjust interpretation: the Controversy is concerning the meaning, not the truth of the words, than which they willingly confess nothing is more true. But (you will say) the words are so clear, so plain and manifest, that it is impossible for a man not to understand their meaning. To you that understand them they are plain and clear, to him that otherwise understands them, they are not so clear, or if they be, it is in that sense in which he takes them. Wherefore of necessity thus much must be granted: that the di erence is only about the meaning, and not about the Truth of the words. Thou therefore that sayest, that such as deny the corporal presence of Christ in the Lord's Supper, are Heretics, and cannot be saved: by what Testimonies of Scripture canst thou prove what thou sayest? Our Lord himself promises eternal life to all that call upon his name, who believe that he is the Son of God, who place the hope of their salvation in him alone, not in the works of the Law or any other thing. This faith, this hope, those constantly profess whom thou callest Heretics: by what Testimonies of God's Word art thou induced by thy judgement to deny them salvation? Produce one word out of the holy Scriptures, which says, that such persons shall not enjoy eternal life. Thou mayst not pronounce so from thine own head: dost thou think, haply, that it is impossible for that man to call upon the name of the Lord, and to put all his con dence in him, who cannot understand, nor consequently believe, that his body really present, is distributed in the Sacrament? What should hinder him? But if thou wilt contend, that he that believes not the latter, cannot believe the former: I would very fain hear, how thou canst prove what thou sayest. But in case, that faith unto which our Lord doth promise salvation, may stand without the confession of his body's presence in the Sacrament; and yet thou ceasest not to account persons so believing, to be no members of the true Church of God: consider with thyself again and again, if thou dost not really pollute thyself with that same crime of making Christ a liar, which thou art accustomed falsely to charge upon others.

I come now to those who say the words are tropical, who, because it is a rmed that the body of Christ is present in the bread, at the same time in very many places, do gather many very great absurdities; but especially this, That such a position denies the humanity of Christ. Wherefore, inasmuch as this point concerning the Son of God, his being made man, and raised from the dead, is necessarily to be known and believed: they deny that such as a rm such a presence of Christ's body can be saved, unless they shall repent. Such absurdities as they gather from the a rmation of Christ's body (whether they err or not in so doing) experience doth manifest, that they can by no means be induced, but to think, that they really follow from the said position. Let us grant therefore, that such absurdities do all of them undoubtedly follow the foresaid presence. But supposing all this, must they therefore that hold the real presence needs be Aliens from Christ? They must needs, (sayest thou) for that condition which they attribute to the body of Christ, that it can be in many places at one and the same time, overthrows the humanity of Christ: so that he which says, Christ's body may be in divers places at the same time, doth as good as say, that Christ's body is no body: and if Christ hath not a true body, he is not true man, and if he be not now true man, either he was never made man, or if he were, he arose not from the dead: both which Doctrines, we before showed are necessarily to be believed. Wherefore, since no man can believe contradictories, they not believing the Humanity and Resurrection, being necessary points, cannot be saved. Those men truly, press the matter vehemently; howbeit, let us make trial, if we cannot make it appear, that hope of Salvation may stand with such gross Errors. Whereas therefore they say, that it is impossible for men to believe things that contradict one the other, that is then true (as we showed before) when they see the contradiction between them. For I confess, that a man cannot believe, both that Christ hath a true humane body, and that he hath not. Howbeit, such things as are truly opposite one to the other, may notwithstanding seem unto many men, void of any such opposition. And in case they are not discerned to be contradictory, the one to the other, nothing lets, but that men may believe them to be both true; so that though it be granted, that these Tenets oppose one the other, and cannot stand together, that there should be a true body, which notwithstanding may be in divers places, at one and the same instant, yet may they seem not to be opposite; so that men may believe, that our Lord hath a true humane body, and yet that the same body maybe in divers places at one & thesame time. Forasmuch therefore as they believe, and that most strongly, that Christ is true man, the Son of God, and raised from the dead, and all other things which the Scripture holds forth as necessary to be believed; what reason hast thou to deny that they may be saved, even in this their Error? It is clear therefore, that as well those which hold Christ's body to be in the Sacramental bread, as those which deny the same, although it must needs be, that one side err, yet are they both (if otherwise conscionable observers of our Lords commands) in the way of Salvation. In which regard, they are bound to love and reverence one another, as brethren, the servants of God, and members of Christ. If they shall mutually vex one another with revile, reproaches & curse: if they shall go on to exercise enmity one against another, they shall not escape the just judgement of God. Wherefore, I pray and beseech both parties by Christ Jesus: that laying aside all hatred and rash judgements, they would strive to go beyond one another in o ces of Love. Let us abandon bad language, sco s, contempt; so will it certainly fall out, that such as err, shall at the length be brought to acknowledge the Truth: If we shall but once be united in heart and a ection, the Lord will not deny us any favour or success; neither will he ever su er, that such, as out of true love endeavour to draw their brethren out of Error, shall reap no fruit of their labour.

Now look how we have discussed these two points, viz. the Error of Sabellius, and the Controversy about the corporal pre-presence in the Sacramental bread; it will be easy for any man in like manner, to judge of what ever other points shall come into Controversy. For concerning what ever Error shall be questioned, we must inquire, whether or no, the person so erring may not believe all such things, as to the belief whereof Salvation is promised; that in case he may, we may persuade ourselves, that he errs not in a point necessary to be known unto salvation: but if not, that he errs in a necessary Doctrine. Howbeit, whosoever would condemn any man for any Error, aught to consider again and again, what assurance he hath, that such an Error cannot stand with salvation. Do but consider, when as our Lord says, come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you ease: Shall any man be so foolhardy, as to dare to pull back him that is coming, and of his own head to say to him: Oh! do you hear, it will be in vain for you to go unto Christ, who do not believe this or that point? Who art thou that wilt hinder another man's servant from coming at his Masters call? With what con dence takest thou upon thee, to divine at the will of God, not being very clearly manifested unto thee? Must you, according to your fancy, set bounds to the goodness, mercy and kindness of God? He unto whom it belongs to give life, calls all unto him; and wilt thou, by I know not what exceptions of thine own devising, limit those graces, which he promiseth, but limits not? What dost thou, in so doing? Doubtless, as much as in thee lies; thou robbest a man of his life, not of this life which is rather a death then life, but of eternal life, and the Kingdom of Heaven, adjudging him to eternal torments; neither is it to one alone, thou art so injurious, but to thousands haply. Thou maimest Christ in so many members, thou rendest the Church into Sects, and pavest a way to in nite mischiefs. And if our Lord so severely menace such as o end the least; what thinkest thou shall become of them, who by their rash judging have drove men to make Sects, without any necessary cause so requiring? woe unto them: And if so be the way which we have set down, to distinguish between points necessary to be believed and not necessary, seem not to be su cient; do thou, if thou canst, produce a better, one more sure, rm and constant. If thou wonderest, that among such points, which we have reckoned up as necessary to be known, thou dost not nd certain other points of Religion, very highly accounted of; Read over diligently the whole Old and New Testament, and search throughly by what Texts thou canst prove, that those points are so necessary to be known: that he that understands them not, cannot be saved. Consider what knowledge the People of Israel could have of them from the Old Testament, who were notwithstanding to be saved, by the same faith that we are. Consider again, what the thief could know, when it was said to him, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise: Or the Eunuch when Philip baptised him: Or that woman to whom, when she had washed our Lords feet, it was said, thy faith hath saved thee: Or she that was wasted away by the bloody issue: or the Palsied man, with many others, whose sins were forgiven them merely upon their confessing the name of the Lord. It is also observable, what the reason should be, that whereas these points which we have set down as necessary, are so frequently repeated in Scripture, and required of necessity to be known; those points which some men so highly account of, are not in like manner required. If those books had been written by the wit of man, which we account (as indeed they are) sacred, we should say that honest Homer had took a nap and forgot himself: But they are indicted by the Holy Spirit. This therefore is not come to pass by chance, but by the sure counsel of God: who, had he intended that those points should have been of like estimation, he would at least in some one place, plainly have signi ed his mind. Which since he hath not done, what is man that he should be able to conjecture God's mind? These things ought not to be measured by our wit or judgement, but by the wisdom of God revealed unto us from heaven: it alone must be regarded, what ever reason may dictate.

But if so be any one shall err in a point that ought necessarily to be known, and cannot be reduced to a right judgement, no man ought to question but that such a person may be justly condemned and cast out of the society of the godly. And that not only, if being admonished, he shall go on to seduce others, but also though he will be silent: for what participation can the Church of God have with him unto whom eternal life is not promised? But if the point, about which some man errs, be not in the number of those that must needs be known; in this case, I conceive we must use a distinction. For if he that thinks amiss, and cannot be reduced, shall likewise endeavour to seduce others, having been often admonished to desist; I see no reason but that he may and aught to be cast out of the Congregation: For such an one exceedingly o ends the brethren: and though the matter be not of the greatest weight, it follows not, that the error is not pernicious; for look how one point of knowledge springs from another, even so do errors arise of errors; and what is there, wherein the glory of God is concerned, that ought not to be of great moment? But if so be he seduce not others, so long as he holds those points that are necessary to salvation, he may be yet in the number of brethren: What if they shall cut him o ? They shall (as much as in them lies) cut a living member from the body of Christ, which were very unjust, neither is there any precept of God commanding such a thing. And so much of a just and unjust judgement: Now let us consider, for our orderly and just proceeding thereto, what we ought to do, and what to avoid.

For the matter of tenets: if some very pernicious errors arise, there is nothing hinders, but that we may forthwith make head against it, and teach the people what a doctrine it is, that they may take heed of it. But the man is not to be cast out, until such time as, according to the rule of the Gospel, all courses have been tried to reclaim him; and if we are forced to proceed to an ejection, we must be careful that nothing be done, whereby any hindrance may arise to the Church. Now it is very clear, that by how much the greater ill-will any man shall bear towards the Church, by so much the more may the Church look to be molested by him, that he will more desperately and eagerly plot against her, privily seducing all he can, and by calumnies endeavouring to render the Church hateful, and the like. Now by how much the more sharply any man is dealt with, by so much the more will he be moved against the Church. In consideration whereof, my judgement is, that the Heretic shall in such sort be condemned, as that the cause of his condemnation being simply signi ed, no kind of reproach be used, and that this be done with intimation rather of grief, then of any anger or hatred: in such manner as the judgement may be full of gravity, but void of all passion and sharpness. But we have before spoken, when we handled the duty of a private man, that which is suitable to the present occasion, & have showed how always more hurt then good comes by sharp language. In a word, we must take heed lest those men arrogate unto themselves to judge either of the doctrine, or of the man, unto whom it does not appertain. For, doubtless it belongs not to any private person, nor yet to two or three, but to the whole Church. Let two or three Prophets speak (says the Apostle) and let the rest judge.

And this is the course the Church ought to take for the resisting the growth of errors: We are now to speak of the Magistrates duty. An argument (if there be any) full of controversy, intricate and of very great concernment. Such as cannot away with the doctrine received, be their judgement better, or be it worse, nd themselves exceedingly grieved that they may not be su ered for to speak their minds. On the other side, those whose doctrine both the Magistrates and people approve, and also esteem of their authority; since they cannot without great grief, nor many times without some diminishment of their reputation, hear controversies daily raised; unto such the use of the sword cannot but seem very necessary to repress such as will not rest content with the doctrine generally received; and it is commonly seen that as any thing is subservient unto the interest of any persons, such persons are soon persuaded, that that thing is justly put in practice, Wherefore, since that a man's own commodity coming into consideration, permits him not to judge so justly as is t, our thoughts must by all means possible be withdrawn from such considerations; and if this be hard to be done, the next hereunto is, that in thought at least every one change his own condition, and make himself of the other part, and so set himself to consider both what may be most convenient to be done, and what is most agreeable to the Law of God. If therefore liberty or toleration seem like to be convenient for thee: imagine thyself to be in his condition who allows of the doctrine received, and would have it preserved, and that there are certain men who daily vex thee, men of no judgement, of no spirit, void of shame, making a perpetual noise, and excessively troublesome; Tailors, Fishermen, Butchers, Cooks, silly women, con dently argue about the chief heads of Religion, meddle with every thing, call all into question, deceive the simple, breed innumerable scandals. Doubtless if thou shalt (as we have said) imagine thyself to be in such a condition; a thousand to one, but thou wilt conceive that it is absolutely necessary to bridle so great licentiousness. But if thou shalt afterwards cast thine eye upon such places of Scripture as are commonly believed to arm the Magistrate against corrupters of religion, haply thou wilt much more be inclined so to think & to judge that such a course will be very pro table. He which conceives the doctrine commonly received to be true and sincere, and judges that it were wisely done for the preservation thereof, to put heretics to death: let him think with himself, that it may notwithstanding come to pass, that by little and little, while the pastors slumber, the doctrine may be corrupted, and the Church degenerate from her ancient piety. For as soon as the Church obtains some short peace and tranquillity, discipline is slackened by little and little, piety grows cold, and a wonderful forgetfulness of God and his Law creeps into the minds of men: which ingratitude since God cannot let go unpunished, he withdraws his Spirit, and gives freer scope unto seducers, by whose craft and subtlety it comes to pass, that, though the same doctrine seem to remain, yet it is by degrees changed and corrupted; now, where it is grown into an use to decide controversies in Religion by the sword, whatsoever doctrine in time to come shall be commonly received, whosoever shall oppose that doctrine, be it right or wrong, he shall be accounted an heretic; and what ever texts of Scripture or arguments he shall allege for himself, the hangman must be the only man that shall answer all. And so it will come to pass, that look what formerly was a just severity, will be turned into a monstrous and horrible cruelty. Imagine thyself therefore to have fallen into those times, wherein it is unlawful, for such as think aright, to oppose such errors as are commonly received and if they shall dare so much as to mutter in the least degree, the sword, the gallows, the faggot shall be at their heels: No place is allowed to plead their cause; and it shall come into thy mind, that such great tyranny had its original from the punishing of such as were heretics indeed; verily thou wouldst rather wish that no heretic had ever been punished, then that such tyranny should come into use. It is llkewise to be considered, how little ofttimes the success of putting heretics to death, answers the expectation of such as practise it. For when a man understands that he cannot safely publish his opinion, he will not discover the same at all times, in all places, or to every one he meets with: but he will rst try how they are a ected, he will by little and little insinuate himself, and if he nd himself mistaken in the party, he will make trial elsewhere. But if he sees, that ear is given to what he says, he will make his progress by degrees, until he be wholly possessed of the party's mind; and thus will he practise with a second, and a third; and such as shall he make companions of his error, those commonly he will make his partners in spreading the same abroad, corrupting others, and propagating the sect; so that before the Magistrate shall come to hear that one is seduced, sometimes a great part of the people is misled, and the wound become almost incurable. And since these things are done privately, not so much as those that are over the Crhurch can use the remedies proper to them, viz. the power of the Word: for though they hear some rumours, yet can they not distinctly understand what is done; what Arts the seducers use, with what arguments they press their tenets, no man can relate. For, such as ean, neither will nor dare; they that would, know them not, and for the most part relate only their own suspicions or ctions: and suppose the Pastors have some grounds to proceed upon; forasmuch as they are exceedingly hated by those whom they should heal, and looked upon as tyrants, all their labour is lost, especially if (as is commonly seen) sharp language and reproaches shall be added. Moreover, when Pastors shall place their hope of prsereving their doctrine, and resisting heretics by the sword, and shall not see any great need of learning to that intent, they addict themselves to idleness, and so by degrees a general ignorance followeth: so that Satan may afterwards easily obtrude any superstitions and errors. Neither is it lightly to be passed over, that forasmuch as it is commonly the lot of godly persons to su er persecutions, reproaches and a ictions for religions sake, hereby, as by a most manifest token, especially if with a courageous and cheerful mind they undergo them, and their conversation be unblameable, they do exceedingly justify their cause with simple people; whiles on the contrary part, those from whom they su er such things, can hardly avoid the imputation of great injustice and tyrannical cruelty. By which means it comes to pass, that many are daily exasperated, con rmed in error, and rendered wholly incurable. For we have too many examples before our eyes, which if any man shall diligently weigh, verily he will nd small cause much to desire the use of the sword, for the extirpatioh of heresies. In a word, that thy judgement may be pure and sincere, thou must bring thyself to such a pass, as not to desire it may be so, rather than so: but this alone, which way soever the matter fall, which side soever prevail, that such tenets may be established, as are agreeable with God's Word, and make for his glory.

Certain it is, that seducers were by the old Law punished with death, and in case any City should be drawn from the right worship of God to worship idols, the Law commanded that that City should be destroyed and burnt up, never to be built again. But some suppose that Law was of force only until Christ, and that it ought not to take place under the New Testament: the ground of their conjecture being this, that the Israelitish nation was a type of the Christian Church, and that they had promises of earthly sensible things, such as were of use in this life, and that their sacri ces were of the same strain, and in a word, all their services: which nevertheless did signify things invisible appertaining to eternal life. Which being so, they collect, that that corporal punishment was likewise a type of eternal damnation; and that therefore this law, with all others ordained to gure out things to come, had an end at the coming of Christ: Which conjecture seems to me so probable, that I should not tell how to reject it, did not the reason, in the Law set down, oppose the same. For thus it is in the Law: that all Israel hearing, may fear, and do no more so for the future. Which reason, truly, is always of force: so that though the Law itself be expired, yet the Magistrate hath as much authority to make another to the same purpose, as he hath authority to make laws against murderers, adulterers, and other criminal o enders. Howbeit, the words of our Lord seem to persuade the contrary, where he propounds the parable of the tares. For to the servants demanding whether they should go and pluck up the tares, the householder is said to have answered, that they should not go, lest gathering the tares, they should pluck up the Wheat. Which place whiles some interpret one way, and some another, we may perceive how great a di erence there is between gathering of testimonies of Scripture to establish an opinion which a man hath already xed in his mind, and to make use of them merely for the clearing of the truth. Now, the way to nd out the truth, were, if when thou hast found an exposition which seems to make for thy opinion, thou shouldest assume the person of the party dissenting, and diligently consider what might be said against it, and not presently applaud thyself in thine own exposition. Hence it would come to pass, that those which dissent should not always descent, but such as err would at last give way to them that judge aright. But for the most part, we care more for Victory then Truth. And forasmuch as the solution of the question in hand seems wholly to consist in the exposition of this text; we must beware again and again lest interest blind our eyes, and that we bestow not less time and study in the examination thereof, than the cause requires. That exposition truly which those give, which say, that Christ doth not here exclude all rigour, but that he shows, such evils are to be su ered, which cannot without some great mischief be corrected; seems not suitable to the words of the Housholder: for he doth not say, Come on, go your ways and do it, but take heed lest with the tares you pluck up the Wheat; but he absolutely forbids them to meddle in the business: and wills that both the tares and the wheat should grow until the harvest. Whence it appears that great violence is o ered to the words by such an exposition. Neither do they seem to expound those words more tly, who a rm that they are to be understood of the universal purging of the Church, which our Lord would have deferred till the day of Judgement; not forbidding, in the mean time, the purging of particular Churches. Neither do I think it requisite, we make any long enquiry, how truly the servants of the Housholder are said to mean the Angels; let us rather with attentive minds consider what ●t is which is forbidden: Hence we shall soon see who they are that are forbidden. Clear it is, that the Wheat is the godly, the tares the ungodly; but whether all kind of ungodly persons, or some one sort of them, we shall see hereafter. And the eld is the world: To take therefore the tares out of the eld, is to kill the ungodly, to pat them out of the number of those that live in this world. But our Lord forbids that, and would have them grow with the Wheat until the time of harvest, and not separated till then. But (thou wilt say) he forbids the purging and cleansing of the whole eld, but not of particular Churches. Suppose then that men shall be so diligent in cleansing particular Churches, that none shall remain uncleansed, will not the whole become by that course cleansed? But thou deniest that that can be done: yet suppose it may; thou must of necessity grant, that when every particular Church shall be cleansed, the whole Church will be likewise pure, which being done before Harvest time, would cross the will of the Lord; forasmuch as, look what he would not have done before Harvest, he wils as little that it should be done by men, as by Angels. Now if so be any Magistrate shall go about to cleanse, not the whole Church which is not in his power, but that which he can, what other thing shall he do, but, as much as in him lies, resist the will of the Lord? And truly how small soever the part cleansed shall be, it will be a part of the whole; so that he that shall do herein what he shall be able, it may well be said, that if he might have had his will, the whole should have been purged. By all which it appears, that this exposition cannot be allowed. Others would have it, that it is only forbidden to pluck up the tares by war. But forasmuch as the words do as well express that way of plucking up the tares, when a particular person is censured and put to death, as that of plucking them up by war; he that would have the words of the Householder to be understood only of the former, bringing no sure reason why he so interprets, aught to be accounted a guesser rather than an expounder. For the words are to be taken according to their evident sense, unless some su cient reason do dissuade: so as if they be general, we must understand the speech to be general: if the Law distinguish not, we ought not to distinguish. How then shall we expound this Parable? Those words (sayst thou) Let both grow until the Harvest, cannot be understood according to the letter, that the wicked should be su ered to grow as much as the godly: So far you and I are agreed. For I see what absurdities would follow, if all the Magistrates authority, and all discipline were removed. Howbeit, plain it is, that a certain kind of ungodly persons are here intended, who though they may seem such as ought to be cut o , yet it is forbidden them to whom that work should belong, to cut them o . Now this cannot be understood of adulterers, thieves, and other agitious persons, since its manifest that Magistrates are ordained by God, and are his Ministers for the punishment of evil doers, neither do they bear the sword in vain: yea, though it should appear that he which hath committed adultery, murder, or other crime, were of the Wheat, by his notable repentance, the Magistrate is not therefore bound to spare him; neither truly will any man in his wits deny, but that monstrous wickednesses ought to be restrained by the avengement of the sword. And if so be the Parable cannot be meant of all ungodly persons, it is necessary that those whom it intent, sshould be by some note of di erence distinguished from all other. Now from whence may this di erence be rather taken, then from that thing wherein godly and ungodly persons do most di er one from another? But, what is that? Is it not in the doctrine of Religion? with respect whereunto the one sort is called pious, the other impious. But there are two, kinds of impious persons, for some are estranged from the true religion, both in name and in truth, as the worshippers of Idols, and the Turks, but especially Atheists: others, are in name and profession Christians, but in deed and in truth they are nothing so, their doctrine being corrupted with great and foul errors, which kind of persons we call Heretics. The former sort may again be divided into two parts. For some of them have never professed the Christian Religion others have Apostatised therefrom. Since therefore we are to distinguish men according to their religion, either we must hold that both these kind of ungodly persons are meant in the Parable, or that one is understood: that we should say both are understood, the words of the Parable give us little encouragement: for they speak of such seed as the enemy had sown among the Wheat: so that it is manifest they mean such kind of impious persons as converse among the godly, that is, the true Christians, and adorn themselves with the name of Christians, of which kind are Heretics. And this truly is very suitable to the nature of tares: for they say that these tares are nothing but Wheat or Barley corrupted by the over- moisture of the soil, and soaked with frequent rains; so that heresy could not have been set forth by a more t comparison: so that this speech is all one, as if the servants should have asked their Lord, whether or no they should kill Heretics, and take them out of the way. That this exposition is neither absurd, nor unsuitable, but rather the necessary interpretation of the place, I conceive every one will perceive, that weighs the words with no other desire but to nd out the truth. The Enemy is said to have sown his own seed amongst the good seed: among the seed (I say) which the Lord had sown. Now the word, Seed, is taken sometimes for that out of which any thing grows, (and this its proper acceptation: ) sometimes, but improperly, it is taken for that which grows out of the seed. The seed which the Lord sowed, to speak properly, was the Gospel which he preached, as it is taken in the Parable next before: but in a less proper expression, the seed are they that believed the Gospel. So the Devil's seed, speaking properly, are false doctrines scattered amongst Christians, improperly the Devil's seed are they who embrace false doctrines. Now, that the faithful are called the Lords seed, the ungodly the seed of the Devil, in respect of that seed from which their godliness and ungodliness springs, is clear, in as much as both the good and bad herbs are said to have grown up after the sowing of seed; and because the servants wondered how the tares or cockle sprang up, since there was none but good seed sown, & bad plants could not grow but from bad seed. So that it is manifest by what hath been said, that by the tares none but Heretics can be understood. The old Law then (wilt thou say) and its reason is abrogated, by this of our Lord. But what if, notwithstanding all that hath been said, both Laws may be still in force, and the latter derogate nothing from the former? It would (I suppose) seem very strange. But what if it may be so? And what is there that may be alleged why this exposition should not be received as true? Come on then, let us examine whether this Law may stand with that of the Old Testament, though it forbidden Heretics to be killed. Now against whom was the Old Law given? verily against such as either drew away others from the true God to worship Idols, or at least being seduced themselves, had forsaken him. But we do not term such o enders Heretics, but Renegadoes & apostates; there is in that law no mention of heretics But God (will you say) doth as much abhor that worship, which is not according to his own commandment, as he doth the worshipping of other gods. Very well; suppose it: What will you infer? Doth it thereby appear, that the law which was made against Apostates, must be executed against Heretics? An Heretic is not comprehended in the name or notion of an Apostate, neither is he mentioned in any other word of the Law. And if so be thou wilt needs draw the law to mean him, that canst thou not do from the proper force of the words: But (as Lawyers speak) by way of extension and large interpretation. But it would rst be known, whether every Law will admit of such extensions, and if not every one, which may admit of them, and wherefore or upon what ground; and whether or no in this Law those things are found, in regard of which an extension is to be made. Doubtless, if thou shalt accommodate the Law to that which the words do not signify; thou must do it only by a conjecture at the mind of the Lawgiver. But, with what Lawgiver art thou here to dealt? With such an one verily, as at whose mind to guess is the hardest thing in the world: So that all such conjecturing cannot but be very doubtful. And besides, since there is extant a general law, that forbids killing, we should not come to the shedding of blood by the authority and warrant of a doubtful law, but of one very clear and plain. And all this di culty would remain, though we could perceive no di erence between the case of an Apostate, and that of an Heretic. For we might justly suspect, that, though we could not see it, there might yet be a wide di erence. Neither should we run headlong to make an extension of a law to take away a man's life. But what, if there are not wanting large di erences by us discemable? For an Apostate, doth not only forsake the true worship of God, but refuses to give any credit to the Word of God: with an Heretic the Authority thereof remaineth rm: so that thou mayst nd other weapons wherewith to vanquish an Heretic, besides stones and swords; but other weapons wherewith to an Apostate, thou hast none. In which respect peradventure it was, that God would by the most grievous punishment terrify a man from all thought of forsaking his worship, and denying to give credit to his Word, and would not however that an Heretic should be subject to like penalty. Hereunto may be added, that the Church reaps no bene t by Apostates, but by Heretics much, especially in this particular, that by means of the godly are provoked more seriously and diligently to search the Scriptures, who would otherwise addict themselves to sloth, and by degrees become ignorant of all religion. But this is of greatest weight, that the Magistrate cannot be so mistaken, as to conceive that a man apostatizeth from the true religion, or solicits others to apostatise, that doth not so do; whereas he that errs not may easily seem to him to err, or he that errs but a little, may easily seem to him to err very grievously, which the many controversies even amongst the most learned, wherewith the Church is evermore exercised, do plainly prove. Now, when I say the Magistrate may err in such a case, I put no fault in the word of God, as if it were not clear and true, but in the Magistrate himself; in as much as he brings not such instruction, nor such a spirit to the interpretation thereof, as he ought to do. For how few of these men that exercise the o ce of Magistrates, though they profess the Gospel, do study the Scriptures as they ought to do? How few of them are eminent for piety and prudence? So that from them no other but a rash and injust judgement, in a matter of this nature, is to be expected? But, you will say, the question is not, whether every Magistrate have authority to proceed against such as he shall account for Heretics; but the question is of a truly pious and prudent Magistrate, and of such as are Heretics indeed. I hear what you say: But who is there bearing the sword, that will not be accounted godly, and that will not account for an Heretic whosoever thwarts him in matters of Religion? So that this will unavoydably follow, that, look what authority you allow a pious Magistrate against true Heretics, that will every Magistrate usurp against every one that shall dissent from him, be his judgement what it will be. For as much therefore as we have showed, that we might not safely make an extension of the Law, though we could observe no di erence between an Apostate and an Heretic: What shall be done now we see so much di erence? It is clear therefore from the premises, that the old Law remains in force, or that at least the like may be renewed, and yet Heretics are not to be put to death, forasmuch as the case of an Heretic, and the case of an Apostate are di erent.

But some may demand, whether or no it may then at least be just to proceed against an Heretic when being commanded to be silent, he shall notwithstanding go on to infect as many with his poison as he can? A question of great concernment, in the solution whereof to err will be of dangerous consequence, on which side soever the error light. For if it be the will of God that Magistrates should punish Heretics that seduce; the reason is, because it will make for the good of his Church, and for his own glory; so that if the Magistrate shall therein be negligent he will be liable to under-go severe punishment from God: But if it be the will of God, that they should not be punished, doubtless he hath weighty reasons why they should not: so that the Magistrate shall not cross his will without punishment. Wherefore it lies the Magistrate in hand to be very careful, that he go not about to guests at the mind of God by his own wit or judgement, but that he attain to the understanding thereof by a diligent search and discussion of God's Word. And since it is clear, that by the tares is meant Heretics, unless somewhat else had been added, besides the forbidding to kill Heretics, the true way of interpretation, accommodated to the ordinary manner of speaking, would manifestly require, that we should understand the Law (for so we would call the Householders forbidding to pluck up the Tares) to forbid the kill of Heretics as Heretics▪ or because they are Heretics. As, if the Law should forbid to kill a thief, we would understand, that the Law forbids that he should be killed for his theft. But in case any man, besides his being an Heretic, would teach contrary to the Magistrates command, the words of the Law so interpreted, would not seem to save him harmless; as in case a man should to his theft add murder, that law which forbids the putting a thief to death would not save him. But the reason and cause is added, why the Father of the Family wovid not have the tares plucked up, viz. left with the tares the wheat also should be plucked up▪ that is, lest with Heretics such should be killed as are not Heretics, but the sons of God. Out of this reason therefore, we must sh for the right interpretation of the Law. Now the most Interpreters conceive that the danger of the mistake in killing a child of God for an Heretic, lies here, in that he who is an Heretic to day, may hereafter, if he live, repent: and that this is the reason they are not to be killed; which opinion I conceive is well refuted by such as say, that if heed were to be taken unto such repentance, it ought to be as much respected in that old Law concerning Apostates, and such as draw men from the worship of the true God, as in this new Law. And since there was no consideration had of such repentance in the old Law, it is like there was none had in this. Whereunto may be added, that he that is to day an Heretic: If he be in the number of God's Elect, he cannot be put to death: but that all that is necessary to be known to salvation shall be revealed to him before: if he be none of God's Elect, there remains no hope of his repentance. So that this seems no just reason, why an Heretic should not be put to death. Now, unless there be a respect had unto the repentance of an Heretic, there is no other danger to be feared, but this, that the Magistrate may at one time or another, account him for an Heretic that is not an Heretic, either because not he but the Magistrate is in the error, or if he be in the error and not the Magistrate, the error is not so great that he ought therefore to be accounted an Heretic. And if this be that which the Housholder, viz. our Lord aimed at, verily he hath peremptorily declared that Magistrates are no t Judges of doctrines; and hath forbidden them to exercise any such jurisdict on. But if any man shall still contend, that respect was had to the repentance of the party erring, yet shall he not thereby be able to prove, that no consideration was had of that other reason, viz. the possibility of mistaking one that is no heretic for an heretic. The Law forbids heretics to be killed, lest that with the heretics be killed, such as are not heretics. By what way or means therefore soever it may come to pass that the one be killed in stead of the other, that way or means may be said to belong unto the Law, as a reason thereof. The Law speaks generally without distinction: so that hue ch will take upon him to distinguish, not having a manifest reason to warrant him; seems to be a guesser rather than an expositor, and cannot avoid the imputation of Rashness. For as much (I say) as the Law speaks generally without any distinction, it must be generally understood without making any di erence or distinction. He that shall take so much liberty unto himself, as rashly at his own pleasure to invent distinctions, cannot be said to expound, but by a cunning kind of cavillation to go about to evade the words of the Law. In which respect, and considering the premises, we must conclude, that whether the matter of repentance were considered or not; yet that there was regard had to that error of the Magistrate, whereby he might at one time or another put to death for heresy him that is no Heretic; and consequently, that judgements of this nature pertain not to the Magistrate, nor to any Men, but to the Son of God alone, who at the last day by his Angels will separate the tares from the wheat, and cast them into the Fire. Now, if so be the Magistrate be not a t judge to discern between him that is an Heretic, that he may kill him, and him that is not an Heretic, that he may spare him; how can he be t to judge between a su cient cause to make an Heretic, that is to say, an heretical tenet, so as that he may under a penalty forbidden the same to be taught, and an unsu cient cause or tenet not heretical, so as that he may allow the same? For what is it to know an heretic, but to know the cause which makes an heretic? What other thing is it to err in the knowing of an heretic; but to err in the knowledge of the causes for which men are to be accounted Heretics? But let us look into the business a little more narrowly. For it is certainly manifest from the words of the Householder, that he commanded his servants not to pluck up the tares, etc. that he gave this command not for the sake of the tares, but of that corn which through error might be taken for tares. For his will was (to speak plainly) that true Heretics should be spared, that by this means the safety of the true servants of God might be provided for. He denied unto pious & prudent Magistrates the power of punishing Heretics, lest by their example ungodly and Imprudent Magistrates should abuse the said power against the pious servants of God. For as much then as, that Law was made for the sake of God's pious servants, lest at any time by a perverse erroneous judgement, they should be put to death as Heretics: We must take heed how we allow of any such interpretation thereof; as that, whiles the Magistrate shall in all appearance be obedient unto the Law, the Lawgiver shall notwithstanding miss of his end for which he made the Law. But if so be, the Magistrate shall so interpret the Law, as to conceive, that he ought indeed to spare Heretics that keep their heresies unto themselves, and endeavour not to persuade others to embrace them; but that he ought to put them to death, if they will teach their errors; shall the safety of the godly be by this means provided for and secured? Surely no. For Laws of Magistrates with such a Proviso, as often as the truth shall, come to be called heresy, will be the death of God's servants: For to whomsoever the truth shall be by God revealed, he ought not to bury his talon in the earth, that is to say, he ought not by silence to dissemble the truth to him revealed: But Gods will is, that it should be acknowledged before the sons of Men and revealed. So that it cannot otherwise fall out, but that, if the Magistrate shall, account some good and faithful servant of God for an Heretic; he not withstanding any penalty denounced, will endeavour to persuade as many as he can, of the truth of that doctrine which the Magistrate accounts heresy. Whence it will come to pass, that whereas the Law was made for the good of such persons, none shall receive less advantage thereby then they. It must be concluded therefore, that this interpretation can be no ways agreeable to the intent of the Lawmaker, but rather that it is most contrary thereunto. Yet is it not my intent, that godly Magistrates should carry no stroke in the Kingdom of Christ: many other things there are, which they both may and aught to do: As to punish irreverent speeches against God, to punish such as forsake the whole Christian religion, and ●uch as dare to persuade others to forsake the same. If any external worships are set up, any Images erected, these they ought to abolish; to keep o the violence and injuries of impious persons from the heads of the godly; to maintain public peace and tranquillity, is their duty, and such like. But for them to assume unto themselves to be judges of the controversies of such men, as submit themselves to the Authority of God's Word, and make use of the Testimonies thereof; they shall do well to weigh seriously what it is which they assume, and how great a liberty they allow unto themselves. Some there are that suppose, in case the sword shall not be unsheathed, all Religion will soon be lost: how beit we shall much wrong our Lord, if we suspect that he is asleep, that he cares not at all for his people, or that he cannot preserve his own Gospel without the sword; as if the Word had no mettle or force, but that all a Christians hope were placed in the sword. For if, after that Satan by his enchantments had possessed the world, and himself was become Lord and Ruler; the power of God's Word was such, that it was able to cast Satan out of his strong and exquisitely-forti ed kingdom; shall it not be able to defend the Kingdom of Christ, against the blunted and broken darts of Satan? Let us be of good courage; our Lord doth not sleep but watch. If we shall put all our con dence in him, if we shall ght with his Word, if being acted by his Spirit (whom we must obtain by continual prayers) we shall diligently and prudently avoid all those policies of Satan, of which we have hitherto treated; verily there will be no cause why we should be afraid of heretics; let but truth warily enter the combat with Imposture, and she must of necessity at last obtain the victory. Wherefore, if there shall daily appear such as move new questions, raise new controversies, bawl at the Pastors, bark at them, and molest them: let them think thus with themselves: What is Satan's drift in all this? Sure he comes in opposition of the truth of the Gospel; but is that all he aims at? What if so be that this be his aim, and some other greater thing be also by him endeavoured? Namely (and that with thy assistance) that he may lay the foundations of such a tyranny, as he intends, when time shall be, to exercise against the servants of God, wholly to extinguish the Gospel with the professors thereof, and to make himself absolute Lord of the world. Come on then, what wilt thou that boastest of thy care of God's honour, do in such a case? Thou that pretendest so much to prise the truth of the Gospel, that wouldst be thought to regard nothing but the good of the Church of God? What wilt thou (I say) do in this case? Wilt thou go and join forces with Satan? wilt thou hire thyself to serve him, wilt thou supply him with tools, stones and mortar for his building? Wilt thou moil and sweat at the same work with the drudges and slaves of Satan? wilt thou in good deed, that thou mayst avoid some momentany short troubles, assist Satan to lay the Foundation of so great a mischief? what if this likewise be by him aimed at, even to wreath out of thy hands those weapons which he most dreads, and to put thee upon the use of such as he fears not a jot, yea, rather which he wholly contemns? Now, without all question, he cares not a rush for swords and such like terrible tooks; there is nothing which he more fears, and which he is less able to resist then the Word of God. But as soon as the Ministers shall have obtained thus much, that whosoever shall dare to mutter any thing against their doctrine, the Executioner shall presently be called for, which by his halter or Axe alone shall resolve all doubts, and untie all knots; what great study of the Scripture will they then use? Doubtless they will plainly perceive, that they have small need so to spend their time. For they shall be able to obtrude upon the poor silly people, any thing they can but dream of, and yet nevertheless maintain their dignity and reputation. Woe be to us and to our Posterity, if we shall cast away this weapon wherewith alone we are allowed to ght; wherewith ght we are always sure of victory. But such (will you say) is the troublesomeness and impudence of some persons, so insu erable, that they must of necessity be restrained with other kind of weapons, beside the Word. Shall I tell thee what I think of this speech of thine. It is just as if some soldier, presuming to excel all others in military valour, should say, that his enemy ghts so eagerly, so stoutly, that he must of necessity throw away his weapons, and become subject unto him. Oh gallant Soldier! What else, I pray you, is Satan's endeavour: what would he rather employ himself about, then to excite the wickedness of men, to provoke the servants of God, with the higest hand of provocation possible? Now, if they shall rigorously prosecute the work of Satan, shall we likewise do that which he most of all desires. This is it which Satan mainly endeavours, even to wrest away the weapon of the Word from us, and that we may descend into the lists against him, armed with such kind of Ammunition, as he slights and contemns. Shall we therefore, because Satan labours with might and main to this e ect, and brings into the eld the ttest soldiers for such a purpose: Shall we, I say, submit unto his will, and casting away those weapons wherewith alone we may win the eld; shall we catch hold of such weapons, wherewith we shall soon be put to the worse, and which will be turned to our own throats? Nay, but let us hold fast this weapon of the Word of God: Let us ght with this alone, herewith alone let us do our endeavour to slay Satan himself, and all his Emissaries. Let us endeavour to learn all the most convenient ways of striking and warding with this weapon; all the Arts of o ence and defence: Of which matter we have already su ciently discoursed.

