And, as it is a thing not appertaining to the Magistrate, to make himself Judge of doctrines, and to use violence towards the Teachers, much less does it belong to him to use such violence, at the discretion, and upon the judgement of others. As in case he should commit the care of Religion to certain persons, and be ready himself to draw the sword against whomsoever they shall persuade him, or should arm them to the same e ect. How well he will be able to justify his so doing to the King of Kings in that day, which will be very terrible to the wicked, and joyful to the godly, we may thus judge. Suppose thou thyself being a King, and to go into a far Country, shouldst commit the care of thy Kingdom, Household, and all thy a airs to the delity of one of thy servants; and he should delegate the administration of all to some other servants, such as came next to hand, of whose wisdom and faithfulness he had no assurance; yea, or to the ttest that he could choose; himself in the mean season being busied about matters of the smallest concernment; and when all were like to miscarry, he should su er the same course to be continued: when thou shouldest come home and take knowledge hereof; couldst thou possibly allow of the do of that servant of thine? For though thou shouldst nd all safe and well, wouldst thou not so account of that servant, as if all things had fallen out cross and contrary? But what if some very great damage, some shameful miscarriage had happened? Of how great punishment wouldst thou judge that servant to be worthy? And is not the Church of God God's Kingdom, his Inheritance, his Delight and Joy? Is not all the dignity and comeliness of the Church placed in the purity of her Doctrine, and the framing of her Worship, according to the Word of God? And what is there in the Administration of a Kingdom, which in comparison hereunto, is not a very light thing, and of no account? Go to then, how canst thou know that any man is of a right judgement in matter of Religion, so as that thou mayest safely commit thy sword unto his care and trust, unless thou thyself shalt rst of all declare, what is to be held therein. But if thou shalt commit a airs of such moment to their delity and discretion, whose inner parts thou dost not know: yea, if thou shalt commit them to whomsoever, and thyself mind other matters, what account wilt thou give of thine administration? Especially, if while thou shalt be naping, and nothing minding any such matter, pious doctrine shall be suppressed as impious, and impious doctrine shall be established for pious: so that thence will follow the slaughter of many godly persons taken for heretics, and the perdition of an innumerable company of people by false doctrine; which people the Son of God made such reckoning of, that he stuck not to lay down his life for them: how severe thinkest thou shall thy sentence be? verily this is my judgement: Whatsoever does any way concern the glory of God, be it, that the liberty of heretics in spreading false doctrines is to be restrained, or any other thing (as far as the nature of thy o ce may require or permit thee to act) that cannot be by thee omited without a great fault; yet will the fault be a thousand times greater, if thou shalt therein make use of another man's knowledge, rather than thyself to use all means possible to understand what ought to be done; and if thou canst not be satis ed in thine understanding, it will be, by much, the safest way to interpose no authority of thine in such a business, either by thyself, or by others. Now, by what more clear example could Magistrates possibly have been admonished, to con de in no man's judgement, than this, in that the Son of God himself by such negligence of the Magistrate, was given up to the judgement, or lust rather of his most unjust enemies? Take ye him (says Pilate) and according to your law judge him. Take heed thou think not thus with thyself: We live now in a most clear light of the Gospel: now the Pastors are most holy: now all is safe. What? shall we think that Satan snorts and sleeps? And to attempt nothing whereby to lay the foundation of some new Kingdom, whereby to erect some new tyrannies; to hatch some new Monsters? Now that is a known saying, That a small Error at the beginning, in the end comes to be of the rst magnitude: And inasmuch, as all things of this nature are of very great moment, whatsoever business shall o er itself, I would exhort the Magistrate, That he would by most fervent prayers ask counsel of him who can never deceive, and act nothing unless he were assured that he were in the right. And in case after all, he shall be of this judgement, to think he ought to prescribe what doctrines ought to be taught, and what not; he must at least be very wary, lest Satan do here gain upon him, either by making him to put his own opinion at such a distance from the Heretics, that while he shun Charybdis, he fall into Scylla; or to allow the Heretic somewhat which ought not to be granted; or to use such words and phrases, as may occasion some new doctrine, himself intending no such matter; or to establish that doctrine as necessarily to be believed, which himself hath by necessary consequence, to his thinking, drawn from the Scripture, there being, in the mean time, some error in his collection or inference. And to the end, that he may not incur any of those errors or the like, let him examine, how far he is assured of the truth of every point, by such ways as we formerly delivered. Furthermore, it seems to me an excellent Caution, That whatsoever shall be laid down as agreeable to the Word of God, may be expressed with the same words and phrases which the Spirit of God uses in the Scriptures. Otherwise, it is almost impossible, but that the wit of man will intrude some thing of its own; which if it do, an error is committed almost incurable. And heed must be taken, that the Heretic be not declared to hold, or prohibited to teach any other thing, than what he holds and teaches for the avoiding of such inconveniences as we have before recounted. One thing there is, which verily I could never understand but to be altogether void of reason; That he who is thought to have taught something false and impious, should be forced to recant, which if he do, he shall not be punished. To what purposed, I pray you, serves this practice? What good is there gotten; if for the avoiding of punishment, against his conscience, an heretic shall recant his opinion? There is only one thing that may be alleged for it, viz. That such as are possessed with the same error and unknown perhaps, will do the like in their own hearts, yea, will counsel others to do the same. That opinion must needs have a very light impression, which can so easily be plucked out of men's minds. Have we no reason to suspect, that such a recantation is rather for fear of punishment, then from the heart? Will there not rather much heartburning by this means arise, if the Magistrate shall seem not only to kill the body, but to plot the ruin of the soul? Are we indeed so ill furnished with weapons to vanquish errors, as to be forced to defend ourselves with a lie, to put our trust in Recantations feigned through fear? But some may say: This is not that which we desire, to force men to any kind of Recantation; but that an heretic may acknowledge his error not so much with his mouth, as with his heart: this were excellent indeed, if thou couldst bring him to it. But what work is there for threats or blandishments in this case? These have some power indeed to prevail with the will. But thy business is with the Understanding, it is changed neither by threats, nor atteries or allurements. These cannot cause that, what formerly seemed true, should now seem false, though the party may very much desire to change his judgement. Which if it seem a new and wonderful thing to thee: I shall not need many Arguments to convince thee of the truth thereof. You suppose, that a man may change his judgement when he will, without any new reason to persuade him to think otherwise: I deny that he can so do. Make you therefore an experiment upon yourself, and see if you can for the least space of time draw yourself to think otherwise then you do in the question between us, so as to make yourself believe as I do, That a man cannot change his judgement when he pleases: without question you shall nd that you cannot do it. But take heed you mistake not an imagination for a persuasion; for nothing hinders, but that thou mayest imagine what thou wilt. I pray thee likewise to consider again, That in case thou fear any thing, as for example, lest some business may not have a good issue, lest something should come to pass much against thy mind, so that thou canst not sleep for the trouble thereof: thou need but change thine opinion concerning such a thing, so as to hope that all will be well, and thy trouble shall be at an end. O most easy and ready medicine, to take away the greatest part of that trouble of mind which men sustain in this life! O short Philosophy! If whatsoever evil a man shall fear may betid him, he may believe (if he will) that it will not come to pass: whatsoever molests a man because he takes it to be evil (when as ofttimes there is no evil in such a thing; ) he may persuade himself when he pleases, that it is not evil. But experience shows that none of these things can be done. Wherefore, if an heretic cannot, though he would, cast away his error, unless reason compel him: why trouble you the poor wretch, to make him lie, and so to o end God, yet more and more? Verily, it cannot be denied, but this was the devil's invention, whereby he might compel the servants of God, for fear of punishments to renounce Christ. So that I wonder some men could not perceive as much, though otherwise wise enough. How much better would it be, in case there were no question, but that a man might be put to death for matter of Religion; to deal with him according to Law, whether he recant or recant not, neither to invite him, so much as by a word, to a Recantation, any otherwise then that he may be won to the truth, and his soul saved: which also were to be done not by threatenings, allurements, or through hope, but by the power of Scripture and Demonstrations.

But as for the authority of the Magistrate, herein it is most necessary, not to su er immodesty, or delight to rail and reproach, to escape unpunished, in whomsoever they shall be found. If a man must needs hear a reproach, let him hear it where he may make answer, and judicially defend himself; otherwise, the life and name of a man, his conversation and reputation, aught to be out of the danger of any man's tongue, or pen. If there be controversies in Religion, let them contend on both sides with Scriptures and Arguments, but let the Magistrates look to it again and again, that they may under a penalty abstain from whatsoever may tend to provoke one another. This, if they shall do, they shall both render the Church very quiet, and obtain great praise from all discreet persons. And thus much shall su ce to have spoken of that change of judgement, concerning the doctrine of Religion, in which, they that have embraced errors, know indeed that they have altered their judgement, but think withal, that they have altered to the better; only, the adversaries know that it is to the worse part. We shall now discourse, how it may come to pass, that the true doctrine may be adulterated, and we never observe so much: and by what means we may prevent the same. 4. Satan's Cabinet Counsel. The ## BOOK IV The Argument. HOw Doctrine may be corrupted, and yet no change appear. The needless multiplication of doctrines caused through the curiosity of Teachers, is a great means: so is the negligence and ignorance of the people, trusting too much to their Pastors. A double Caution to be used: That no change be made in Doctrine, when it is pure: That in case any change happen, it may be discovered. An excellent way to keep doctrine pure, is to avoid all curious and vain questions; to have the scope of Religion always in our eye; and to express the doctrine thereof in the phrase of Scripture. To discover whether there hath been a change made, we must compare the doctrine of our times, not with that of our Predecessors and Ancestors, but with the doctrine taught in the times of the Apostles. Man would always seem more wary and wise than God, in expressing the points of Religion. The people must frequently be admonished, That the care of Religion, and reading the Word, belongs not to Pastors alone, but to every one that intends to be saved. The restoring of that ancient custom prophesying, one by one in the Congregation, would be an exce●●● means to discover corruption of Doctrine. Objections against the use of prophesying answered. If prophesying were restored, there would be less need of such mercenary Teachers, as make a trade of the Ministry. This practice of prophesying was used in the Jewish Church. Our Lord, at twelve years of Age, was su ered to teach among the Doctors, having no O ce, and unknown, by the privilege of prophesying. The use of prophesying was continued in Christian societies, till the time of Constantine at the least. How prophesying aught to be regulated. Every one ought to submit to the judgement of the Congregation, and how far. Whether Councils are to be called, and what Authority they have. They may not make new Laws, nor institute new Worships. Men are not bound to submit to their determinations in matters under dispute: Yet there is use of them. An Objection answered. The di erence between the Councils of the Apostles, and of those that pretend to succeed them. The determination of a Council must not rashly be rejected. Who ought to sit in Councils.

WHen the Doctrine of Religion shall be depraved; that yet no change be discernible, there are many causes; of which some are in the doctrine itself, others in the manner of the mutation: Some respect those which teach, others those which are taught. In the doctrine itself, there seem to be these: First, that it is an heap, as it were, of many things very unlike one to the other, like so many grains, so that a change may be made by the smallest parts. For look, as if out of some great heap thou shalt daily take certain grains, and put others in their rooms, the heap will seem to continue as it was, though by little and little it be changed, and begin to be another kind of heap from what it was; even so, forasmuch as the doctrine of Religion consists of many sentences and doctrines very unlike one to the other, though conspiring together, and tending to the same end: Whiles now this doctrine, now that, shall be changed and corrupted, the body of doctrine itself (that I may so speak) seems to retain the same gure, though it be not indeed the same, but in part altered. Yea verily, one only sentence may be of such weight, that it being depraved and altered, though no such thing appear, the whole doctrine of Religion may notwithstanding be by that means corrupted: Forasmuch as without that sentence, all the rest of the doctrine may become unpro table, and of no value. Such an one is that sentence, that, By the blood of Christ alone shed for us, and his sacriﬁce oﬀered for our salvation upon the Cross, all our sins are expiated; which sentence, if thou shalt so change, as to say, That our sins are done away by the merits of our good works, or the intercession of Saints, of a Christian doctrine, thou wilt make one altogether Antichristian. Neither is the doctrine of Religion, in regard that it consists of divers unlike parts, subject to secret mutation, only by changing and depraving the sentences as we have said, but also by adding some sentences, and taking away others. I do not say, that this depravation can be made secretly in such manner, as to corrupt the Scriptures. For if that were done, the deceit would be manifest: But that in speaking and writing, false sentences may be uttered instead of true, and depraved sentences instead of such as are incorrupt. Now by how much the heap shall be greater, by so much the harder it will be, in case there shall be a change, to observe the same. In which respect, the enlargement of the doctrine helps much to hid any mutation in the same. Now the doctrine of Religion is enlarged, whiles it is variously handled, whiles it is drawn forth into many di erent questions, which sprout one out of another, and are propagated in nitely. The cause of which mischief is the overgreat curiosity of men, their rashness, arrogance and ambition; with which diseases of the mind being madded, we must print and publish whatever we dream of. Yea verily, if we want matter to write, we unrip other men's discourses, and sew them together after a new fashion; and had rather do that which is done to our hand, then be thought to do nothing. Now this is a thing which tends much to the hiding of corruption of doctrine, when as those false sentences which shall be put into the place of the true, shall have the appearance and show of truth, though indeed they are far from any acquaintance therewith. Which is occasioned divers ways. The rst is, when some true sentence in Scripture shall be expressed in such words, as admit divers interpretations, which cannot all be true, and another sentence shall be composed, agreeable to those words misunderstood; for by this means, while a very di erent thing is spoken, the same thing which is in the Text, seems to be said without any change. In like manner, when a Text is gurative, so that one thing is meant indeed, another thing seems to be meant, and a man shall take it in the seeming sense without any regard to the gure. As if a man should say, That in case any man's sight be an occasion of sinning, he ought to pluck out his eyes, and wholly bl●nde himself, because it is written, If thine eye shall oﬀend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee. For these words do at the rst sight seem to say as much, whereas their sense is very di erent, viz. Whatsoever may slacken or stop a man's progress in the way of the Gospel, he ought to abandon that thing forthwith; for that it is better to be without that thing then being thereby hindered in such a course, to lose the Kingdom of Heaven, and to be adjudged to eternal tortures. In like manner; if, when the meaning of a Text shall be according to the letter, the words are so expounded, as if they meant otherwise. As is practised upon these words, Go and show thyself unto the Priest, from which, this sentence is drawn, Every man must confess his sins to a Priest. Another means whereby a false sentence seems to be true, is, when in the true sentence there is somewhat contained, either expressly or implici ely, and the false sentence shall be expressed in such terms, as exclude that thing so contained. (The thing we speak of, so contained, is either an exception, or a condition, or a circumstance, or some explanation. ) Or some condition or exposition, suiting not with the Text, shall be added. Those words of the Apostle, have questionless an exception or a condition, Be not deceived, neither whoremongers, nor idolaters shall attain the Kingdom of Heaven, for we must understand that condition, unless they repent. Now if any man should say, That the sin of uncleanness could not be pardoned, he should speak that which were agreeable to the words indeed, but far from the scope and purpose of that Text. In l●ke sort, those words of Solomon need an exposition, The condition of man and beast is the same, as these did, so do they, both die alike, neither is a man better than a beast. Now the exposition to be understood is, that thus it is not absolutely, but for aught which a man's reason can observe to di erence them. Which exposition being excluded, he that shall press the words of Solomon, shall pluck up all Religion by the roots. Those add unto the true sentence of Scripture, who say, That those shall obtain eternal life, who believe that their sins are forgiven for Christ's sake, provided they shall recount all their sins unto the Priest, and obtain absolution from him. He changes somewhat of the true sentence, who says, That the Law is therefore holy, because the knowledge thereof makes a man holy: for it is not therefore holy, but because it makes a man to despair of his own strength, and brings him unto Christ, the only means of salvation, and because it shows what things please or displease God; to the end, we may worship him, not after our own inventions and constitutions, but according to his command. A third means, whereby a false sentence is thrust into the doctrine of Religion, appearing to be true only, instead of that which is true indeed, is, when from some true sentence a false one is by a wrong inference collected, which collection shall be used in place of the true one, from which it was drawn. So, when the Bishop of Rome hath gathered out of those words, Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever shall be loosed by thee on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: this sentence, That he hath power to make new laws, and to constitute new heads of doctrine, or as they call them, new articles of Faith, and to compel men to keep and observe the one, and to believe the other: This collection or inference of his, he makes account of, as of a sentence of Scripture. Now there is a kind of false inferences or collections, very hidden and obscure; forasmuch, as they are partly drawn from suppositions, which are neither expressed, nor perhaps once thought of by the collectors; yet are such collections admitted without any question, even as if they did arise out of most certain and clear grounds. This may be seen in that collection we last named: For, that it may be infered, That power to make laws was given to Peter, it is requisite, that the word bind should signify to make laws: For so you shall rightly collect; to bind is to make laws, power of binding is given to Peter, and consequently of making laws: In like manner you may collect; to lose, is to repeal laws: now power to lose, was given to Peter; therefore, power to abrogate laws was given to him. And since it is said, Whatsoever thou shalt bind and whatsoever thou shalt lose, it will follow, that Peter may make or revoke what laws he please; yea the Ten commandments he may abrogate, if he think t: Again, That all this may appear to belong to the Pope: another supposition must be made, viz. Whatsoever authority was given to Peter, the same is given to the Roman Bishop; since therefore Peter had authority given him to make or abrogate what laws he please, the same authority is given to the Roman Bishop. But this conclusion is infered, without any mention of those suppositions; That to bind, and to lose, is to make, and revoke laws; and that Whatever authority was given to Peter, is given to the Bishop of Rome. Neither is every man able to mark in the making of such collections, what that is which is omited and passed over with silence, as out of all question true, though it be indeed as false as false may be. Furthermore, easy it is for any to understand, That the obscurity of sentences or doctrines of Religion, is a cause, that if any mutation be made, it cannot easily be discerned. Now the obscurity of Christian doctrine, springs from these grounds. First, because it handles the things of the spirit, and therefore cannot be understood without the spirit: which spirit being wanting, though there be a great corruption of doctrine, yet can it not be discerned. Another ground is, because, being written in one tongue, we are forced to learn it in another tongue, into which it is not very aptly translated. And although a man should give himself to study the Hebrew and Greek; yet seeing they are not now used by any Nation, but have their Being only in Books, he will never be able to learn them so perfectly, but that the proper signi cation and various use of many words and phrases, will be hid from his knowledge. Howbeit, this obscurity we speak of, is not so great, but that where some portion of the Spirit is present, those things at lest which are necessary to be known for salvation, may easily be understood. And so much for the causes of not discerning a change in doctrine, which are in the doctrine itself; we are now to handle such Causes as are in the manner of the change.

Now the manner of the change makes it undiscerned, for as much as the change is made by little and little, for, if so be, as we said before, out of some great heap of grain, every day some few grains should be taken, and as many of another sort be put in the room of them, who could be able to discover the mutation? Who is able to discern how much it is that a boy grows daily, or how much a man declines and waxes old? Now the very selfsame thing is to be seen in the mutation of doctrine: for we shall have a man, to day suppose, who if he make no other change, will at least invent some general name, for to call such things by, as agree in nature or in some common reference or respect: which name will be afterward applied to things very di erent, and it shall by this means come to pass, that the nature and notion of the former things will be obscured: thus did they that rst called the holy washing, and the Supper of our Lord, Sacraments. What hurt could any one so much as suspect from so small a matter? Howbeit, in process of time, there were those, who supposing that any sacred and holy rite was intended by the term Sacrament, began to give that name to laying on of hands, Marriage, Penitence, Con rmation, Extreme Unction: Whence it is come to pass, that Baptism, and the Supper, having a name common to them, with other things of much di erent nature; their true notion is rendered, dark and obscure. For there remained with the general name, a notion in like manner general and common to those other things: whereas, the proper notion, which ought ever to be kept in mind, is forgotten. Hence also it came to pass, that as it was manifest, that baptism and the Supper were ordained by our Lord: So was it commonly believed, that all those other things termed Sacraments, were in like manner by him instituted. At length Bells began to be baptised: which practice, what else did it, but occasion the simple people to think, that the baptism of men was of the same importance with that baptism they saw practised upon the Bells; whereby, the memory of the washing away of sins by the blood of Christ, signi ed by the washing with water, was abolished? Now, this makes much to hid the cozenage and deceit, when there is a colourable pretence: So as the innovators may seem not to bring in any new thing; but to desire the preservation of doctrines, received by some weak ceremony and observation. Wherefore, when the rst Christians, or rather those which succeeded the rst, growing very remiss, in respect of their former heat of piety (which is commonly seen when men cease to be exercised by a ictions) and so growing less frequent in the exercise of breaking of bread: some one peradventure there was who judged it a very good course, that the Priest at least, should frequently receive the bread and wine in the presence of the multitude: and by so doing, celebrate the memory of the Lords death: for as much as it would be all one in a manner, as if the bystanders had all of them communicated and participated thereof. In which practice, truly a man would not think there was any innovation, but only a care showed to preserve so wholesome an ordinance of our Lord from growing quite out of use, which being grown into a custom; forasmuch as it was done wholly to commemorate that sacri ce which our Lord o ered for us upon the Cross, and the term of Priest was not wanting, it gave occasion to some, to attribute the name of the thing signi ed to the thing signifying, so as to call this performance now no longer the commemoration of a sacri ce, but a sacri ce itself. Afterward, when it had obtained the name of sacri ce, who will wonder that it began to be accounted a sacri ce? And so whiles every day there was innovation made, yet inasmuch as it was little which was changed, and some very goodly pretext was ever in readiness, the innovation could not be perceived; so that at length, the most plain and simple institution of our Lord, concerning breaking of bread, was by a wonderful metamorphosis changed into that most pompous and laborious business of the Mass. And who so shall diligently consider, will easily observe that the like hath happened touching all other points. In those that are the Teachers, in case they corrupt any point, the main cause why such their corruption is not discerned, is the great opinion which men have of their piety, holiness, and learning, and their being thought to stand very much a ected to the doctrine received. Now such an opinion as this with the people, a man attains, either by giving some eminent proof of himself, or by the testimony of such men as are of greatest repute, or by right, as it were, of inheritance. He gives a good proof of himself, who does acutely and uently discourse of matters divine, and by often citing the Scriptures, and to good purpose, shows himself well versed in such studies: but especially, if he show himself an eager opposer of such doctrines as the people abhor, and a great honourer and reverencer of such persons, as the people highly account of: Now the testimonies of men approved beget a good opinion in the people, because men are persuaded, That in regard of their gravity and prudence, they will witness nothing, but that whereof they have a certain knowledge, whereas notwithstanding it is very often seen, that by simulation, attery, and other arts, the overgreat facility of good men is so overcome, and wrought upon, as that they may be brought to commend such persons, of whose piety and learning they have small knowledge. In the mean time, however their testimonies are drawn from them, yet the simple common people do yield thereunto no less credit, then if they were oracles. Some men gain a good opinion of themselves, as it were by right of inheritance, when as they succeed in place, such persons whose life and doctrine have been very much approved of. For it seems a likely thing, That none but good men should be put into the place of good men, and so the reputation of honesty and learning is transfered from the one to the other, even as inheritances pass from the Father to the children. Nevertheless, even as those who from a low and mean estate, have by great labours and di culties attained great wealth, leave their children, heirs of their goods indeed, and all their possessions, but not of their industry and wit; forasmuch, as being born in the midst of wealth, they nd no need to exercise their wit: even so those men who are at certain seasons, stired up by the providence of God to purge the Church from errors, since they cannot but be exercised with great and knotty di culties, they must be of necessity armed with very excellent virtues, and so become famous; whereas their successors, matters being reduced into order and composed, and Satan dealing now no longer by force, but by craft and policy (which they are not aware of) they meet with no considerable occasions to exercise their piety and prudence. Yet nevertheless, though they be far inferior in virtue, yet in outward appearance, as they hold the place of their predecessors, so do they retain their dignity and reputation: and by how much the farther you descend from those rst, so much the more unlike shall you nd their successors, and the more estranged from their virtues. And forasmuch as the same or greater authority abides, with very little piety, prudence, learning, and hearty diligence; who sees not, how easily it may come to pass, That they may daily, through unskilfulness, corrupt many points, and no man discern the same by reason of their authority and reputation? And to the end, that such like Pastors may by little and little be brought into place, by whose means, Satan hopes to procure a greater and speedier corruption of doctrine; it is a great furtherance, if so be such things shall be annexed to Ecclesiastical Functions, as shall make them much to be desired: as for Pastors to be highly esteemed of, to have all men rise unto them, and give them place; if they shall be well accommodated and live in abundance of wealth; if they shall be accounted such as ought to censure all, and themselves not to be questioned, without impiety and wickedness. For who is there that would not exceedingly desire to be in such a condition? So that in case there be these allurements and the like, as soon as any place shall be vacant, take heed of thinking that some excellent person shall obtain the same: he will soon obtain it, that does best know how to beat the bush that can sue for it with greatest art. A good and godly man, though he conceive he may honestly seek it, as minding only the glory of God, and not his own honour or pro t; yet for this cause he will not sue for it, forasmuch as those that are truly pious, being most of all conscious of their own weakness, which is always great enough, have a modest opinion of themselves, and account themselves inferior almost to every one. And if so be the times prove yet so good, as that o ces are bestowed, not upon those that hunt after them, but upon choice and quali ed persons: yet shall not the best men, even at such a time, always meet with best quarter. Inasmuch as men void of all craft, and enemies to all bad arts, taking more pains to be good indeed, then to seem to be so, are easily in the gaining of an estimation of holiness, out- striped by crafty fellows, ambitious of honour and dignity. For they will not so cunningly hid their own in rmities, they will take more pains to be rid of, then to hid their vices, they will not use any policies to procure the favour of men. He that is ambitious of honour, will most carefully hid all his vices: he will most diligently addict himself to whatsoever he understands those men do most approve of who are able to promote him; and will never leave until, by simulation, dissimulation and attery, he have gained their approbation to the full. And by this hidden and more cunning and painful kind of suing, sometimes wicked persons prevail as much, as they could do, were they allowed to use an open and free trade.

It remains, that we speak of such causes of the not perceiving, that a change of doctrine is introduced, as consist in the persons that are taught. Now they are chief two, carelessness and ignorance. Carelessness for the most part ariseth hence, In that the people trust too much to their Pastors; and persuade themselves, that they will not slip into any error, and that therefore they have small need to have an eye over them, but that they are bound rather to embrace whatsoever they shall hold forth, without any curious examination. Hereunto may be added many other businesses, whereunto men addict themselves: For that saying is of large extent, Where men's treasure is, there is their heart, and that other, No man can serve two masters. Now, how it may come to pass that after a people hath once had a great knowledge of divine Truths, the said knowledge may as it were vanish away, besides that cause which hath been even now alleged, we shall in another place make discovery of some other reasons. We shall for the present add only this one; That the people themselves are in a perpetual kind of mutation, some daily dying and departing, others succeeding and growing up in their stead. Whence it comes to pass, That since the change which is made in every age, is small, either the people cannot perceive it; or if they do observe it, yet they esteem it not of such moment, as to think t to move any di erence thereabout. This thing also is of very great force, to keep the people from taking notice of a change in doctrine; when men shall persuade themselves, that they are not able to judge of matters of Religion, as though it is, it is not, and other words used in Scripture, do not signify the same which they do in common discourse, or as if nothing could be understood, without some great knowledge in the Tongues and Arts or Sciences, and as if the power of the Spirit were of no e cacy without these helps. Whereby it comes to pass, that whiles they think they understand not even those things which in some sort they do understand, being expressed in most clear and evident words; they do at length arrive to that blockishness, that they cannot understand them indeed; so that, though they have before their eyes a sentence of Scripture so clear, that nothing can be more evident; yet if they to whose authority they in all things subject themselves, shall say any thing point-blank opposite thereunto, they will give credit unto them, and imagine themselves not to see that which they see as clear as the light. And by these means verily it comes to pass, That when the doctrine of Religion is corrupted, the mutation is not discovered: Furthermore, when the doctrine is once begun to be changed, it must needs be, that out of one error another should spring, and propagate in nitely; and God, for just reasons of his own, blinding them, men bring upon themselves so great darkness, and slip into such foul errors; That if God out of mercy open a man's eyes, and let him see those errors he lives in, he can scarcely believe himself, or be persuaded that he was ever enveloped with such blind errors. Which thing is as true, and as well to be seen in men of greatest learning and experience. If thou shalt thoroughly peruse the writings of some of the Schoolmen (as they call them) thou shalt in some places meet with so much acuteness, as will make thee admire. Thou shalt see them oftentimes cleave a ne thread into many parts, and accurately anatomise a ea, and a little after fall so foully, and avouch such absurdities, That thou canst not su ciently stand amazed; wherefore we must obey that advice of the Poet.

Principiis obsta, serò medicina paratur, Cum mala per long as invaluêre moras. Resist betimes; that Medicine stays too long, Which comes when age has made the grief too strong. Now there is need of a double Caution: viz. That there be no change made in the doctrine, when it is pure: And if any change be made, that there be notice taken of it. Now look what change is made in this kind, all the blame is laid upon those whose o ce it is to instruct the people; for though themselves are the authors of the change, yet will the people impute it to the Ministers sleepiness, and want of care at least. It concerns therefore the Pastors and Teachers to be Eagle-eyed, and to be very well acquainted with those causes, whereby the change of doctrine becomes undiscovered, and to have them at their nger's ends, and to be wary, that on no hand they may miscarry. Now it will be an excellent caution for the keeping of doctrine pure, if they shall avoid all curious and vain controversies: If they shall set before their eyes, the scope and end of all religious doctrine, and likewise a series or catalogue of all such things, as make to the attainment of that end (of which we formerly spoke; ) if they shall a ect not only the matter itself, but also the words and phrases which the holy Ghost in Scripture makes use of, and exceedingly suspect all di erent forms of speaking. Not that I would have them to speak nothing but Hebraisms▪ for so their language would not be plain nor intelligible; but I wish that they will shun all such expressions, as have been invented by overnice disputants, beyond what was necessary to express the sense of the Hebrew and Greek, and all those tenets which men by their own wits do collect and infer from the Scriptures. Now of what concernment this will be, we may gather by this instance: The Papists think it one and the same thing to say, The Church cannot err; and to say in the words of our Lord, Wheresoever two or three shall be gathered together in my name, there will I be in the midst of them. Yet is the di erence very great, which may thus appear; forasmuch as in case any one shall conceive the Church to be the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops anointed by the Pope: he hearing the aforesaid sentence, will judge, that whatsoever they shall decree, aught to be of force. But if he shall rather mind the words of our Lord, and shall consider that those kind of men, do regard nothing but their own commodity, wealth and dominion; he will be so far from so understanding them, that peradventure not being able to allow the deeds and practices of these men, he will come to hope from those words, That if himself with some other good men loving God with their whole heart, shall come together, and unanimously implore the assistance of God, shall be better able to determine what it is that aught to be believed and practised for the attainment of salvation, then if they should persist to put their con dence in such Pastors. Now this rule, That the words of the Scripture ought to be used rather than any other, is then especially to be observed, when any thing is delivered as a certain and tried truth, or as a rule of faith or life, or out of which any other thing is to be inferred. For in expositions and explanations, as there is need haply of greater liberty, so is there less danger if it be taken. For, when as the word of God, and the exposition thereof, are at one and the same time both together in view, as it were; there no man can be ignorant, that the exposition is the word of man, so that he may reject it, in case it seem impertinent. And look by what means a man may hinder the doctrine of Religion from being changed, by the self same he may nd whether it be changed or no. Now every man ought to compare the doctrine of that age wherein he lives, with no other doctrine then that which was out of question spotless, which is the doctrine of the Apostles. Wherefore, notwithstanding that in our age the Gospel is as it were revived, yet ought not any man thus to think, That he ought to examine whether the Gospel hath lost any of that purity whereunto it had at this time arrived; he ought rather to look again and again, whether some corruption do not yet remain, whether it be not in some part, as yet not su ciently restored to its ancient purity and lustre: and con dently persuade himself, That he cannot be (that I may so speak) su ciently superstitious, in rejecting every word which is not in the Scriptures. Forasmuch as man will ever be more wise and wary than the holy Spirit, and can very hardly forbear to mingle somewhat from his own head: so that whatever comes from man, can never be su ciently suspected. And because a thing will be so much the better preserved, by how much the greater is the number of those that keep it: the people ought often to be put in mind, That both the reading of the Scriptures, and the care of Religion, belongs not to the Pastors of the Church only; but that every one that would be saved aught to make diligent search, whether any corruption be already, or is for the future like to be introduced; and this to do no less carefully, then if he were persuaded that all beside himself were asleep: and whatsoever is wont to take the common people o from such studies, care must be taken that that thing be wholly taken away. Concerning which matter, we shall more conveniently discourse anon. Now, forasmuch as the pro t will be small, if some private man shall observe that an error is introduced, unless he discover the said error, and lay it open: there must of necessity be some way how this may conveniently be done. Now there cannot be a more tting way, then that which Apostle propounds to the Corinthians. Let two or three Prophets speak, and let the rest judge; and if any thing be revealed to him that sits by, let the        1 Cor. 14. former be silent. For ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be exhorted. If some one person shall always speak in the Church, and no man at any time may contradict him; it will be a very strange thing, if that one man be not pu ed up, if he do not fall into such a conceit of himself, as to think that he is the only man, that he only hath understanding, he alone is wise: that all the rest are a company of brute animals as it were, who ought to depend only upon him, and to do nothing but learn of him. And if any man shall think, that himself likewise hath some ability to teach, he will account that man an heinous o ender. But what says the Apostle to this? Did the word of God come from you? or came it unto you only? If any seem to be a prophet, or spiritual; let him acknowledge what I writ unto you to be the commands of the Lord. But if any one be ignorant, let him be ignorant. Wherefore brethren, labour that ye may prophesy, and forbidden not to speak with tongues, let all things be done decently, and in order. It is exceedingly to be lamented, That this custom, and the practice of this command of the Lord, is not again restored into the Churches, and brought into use. But some men may say; Such is the rashness of this age of ours, such the boldness, such the impudence, That if it were allowed to every one to speak in the Congregation, there will be no end of brawls and contention. Why so? Is a man another kind of creature now, than what he was of old? Thou wilt say, he is. For mankind hath continually degenerated, grown worse and worse, and seems now to have attained the top of corruption. Is it so indeed? But, suppose it to be so. Thou that art the Teacher of the people, art not thou also thyself made of the same mould? Art not thou born in the same age? Inasmuch as this ordinance principally was intended to keep Pastors within the bounds of modesty: that they may understand, That they are not the authors of the Word of God, that they have not alone received the Spirit: by how much the more mankind hath degenerated, by so much the greater need is there thereof; for, that there is now, more rashness, arrogance, pride, then of old; this is true, as well of the Pastors and Teachers, as of the rest of the people. Art thou a Prophet, hast thou any portion of the Spirit? If thou hast not, so un ting it is, that thou alone shouldest speak in the Congregation, that there will hardly be found any that desires rather to be silenced, than thyself. But if thou art a prophet, if thou hast the Spirit, mark what the Apostle says, Acknowledge (quoth he) that those things which I writ, are the commandments of the Lord. Go to then, On the one side we have the judgement of our Lord, willing that prophecy (for this is a word that we are obliged to use) should be common to all, and that not for the destruction, but the salvation of the Church: On the other side, we have thy judgement, who fearest lest that may breed contentions and confusion; whose judgement now ought we rather stand to? If thou shalt conceive we must stand to thine: consider what thou assumest unto thyself, and what will become of thy modesty. Our Lord, it should seem, understood not what a kind of creature man was; he wanted thy wisdom, belike, to admonish him of the danger; or haply he thought not upon that corruption which should befall mankind, whereby such a Liberty might prove unpro table. But Paul answers thee, That God is not the author of contention, but of peace: Who well knowing what might move contentions, what beget peace, and not loving nor willing to have contention, but peace, willed that this liberty of prophesying should be in the Church. What canst thou say to the contrary, what hast thou to object against God himself, wilt thou accuse him of indiscretion▪ No man hath so wicked a tongue, as to dare to do it. Yet if thou shalt diligently search thine heart, thou shalt nd there a certain disposition ready to contend even with God himself: Which motion of thy heart, must by no means be harkened unto, but sharply repressed, and wholly subjected to the Spirit of God. It may seem peradventure an absurd thing, That after some very learned person hath spoken, some contemptible person shall be allowed to contradict him. Can such a person so do without great rashness and temerity? Were I to speak according to the judgement of man, verily I could not deny it. But if we be really persuaded, That the knowledge of matters divine, ought not to be attributed to our watching, studies, wits, but to God and to his Spirit, wherewith he can in a moment endue the simplest person in the world, and that with no more labour or di culty, then if he were to give him unto one that had spent Nestor's age in study: What reason is there for me to judge that this man does rashly and unadvisedly, if he shall arise and contradict? Is not the spirit able to reveal somewhat to him, which he hath hidden from thee? Now, if the spirit have revealed somewhat to him, and to that end revealed it that he might contradict, that by his means the thing may be revealed to the Church: shall I say that he hath done rashly in obeying the holy Ghost? And if thou think otherwise, verily thou art not persuaded that the Spirit is the Author and Teacher of this Knowledge, but that all the praise thereof is due to studies, watch, and the wits of men. And if this be thy judgement, I tell thee again, That thou art not only unworthy to be the sole speaker, but worthy rather to be the only person not permitted to speak in the congregation. And that thou mayst the better understand, that the most unlearned aught to be allowed to speak, consider, God will have himself to be acknowledged the Author of his own gifts: he will not have his praise attributed unto our studies or wits, but unto himself. But if the man that hath spent all his life in study, speak wisely, it is not attributed to God, but to study: In word perhaps it may be attributed to God, yet not without a vehement reluctancy of our judgement: and this is that which (I say) God will not abide. But if so be thou shalt hear a wise word come out of the mouth of some unlearned person, thou must needs, whether thou wilt or no, acknowledge God to be the Author thereof. So, when God was minded to give unto Israel a victory against the Midianites, under the conduct of Gideon; and Gideon had gathered together Thirty thousand men, lest the Israelites should boast that they had gotten the victory by their own strength, and not by the assistance of God (which might have been conceived, if Gideon had fought with so numerous an Army) he would not su er him to have above Three hundred, that it might appear that he was the cause of the victory, and not the number or valour of those that fought. Now, besides the glory of God, hereby great pro t does accrue to the Church. For if the people shall see now one man, now another, endued with the spirit, beyond all expectation; many will thereby be encouraged to hope for the same gift, if they shall ask it; many will learn and pro t; and it will thereby come to pass, that when occasion shall be to choose a Minister, the Church shall not need to call strange and unknown persons to that o ce, but she may have of her own such as are t to be chosen, men whose conversation and manners are su ciently known. And when the number of such as are able to prophecy, shall be great, the Church will not be forced to use such Pastors as from their very childhood have proposed to themselves such o ces as the reward of their studies; and addicted themselves to the study of Scripture and Religion, no otherwise then they would have done to some Trade, whereby they meant in time to get their living: So that a man can expect but very few of them to prove other then mercenary or hireling Pastors. Now, ●hat it was the custom of the Jewish Church, that all might thus prophesy; we may hence conjecture, in that it is upon Record, Luke 4. how our Lord, upon the Sabbath day according to the custom,          Luke 4. came into the Synagogue, took a book and expounded a place of Esay; and how, being twelve years of age he sat at Jerusalem in the temple among the Doctors, and did dispute. For he could not so do by virtue of any ordinary o ce, forasmuch as his age was uncapable, neither did the Doctors know who he was. Yea rather, our Lord in so doing must needs make use of the power which was granted to every one to speak. It remained in the Christians Congregations until the times of Constantine, at the least. Forasmuch as we have these words of Eusebius, the Writer of Church-a airs, Eccle. hist. lib. 9 to that e ect: If any man inspired by the grace of God, should speak unto the People; they all with great silence ﬁxing their eyes upon him, gave such attention, as if he had brought them some errand from heaven. So great was the reverence of the hearers, such order was seen among the Ministers. One after another, another after him. Neither was there only two or three that prophesied, according to what the Apostle said, but to all was given to speak; so that the wish of Moses seems rather to have been ful lled in them, when he said, Would God all the people might prophesy. There was no spleen, no envy, the gifts of God were dispensed, every one, according to his ability, contributing his assistance for the con rmation of the Church: And all was done with love, in such sort, That they strove mutually to honour each other, and every one to prefer another before himself. But to the end this common prophesying may be pro table to the Church, we must diligently mark what the Apostle advises. For a sure thing it is, that the pride of man is so great, that whatever hath once fallen from him, he will by any means have it stand for a Truth, neither can he su er that any man should infringe the same. So that if he might be permitted to judge, that last spoke, it will be a miracle, if a man in his life-time should see any one give way to him that contradicts him: What is Paul's advice therefore in this case? Let two or three Prophets speak, and let the rest judge. He will not therefore have the same persons to be parties and judges. And he adds a little after, And the spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, for God is not the Author of dissension, but of peace. So that as soon as any man hath spoken his own mind, he ought to rest himself satis ed with the judgement of the rest, and not obstinately to make no end of contending: if this be not done, a sure thing it is, there will be no end of strife. But what if any man will not be content to submit to the judgement of the rest: Verily I would avouch, that being sharply admonished, that he disturb not the Congregation, and that he go not against the command of the Apostle, or rather of our Lord, commanding the spirits of the Prophets to be subject to the Prophets; he ought to be cast out of the society, though he should hold the prime place in the Congregation. The people likewise must frequently be admonished; that liberty for any one to speak in the Congregation, is not therefore granted by the Apostle, to the end every one should speak what comes to his tongue's end, as if he were in a market; but whereas he gives liberty to him to speak to whom any thing is revealed, he would have all rashness and impudence to be laid aside. He that reuerences not the Church of God, let that man know, he despiseth the Spirit of God, who is Precedent there; and shall be sure not to escape unpunished. Before a man propounds any thing to the Church, he ought to consider again and again, how sure a manifestation he hath of that thing, and what ever the matter be, let him be sure not to forget a sober, modest, bashful behaviour, without which virtues, doubtless not good can be e ected. But here we must attentively consider, both how far a man ought to submit to the judgement of the Congregation, and who may deservedly be accounted a troubler of the Church. Verily, I conceive a man ought so far to give way, as that after I have alleged what I had to say for my opinion, if yet the rest shall not allow of my judgement, I ought to give over defending of it, and cease to be troublesome to the Congregation concerning the same: But I ought not to be compelled to confess that I have erred, or to deprecate any fault, whiles I do not yet understand that I have erred, for so I should sin against God. He therefore is a troubler of the Church, that will not, so far as we have expressed, submit to the judgement of the Church, but goeth on to be troublesome; but especially that man who would exact of another that which he ought not to do; viz. to recant, being not persuaded that he is in an error. But those men are commonly reputed troublers of the Church, who refuse to ratify what ever shall any ways fall out of the Pastor's mouths. Again, in this place it may reasonably be demanded, whether, when that a matter hath been once or twice debated, and some man knowing the judgement of the Congregation, would again reduce it into Controversy, he ought to be heard, or enjoined silence, and take the matter for determined. But of this we shall in another place more conveniently dispute. That which remains, therefore, is, that we wrestle with God, by daily prayers, to grant that we may have the use of this so sovereign and saving liberty, so pro table to the Church, and that thereby we may reap abundance of fruit. And that he would, to that end, tame and break our spirits with his Spirit, and render them mild and gentle: and not su er what he hath ordained for the con rmation and establishment of his Church, to be by the stubbornness and perverseness of our wits and minds, turned to the mischief and destruction thereof. Now it hath been frequently practised, that when some di cult point hath been to be decided, not only one particular Church should judge, but a Council of that Province, or of the whole Christian world hath been called. Which, whether it ought to be done or no, and what ought to be the Authority of Counsels, may be by some demanded. That the custom of calling Counsels ought to be retained, seems clearly to me, to be taught by the example of the Apostles. For, if it were requisite for men endued with so great a measure of the Spirit, to confer together about matters of Religion in controversy: It seems, that it ought much more to be practised by those that have not such a portion of the spirit: Neither ought we to make light account of our Lords promise, who hath engaged himself, that where two or three shall be gathered together in his Name, there he will be the in midst of them. But the question moved concerning the authority of such a Council, is harder. And for as much as I have not now to deal with Papists, but with such as would have the truth of the Gospel restored; I shall not need with many words to demonstrate, that no Council hath authority either to make new Laws, or to ordain new worships. But what shall we say concerning controversies of Religion, which are raised about interpretation of Scripture? Whether or no, hath a Council authority, in such cases, to determine what ought to be held? And if a Council cannot do thus much at least, what other use there can be of Counsels beside? And whether there be any di erence between the Council of the Apostles, and those of their successors? If, as certain as it is that our Lord will always perform what he hath promised, so certain it were that such as meet to consult, would evermore refer all their cogitations to the glory of God, and place all their hope of discovering the Truth in the promises of our Lord, and the direction of his Spirit: there were no reason, but that all the determinations of Counsels should be accounted rm and authentic. But forasmuch as these are the secrets of men's minds and hearts, God only can know them. And inasmuch as these conditions which are annexed to our Lords promise, are hidden, the conscience, in this case, hath nothing certain to rest upon. Make it appear to me, that a company, either of Bishops, or any other men, are met together in the name of Christ; I shall willingly stand to their determinations; but how wilt thou make it appear, that they are so met? Because themselves profess so much; as if a company of ungodly dissemblers would not say as much concerning themselves. Doubtless it is no ways likely, that God hath imposed such a law upon us; as one time or another, whether we do obey it, or not obey it, will render us guilty. But such a law were imposed upon us, in case we were bound to obey a Council, and in the mean time, either the Council may err, or in case it do err, our obedience shall not nd excuse before God. But, that Counsels may err we doubt not; yea verily, nothing is more sure, than that Counsels have often erred. And if we shall give obedience to the impious determination of a Council, sure we are, that no Text of Scripture will excuse us: yea rather, we are strictly admonished not to give credit so much as to an Angel from Heaven, if he would teach us any thing besides what hath been delivered by the Apostles. For the holy Scriptures are set before us, out of which we are to know the will of God: Which that we may understand, we are taught to pray to God for wisdom, and the holy Ghost; that we should rest in the determinations of Counsels, there is not a word, that I know, in Scripture, to warrant us. Now, if so be our obedience to Counsels, in case they determine any thing amiss, shall not be excused: neither have we any assurance that Counsels never err: Neither may it be said, that God hath subjected us unto such a law, whereunto one time or another we can neither obey, nor not obey without sin: It follows, that none ought to be compelled to stand to the determinations of Counsels. Now since it is all one to say, that a Council hath authority to judge of controversies of Religion, or to say, that every man ought to obey whatever a Council shall decree; and since we have showed that there is no Law binding men to give such obedience, it follows, That a Council hath no such authority to judge in matters of Religion. It may further be demanded, what we say concerning him who is called to the o ce of a Teacher? whether he ought wholly to obey a Council, so as to teach nothing di erent from the Counsels determinations? It were an absurd thing doubtless, for a man to be bound to teach that unto others, which he himself cannot safely believe: or shall he be more excused, if he follow the impious determination of a Council in his teaching, then if he himself for his own particular, embrace and believe the same? Yea verily much less, for Paul will have him to be accursed who shall teach any thing beside what the Apostles have taught; or is he rather than the man that only believes the Council, but teaches not, entangled in this gin or trap, That whether he obey or obey not, he must o end? or shall he rather keep himself silent? Woe is me (says Paul) if I shall not teach the Gospel; and Peter says, We ought rather to obey God then men. It is manifest therefore, That a Council hath not authority so to judge of controversies, as that men should be bound to obey their decrees. Inasmuch therefore as Counsels are to be called indeed, but not to this end, of necessity there must be some other end why they are to be called. If so be therefore Counsels shall meet, that the controversies which trouble the Church being propounded, and every one having free liberty to speak, those to whom the Lord shall please to reveal any thing to the clearing of matters propounded, may speak and declare their judgement; and the rest afterwards judge; not so, as to vote, and the greater part to make a Law to necessitate every man to assent (for so the greater part would commonly be too hard for the better) but that every one might weigh what is said; to the end, That if he shall nd it proved by su cient testimonies of Scripture, he may both embrace it himself, and endeavour to persuade others to embrace the same; not by urging the authority of the Council, but by those Texts of Scripture which he heard alleged in the Council. Doubtless if those that meet together should make this their aim, although amongst two or three hundred hypocrites there should not be above three or four persons truly pious, who hearty seek the glory of God, and put their con dence in the promises which our Lord hath made, praying to him that he would reveal the truth unto them; they, as few as they be, should not meet in vain, doubtless that so great number of hypocrites, should not cause our Lords promises to become vain and of no force. What should be revealed to one, that would all that were docible embrace; and so Satan should in vain, hope to get the victory by the number and multitude of persons unskilful, and of his masked and disguised subjects, or by the outward, dignity of men's persons. There would not then be such a stir to purchase voices and to make up the number su cient to carry the matter: but the care would be rather, how every man might nd such ground of Truth, as upon which he might safely rely. Verily, we should often see, that even by the meanest and most contemptible of the company, God would dispel great mists of errors. But so long as most account shall be made of number, and the glistering of outward dignity; so long as the consent of the major part shall stand for a law, nothing is more sure, then that Satan shall ordinarily get the victory and bear away the bell in such Counsels. Which way, then, wilt thou say, may a man be excluded the communion of the godly, because of some ungodly tenet which he shall hold? Shall the authority of any particular Church be greater than the authority of the whole or universal Church: so as that the particular may condemn both the tenet and the man, and general or Catholic Church may not? I answer: A particular Church condemning any man, unless their condemnation be just, they do indeed separate that man from themselves, so far forth, as that they do not acknowledge him to be one of them, but they separate him not from Christ: Neither do they pronounce him faulty before God, because he would not credit them to believe as they did: How justly they reject him, let them look to it. But when the Congregation justly rejects, it does not therefore justly reject, because the man will not embrace its tenets, or stand to its judgement: But because he rejects the doctrine which came from God, and that doctrine of such consequence, That it ought of necessity to be known to salvation. Likewise when a particular Congregation, allows of one tenet, disallowes of another, it does not impose a law upon any man's belief, but only declares its own faith: to the end, That he which is not of the same mind, at least in the more principal points of doctrine, may know that he belongs not to that society; for there must of necessity be some kind of Government, that the Congregation may not be forced to communicate in Religious Services, with that man, of whom she is persuaded that he is not any ways related to the Church of Christ, neither hath any right to the privileges thereof. Hence we may easily understand, and in one word express what di erence there is between the Council of the Apostles, and those who make themselves their successors, be they who they will. Forasmuch as it was apparent that the Apostles were by name chosen by our Lord himself, to the o ce of Apostleship, it was manifest that they were endued with a large measure of the holy Ghost, which Spirit would lead them into all truth: Now there is no testimony of any such, concerning any of their successors: We are left only to conjecture what they are by their words and actions, which are subject to counterfeiting and fraud: In the Counsels of the Apostles, men were not to mind, so much, what was judged and determined, as by whom, it was so determined: So that they needed not with many words to render a reason why they so ordained. Contrariwise in the Counsels of their successors, it matters not so much who they are that decree a thing, as what that thing is which they so decree, what testimonies they produce from Scripture, how clearly and manifestly those testimonies do teach the point determined. So, that doctrine of Luther, That we are saved only by the merits of Christ, is embraced by us: yet do not we look upon Luther, but upon those testimonies which are by him cited from Scripture, which also the holy Ghost, that internal Expositor, witnesses to our spirits, that they teach the same. Otherwise, be they never so many, let them be pious, learned, holy, yea verily, let them be angels of heaven, unless thou shalt perceive that what they a rm is proved by the Word of God; there is no reason for thee to su er thine eyes to be dazzled with the splendour and pomp of a Council. Howbeit, tting it is to attribute so much authority to a Council (unless it be of such as are manifestly enemies to truth) as not rashly to reject the judgement thereof; but let every man diligently weigh the same, desiring earnestly the assistance of God, that he may judge aright. Hence likewise we may conjecture, who ought to be admitted to a Council. For, since they do not meet to make any laws of Faith, but rather to pray for the holy Ghost, by whom they may be led into all truth, and in a word, to learn: It will not be necessary, that he that must be admitted, should be a Bishop, or an Archbishop, or a Pope, nor yet that he should be famous for learning; nay rather, no reason there is why any man should be excluded, that appears to be possessed of any measure of piety, and of the holy Ghost. So, we see in that same decree of the Apostolical Council, after the Apostles and Elders, the whole Church is named. For, inasmuch as the holy Ghost is not tied to any dignity, or to any certain kind of persons. Who knows by whom God will choose to discover the Truth? And forasmuch as we are not to regard any number of voices, but only what that is which is said; although some foolish indiscreet person, or a man that makes only a show of godliness shall be admitted, they cannot do much hurt; for we must count every man to be such as his speech shall declare him to be. And thus we have declared, by what means the doctrine of Religion comes to be corrupted; and what cautions we are to use, when it is pure, to keep it so. Appendix A ERRATA. PAge 2. l. 6. is not God. p. 3. l. 6. is to take into, l. 27. disobeys the command. p. 6. l. 32. yet is their strength. p. 8. l. 31. self interests, p. 18. l. 10. like wise men, l. 22. it is no small. p. 22. l. 5. any time come into. p. 30. l. 8. should contend. p. 31. l. 9 the time, place, p. 36. l. 18. to that end. p. 37. l. 1. shall set upon the another way. p. 45. l. 15. wonderful example is that. p. 46. l. 31. best of shepherds. l. 33. to thee weak. p. 55. l. 24. be so ingenuous. p. 58. l. 1. 2. one whole sentence; ere his mouth be well open, l. 23. a bene ce, p. 65. l. 38. betid others as, p. 74. l. 20. shall by his 22. the instrument. p. 75. l. 37. accounted of; others howbeit. p. 78. l. 33. of our Lord. p. 82. l. 24. ingenuously. l. 38. a couple. p. 83. l. 17. is not to, p. 93. l. 7. heretics in the. p. 99 l. 10. to vanquish an Apostate, l. 16. means of them the. p. 102. l. 35. that when he. p. 108. l 4. and will attempt. p. 135. l. 2. 3. no such testimony concerning any successors.

Information about this book

Title statement Satans stratagems, or The Devils cabinet-counsel discovered whereby he endeavours [sic] to hinder the knowledge of the truth ... wherein is laid open an easie way to end controversies in matters of conscience ... together with arguments to each book ... / by Jacobus Acontius ... ; as also the testimonies of some ancient divines, together with an epistle written by Mr John Goodwin ; and Mr. Duries letter touching the same. Aconcio, Iacopo, d. 1566.

Edition statement This text is an enriched version of the TCP digital transcription A75849 of text R42404 in the English Short Title Catalog (Wing A443A). Textual changes and metadata enrichments aim at making the text more computationally tractable, easier to read, and suitable for network-based collaborative curation by amateur and professional end users from many walks of life. The text has been tokenized and linguistically annotated with MorphAdorner. The annotation includes standard spellings that support the display of a text in a standardized format that preserves archaic forms ('loveth', 'seekest'). Textual changes aim at restoring the text the author or stationer meant to publish.

This text has not been fully proofread: .

Publication Publisher EarlyPrint Project Place of publication Evanston,IL, Notre Dame, IN, St. Louis, MO Date 2018 ID [DLPS] A75849 ID [STC] Wing A443A ID [STC] ESTC R42404 ID [EEBO-CITATION] 36273502 ID [OCLC] ocm 36273502 ID [VID] 150539 ID [PROQUESTGOID] 2240917203 Availability This keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above is co-owned by the institutions providing nancial support to the Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership. Searching, reading, printing, or downloading EEBO-TCP texts is reserved for the authorized users of these project partner institutions. Permission must be granted for subsequent distribution, in print or electronically, of this EEBO-TCP Phase II text, in whole or in part.

Series Early English books online text creation partnership. Notes (EEBO-TCP ; phase 2, no. A75849)

Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 150539)

Images scanned from micro lm: (Early English books, 1641-1700 ; 2223:19)

Source — Satans stratagems, or The Devils cabinet-counsel discovered whereby he endeavours [sic] to hinder the knowledge of the truth ... wherein is laid open an easie way to end controversies in matters of conscience ... together with arguments to each book ... / by Jacobus Acontius ... ; as also the testimonies of some ancient divines, together with an epistle written by Mr John Goodwin ; and Mr. Duries letter touching the same., Aconcio, Iacopo, d. 1566., Goodwin, John, 1594?-1665., Dury, John, 1596- 1680..

Extent

[18], 36 (i.e. 136), [1] p., [1] leaf of plates : port.

Printed by John Macock, and are to be sold by G. Calvert,. London :: 1648.. (Includes frontispiece port. of author.) (Errata: p. [1] at end.) (Imperfect: torn, worn, and with print show-through.) (Reproduction of original in William Andrews Clark Memorial Library, University of California, Los Angeles.)


* * *



PART II — BOOKS V–VIII, FROM THE LATIN OF 1631

Now first Englished.



BOOK V

[The book opens mid-argument, the opening lines being imperfectly preserved in the scan; the translation begins at the first complete train of thought, p. 222.]

…others again make little of the law: some offend in such a way that they either do not understand that they act against the law, or do not notice it. Those are to be called "not understanding" who have either no knowledge of the law at all, or knowledge corrupted by great and impious errors — of which we seem to have said enough in the former books. "Not noticing," on the other hand, are those who, though they have the law somehow known to them, do not apply it as the test of their own actions, studies, and thoughts — just like a man who owns a mirror but never looks into it, and so never sees the spots on his own face; or if they do apply it, they use so depraved and worthless a judgment upon it that they cannot discern what manner of men they are in their deeds. That men who know the law should not apply it to judge their own actions may happen for several reasons. The chief is this: busied with other things — some with their pleasures, others with their trading, others with earning their bread by their hands, others with the study of human letters, and some even with the contemplation of divine things (being so given up to contemplations that they forget what use contemplation ought to serve) — distracted by these several employments they take no time to make an examination of their life and to measure it by the rule of the divine law. Others pass by this examination because they think they have now made such progress, and have the law so ready at hand, that they judge it hardly necessary any more — as though they could no longer slip, or be deceived by a false appearance. Led by this persuasion, they live secure; and they commit many things in the common manner of men in which, although there is very much blame, it never so much as enters their mind to suspect that the least blame is there. But to most men this befalls: they look only at those evil works which in their own judgment they do not commit, or those good works which they suppose themselves to do, so as to take pleasure in themselves for them — what evil they do commit, or what they leave undone, they do not so much notice. Thus it comes about that each man, with the Pharisee, flatters himself: I am not as other men are. And this carelessness is commonly followed by that error, that like dreamers they place all holiness of life in some one thing which is wholly abhorrent to God's ordinances; and with their eyes fixed upon that, they think it goes excellently well with them. Or else upon things which, being forbidden by God's commandments, they nevertheless practise, thinking that God requires nothing beyond them, and never calling other duties to mind.

Thus it is that a most foul darkness of errors overspreads the Papacy (to use that word); yet I would never believe that such blindness had gone so far there that, if you asked any of them whether he believed the observance of God's ten commandments to be necessary for a Christian man, he would not answer that he altogether believed it. If you asked further whether he himself stood in the good and pious observance of those ten — by abstaining from meats on the days forbidden by the Roman Pontiff, by confessing his sins to a priest once or twice a year, by venerating the images of saints, and doing other things of that sort — would he not altogether deny that his piety consisted in those things? I do not doubt that he would utterly deny it; and yet it is most certain that this is what happens in practice. So that if a man were — what has been said of us only — an adulterer besides, and given to other vices, yet in the judgment of others, and in his own, he seems to himself to live a most beautiful life. This persuasion, that holiness of life is set in those things alone, so lurks in men's minds that they do not notice that they judge so; rather, if one asks them, they will answer in such a way that they seem to believe nothing less — and yet that most men are led by this error can be known most certainly both from their judgment of others and from their judgment of themselves.

In the same way, if you ask very many of our people whether they think Christian piety is placed in this — that a man never cease to speak contemptuously of the Roman pontiff, of cardinals, of sacrificing priests, never cease to declaim against their impostures and errors, never make an end of disputing about the choice of meats — they will all to a man confess that piety is by no means placed in such things alone, so that they would marvel that it could occur to anyone to doubt it. And yet it will be possible to perceive that some such persuasion lies hidden in the minds of many, if one diligently observes, on the one hand, what manner of men they are in those actions which truly befit a Christian man, and on the other hand, what a high opinion of their own holiness they carry about with them — for no other cause than that they profess great enmities against the Papacy, and in gatherings, and over their cups, speak magnificently of the Gospel, and extol with wondrous praises those who were famous in the restoration of the Gospel.

There are very many, too, intent upon things which more of their own nature follow upon a true abasement of mind than the true piety pursues them with any zeal: utter neglect of all ornament in dress and in all things; contempt of all music unless it have some exercise of piety joined with it; a certain severity of countenance and gravity in action, such as is seen in all who are turning over great and weighty matters in their minds. Busied with these things, and others of the same kind, they so please themselves in them and set so much by them that they do not even remember the things from which these were bound of themselves to flow; and while they abundantly satisfy themselves in these, they do not doubt that they live a Christian and holy life. This befalls them not because, raised from some sleep that occupies their minds, they could not judge of things better, but because they pay little attention to what they do. What remedy do all these need, but to be roused from sleep, and to be often reminded how brief is the tenure of this life; what punishments they shall pay for their sloth, carelessness, and drowsiness, unless with intent minds they meditate on the law of the Lord day and night, and prudently order their life by its rule?

But there are others also, and very many, indeed of the number of those who think they go far ahead of all others, and even despise all others in comparison with themselves — who, paying close heed, have fashioned for themselves a wondrous kind of holiness: for each examines most diligently his neighbour's deeds, and calls his own life to account before the bar of censure. Nor are these of the number of those who are given to bouts of drinking in common, to gluttony, drunkenness, whoredoms, luxury, wantonness, and other lost manners of life like these; but rather of those whose life otherwise seems much more reformed than other men's. But since it belongs to a man who loves God to abhor all foulness and licence of life, and to delight fittingly in upright, honest, and holy conduct, the piety which every man ought to practise in his own life they are for the most part willing to practise in examining the deeds of others. And so they do indeed search out most curiously what manner of life this man and that man leads: what he does, what he says; even, it may be, what he thinks; whom he loves, whom he honours, whom he holds of less account. Nor is there anything so small that it is not matter enough for them to begin to think ill of a brother. Whatever there is of that kind, which could have been done as much to an evil as to a good end, they will never interpret it otherwise than in the worse part — thinking, forsooth, that they will err the less often if they always believe the worse of another. And if anyone has once come into a less favourable opinion with them, it is all over: they will keep him forever in the same place, being assured that he can never return to better fruit. And as soon as anything about a neighbour reaches their ears, do not think they will go to him, lovingly admonish him, and exhort him to remember his duty: nothing less. Rather, having wagged their slanderous tongue against him with whomsoever rather than held one word with himself, they will publish the matter abroad the sooner; nor will they make an end of whispering until some other argument offers itself for the exercise of that their excellent piety. And so far are they from ever afterwards performing any office of a brother toward him, that they will rather take pains that he find no kindness anywhere with anyone. And while they do these things, it is marvellous in how high a place they think their sanctimony is set; and those who do not imitate them they despise, and count for nothing. Which is the more to be lamented because these are of those who did not hesitate, for the Gospel's cause, to become exiles, to leave goods, honours, advantages, kinsfolk, and friends; and the more specious their beginnings were, [the sadder the fall.] Of a truth, what shall I say? I know many such, and not in one place, nor of one nation; but they were all exiles for Christ. Ah, brethren — this way you have entered is not the right way! You entered the right way once; but you are declining from it. And truly the way you now press upon will lead you to perdition: yet turn back into the right way while you may, while some daylight still remains to you, and do not let that night overtake you wandering in this path.

Surely charity has no lynx's eyes to spy out another's spots; she has, in truth, no eyes at all: she is plainly blind. She covers another's sins, and does not allow them to be seen, and gladly does not look too closely lest it should happen. Behold a mother who loves her little daughter uniquely: though the child is of no comely form, yet she seems to her very beautiful; if her manners are awkward, clownish, and even perverse, they cannot seem so to her. When she has been in sickness, if those things happen to her which might move anyone's stomach, the mother is not disgusted at any of them. If, grown older, she bends to dishonest ways of life, scarce at last, after all things tried, does the mother suffer herself to be persuaded of it: whatever ought to have made her daughter suspected to her, she interprets it in the better part; nor can she suspect anything evil of her before she has had her own eyes as witnesses of the fault. This, namely, is what love and charity do. "But," you will say, "the charity you describe is foolish and silly." I say on the contrary that it is foolish and silly; for charity (in man, at least) would not be charity unless it were foolish and silly. For what is that — beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things? Does the Apostle seem to you, in these words, to be painting a very shrewd and crafty [charity]…

[Marginal references in the original at this point: 1 Cor. 13; 1 Pet. 4; Prov. 10.]

"But," you say, "the mote I spy in my brother's eye is no more than a little straw." Granted you see it: yet there are still great beams in your own eye which you cannot see; and yet He to whom you owe all things requires of you that you love him. Or do you think there is no mote in your own eye? Without doubt there are many, and others see them as plainly as you see theirs. Nay, there are beams — and great beams — which, besides God and perhaps in part your own conscience, no one can see. The Apostle certainly understood that he had beams in his own eyes, and so understood it that he groaned heavily: O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? [Margin: Matt. 18; Rom. 7.] Since, then, you have at home that which you may look upon, which you may reprove, which you may pursue with hatred — have you so much leisure left that you must go inquiring into other men's? With what face dare you assail these things? How dare you, for that cause, turn your mind away from your brother, and raise ill-will against him among others? And if you judge your brother unworthy of your goodwill because of many and great offences noticed in him: what sentence, and how severe a one, do you pronounce upon yourself? It may be that you have not so great need — but certainly you stand in need altogether of God's mercy yourself. Does not that word terrify you? O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt… shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow-servant, even as I had pity on thee? [Matt. 18.] Truly you are miserable if, with your tongue's petulance, you rob your brother of that which every man holds dearest of all things: his good name. In what great matter have you ever profited him, when by your whisperings you have spoiled him of his fame — and what have you left him? It seems (I believe) a light thing to you to open your mouth and blurt out words; but does it seem as light a thing where another does the same in fraud of your honour? Even if you did it only when your brother's sin was fully known to you — whereas it may be, indeed it is very credible to charity, which believeth all things, that he will repent and be drawn away from that evil custom — by publishing it, and dragging it through men's mouths, you would do a thing most unworthy of a Christian man, as may be taught from the example of Joseph. It was most fully known to him (so far as human judgment could reach) that Mary his spouse, whom he had not yet touched, and whom he found with child, had committed a great crime, worthy of great punishment. What, then, says the writer of the sacred history? Did he straightway cry out? Did he spread the matter among the common people? Did he flee to the magistrate with complaint of the wrong? So, certainly, would these holy men have done of whom we are now treating. But see how Joseph thought nothing of the kind; how utterly otherwise was his counsel. Joseph, says Matthew, (note it well) being a just man, and not willing to make her a public example, was minded to put her away privily. [Matt. 1.] If, then, it belonged to a pious man to cover that sin, surely it would have been impious — the act of one in whom there is neither fear of God nor any charity — to publish it, even though the certainty of the offence were (so to speak) so great. But if a man who has certain knowledge of another's sin still does not do well in divulging it, what will it be if he has nothing but suspicions, and slight suspicions at that? Can there be even a crumb of Christian charity in him who, upon any slightest suspicion, shall not scruple rashly to rob his brother of that thing than which, next to God's grace, he can have nothing more excellent, and which, if he most desire it, he cannot afterwards restore to him? And where there is no charity, who does not love his brother — what judgment can be made of him, except that he does not yet know God? What! Did you dream that the law was given to this end, that each man should curiously observe how holily this man fulfils it, how wickedly that man violates it — and that rather than to blame his neighbour and publish him, than to strive to bring him back to soundness? If you think so, truly you dream. That (I say) is not the end of the law given; but rather this: that it should be to every man a rule of life, in which, as in a mirror, he may behold the stains and foulnesses not of his neighbour but of himself — that he may first correct his own life, and then also his neighbour's, if he can.

There is another kind of hallucination, into which those who fall commit many sins, thinking they do nothing of the sort. It is of this nature: since many actions and deeds deserve praise or blame only for the reason that they were undertaken toward a good or evil end, it happens to many — a thing all men may well marvel at — that, not understanding their own thoughts and feelings, they in truth undertake a thing with one counsel, and seem to themselves to undertake it with another. I know this will seem absurd to hear; but (believe me) nothing is more true. And not to go far: James and John, the Lord's disciples, when in a certain village of the Samaritans they had not been received into lodging together with the Lord because they were journeying toward Jerusalem — a city to which the Samaritans bore ill-will because of the controversies of religion they had with the Jews — asked the Lord thus: Lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven and consume them, even as Elias did? But what said the Lord? Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. [Luke 9.] They doubtless seemed to themselves to deliberate this from zeal for the divine glory, and from that charity and piety with which they followed the Lord; otherwise they would never have asked the Lord so. But the answer they received shows plainly that the thought had proceeded from offence taken at the lodging denied, and from the inveterate hatred between those two peoples, and from a certain secret desire of revenge. So also in the time when the Roman Pontiffs began to acquire opinion, authority, and splendour, I would never believe that they were wholly devoid of piety — except perhaps a few: since in their writings traces of no common piety are conspicuous to see. When those men, therefore, not only suffered themselves to be most honourably worshipped, exalted, and most liberally enriched, but also in acquiring [greater power]…

