Periculum facite vestrae in tractandis controversiis lenitatis — make trial of your own gentleness in handling controversies, with mild words, humane and meek address. And we shall see whether there will be here the same abundance of words [as in railing]… The cause is no other than that, in the speeches you address to your adversaries, you gratify your own dispositions — not that you act the part of God's servants. "For on that account I deny that you are God's servants…" — no, rather: see to it that you have no excessive store of words; for if indeed you used that same fierceness against Satan, I say nothing of using it sometimes against men not of the worst sort — yet I see other things which I cannot persuade myself proceeded from any other source than the Spirit of God. Yet those men of whom I spoke just now were God's servants and apostles, though meanwhile that desire neither of executing vengeance, nor of avoiding death, was of God. In truth I hold you for God's servants, for whom also the greatest thanks are due to God: since through you He has put to flight so many and so foul darknesses, brought so much light to the Gospel, and freed so immense a number of men from the most savage tyranny of Satan. These are great things, and such as ought not by an ungrateful forgetfulness to be blotted out. But nevertheless it does not follow that you are not men, and that you do not sometimes do something after the manner of men. We must with care separate those works which you perform with the Holy Spirit as leader and author from those which are your own proper works: so that for the former we may render God (as I said) immense thanks, and strive to imitate that same [Spirit]; and pray the same God that He would lay open to you what those your own works are, and not suffer you to persevere in them; and grant to us that we prudently decline them. Otherwise was judgment to be made of Jonah's words which he delivered to the Ninevites, which were of God; otherwise, of that in which he said he was angry even unto death — being angry with God himself. "Why then was he angry? O how detestable a thing is man's disposition, if God withdraw His Spirit!" — because, whereas God by him had threatened the Ninevites, He would not destroy that most ample city; nay, having seen that people's repentance, He chose rather to spare it. Which example is therefore recorded in the divine writings, not merely that in reading it we should take pleasure and waste our time over the folly of the prophet, who took it into his head to be angry with God himself, and to whom it marvellously seemed that God, exercising such clemency, did not wisely, and that he himself understood better what needed to be done. No indeed; since all things are delivered to us for our instruction and teaching, the Spirit of God left this example written, that in it, as in a mirror, we might see what our own feelings are, and of what sort our nature is: that although we cannot obtain salvation otherwise than as impetrated by the highest mercy of God, yet we are so affected that each man would have this clemency and mercy for himself only, and for a few whom he loves; but toward all others he would have God proceed with the utmost rigour, severely and cruelly — and would indeed wish to see God behave exactly such as he himself behaves. Nay, this example is delivered in Scripture chiefly to be a lesson to you who act as God's mouthpieces and ambassadors, whose own peculiar feeling this is wont to be. Not as though you were of a worse disposition than others; but because opportunity, in the exercise of your office — unless it be repressed by a great force of the Spirit — produces great [defects], so that unless you understand that your feelings have nothing like God's nature, you will think that in exercising your office these precepts are not to be followed as guides; and you will learn from His example, such as He showed Himself toward Jonah, such each of you should show himself toward all those…

[There follows counsel against feigned sanctity and the censorious spirit; the argument proceeds to the devices by which counterfeit Antichrists are manufactured — the heads of this whole passage in the 1631 index are: "Antichristi fingendi artificia"; "Quidam ut se sanctos simulent, rigide retractant, alios censent, damnantque"; "Plerique ipsi sibi vana pietatis specie illudunt."]

They make irreparable ruin. But it is to be seen that there are no measures, no laws by which such painted lust is restrained, for one who dreams he does something toward some good end, in which he nevertheless indulges his own desires. So the Roman Pontiffs, while they judged that their splendour and wealth pertained to the glory of God and the best estate of the Christian commonwealth — and in this made a deceit (a fucus) for themselves — had such daily increases made to their power, dignity, and pride that they could be an envy to the mightiest kings and emperors. Let whoever would see a thing most worthy to be marveled at read the book entitled Ceremoniale Romanum, lately printed at Cologne. There he will see with what pomp the Roman pontiff celebrates a solemn Mass; with what pomp a solemn banquet; with what pomp he solemnly rides — as if God, in human form about to reign among men, and to use pomp after the manner of men according to His dignity: what greater thing could now be devised for Him? — nothing seems left. From one thing it is permitted to conjecture what the rest are. For among other laws this also is one: that if, at the time when the pontiff solemnly rides, any king be present, or even the Emperor himself, some office is also to be performed by him. But what office, I beseech you? Perhaps that by his wisdom and authority he should take care that all things be done decently and in seemly fashion according to the dignity of the play, and certainly that he should hold the first place next after the Pope? O unworthy deed! Who would have believed it? No indeed: the imperial office shall be to attend the pontiff at his side like a footman on foot — which Sigismund did at the Council of Constance, when Martin V had obtained the pontifical crown. Who could, even in thought, rise to such arrogance? Thus, if any seem to you to be carrying on Christ's business and serving God's glory by hunting down whomsoever by any means whatever, while in the meantime it serves their own advantages, dignity, or pursuits, they can devise nothing so bitter, nothing so cruel or atrocious, which does not seem to them to contain too much mildness and clemency; and to lie against those whom they have determined to persecute or destroy, and to load them with the greatest and most unjust calumnies, seems to them a much holier thing than to speak truth in any other matter; and to take the life of one such man seems a better deed than to keep whole very many others, even of those whom they favour.

[Marginal heading: "The false confidence of very many toward God, and even their false gratitude."]

Something very like the above happens both in placing whatever confidence we have in God, and in acknowledging God as the author of whatever benefit we have received — the latter by a contrary perversion. Suppose a man so furnished with necessaries that he lives comfortably, whether from his own lands, or from a trade or merchandise; that his life is honest, his manners such as befit a good man; that he loves religion, frequents assemblies, hears sermons, calls upon God both in public and in private — in short, performs all those things by which a not-careless observer may commend a pious man. And indeed he does not think he does anything in pretence. If, then, you ask this man: "Whence comes this your livelihood? From your lands?" — "What?" he will say; "my lands might very soon cease to be mine, unless God by His highest goodness brought it about that they should become rich for me. Nor, even if they were mine, could they feed me, unless He made them fruitful to me." A very fine and holy speech — to which perhaps he will add moreover, and say: that not even the bread which he now has ready at home, nay, which he holds in his hand, could feed him, unless God should give that it may and can do so; thus He is still to be asked notwithstanding. What can be conceived either more holy or more religious than words of this kind? "Nothing," you say, "if only they had nothing feigned in them, but expressed the man's true sense in good faith." Suppose the man speaks in no other way than he seems to himself to be persuaded. What if we shall show, notwithstanding, that the man's real confidence is one thing, and that other which, beyond all his own opinion, he feigns to himself? It will seem (I think) hard to do; but it can surely be tried. Let us therefore enter upon this way: let us strip this pious man of his goods, of every art of making gain, of friends, of the society of all men; in a word, of everything that is not God; and let us set him down in some desert place, far from towns, villages, and all commerce of men, with only his wife and the little children whom he loves uniquely, without any provision. Let him hear his little children crying and asking for bread: what will our man do here, left with God alone? The time of supper (I think) he will patiently await; and when it comes he will pray God to supply him food; or perhaps he will delegate that office in the usual way to his elder son, not less certain that God will show Himself rich and liberal here than He was when he had experienced Him at home. Ah me! how I fear that here he will appear far other — as one who, fainting and drawing breath with difficulty, will with great groanings beg of God that He not forsake him! But what do these groanings mean? At home, truly, when he was there, his prayers had no such company of groanings. Does he perchance fear lest God has not so much to supply here in the desert as when he was at home? Or is the good God less holy now than He was a little before? Where is that former confidence, so firm, so tranquil? How is it that it is not the same here as it was at home? The same God, certainly, is here; the thing itself speaks: the truth is that the confidence which seemed to our man placed in God, when he was at home, was resting in the affluence of things present about him. That he had it placed in God alone was nothing but an illusion and a dream. He trusted God, that is to say (as the vulgar phrase runs), while holding a pledge — while he beheld God in the pantry, in the barn, in the cellars: He smiled on him abundantly there. But after God has withdrawn Himself from bodily eyes, so that He can now be discerned only by the mind, it is a far other matter. Hence those tears and those groanings. From such an example and likeness we may learn that what was said by the Lord — If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove — is not so to be received as though there were some excess in the words, such as can be perceived in [hyperbolical sayings]…

…[Moses himself, for all his excessive confidence in himself, and the people's hallucination — who, when they seemed to themselves to have transferred their faith from men unto God, had transferred it from men unto a man — having also experienced how much inconvenience that thing carries, therefore did all things to the uttermost to free that people from such a kind of enchantment, and to open an entrance for truth to come to him; finally he showed them all these things, and so dealt with them that they should wonder at nothing so much as at that so great force of error. But what, pray, will the other man himself do? He will much more prudently beware, I think, lest what he condemned in another he commit himself. He will warn his own not to give him more faith than is fitting — seeing that he is a man and therefore liable to errors; nay, that it can scarce be but that he is ignorant of many things; and that therefore they should give him credence only so far as he brings certain and perspicuous testimonies out of the divine writings. And whomever he notices holding him in too great honour, him he will rebuke — as Paul and Barnabas did when divine honours were offered them. [Acts 14.] Do you think he will do any of these things? Unless a great force of the Spirit compel, do not persuade yourself of it. Nay, rather he too, when he thinks himself to be the man who knows all things, who cannot err, into whom God has so poured the immense treasures of His wisdom that He has left nothing He could bestow on others, who in fine equals God himself in wisdom — will wish to shut up the heaven, that not a drop more may rain; will suffer no water to be accounted good unless it has flowed from his own fountain. And although some word now and then escapes him which carries some show of modesty — as if, when asked, should anyone discover any error in his sayings or writings, he would have him admonish him, that it would be very grateful to him, or something of the sort — yet, when it comes to the trial, it may then be seen that those words proceeded from nothing but the surface of his lips, however much they may seem to you to have been uttered from the heart and in earnest. And those who have followed him will make God as much of themselves as others made of the former man; and those who wonder at this — with the greatest astonishment, as if nothing more absurd could be imagined — will at last do the same themselves, or much worse: so great a business is it for any man not to place either some other man, or himself, in God's room, while nevertheless he thinks he does nothing less than that. — These examples occurred to me, by which I might show how it comes to pass that a man does one thing, and thinks he is doing another; has his confidence placed in one object, and persuades himself he has it in another; in discerning his own thoughts, wondrously blind. And I know not whether something else is to be added: that those who, discoursing of the Christian religion, confess that salvation comes to men by the grace of God alone, for Christ's sake, yet can scarce afterwards take their eyes off from their own dignity and their own merits in placing their confidence — a suspicion which is cast upon me partly because the natural sense of man suffers itself to be abased with great unwillingness, and eagerly studies its own praise and glory; partly because I see that, though it is a matter of so great difficulty to order one's life by the evangelical rule without deceit, man is so prone to devise other holinesses by which he may please himself — by gathering together (as we said a little before) the sins of others and damning them with a severe brow; by carrying on many and most wordy discourses about the Gospel; by handling insolently those who deflect a little from the beaten track and the received doctrine; by the utter neglect of all care of the body, and other things of the same kind. For as to the Papists, who have devised so many ways of purchasing eternal life, it is no wonder, among whom that opinion had already openly prevailed that every man must be saved by the merits of his own good works. Indeed, I strongly suspect that to discourse of faith and of God, and to say that salvation is obtained by faith and freely, is one thing; and to be so persuaded is another: and that each man privately settles his own account, persuaded that if God for Christ's sake freely pardon him his sins and receive him into sonship — yet it may without doubt come to pass that one who holds this for certain may discourse of faith most fluently, while the other has not yet so much as tasted the other with the very surface of his lips. Whence it may perhaps happen that not a few are hallucinated about their own confidence, claiming to themselves a confidence of which they have no taste. And would God that the number even of these were not too great! To keep us from being hallucinated in any of the ways we have hitherto recounted, there is well-nigh one safeguard: that the error, in which it lies hidden, be not only not unknown, but be also held ready at hand and meditated. Wherefore it will not be enough to have learned these things once; they must be turned over in the mind again and again, so that on this side those snares of Satan (real, though otherwise hidden) are before our eyes: on that side, your own bent of life and condition and disposition, and the times into which you have fallen — so that whatever there is of that kind in which the depraved sense of man may have somewhat to seek, to desire, to use, to love, to esteem, even if your spirit seems to you to be such that you think nothing of the kind can befall it — one the Spirit by which you are led, another the mark toward which you direct your counsels: beware of flattering yourself; beware of lightly believing yourself; shake yourself out, often and [sharply]. For you will find, more than once, what you would have sworn was nothing but spirit, to have been anything rather than spirit. And if you can do anything further: let there come into your mind some deceitful simulator, or covetous man, or proud, or ambitious, or envious, or one desirous of revenge, but well known and thoroughly understood by you; and think with yourself, if that man had done what you are meditating, attempting, or doing — what mind would you suspect him to have, what counsel, what sense? Presently return to yourself, and search most diligently the secrets of your own heart, whether there is any trace of such a sense in you; and if any, even the lightest, impression appears, do not despise it, but search more and more: for you will find, even beyond what you will wonder at. [Consider also] how much you think the glory of God, and the best state of the church, and the hope of everlasting life are to be prized — and in so serious a meditation of all these things you will have to exercise yourself.

[Here the margin carries the theme forward: how it comes to pass that men knowingly and deliberately offend against God's law — principally the nature corrupted by the fall of our first parents, spread into all men, in all things wholly an enemy to the divine law: first, because God's providence does not satisfy it…]

…Thus it comes to pass that one who has once, by snatching some thing of however small price, violated the laws of shame and honesty, is afterwards rendered by degrees more and more bold. This public penance is also, in truth, suspected by me, as a thing which seems to [feed and] give no small strength to the Pharisaical spirit. For there is in man, by nature, a certain elation of mind by which each affects a kind of dominion over others, and authority and eminence; and for that cause it seems a fair thing to each to behold suppliants, and men humbly begging pardon. For which cause it will surely not rarely happen that, while a man thinks he is exacting this for the glory of God's cause, he exacts it, led by private reasons or affections. In sum: I judge that nothing at all is to be added to that which is commanded; but simply what the Lord taught is to be done: that him who will not obey the church's admonitions the church shall thenceforth not acknowledge for her own. But if that man afterwards give any signification of repentance, and trustworthy men bear witness to it, when it is made known to the church, let him be in the same place where he was before — and let this be done with as little pomp of words as may be.

But for what causes shall there be place for censure? Certainly whatever is reproved in a man by a clear testimony of the word of God — unless, being admonished, he is willing to abstain from it — seems to be cause enough for censure. In which matter, nevertheless, account is to be taken of human infirmity, which I indeed think no one will rightly take who is not himself, held by a true desire of obeying God, not negligent also in continually exploring his own infirmity. Here there is need of great charity, and likewise of prudence, without which nothing in this kind can be rightly done. But I marvel that, though there is scarce anything so unworthy of a Christian man as that the petulance of the tongue should harm another, or lie in wait for his fame — and in no thing is sin more committed — yet I have never heard of anyone marked with censure on that account; though as no other vice was to be endured, so neither is this in any way to be neglected, by which infinite brawls, contentions, and enmities are daily wont to be stirred up in the church. But since for the most part these whisperers have much skill in the arts of flattery, they win for themselves the favour of those who have some power by authority; and by retailing now this man's sins, now that man's, and detesting them, they hunt after a good opinion of themselves among them, and so provide for themselves.

Moreover, whom shall we say are subject to censure of this kind? The promiscuous common people alone? What if those whom the Lord calls the salt of the earth should be worthy of censure? Since it is said of them, If the salt have lost his savour, its use henceforth shall be none, except to be cast out and trodden under foot of men [Matt. 5], it readily appears that they also are subject to censure. And truly it would be very absurd if, when no blemish is to be tolerated in the foot or in any despised part of the body, it ought to be tolerated in the face, and in the very eyes. But who shall be the censurers of the censurers themselves? Suppose the whole ecclesiastical senate labours under infamy: shall the church be compelled to connive — not only so far as to suffer them to be, or to be held, her members, but even to bear their unjust dominion? Certainly, since they now preside only to destroy the church, it must needs be possible that what the Lord says should come to pass: that the unsavoury salt be cast out and trodden under foot of men. And since there are only two parts of a church — one of those who govern, another of those who are governed — those men will certainly not condemn themselves: it must needs be, therefore, that they can be condemned by the rest of the church. — Further, it is to be understood whether it belongs to every man to reprove one who sins, or whether there is some exception. Certainly he who has a beam in his own eye is not a fit man to attempt to draw the mote out of his brother's eye — unless perchance so that, having accused himself also before his brother, he exhorts him together with himself to amend his life: for if the no-obscure amendment of the one who exhorts the other should so follow, such an admonition will be so far from useless that perhaps no other can be more fit. Nor, indeed, is he fit…

[Here Book V ends (p. 290). Its closing argument in the 1631 index: ecclesiastical censure is useful for preserving purity, but many frauds lurk in its exercise; public penance is neither necessary nor useful; and its censurers are themselves under censure.]



BOOK VI

[Margin: "Modest liberty of opinions in religion is above all things adverse to Satan's kingdom."]

…that there will also be a like diversity of opinions and judgments; and that no man will lack someone to dissent from him and contradict him; and since almost no one is not contradicted, many must needs come into doubt as to what they should chiefly approve and follow. But he who doubts is stirred up to the inquiry of the truth; and if many are inquiring, it would be wonderful if someone did not find it. But when the truth is found, if there be liberty of discoursing, and a comparing of opinions together be made, it must needs come uppermost. From which it is brought about that Satan's kingdom cannot stand long together with liberty of opinions in religion. But if that liberty does not agree with it, it follows that some certain law does agree with it, by which that liberty is restrained and taken away. And since the very name of religion cannot be wholly taken away, and all readily understand that there cannot be more than one true religion, what other such law will there be than one by which some certain religion — [that is,] indeed, one most impious and detestable — is ordered to be worshipped? And whoever shall dare to mutter anything against it, let the most atrocious punishments of all kinds be ordained against him.

But whatever law is to be promulgated, there is need of an occasion; and what occasions are wont to afford a pretext for taking away liberty of opinions in religion is not very hard to know. They are surely these: too great a multitude of dissenting opinions, contentions, lawsuits, brawls — which Satan sows, not only at that time when the doctrine is already depraved, but even from the time when it is whole and sincere; for contentions and brawls are a kind of way and means toward depraving and shaking it. And though Satan cannot approve those ordinances which do not suffer the doctrine, while it is sincere, to be depraved, yet he certainly approves those which, though they were devised to that very end, nevertheless rather confirm and propagate errors, and furnish occasions for sects, than hinder any of these things. Of what sort those are has already been shown above. And since the more numerous those are who rise against the received doctrine, and the more rash, insolent, and peevish they are, and the more absurd the things they bring forward; and the more authority those who preside over the churches have, and the more they are liable to anger and indignation — the more outrageously do all things seem to attempt the disturbance of the public quiet: let it be considered again and again what is to be decreed, lest while you think most beautifully that you are resisting Satan, beyond all hope you do Satan's business instead — of which matter we discoursed in many words in the Third Book.

Seeing, moreover, that man is born with a desire of knowing, and has some power of judgment, by which he can not rarely discern the truth; and that both the desire of knowing and the judgment may be either quickened or slackened — it is without doubt to Satan's interest that these have as little strength as possible. And since inquiry proceeds from the desire of knowing, and inquiry is the way of arriving at the knowledge of the truth, partly, indeed, it does not profit Satan (as has been said) to permit liberty of inquiry in his kingdom; partly, also, it seems that if it be taken away, it will do him hurt — for (as the adage has it) we always strive after things forbidden, and desire what is denied. But if a desire is great and intense, we cannot rest until, the impediments being removed, we have by every means satisfied it completely. Wherefore, if by taking away the liberty of inquiring the desire of knowing be heightened, there is need of some other means by which such desire may be restrained, or even, if it can be done, be altogether taken away. But all desire rests in thought; for no one can choose anything except by thinking. Therefore, if Satan can bring it about that we do not so much as think of knowing the truth of religion, he will surely bring it about that we do not choose it. And since the desire of anything consists of three parts, as it were, of thought — the first, that by which we think the thing to be good; the second, by which we think it absent from us; the third, by which we think it possible that we may attain it — if any one of these be wanting, the desire itself cannot stand; much less if two, or all, be wanting.

Come then: suppose someone is persuaded that, whatever he does, God will take it in good part, provided he is moved by a desire of pleasing God at the urging of those whose business it seems to be to instruct the people in piety — for if he is wrongly taught, those who taught him will pay the penalty, not he. To such a one it will seem to matter little whether he espies the truth or not. And since, if anything (though otherwise good and desirable) is seen to have some evil joined with it, that thing is of so much the less account the greater that evil is — so much so that, if it seems to have more of evil than of good, he will count it not among goods but among evils — if a man first thinks it a matter of small importance whether in the affairs of religion he have a knowledge of the truth or not; and afterwards is persuaded withal that he cannot attain that knowledge except with the greatest and most laborious studies, and even with great expenses (which hold the place of evils); that business will seem to him something not good to be sought, but evil. And he who is persuaded that he can in no way attain that knowledge — whether because he cannot bestow upon it those studies which it seems to require, or because he lacks either the judgment that seems necessary, or sharpness of wit, or something else — will not be held by any great desire to inquire after it. Finally, he who holds for certain that the received doctrine is true, and whatever is repugnant to it false, will not think knowledge of the truth in religion is wanting to him; and so will judge it need not be inquired after. Since these persuasions seem to have the greatest force for extinguishing the desire of inquiring after the truth, it will be worth the labour to know whence they arise, and by what things they are confirmed.

It is likely that when the common people see learned men, and men of great name, not agreeing on various points of religion, but that there are great lawsuits and contentions among them, they fall into such a thought as this: that the doctrine of religion is a matter exceedingly difficult to be known, and uncertain, and that there is no end of inquiring after its truth — inasmuch as neither the knowledge of Latin, nor of Greek, nor of Hebrew, nor any other learning, nor the writings of so many expositors who believed they could illustrate the divine writings, nor indeed anything else, has been able to contribute so much toward [the finding of it]…

[Marginal heading: "He is busy about this: to take away all desire of inquiring after the truth."]

…may it not rather be hoped that, if simple men give themselves to God and implore His Spirit, those things will be opened to them which the wise can attain by no studies, by no helps of human arts? Indeed that those wise men cannot perceive them for this reason — because they ascribe more than enough to such helps? Which God cannot bear, since He will have all wisdom to be ascribed to Himself, and to nothing else; and He deprives them of all power of sight, so that they plainly can see nothing. Or were not unlearned men for the most part those who followed Christ while He walked among men, while learned men — such as the Pharisees were — persecuted Him and were His greatest enemies? Let us wonder, then, not that they see not, and so, after the manner of the Andabatae, fight in darkness — those who are taken in their eyes.

[Margin: "The custom of citing writings or authors is to be disapproved, and is dangerous."]

But what shall we say of the custom of citing the authorities of writers? Wherever it prevails, men must needs be of the opinion that what is to be held in any matter cannot otherwise be ascertained than by shaking out the opinions of all the better writers; and those who are entangled in that error — if, leaving all other things, they give themselves wholly to reading those writers (which will be very few men) — I see not what can be hoped of them, except that they desert all reading, and come into this opinion, that it belongs to none to search out divine things but ecclesiastical pastors. Wherefore, even if this custom had no other inconvenience, yet on this account alone it would seem most detestable. But other causes are not lacking, and those most weighty, for which it is to be disapproved. And first indeed: the honour which was due to the written word of God is by this custom transferred well-nigh wholly to expositors. For what every man ought to hold as persuaded because the Spirit of God left it so written, he is now persuaded of because such men so interpret it; for although he holds it as persuaded that what is written ought to be true, yet he believes that which is written, not because it is so written, but because those men expound it so, whose authority he thinks he must acquiesce in — so much so that if the exposition is contrary to what is written, he will follow the interpreters, not the written sentence of the Holy Spirit. Who, then, does not see here that more faith is given to expositors than to the divine Scriptures? Or at least, certainly, as much? For the same thing happens as if ambassadors came from somewhere to a king whose language he does not understand, so that he must use an interpreter: for if he believes what is spoken, assuredly it is not because the ambassadors so report it — since he does not understand them — but because the interpreter testifies that they so report it; so that if the interpreter expounds amiss, he will give faith to the interpreter, not to the ambassadors; and it easily appears that the king's credulity rests on the interpreter's fidelity, not on the ambassadors' words. And since the authority of writers is not a firm and stable thing — for at one time some, at another others, are in greater price, as not long ago Thomas Aquinas had the highest authority with all men, and with us he has none — it will come to pass, if men of somewhat insincere doctrine get authority, that by their testimony that doctrine will be believed as divinely delivered which is by diametrical opposition repugnant to the divine doctrine: which we see has happened in the Roman church. Moreover, since the Son of God testifies that the Father would not lay open His secrets to the wise, but to babes [Matt. 11], it must needs be that the things that are written were written for babes, not for the wise. But by that custom it will come to pass that only the wise seem able to understand them — those, namely, who by the Lord's testimony alone cannot understand — not that all writers are of the number of those wise men of whom the Lord speaks; but however you take the matter, an opinion contrary to what babes ought to have from the Lord's words cannot fail to rise from it. Add to this: as it is to be wished that no lawsuit or controversy arise, so it is to be wished that, if any arise, the way to compose them be as expeditious as possible. But if the opinions of the expositors are to be produced, and it may be seen that they themselves set down things far more conflicting than the Spirit of God does, and speak ambiguously and obscurely, so that some places of the expositors themselves must be explained by others — who does not see that the way of ending dissensions is made infinitely longer than if the divine testimonies alone are cited? For there an end is at last made both of citing places and of weighing them; but here there is no end at all. Or do we not see that on one question alone a huge volume is sometimes written, and yet all the cavils are not taken away, so that a larger field for cavilling seems to have been given? Luther had restored, and other first champions of the truth, that most beautiful and most necessary custom of seeking testimonies from the word of God alone; but certain others, thinking they would do most beautifully if they should confound their adversaries with their own weapons, returned to this: to fill all things up anew with the authorities of the Fathers; which would to God they had done with as good success as the good hope with which they attempted it! Certainly, whereas the adversaries had before been driven into so strait a place that they knew not whither to turn themselves, by this means they obtained a very ample space for exercising the arts of cavilling, tergiversation, and eluding. In truth I judge this custom most pernicious and altogether to be fled, and that men's ears are to be accustomed so that they acknowledge no faith is to be given to anything except the oracles of God alone, comprised in the sacred books. But since the variety of dispositions is very great, and the natural curiosity of some men is by far the greatest — who think there is nothing of which they do not have a fixed ratio in their minds — [Satan labours] to persuade them [to let him join causes with them], lest their curiosity be applied to the invention of truth; [and] by some provision for his kingdom there is need to blunt in them all the force of wit and judgment.

[Margin: "By what arts Satan confirms errors in the minds of the vulgar."]

Now man's judgment chiefly obtains its strength when age is ripe, and when judgment itself is accustomed by right meditations and thoughts, not contaminated before reaching its maturity by any errors, and free from all perturbation of mind; but, on the contrary, it has no force in childhood, nor in the age following…

Lastly, men judge by this sign also that they discern false religion from true: if it is taught secretly — and not altogether foolishly. For since thefts, adulteries, and many other crimes are committed only in secret, it is no wonder if in a doctrine which is taught in secret some crime also seems to be contained. But although this reasoning may avail for some time, it cannot avail always. For as, when the magistrate favours the true religion, whatever is taught secretly in corners, or by night, must needs be false and impious; so, if he is an enemy of the truth, it will be no wonder if that which may not be done openly is done secretly and as by stealth. Or was sacrifice offered of old in secret to Jupiter, Saturn, Juno, and the other gods of that meal? Was not the manner of their sacrifices delivered openly — unless the religion itself stood in the way? What of the Turks? Do they not today publicly instruct men in their impiety? Are they therefore said to teach true things? On the contrary, what of the first Christians when tyrants raged against them? Did they not very often, both by night and in secret, give themselves to prayers and reading? Was their religion therefore to be condemned? In good time, then, before the light of truth is withdrawn, the people must be warned as often as possible: that they do not think they can rightly judge of any doctrine's truth or falsehood by signs devised by themselves, or in any way by the judgment of their own reason; but that the rule of judgment is the oracles of God, comprised in writing — that these alone are our Lydian stone by which we discern gold from brass; that there is plainly no other true judge. Wherefore this precept is to be stamped upon the memory, to be delivered to children, to him that sits in the house and to him that walks by the way, to him that lies down and to him that rises up; to be bound for a sign upon the hand, to be written on the walls of the house; in short, to be always before the eyes [Deut. 6]. And if the forgetfulness of this precept once creeps in, it cannot be but that the depravation of all doctrine presently follows, and follows in such a way that afterwards, though great endeavour be used, truth will scarce find a place.

And since hatreds are the more vehement, and oppress all judgment with greater force, the more often minds are irritated and disturbed — and hatreds cannot be exercised against a pious doctrine at the time when it is already taken away and come into oblivion — minds must be accustomed to exercise their hatreds against some false doctrine. And since the same people cannot both love and pursue with hatred the same doctrine, there must of necessity be several false religions, and diverse ones; and since these can scarcely coalesce in one people, they must also be in diverse peoples, so that each approves its own, and whatever dissents from it disapproves and hates, and those withal who swerve anything from it. Thus, while sect exercises hatreds against sect, it will come to pass that from whatever quarter the truth shines forth, against it from every quarter the greatest hatreds are prepared; and as the followers of each impiety will have been wont to be received by other sects, so shall the assertors of the truth be received — and so much the more harshly, as Satan will inflame men's minds with a more wicked hatred against them. For this cause the people must often be warned: that those alien from the true religion are to be hated only so far as we are enemies to their impiety, and to those actions and deeds by which they either resist the truth, or are in any way injurious to God and His church. Otherwise it so little befits us to exercise any enmities against them that we must pray for them, and by every kind of kindness endeavour to provoke them to a better mind.

[Margin: "How those who preside over the church are incited against the professors of the truth; and how those who preside over the commonwealth."]

But since it is Satan's design to deprave the judgments of men of every sort, and to exercise them in mutual hatreds, it is his design most of all if this happens in those whose authority is great: as in those who preside over churches, or who can apply force — as in magistrates, and all powerful men. As to the pastors of the churches: whenever anyone is raised up a professor of the truth, they are incited much more bitterly and more readily against him if this be added — that from the depraved doctrine they perceive much advantage and veneration among the people, so that when the doctrine is called into controversy, a suit seems to be moved against them concerning their whole estate. In magistrates, moreover, and other powerful men, if anything of the kind can be, it is best of all for Satan. But this above all serves his purpose: if they are persuaded that their office will then at last be approved by God if, in those things which touch religion, they accommodate themselves to the beck of the ecclesiastical pastors, and at their discretion, without any knowledge of the cause of their own, are ever ready to shed blood. And these two, indeed, are great fortifications of Satan's kingdom; for we see how, against the evangelical truth, their power, dignities, wealth, and advantages — which they were wont to perceive from traffickings of souls — arm the Roman pontiff, cardinals, bishops, monks, and other men of that meal against us; and how their butchers — magistrates, princes, and kings — rage against us. Therefore, while any piety flourishes, the people must beware: that they do not suffer their pastors, under any pretext, to institute any trafficking — not even in such a way that at the beginning they do not mix themselves in it. For it will come to pass that, when it is instituted, they will afterwards snatch it to themselves. But this caution is now too late, the last day being now at hand. Magistrates, however, who in other respects, at whatever time, might sin even most grievously, must be warned: that they do not make themselves the executioners of ecclesiastical pastors; but know that whatsoever they shall have done, an account of it must be rendered by them, and that it will not be heard if they plead that they were so persuaded by their pastors. For no command is laid on them to obey any race of men, but to read the volume of the law themselves, and thence to learn what needs to be done in each matter — of which thing we have disputed above in more words.

Now because Satan's kingdom cannot be in safety unless some means exists by which those who are fit to do him secret hurt — by laying open errors and by bringing in some light of truth — may be detected and known, it greatly avails to that end if, together with the errors, a custom of publicly doing something grows up, by which those who do it may be observed without much difficulty, and which is of such a kind as to be joined with some grave offence against God. Of this sort there are many things to be seen in the Papacy: for the Mass is there, in the first place, in such honour that they think there is no sanctimony more excellent than for any man to be present at it daily…

[The argument continues through the public marks by which professors of truth are detected and held odious; it closes with the chapter indexed at p. 323, "The many and great disadvantages of the confessions that are exacted from individuals."]

…he holds his own subjects down with every kind of servitude; he abuses his authority over them in his own interest. You think liberty of opinions is a pernicious thing in the church; and so you do not suffer it, and you judge it well-devised to inquire most diligently, and that if anyone perchance thinks amiss about anything, either he be drawn to a confession of the truth, or be cast out from the church — add, if you please, also that he be punished with death. And for that business exacted confessions seem a convenient means. It is likely, then, that if any danger or ignominy from the church threatens those who dissent in anything, most men will gladly hide their opinion. Wherefore, if they can make a confession by which they do not express that which they desire to hide — whether making no mention of the matter at all, or using envelopes of words by which they seem to say something else, yet express what they wish — that is what they will attain. But if they must needs express it, then, if a man be of a dejected and timid spirit, what will happen? He will testify that he believes what indeed he does not believe, and will seem to himself to assent to a false dogma: he will offend God; and, if the matter be of such moment that he could not have been saved with that error, his conscience will be butchered into peril of salvation. But a much graver sin it will be if there be any error to which, for the pastors' favour, he has assented, and a grave one — as if it pertain to a great diminution of the glory of God. But if he be a man of great spirit and endowed with the fear of God, he will indeed undergo every danger rather than lie. Wherefore, if he be punished for it, and constantly suffer death, with how many disciples will that blood make [disciples]? But if he withdraw himself, and be forced to lack country, perhaps moreover wife and children and his goods — what hatreds will there be against the church? What curses will he hurl against those who preside? How earnestly will he endeavour (when he has found any asylum) to prove his own opinion, and to tear down the doctrine of the church from which he was cast out? Thus diverse pursuits of men will be joined, and the sect gradually grow, and errors will sprout — beyond all measure increased by the means mentioned above — and the most pernicious thing will be introduced into the church: highest and bitterest discord. But it is known, both by the very experience of things, and by the most certain testimony of Him who could neither be deceived nor deceive, that there is no kingdom so firm, no house so stable, which dissensions will not overthrow. So, since from the very beginning of the church there have ever been in her so many, so frequent, so bitter strifes and discords, a collapse has followed, and most lamentable ruin. Of which evils the chief and well-nigh sole cause was that, for any however light dissension, men condemned others and were divided into sects. Wherefore if we imitate our own times in this, who can doubt that the scarcely-yet-restored church is again on the edge of utter destruction? It is therefore much better that, no laws or ordinances being devised which can at any time ensnare men's consciences, we be content with a simple confession of faith which comprises the necessary heads of religion; and as to other dogmas, that those errors which of their own accord emerge and gnaw, be overthrown by convenient and suitable demonstrations. Let pastors leave the secrets of hearts to God; let them not usurp to themselves an empire over souls; nor apply their minds to framing any laws. That is the office of God alone, who alone can certainly see what goods or what evils can flow from every institution. Men who, without the light of the divine word, bend aside to their own prudence cannot [guard even] a thread while Satan, taken upon himself the person of an angel of heaven, joins himself to them as counsellor…

[Here Book VI ends. Book VII follows: "That errors are detected, and yet the truth makes no way: how Satan endeavours this."]



BOOK VII

But when Satan has at last gotten possession of affairs, and has fortified his kingdom with all the munitions he can — so that no spark of truth can shine forth from any quarter, or penetrate thither — it follows that we treat by what arts he guards it, by what arts he repels his most hostile enemies, the assertors of the truth; and what, nevertheless, is the art of defeating him. Nor is it a matter of great business to know toward what mark Satan has all his mind, eyes, and thoughts fixed. He would, namely, have all the received errors remain firmly rooted in men's minds. But if it must needs be that some are detected, that very few should be those who acknowledge them; and even then he would have it so, that when errors become known, not the truth succeed in their place, but other errors, or an unbelief in all divine things. Of those things which it behoves the pious to believe, he would have nothing, or at least as little as possible, laid open; and if anything be laid open, that it come to the knowledge of as few as possible, and obtain a most infirm foundation, and cannot stand. And since neither errors can be detected, nor the things that are to be believed, unless there are both those who detect and those to whom they are detected, he himself would indeed have it that there be none who teach…

[Margin: "That errors are detected, and yet truth does not make its way — how Satan contrives this."]

He endeavours to accomplish it by means of the magistrate. But that this be done, the man must be known; and who is sent for the sake of laying open the truth will not find it hard to be known, inasmuch as he cannot be silent and hide his treasures. And if he opens his mouth, there will be no lack of one to inform against him as soon as possible — if he has done it in secret: but certainly when they have detected the ordinances which were appointed (as we have said) for the fortification of Satan's kingdom, as among the Papists: unless he be present at Masses, unless he veneer images, and by other indications of the kind — among which this will hold no last place: if, where there is some number of godly-minded men, in some one of their presence talk is made of them as of the greatest heretics, and many things spoken against them with utter calumny, and he has not dared to cast forth his own darts of reproach, or at least has not joined his laughter with others at every most cunningly-wrought slander; much more, if by one little word he has dared in some measure to exempt the innocent from calumnies — as though, when mention is made of such people, everyone ought not to rush upon them with every kind of curse and injury. And since it is not lawful for any of the common people to lay hands on anyone, it must needs be done by those whose office it is to punish wicked men, or specially heretics. Nor can so great barbarity and cruelty ever gain ground that magistrates, with no colour of cause at all, may shed innocent blood; indeed, they must appear convicted of some crime worthy of death — for otherwise they would scarcely be fit to reign at all. But if to him who is said to have seduced the people opportunity of defending himself were given, the truth has so great force as it has: compared with impostures it could not fail to be recognised, and it is most certain that danger would be created for Satan's kingdom. Wherefore every such comparing of notes must be eluded by Satan. Yet, that nothing may seem to be done unjustly, it is enough to compose a name of heresy or sect, or to borrow some old one, and condemn it: so at the beginning they said Luther renewed the errors of John Hus and Wyclif; and those who embraced the evangelical truth were afterwards, from Luther, called Lutherans; so that whoever is taught to favour Lutheran dogmas, no need seems to be of greater examination of the cause why he should be burned. And that the people may inquire less curiously what just cause there is for this kind of men to be put to death — nay, that they applaud their punishments — it much avails that this sect (as they call it) labours under the foulest infamies, and is so ill spoken of that they cannot so much as utter its name without loathing. This they attain by the arts of calumniating. So in the time of the nascent church it was said that the Christians met by night, and, the lights extinguished, most foully indulged in promiscuous lust — which calumny has been most wickedly renewed against the Christians of the church now reviving; and others added besides: that they gave the reins entirely to every kind of lust; that they took away the difference of actions and works; that they taught it to be all one how anyone lived, whether he ordered his life by the rule of God's commandments, or permitted himself anything whatever; and by what things they can, the enemies of the truth endeavour to heap the greatest ill-will upon us, to turn men away from all thought of inquiring what in truth our dogmas are, and of what kind. And where the state of things is such that those who claim the care of religion are themselves armed with the sword — as there are at Rome and in many other places many who even themselves exercise the office of punishing God's servants — they will punish them in such a way that, unless the greatest stupidity occupied men's minds, it could easily appear by what spirit they are led. But where a king, or any other magistrate, bears rule, that the same be done must be obtained of the magistrates, but in such a way that there be no place for pleading the cause; and that they may obtain it, the same arts of calumniating are needed.

[Margin: "That there be none who teach: he assails such men with calumnies."]

Now the calumniator's art is this: when he falsely accuses someone, so to occupy both ears of him with whom he makes the accusation, that the accused can obtain no part [of a hearing]; so that, as if the accusation were most certain and most just, he be condemned — no opportunity of speaking ever having been made before the judge. That this may happen, many things must concur: in the calumniator himself, great authority; in him with whom the accusation is made, great ignorance of the matters in hand, and about the things he values most, the utmost suspicion; in those who are accused, utter poverty and utter contempt, so that no one even deigns, or dares, to favour them with a single word.

The calumniator's authority has two parts. One is that he appear of such innocence and holiness as never to burden anyone with an unjust accusation. The other is that he appear of such wisdom as that he cannot be hallucinated in discerning the crime of the man he accuses. In general, how authority is acquired by wicked pastors of churches has been said above. But they confirm it especially with princes and other magistrates — besides the arts of flattery and adulation and other arts of that kind — by a feigned notable sanctimony and by the name of the office they usurp to themselves. It is certain that the farther off anything is, the less it is seen; and the life of every man is far from a prince's eyes, since, occupied with the weight of governing his own greatness, he cannot observe how each man lives, or of what disposition he is; indeed he can know nothing of these matters except by many reports — by which very often a deceit is worked upon the prince himself, and many are also corrupted by gifts and bribes. In ecclesiastical pastors, then, and in their helpers, the prince can see countenance, gesture, habit, and speech, most diligently composed for authority, gravity, and the simulation of holiness — nothing besides. That any wicked counsel can lie hidden under such specious coverings seems in no way likely; especially if the prince himself is of a candid mind, as those commonly are who are born of illustrious stock. And that such men have it sufficiently explored what in religion is true, what false, what pious, what impious — because of their profession — cannot be doubted by those who do not examine the matter more subtly. And that they fully and diligently know anyone's deed before they inform against it — because of the opinion entertained of their holiness and their wisdom — no one can doubt in the very least…

[Men] think they need so much more time, labour, and expense to attain certainty in these difficult matters [the more learned disagree]. There is added this persuasion: that the things which come into controversy have been often assailed before by diverse heretics, and most excellently defended by men endowed (forsooth) with the highest sanctity and highest wisdom, so that they are now taken for matters already adjudged. There is added, finally, that men, in estimating things, use their most inept judgment, and are governed by those signs which we recounted above. For those dogmas cannot be approved by them which are repugnant not only to man's judgment but to his utmost desires; which condemn the judgment of ancestors, and of many ages and nations — nay, of very many men most famous for the name of wisdom; among which number are chiefly counted those who enjoy ample fortune, and those whom these very men advance and value most — but those most of all to whom antiquity has added authority. Nor, indeed, can those dogmas seem true which, to those who embrace them, prepare forthwith the most numerous and greatest afflictions, and are (as they seem to him who judges) hateful to God as well as to men: in short, those dogmas which are not publicly delivered, but secretly, in corners, and as by stealth instilled into men's ears; and they shut their ears to the truth when, preoccupied by hatreds, they have been set against that unspeakable name of heresy with which it is defamed, before they have known what is said. By what means this comes about has now been told. But the inward fear also which is conceived from the edicts and punishments of those who, when they have been willing to assent to new things (as they seem), have been afflicted with the most savage punishments, has very much in it — not only for this reason, that they prefer their present tranquillity to the knowledge of truth and the glory of God, but for this also: that those doctrines may seem the more to be heresies which such cruelty pursues. For (as has been said elsewhere) what men are unwilling to have be, they unwillingly suffer themselves to be persuaded of; and since they would neither undergo eternal damnation by resisting the truth, nor embrace those dogmas which would immediately be a cause to them of the greatest calamities, unless God does them great violence, they cannot be brought to believe those doctrines to be true. But this, above all things, makes men with the most obstinate minds reluctantly resist the truth, and utterly deaf: that both the Gospel and those who profess it are most evil spoken of among them. The Gospel, indeed, while, defamed by the name of heresy, it is said to contain other things than it really contains — as, a licence for all lust and impure life, and other things of the kind; the professors, while they are accused of an impure life, contaminated with every kind of vice; while it is said that they do not all think the same, nor agree among themselves, but that there are as many heads, so many opinions. But they vent their rage chiefly against those who discharge the office of teaching: that they are unlearned, arrogant, rash, of most corrupt minds; that they do not study God's glory, but endeavour, led by envy and hatred, to overthrow all human and divine rights, to break all laws of justice and honesty, all laws of shame. As the fame is of Luther among the Papists: that because he could not obtain a Cardinalate (as they call it), he rose up against the Roman church — which has also been said of certain others. And the reproaches cast against them partly have nothing at all of truth, but are devised by utter calumny; partly indeed have something of truth, but — besides what the calumniators add of their own — are also wrongly interpreted. For as to so great a discrepancy of opinions: it is indeed true that among those whom the impious call by one name there are diverse and manifold [opinions]. But what, pray, is this? Nothing but that, as soon as anything of evangelical truth is restored, to make it infamous, and to take away faith from it, Satan sows here and there many absurd opinions — tares, forsooth, among the wheat — and frames up many sects, to which, along with the evangelical [truth], he gives one name in common. Wherefore since that multitude of opinions is common to it with the Gospel, and does not justly pertain to its infamy: Satan may stir up how manifold and how multiplied a crop of tares he will — he will never bring it about but that wheat is wheat. But this can happen, and does happen: that although some think rightly about the chief heads of religion, this man also errs in certain things, though least of all concerning this; another in another; so that also among God's pious servants there is something of dissension. But who can marvel enough at this? If in some one city there are twenty or thirty thousand men, among whom there is the highest agreement about religion, five or six will dissent among themselves. Of that so great number of men agreeing, there will scarce be any talk; of those few, an infamous murmur — and so the matter is cast into men's ears that it seems in that city there is nothing but dissensions, that scarce between two citizens there is agreement. The same thing happens concerning men's lives: for if in any people which has embraced the Gospel a great amendment of manners has followed — since men are still men — it cannot be but that sometimes some crime is committed by someone. Here the adversaries, to note the few crimes, will have lynxes' eyes; but to see that amendment of manners they will have no eyes at all. And it seems somehow to come to pass in this way, that in most things that which is done amiss is more noticed than that which is done well. Does someone restore a deposit? Does he behave honestly with his neighbour's wife? Does he give just measure to those who buy of him? Scarcely does anyone tell it to anyone — unless the matter carries some great novelty before it: as if one man contended that no more than ten pennies were owed to him and would accept no more; the other contended that he owed fifteen and would compel him to accept them. But if anyone touches another with one word, or in any way (as happens) has slipped, forthwith the fame flies, complaints are heard. I say nothing of this: that where any people embraces the Gospel, there are many of the people who would have embraced any other doctrine whatsoever rather than the evangelical, inasmuch as they are touched by no care of religion; wherefore their impure life, worthy of many and the greatest reprehensions, brings infamy and dishonour upon the Gospel — which perhaps with magnificent words over their cups — not to say among harlots — they vaunt. Such men shall one day pay God the just penalties of their impiety and crimes. Nay, there are not lacking of that number those who, while in truth they care nothing for religion, yet feign that they love it exceedingly; bestow much labour upon the divine writings; sweat to appear learned and eloquent disputers in divine things; and at last arrive at the office of teaching and preaching; and (O shame!) there is a great dissonance between their heart and their tongue — as they teach far otherwise than they do — which redounds to the greatest infamy of the Gospel. For it is marvellous how inconvenient and unworthy speeches go forth among the common people by the work of the enemies of truth and of Satan, and how no oblivion can wear them away. But though there may be many pretenders, there are also undoubtedly many who worship God from the heart; who nevertheless cannot themselves help sometimes suffering something humanly, which furnishes the calumniators matter for whispering…

…that no one be rejected except those who are to be rejected, and no one be received except those who are to be received. And so the symbol will be most fit, by which Christians are discerned from non-Christians. From which things it sufficiently appears that to write a confession of faith is also a far other thing than to write an instruction or sum of religion. For he who writes an instruction must comprise not only those things which are necessary, but also whatsoever things have any use; but in writing a confession, as nothing that is altogether necessary to be known must be passed over, so whatever is added that is not necessary (even if otherwise true and good) pertains to the division of the church into sects, and to discords and brawls. He who wants peace and concord to be in the church must be content with a confession of those things that are necessary. For it is in vain for anyone to hope that it will ever come to pass that the church of God is so happily dealt with that all men think the same about all things. Wherefore that one way to concord alone remains: that those who embrace the necessary things bear with one another, and treat their controversies among themselves lovingly and humanely, as brethren.

Nor is it enough that [the symbol] neither lack anything nor have anything over, but what the symbol comprises must also be so expressed that a man who has not acknowledged it cannot seem to have acknowledged it, nor can he who has truly acknowledged it seem not to have acknowledged it. But a man might seem to acknowledge something which in truth he did not acknowledge, if the words by which it were expressed he himself understood otherwise than he ought. As the Papists confess with the word, indeed, a remission of sins; but since they understand such a remission of sins as is made by a compensation of the merits of good works, what they confess with the word they do not in truth acknowledge. On the other hand, a man might seem not to acknowledge something which nevertheless in truth he acknowledged, if he did not understand the words by which it was expressed, and therefore denied it — though he would not have denied the thing itself, plainly expressed. What then is to be done, that both these inconveniences be avoided? In my judgment they may be avoided in this way: some things, in a confession of faith, are to be asserted, as that there is one true God, and Him whom He sent, Jesus Christ; some may be denied, or indeed condemned, when anything fights with the confession of things necessary to be known — as if I deny that righteousness is placed in the law, or say with Paul: that those who have placed their righteousness in the law have nothing to do with Christ. But beware you do not understand it to be the same thing to fight with a thing necessary to be known, and to fight with the confession of a thing necessary to be known. For since we taught above that it can come to pass that a man believes things which fight among themselves and cannot be true together, it is not necessary, if anything fights with a thing necessary to be known, that it also fight with the confession of the same thing. But we are persuaded that the things which are necessary to be known are all contained in the divine writings, and expressed there plainly and perspicuously, so that no one can fail to understand them unless blinded; for if anyone is blinded, nothing can be spoken plainly enough for him. Which things being so, nothing seems to me more advisable than that a confession of faith which is to be used for a symbol not only comprise nothing not necessary to be known, nothing not most true and most certain, nothing not most fully attested by the testimony of the divine writings, but also that it comprise nothing except expressed, as much as possible, in the very same words and forms of speech which the Spirit of God himself used. Not that any force is to be thought to lie in the words or syllables themselves, or that it matters anything in what words everything is expressed, if only it is both true and rightly understood; but since the disposition of man is exceedingly slippery — who often judges those things most certain and most explored, and incapable of being brought into controversy, which afterwards not only come into controversy but are even shown to have been false — therefore I judge it more advisable, in writing a confession of faith, to retain the words of the Holy Spirit than to use our own; lest, indulging our own disposition, we insert something which is not only not certain and necessary to be known, but not even true. And furthermore: even if nothing is inserted except what is both true and necessary to be known, it may yet happen that our words, unnoticed by ourselves, have something ambiguous in them (for there is often scarcely anything more difficult than so to express any sense that no place is left for cavilling); and so it will come to pass that he who would have embraced your sentence as expressed divinely, and who therefore ought himself to be received, when he suspects something else is being said in the words expressed by us, rejects it, and is therefore himself undeservedly rejected. Which thing has been the origin and beginning of many a sect. From which things it comes to pass that there exists a cause, by no means to be despised, why the very words of the Holy Spirit should be retained; while why we should rather use our own, there can scarce be any cause at all. For no one denies that the things necessary to be known are contained in the divine writings, plainly and perspicuously expressed. I speak not now of the Papists, whose whole faith stands upon the authority of the Pope, but of those who profess that the word of God is the rule of their faith, and nothing besides. But what else do we want than to express all things plainly and perspicuously? If we can do it by the words of holy Scripture, which we confess to be clear and perspicuous — shall we therefore use our own words rather than the Holy Spirit's, to cut off from sophisters their occasions for tergiversation? Forsooth, we will be wiser and cannier than the Spirit, and will see better than He what is exposed to cavil and what is not! What rashness will that be? I judge, then, that the things that are necessary to be known are also to be asserted in the words in which they are divinely expressed. But those things which are either to be rejected or to be condemned can perhaps not be expressed unless we use the words that those who assert them use. Only let it be seen what is to be condemned; for whatever is of that kind is to be condemned in that confession which is to be used for a symbol of faith — otherwise, if an error be condemned which does not exclude the erring man from a true knowledge of God, and, because someone refuses to condemn that error, he also refuse to profess the symbol itself, he will be rejected — those being rejected who were not to be rejected. But only those things are to be condemned which so fight with faith in the things necessary to be known that a man cannot together believe both that which he ought to believe, and that which is condemned: as a man cannot have righteousness placed in Christ alone and at the same time in the law also. Wherefore, since it ought to be had placed in Christ alone, those are rightly condemned who place it in the law. But whatever error is of such a kind that it does not hinder that he who errs believes those things which he ought altogether to believe — that error is not to be condemned [in the symbol]; otherwise the true use of the symbol will perish, which (as we said) ought to be this: that whoever receives it be received himself, but whoever refuses to receive it be not received himself either — so that by that sign any who in any way pertain to that church of God which is through the whole world [may be known].

…or this is the way of concord among Christians, or there is absolutely none. For as long as every man will have his own judgment about all other matters be the rule of believing, and a law which it is not lawful not to obey, it must needs be — I had almost said — that all are heretics to all, and that Satan's measure of sects, brawls, clamours, and enmities be none. But if men were once persuaded that whoever should profess that symbol (whatever the rest might be) are nevertheless to be embraced as Christians and as brethren, and that the rights of the sacraments are nevertheless common to all, there would be great hope that the controversies themselves also would be handled with much greater equanimity. Nay, even that, all enmities being removed, they would at last agree among themselves; and so every occasion of calumniating would be cut off from the adversaries — which that it may one day come to pass is to be contended for with God by the most earnest prayers.

These things we set before every godly and peaceful disposition to consider; and if anyone sees anything more in this matter than the Lord has hitherto laid open to us, we earnestly beseech him, again and again, not to wish to hide his talent in a matter of so great moment; and meanwhile, whatever he may find lacking in us, not to interpret our endeavour unfairly.

But that, some errors being detected and laid open, the rest should also be laid open — this cannot easily happen. For unless he who first began to behold some light has noticed all the errors at once — indeed, has approved some of them as though they were true dogmas — it will be a matter of great difficulty that the same man afterwards notice them, especially when admonished by another. The causes are the same as those we mentioned a little before, namely too great an opinion [of oneself] and elation of mind: that [opinion] makes it so that, however little a man sees beyond, he easily persuades himself that he has straightway seen all things; that as he has found his own judgment right in some things, so he persuades himself it has been so in all, and whatever comes into his mouth is an oracle. This [elation] makes it so that no one who is persuaded of anything about himself is willing to seem either to have erred, or not to have seen all things; wherefore, if he has once asserted anything, he can scarce be brought to retract it — especially when admonished by another — nor to suffer it to be overthrown; and what he would be unwilling to do, he cannot even easily understand that there is just cause why he should do it; wherefore, as he would not have the things he asserted to be false, so neither can he be persuaded that they are false. Excessive elation of mind also brings it to pass — which is joined with the disease of our nature — that no one easily admits companions in praise. Whence it comes to pass that if anyone wishes to touch those things which the first men passed by, or approved by their own vote — as if someone were to come to snatch away a crust of bread from a man famished with hunger who had gotten it — he burns with anger at him. And just as those very men who first tasked themselves with routing errors are themselves a hindrance to another's touching anything further in that kind, so are all those who have held those first teachers…

…rather let the former hold his peace. And those words: Quench not the Spirit; despise not prophesyings; prove all things; hold fast that which is good. [1 Thess. 5.] "For what can we now handle that has not been handled before?" Not that this is to be endured — that anyone should perpetually weary the church with the same testimonies or reasonings on the same matter, and be troublesome to her. But from this also it can come to pass that remnants of errors and superstitions remain: that at the time when a restoration of divine worship and of godly dogmas is to be made, men think that not all things can immediately be restored at the start, but that first those things are to be removed in which there is some notable impiety; then, some time having intervened, a complete restoration can be instituted with less hindrance. But the event has taught in many places that there is afterwards more difficulty in removing the remnants than there was at first in removing the chief errors — so that when it comes to that point, it is much better to correct all things with the same labour. For Satan endeavours with all the arts and with all the forces he can, to hinder a restoration of whatever kind as much as a full and complete one.

[Margin: "That, errors being changed, the change is not with the truth, but with other errors."]

That a change may be made from errors not to truth but to other errors may happen in the same ways by which we said errors grow out of controversies. But that men pass from errors to an unbelief in all things: the first and chief occasion which those so many lawsuits and controversies about religion afford (as we have warned above). The same cause of old, when among the philosophers there were lawsuits and brawls about every matter whatsoever, and things were plausibly disputed on both sides about everything, there were not lacking great names among philosophers who maintained that all things rest in opinions, and that there is no certain knowledge of anything. There is added also the impure and loose life of almost all men of whatsoever religion. For thus some argue: that religion is not to be approved which does not make its professors good; and since none, in their judgment, effects this, they despise all alike. But so indeed are they wont to argue who have turned their thoughts to lusts and to foul and criminal desires, and seek how at some time to be freed from every sting of conscience (which is wont vehemently to diminish the sense of pleasures), that they may with a looser mind indulge their genius; and what they greatly wish were most true, they persuade themselves is also most easy. But not a few also are brought to this by the fact that whatever they hold as persuaded in religion they believe for this reason — because they think most highly of those doctors whom they follow, and judge those who teach the contrary to be very wicked and ignorant men. For when the opinion about their own teachers is changed (which can happen for the lightest cause), their whole faith collapses like a building upon a corrupted foundation: and this happens the more easily, the greater the opinion they have had of their teachers. And so it comes to pass that if a man of good faith describes the life of a Christian man, the more finished in all its parts he paints his exemplar, the more wholly the hearers dream that the man himself is of such integrity and holiness of life, and do not wish to have any account — not even when often admonished — of human infirmity, nor to consider how much easier it is to express true holiness in words than in deeds. Therefore whatever they hear or observe of that kind repugnant to their dream, they forthwith withdraw all faith from that man; and since they can neither return to the old errors, nor see anything better to follow, it remains that they cast away all thought of religion, and think that alone is to be feigned which seems most fit to win them the minds of those from whom they hope good may come to them — than which kind of men nothing can be more pernicious. Controversies full of contentions and brawls are therefore most of all to be avoided; and no less is it to be taken care that by examples of an impure, dissolute life, alien from the profession of piety, we do not alienate men's minds — otherwise inclined to hate being deceived — from the truth. But those men are often to be warned: not to fix their eyes on men; not to place the integrity of men's lives as a foundation of faith; that men's piety is often feigned, often unstable; indeed, that the infirmity of human nature is so great that, although a man can discourse of religion and of God most holily, and worship God with no feigned faith, yet for all that he cannot long support too great an opinion. The example of David alone can teach this abundantly — I say nothing of the many unjust interpretations with which holy men themselves are burdened by Satan's industry. Wherefore faith ought to rest upon the oracles of God, i.e. to be firm and stable however men behave themselves. But if eyes are fixed on men, it will most certainly collapse as soon as possible.

But if to errors a knowledge of the truth should succeed — it does not suffer this knowledge to be firm and stable [when ingratitude intervenes]. First, if there are no [adverse times]. For God is wont to take vengeance upon the ungrateful; and the penalty very often is to recall His own gifts, as though demanding them back. And this ingratitude is seen both in adverse times, when the enemies of the truth rage; and in quiet and tranquil times: in adverse times indeed, when a man, that he make no loss of goods, or be forced to lack his country, the most delightful society of his wife, the embraces of his most sweet children, or even to give his body to be burned by fire, and to be marked (in the vulgar opinion) with most foul ignominy — though God has laid open the truth to him, yet does not dare to acknowledge it, nor impart it to anyone: plainly valuing the commodities of this life more than the glory of God. In tranquil times ingratitude is discerned when we grow insolent, indulge our disposition, and confer all our studies, endeavours, and accounts upon the commodities, delights, and blessedness of this life…



BOOK VIII

Since it now remains that we treat of the very inventor, deviser, and effector of all these things — Satan — of whose history, nevertheless, sacred letters have not left so full an account as our curious dispositions might desire: only thus much is known — that he was created of a most excellent nature, and adorned with the most excellent gifts; but when he had abused them to the utmost arrogance, he was hurled down from heaven, and those most excellent gifts, by the most just and most tremendous judgment of God, were converted into utter wickedness, by which he took upon him to oppose God in all things so far as he could strive to do it. Nor is he the only spirit of that kind, but there is a very great multitude, of whose head and prince is Satan. For it is written that from the region of the Gadarenes a whole legion [of demons was cast out]… and therefore the eternal fire is said to have been prepared for the devil and his angels, because of his sin [Matt. 25]. That Satan is the greatest old-deceiver and the most implacable enemy of the human race is clearer in the sacred writings than to seem to need any demonstration. From which that other thing I said at the beginning is easily brought about: that whatsoever is of such a kind that, if men do it, speak it, or think it, it can confer something to his endeavours, he will always endeavour that it be done, spoken, and thought. And although, for the sake of that business, he must deal with the minds of men — to deceive them, to delude them, to persuade them, to inflame them, to work upon them by hope and fear — it is not our purpose to philosophize more subtly how he does these things. This is certain: that he impels men to do the things he himself desires; that he spares no one; that there is no one from whom he fears for himself, or whom he reverences — of how great wisdom, holiness, or authority soever — since he did not hesitate to attack even the Son of God himself. Nor yet are those whom he attacks all men; indeed, not even the least part of them, as it might seem; nor does he address them as though he wanted something else from them. For although it is written of Judas that Satan had put into his heart the thought of betraying the Lord [John 13], it is not written that he so accosted Judas that he could be seen, and exhorted him to it. Rather, since Satan is a spirit, he seems to deal with men's minds in no other way than the Spirit of God himself does; for He so moves and works upon minds that nevertheless they do not perceive there is something else which, as it were, addresses them — indeed, the thoughts seem to them nothing other than their own. Except insofar as someone, being taught what man can effect and what he cannot, if he perceives thoughts to be exceedingly pious and holy, understands that they are to be attributed to the Holy Spirit and not to himself — yet even that is to be interpreted as he is helped by the Spirit himself. Wherefore, whatsoever thought Satan injects, it seems to the man altogether the same — namely, that he himself is the one who thinks it — unless, if it is utterly wicked, he notices it to be a thought [from without], and, not being altogether ignorant of Satan's works, suspects it to be from him. Perhaps, too, not every evil thought and evil counsel is to be referred to Satan as author, since man by his own nature, even now, never ceases to think evil and to do evil with no added stimulus, and follows entirely the very things which Satan most wishes him to follow. Only this difference there is between them: man is held by I know not what desire of his own salvation; Satan desires nothing less for him than salvation. To man for the most part that happens which Medea says of herself: I see the better things, and approve them; I follow the worse. Satan opposes God by will and purpose. Man courts present pleasure and is moved by things present. The things to which Satan impels a man he often, with a fixed counsel, directs to a very remote end. Thus it comes to pass that Satan sometimes brings a man to do things which are by no means pleasant for him to do: as, to beat himself with scourges, to accomplish some long journey with bare feet, to impose upon himself frequent fasting and other inconveniences of the kind — in which Satan has persuaded him there is much safeguard for salvation. And man also perpetrates many evils (as is likely) with Satan himself unwilling: as if a man of great name, and the same a great patron of errors and impiety, slips into some crime by reason of which he makes a wreck of his name and authority, and affords men an occasion of opening their eyes and of recognising impostures. Otherwise, the instincts of man and of Satan are so like each other that milk is not more like milk. But man is also of his own accord liable to errors, even if no work of Satan approaches to deceive him. Wherefore, the more alike the proper thoughts of man are among themselves and those which are from Satan, the harder it is for a man to recognise Satan (so to say) speaking in his own heart. Nor indeed is it worth the labour to investigate any subtler means of discerning which are man's from those which are Satan's, so long as it is established what is good, that we may follow it; what evil, that we may decline it. But if perchance we have attributed to Satan what was man's, or to man what was Satan's, the error will be by no means great. Indeed, it is to be seen that the same thing has been attributed now to man, now to Satan — which was done by the Apostle Peter when he reproved Ananias, who had lied to the Holy Spirit about the true price of the field he had sold. For first he speaks thus: Why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? Then again thus: How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? And his wife also he reproved so: How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? [Acts 5.] That which most fits the matter is this: that Satan injects thoughts into men. As it is written of Ananias (as has just been said), so it is written of Judas, that Satan had put it into his heart to betray Jesus [John 13]; and that Satan takes the word of God out of men's hearts [Luke 8]. Since, then, Satan's manner of dealing with man is such that he can deal with him without his perceiving it, he must needs thence have wonderful opportunities of assailing him, and storming him, in a thousand ways. For if some man accost you, and give you evil counsel, or play you a deceit once or twice — if he returns, that he may still catch you with some fraud, even under some specious pretext — since the man's disposition and will are already suspect to you, you will not suffer yourself to be imposed upon. But since Satan can approach in the way that has been said, even if today he has cast before you some most abominable and plainly impious counsel, so that whence it comes cannot lie hid — nothing will hinder but that tomorrow he may return and assail you in another, craftier way. For you cannot beware of that counsel, because its author is suspect to you; since you acknowledge no other author of it than yourself. From which it may be gathered that there is no one whom Satan does not, in some way, assail. For since no state of his can be a hindrance to another's assailing, whatsoever any man is — whether in wisdom, or in holiness — he will assuredly experience nonetheless whether Satan can draw even the most foolish man into error, or puff him up toward the most wicked [pride]…

…The higher anyone has obtained a place in God's church, the more ample fruit Satan gathers if he can deceive him or bend him in any measure: it is credible also that he will do all things to the utmost to lay snares here and there for such men. Yet he is not so occupied with great men as not also to remember the most obscure men of every kind — like a most diligent householder, who so cares for great things as not to neglect even the least.

But Satan is not only occupied with bending men's minds to his wishes in the ways that have been told: his works are much more manifold. He draws down fire from heaven to destroy Job's sheep and many besides [Job 1]; he stirs up that great violence of winds by which the house where Job's children were feasting was overthrown, and they all perished; and in the end he most grievously torments Job himself in his body. He also works great miracles, if it be by his work that Pharaoh's magicians imitated Moses' miracles well-nigh exactly. And of Antichrist it is foretold that his working shall be with miracles. From all which it may be conjectured how much he can do in very many other things also; and he is also called the Prince of this world [John 12] — which cannot be in vain; indeed, it may be conjectured that, since wealth, honours, dignities, worldly things are said to be disposed by his arbitrament in great part. Since, then, Satan has such great opportunities as we have spoken of: whatever it concerns him should be done or believed, he gives his labour to bring about — if mere reasons suffice, by himself immediately, or by others. If there is need of miracles, he either performs them or, by many deceits, arranges that they are believed to have been performed. If for the belief of some very absurd thing some sort of train of preparation is needed — that from light errors a beginning be fitly made, and that by certain steps men be led on — he does it most ingeniously. And since a thing can be believed both because it is false and because it is really so: if it so expedites, he will take care that it so be. Wherefore, since it most expedites for him that whoever teaches true things in religion be believed to be defiled with some foul crime, and make shipwreck of all his authority, he will lay every kind of snares for him that he fall into some [sin] of which he may triumph; and if he cannot do that, he will suborn those who may assail the man's fame with calumnies; and if through anyone he can shake that fame (him, namely, who is said to profess the same dogmas), nothing will be more to his desire. Wherefore he will endeavour with all zeal to set those who profess the evangelical truth against one another; he will sow certain controversies, lawsuits, discords, brawls, in fine hatreds, by which it may come about that they tear one another with mutual curses. And when he has found by experience that he resists the truth in vain, he will stir up toward the divine writings those dispositions in which he has scented the least piety — holding out to them the hope of great honour, name, celebrity, and very many advantages. He will favour them as much as he can, so that they come into great repute and at last obtain ecclesiastical offices; so that when afterwards he has driven them into some crimes, and these have become public, the truth may thence be noted with infamy and afterwards find the less credit; and the common people cry out against it, "See how those men live who seem as though they were sent, as from a council of the gods of mortals, for the restoration of religion and manners!" "These, then," they will say, "are their masters? This is that their new and recondite wisdom which they vend with so great a brow?" …Wealth, honours, advantages — or, on the contrary, present ignominy, disadvantages, afflictions — are most of all placed before men's eyes; if hope, fear, anger, friendships, enmities be of help to the deceit, their seeds never fail. If there is need of any custom, he devises occasions by which he imposes a kind of necessity for it, and suborns authors for it, and adds most specious colours.

[Margin: "He snatches occasions for his designs from every quarter."]

