But Satan snatches occasions for his designs from every quarter. For if anyone is foolish and inept, he will persuade him whatever fables he pleases, and fill him with the most inept errors; he persuades him he is endowed with some excellent wisdom, and on that account lifts up his spirits, makes him insolent, arrogant, rash. If he is learned, he wonderfully increases his opinion of his own learning, so that he persuades himself that he alone knows something, despises all before himself, and cannot bear it if anyone [contradicts him]. If anyone is of a crafty disposition and but little religious, he uses him most conveniently as an emissary and impostor, to fill all things with deceits, impostures, brawls, and fires. If anyone is endowed with knowledge of the truth and with some piety, he subjects him, as much as he can, to contumelies and the contempt of men, so that no one makes any account of his words and teachings. But if he cannot hinder that faith be had in him, he will take care that men's opinion of him be excessive — and that he be held altogether in God's place. If a people has deserted the reading of the sacred books, he shakes off from them all fear of God, allures them by degrees to pleasures, to luxury, to licence of life, to every kind of lust, in fine to a certain beastly custom of living. If they cultivate studies, he sows lawsuits, discords, and all the other evils of which we have spoken; when he cannot shake the doctrine, he sets his engines against manners; or, if he labours here in vain, he assails the doctrine itself. For the most part, though, he attempts both at once; and perceiving men's sluggishness, he endeavours to make great advances. If he finds them a little more wary, he will assume the person of some heavenly and notable angel; he will inflame men's minds with excessively holy (so to speak) thoughts, by which they transgress the limits set before them by the divine discipline. For example's sake: whereas there is nothing more excellent than to be ready, whenever the account of God's glory may demand it and God impel to it, to meet death in witness of the evangelical truth — he will have injected into someone an ambitious desire for such a death, that by that means he may commend his name to the everlasting memory of men. For Origen is said to have long burned with a desire for death of that kind, and to have voluntarily caught at occasions for it; which indeed can scarcely have proceeded from any good spirit, since we see that not even the Son of God himself brought greater spirits to his own punishment than was needful — inasmuch as he also prayed the Father that (if it could be done) he might be permitted to decline it, but that his will, not his own, should be satisfied [Matt. 26]. Whence it appears that that kind of death was even a horror to him; so far is he from having been carried toward it with cupidity, except insofar as he was most obedient to the Father and thirsted for our salvation. Since it is so, how can it be that Origen, or anyone else, was of a more forward mind than the very Son of God himself? A desire of that kind could scarce be without some rashness, and an excessive and empty confidence — which could also happen…

…against tyrants and the butchery of consciences. For let the people of Israel come into our minds, but chiefly of the Pharisees, Scribes, and Sadducees — what unheard-of blindness was theirs, to whom neither the clearest prophecies of the prophets, nor so many and so great miracles, could open their eyes to acknowledge Him whom they had expected with so great desire! The Pontifical kingdom stands before our eyes. Unhappy people! What shepherds, and of what kind, have they gotten? To whom do they trust their salvation? Whom do they think cannot err? What fictions, what dreams, what trifles have they suffered to be thrust upon them in the Gospel's place? How foul, how abominable, how ruinous a trafficking do they suffer to be exercised upon themselves — that they buy poison for medicine, damnation for salvation, death — and that everlasting — for life; that they worship for God gold, silver, wood, stones, and other most inept inventions of their own madness! And whereas the Apostles in well-nigh one moment spread the Gospel through the whole world, for restoring the same how long, and with how small fruit, has labour been spent? For chattering, for contentions, for fights there are very many among us; but of true piety there appear not so many examples to comfort and gladden us as there exist of impiety to draw from us (unless we were plainly stones) most copious tears. These things it befits all who love Christ to meditate continually — but those chiefly who handle the rudders of the church — lest by any means it come to pass that, unwitting, they lend their labour to the most implacable enemy, for the accomplishing of his crimes. Woe to that miserable man to whom that shall happen! For since, to him who shall have called his brother a fool, the penalty of everlasting fire is set forth; since it would be better for any man to be drowned in the sea with a millstone about his neck than to offend anyone, even the least of those who believe in Christ [Matt. 18]; and since, according to the greatness of their wickednesses and crimes, every man shall pay penalties — since it is said to certain cities, in which many miracles had been wrought without fruit, that it shall be more tolerable in the day of judgment for Tyre and Sidon, nay, for Sodom — what penalties, pray, do we think await those who have conspired with Satan for the perdition of very many peoples, and for the desolation of Christ's kingdom? See what the difference is: whether you only call your brother a fool, or take away his life — and not this temporal life only, but the eternal; and not from one man alone, but from many; nor yet from many men only, but from many peoples. Nor will it excuse you that you did it ignorantly, since you could, by God's oracles committed to you — by which you were warned what you ought to follow, what to beware of — not have been ignorant. If (I say) for so light an offence the penalty of eternal fire is to be undergone, what shall become, in comparison with this, of so implacable a crime? See what this is: from the greatest praises of God, set above all human thought, we can name scarce any greater than this — that for our redemption He delivered up His own Son to death. What, then, shall be His deed toward whoever shall have furnished any cause of destruction — how detestable shall he be with God? Woe therefore to you who, catching at an empty wind — that whether by wit or by learning you may seem to have some value — or led by an importunate curiosity, never make an end of sowing controversies, lawsuits, and brawls! Woe to you who, to indulge your hatreds, envy, emulation, and to serve your own reputation (I know not what), not only do not restrain lawsuits but sharpen them rather, and stir up minds more and more, and so render them immortal! Woe to you who, whether by depravity of mind or even by carelessness, bring no reverence to the handling of matters of such moment, nor weigh what you do, and so fill all things with such men! Woe to you who, with eyes fixed only upon your own dignity, reputation, and the common people's opinion of you — that you may hold the place of certain gods among men — hold your brethren in contempt, afflict and oppress them, and usurp to yourselves a certain dominion over their consciences, and so throw walls around the Satanic kingdom and build up bulwarks for it: woe (I say) to you, woe, woe! How horrible punishments await you in that day! Nor indeed do I now say these things to the Roman Pontiffs, Cardinals, and men of that order alone — what else would it be but to lose labour and oil? I say them to those who (I hope) are still endowed with ears, that they may hear; who love Christ, and are fought against merely by the crafty snares of Satan, so that he may use their work, they thinking nothing of the kind, for his own endeavours. Let each man beware for himself. The Papacy was not first born at Rome; it derives its origin already from our first parents. There is none of us who does not carry his own Papacy in his breast, most surely to bring it forth at the first occasion, unless with great wisdom he has explored himself; and where he plainly sees violence [it has done him], let those who have ears understand. Woe to that miserable man to whom it shall happen to behold the greatest throng of damned men, to whose perdition he himself, however unwittingly, has furnished any work — especially if, having been admonished, he has not even then taken care for himself. How, I ask, will he be able to bear the severity of the Lord's countenance, joined with the highest majesty? What spirit will he have then? What mind? What sense? Therefore let ambitions, angers, enmities, lawsuits, discords, and all other affections depart: let there be one heart of us all, one will of us all; let Christ, and the glory of His name, be the one mark of us all. Let us at length shake off that sleep by which it comes to pass that we cannot discern what snares are laid for us. Nor let anyone applaud himself: that he now sails in harbour, that he is now placed outside all danger — that these exhortations will be useful to others. For I repeat what I said a little before: whoever reasons so with himself — whosoever he may be — him either [I judge to be] nearest the snare, or already most tightly bound fast. For that is Satan's speech, whose custom it is to render a man secure and foolishly confident: then above all to promise peace when there is nothing less than peace. Beware for yourself (I say), beware! Rather, let us know the enemy who is set before us; let us put on the arms of which we have just spoken; and let this be our chief caution: that we never cease to fear; nay, the greater advances against him we shall seem to have made, the more we should determine for certain that we must beware of him; so that we never cease to contend with God in prayers that He show us the snares — but (I say) to each man his own, not only those that are laid for his neighbour. For so necessity of praying is in every way greater than all faith.

FINIS.


* * *

Here ends the first English Satan's Stratagems complete in eight books: the first four as London read them in 1648, the last four as the Latin of Oxford, 1631, here gives them. The 1631 volume closes its eighth book with FINIS, and appends Acontius's letter to Johann Wolf of Zürich on the slow ripening of books — a letter every editor of him may take to heart.

