THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURES AT THE GOLIGHER CIRCLE

by W. J. Crawford, D.Sc. (1880-1920)

Basis: Clean reading edition of W. J. Crawford's The Psychic Structures at the Goligher Circle (New York: E. P. Dutton & Company, 1921; Internet Archive psychicstructure00craw); spelling and wording original; running headers, page numbers and scanner noise removed; the List of Illustrations and the lettered plate figures are not reproduced in this text edition.

Reader note: Crawford's last book, seen through the press after his death by the editor of Light, David Gow, whose editor's note stands at its head. It brings the Goligher Circle trilogy to its close: The Reality of Psychic Phenomena (1916) and Experiments in Psychical Science (1919) precede it in this series.

Rare & Obscure Books series


* * *

THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURES AT THE GOLIGHER CIRCLE

BY W. J. CRAWFORD, D.Sc.

Late Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering, The Municipal Technical Institute, Belfast; and Extra-Mural Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering, Queen's University of Belfast. Author of "The Reality of Psychic Phenomena," etc.

New York: E. P. Dutton & Company, 681 Fifth Avenue

Copyright, 1921, by E. P. Dutton & Company



Editor's Note

As the records contained in Dr Crawford's first book, The Reality of Psychic Phenomena, made their first appearance in Light, which led to my personal acquaintance with the author, who, just prior to his tragic death, desired that I should assist in preparing the present work for the Press, I may perhaps be allowed a few prefatory words.

In his last letter to me (received after his untimely death) he explained that his collapse was due entirely to overwork, and he wrote :

"My psychic work was all done before the collapse, and is the most perfect work I have done in my life. Everything connected with it is absolutely correct, and will bear every scrutiny. It was done when my brain was working perfectly, and it could not be responsible for what has occurred."

And in another part of his letter he said:

"I wish to reaffirm my belief that the grave does not finish all."

These two extracts from a long and affecting letter may be appropriately quoted here.

For the rest, I may pay a tribute to the careful,

vi THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURES

courageous, and most valuable work of the departed scientist, in an obscure but tremendously important branch of scientific research. I could say much about the present book, with its remarkable elucidation of many problems connected with the physical phenomena of spiritualism, but I content myself with a reference to such experiments as those with the soft clay and the methylene blue, which finally clear away certain suspicions that have always attached to physical mediums in connection with materialisation phenomena, amongst uninstructed investigators. This is not the least valuable part of a valuable book.

DAVID GOW.

October 25, 1920.



Illustrations

[The List of Illustrations is not reproduced in this reading edition; the figure references throughout the text stand as printed. See NOTES.md.]



The Psychic Structures at the Goligher Circle

In my former books, The Reality of Psychic Phenomena and Experiments in Psychical Science, I have given reasons for supposing that the psychic structures which emanate from the medium's body and levitate the seance table, rap on the floor of the room, move the table about the room, and in general produce most of the phenomena of the Goligher circle, possess a variety of shapes and dimensions, and have various methods of action, depending chiefly upon the magnitude of the psychic forces applied. I showed that if a light table, for example, was to be levitated, the psychic structure employed was a cantilever firmly fixed to the medium's body at one end and gripping the undersurface or legs of the table with the free, or working, end. Fig. 1 gives a rough diagrammatic view of the structure, when M is the medium, T the levitated table, and S, S, S the psychic structure. It should be noted that the structure in this case does not touch the floor, and that consequently all the reaction due to the levitated table is upon the medium. If, however, the levitated body is a heavy one, the psychic structure

employed is not a simple cantilever, as shown in fig. 1, but is so modified that the reaction, instead of being thrown on the medium, is applied to the floor of the room. Fig. 2 shows the method.

M

\ s

S

Fig. i.

r

M Y

s

V — ^-S^

K

Fi&I.

M is the medium, T the levitated table, S, S the structure. The latter rests on, or is fixed to, the floor at K, so that a kind of strut exists between the undersurface of the levitated table and the floor. This method is also used when an experimenter stands over the levitated table, grips its

sides and endeavours to depress it to the floor. The actual shape of the psychic structure may not be as shown in fig. 2. It may have a shape such as is shown diagrammatically in fig. 3, where

Fig. 3.

MEDIUM

TABLE

Fig. 4.

there is a point of juncture at P of two parts of the structure, with one vertical limb rising to the levitated table and another proceeding to the floor. The mechanical reaction would be the same in either case.

When the table rests upon the floor of the

seance room and the experimenter stands behind it and endeavours to push it inwards towards the medium, the psychic structure used are of two kinds : ( 1 ) a pair of straight rods proceeding from the medium to the two nearest legs of the table, as shown in fig. 4; and (2) a pair of rods proceeding to the floor and thence to the legs of the table, as shown in fig. 5. (1) is used when the applied force is likely to be small, and ( 2 ) when it is likely to be large, with the consequent advisability of placing most of the reaction upon the floor instead of upon the medium.

When the medium and the chair upon which she is sitting are bodily moved about the floor of the seance room by the operators, the structure made use of is as shown in fig. 6.

A rigid psychic "bar" is fixed to the floor at K, and pushes on the front leg of the medium's chair at D. The "bar" is fed by an unstressed or but slightly stressed link proceeding from the ankle A of the medium. There are, of course, two such psychic "bars" in operation at one time.

The invariable rule with regard to these psychic structures is that they are as simple as possible consistent with the carrying out of phenomena. They can be divided into two distinct classes: (1) structures which do not touch the floor of the seance room (at any rate, beyond the immediate vicinity of the medium's feet) during action upon the experimental table; and (2) structures which touch the floor somewhere. Whenever possible, the structures used are of class (1).

The touching of a material body by these psychic

structures is a most important point in connection with them. Certain dispositions and operations seem to require to be gone through by the part of a structure which is intended to touch or adhere to a floor or table. The reader must not suppose

MEDIUM

Fig. 5.

Fig. 6.

that a psychic rod structure resembles, say, the handle of a broom, which could be made to apply force to a material body anywhere over its length. The rule is that only that portion of the psychic structure which has undergone special preparation can grip a material body such as a chair or a table. In other words, the gripping part of the structure must have special labour expended on it before it is

able to perform its function. It must, of necessity, be a differentiated portion of the structure. It follows from the point of view of the saving of energy that the fewer the number of these differentiated portions the better. And this is the reason why, whenever possible, a psychic structure at the Goligher circle has only one gripping surface: in other words, that a cantilever, which grips with its free end and does not touch the floor anywhere over its length, is invariably used if the body to be acted upon is not too heavy, or in general if the psychic force to be exerted is not too great.

We may call a structure which has only one differentiated gripping area a single-ended structure (this is the case with the psychic cantilever), and a structure which possesses two differentiated gripping areas a double-ended structure (this is the case in which the table is levitated by the strut method shown in figs. 2 and 3).

It requires a considerable time, from one to five minutes, depending upon the change in dimensions as well as change in form, for a single-ended structure to be converted into a double-ended one. I have experimentally observed the process many times. For instance, I have asked the operators to levitate a fairly heavily weighted table alternately by the cantilever method and by the strut method, and I have verified their statement that it was so levitated in each case. I found that a minute or more was required to effect the necessary change in the levitating structure. And similarly with other varieties of phenomena. Several minutes were required to prepare the double-ended structure

employed to move the medium and her chair bodily along the floor (fig. 6). Time was also required to change the single-ended structure of fig. 4 into the double-ended one of fig. 5.

The reader will see that the psychic structures present in the seance room at the Goligher circle are, comparatively speaking, simple affairs, and in no wise comparable to the materialisation phenomena obtained with some mediums. Nevertheless I will show later on that there exist in these structures all the potentialities of materialisation phenomena, and that they are in reality but some stages further back in development and do not differ in essence. This is really what might have been expected, though the two classes of phenomena are themselves so far apart in point of actual result. There is a line of continuity about all the physical phenomena of the seance room which is more real than apparent.

What I have said about the general shape of the psychic structures at the Goligher circle has been deduced from a lengthy consideration of the mechanical actions due to the phenomena. Dozens of experiments carried out over a period of years could result in no other conclusions than those stated. Force-registering apparatus used in various ways and under different conditions determined the locality on which psychic pressure was exerted, whether that locality was part of the levitated table or part of the floor under or near the table. All the mechanical results without exception agreed with the mechanics of a beam fixed to the medium's body at one end and with the other end projecting

into the seance room, this latter being supported or not by the floor as circumstances dictated. In short, these mechanical experiments showed that a rigid or semi-rigid structure, at all times connected to the medium and capable of being manipulated in various ways within the circle of space formed by the sitters, was present and accounted for all the phenomena. But though the general outline of these structures was thus ascertained, though the localities of pressure were discovered and the methods in which the psychic beam was manipulated were deduced, yet these particular experiments gave no definite information of the exact shape or composition of the structures. They established beyond all reasonable doubt where the pressures were applied by the structures and what kind of mechanisms must be employed to produce such pressure, but they did not go beyond that.

If we consider one of the simplest of these psychic structures, say an ordinary psychic rod used for rapping, or a cantilever used to levitate a light table, the following questions in connection with it naturally come to mind : —

(a) What is its exact shape?

(b) How does it grip the table or rap on the floor?

(c) Is it of uniform composition throughout its

length?

(d) Is the gripping end different from the re-

mainder of the structure?

(e) Is any part of it tangible? (/) Is any part of it visible?

Fig. 7.

(g) Is its composition simple or complex?

(h) How does it get through the clothing of the

medium? (i) From what part of the medium's body does it

issue? (j) Is there any matter in it taken from the

medium's body?

The greatest trouble experienced by the experimenter in tracing the outlines of these psychic structures at the Goligher circle lies in the fact that they are generally quite invisible under the ordinary conditions of the seance room. They are not always quite invisible, but usually so. The fact as to whether they, or some part of them, are visible or not depends on several factors. I have found that under the best conditions of sitting, i.e. when strangers were not present, and the members of the family were all in good health, that the structures were perfectly invisible in the red light. On several occasions under such conditions I have carefully experimented to see if I could detect any signs of visibility. I arranged matters so that a strong red light was falling upon the space below the levitated table, while another source of red light was shining from behind, so that the whole area between medium and levitated table was itself quite visible. The table remained levitated for several minutes, and I shifted my position into various parts of the circle, looking at the space below the table from different angles. But to all appearance the space was empty: that is, no part of the levitating structure reflected, refracted, or

absorbed the light. On many similar occasions, under the very best conditions for observation with the red light, I have endeavoured to glimpse the structures, but always vainly, when only the members of the family were present in the room. On one such occasion I asked the operators specially to make the structures visible to me, which they said they tried to do, but vainly. There was nothing visible to me or to anyone else in the room below or round the levitated table.

When, however, there are a considerable number of spectators in . the seance room looking at the phenomena, some of the structures have in part become visible. Also very lately there has been observed a tendency for portions of the smaller structures to become visible with only one or two persons besides the family present.

What are the factors which result in the outlines of these psychic mechanisms taking on such a form that they can be seen by the normal human eye? In my opinion they are two in number : — ( 1 ) When a considerable number of persons in good health are present in the seance room in addition to the regular members of the circle, a certain quantity of unstable psychic matter in excess of what is strictly required is at the disposal of the operators. This matter_is__drawn from the spectators, and it does not blend_well with the psychic matter taken from thejnedinm and members of the circle. It pollutes, as it were, the main body of the structure, while no doubt at the same time strengthening it, for the most powerful phenomena are obtained with

many spectators present. The structure changes like a usually clear stream which has become coloured and enlarged by a dirty tributary. (2) Of late months the operators have become more expert in thickening the materialised skin covering the ends of the structures (this process is referred to later), with the consequence that now and then such ends become faintly visible.

What I have said above with regard to visibility of the psychic structures refers only to observation in the ordinary red light of the seance room. Other means, which I shall describe in detail in the proper place, have been evolved whereby these structures can be rendered visible at will and their whole formation and modes of action examined at leisure.

In the meantime I wish to say something about a photograph which was obtained by flashlight at an early stage of the investigation at the Goligher circle. I have already briefly referred to it in The Reality of Psychic Phenomena, but in that book the actual photograph was not published, as I did not think at the time that it would reproduce well. I have since then come to the opinion that even though something of definition may be lost in the reproduction, it would be well to give the actual print here, and this I accordingly do ( fig. 7 ) . Unfortunately, the negative was accidentally dropped, and in consequence it was badly cracked, though luckily little of the actual picture of the structure was injured. I briefly describe under what conditions the photograph was taken, quoting from The Reality of Psychic Phenomena: —

"The circle had assembled with the object of obtaining flashlight photographs of the levitated table. During the whole of the day Miss Kathleen Goligher, the principal medium, had been suffering from a cold and a sore throat, and I thought of postponing the seance: but feeling a little better in the evening, she desired that it should be held. The circle sat in its usual order, with the medium at the top end of the room. The camera was placed in position near the bottom end and focussed upon the table. I decided to wait for the photograph until the latter half of the seance. In the meantime we had a display of rapping, levitation, etc. After half an hour or so of this, phenomena ceased, and I told the operators to rap when they were ready for the photograph. During the period of waiting the operators asked us various questions about the height we desired the table to be levitated, the method of procedure with the flashlight, and so on. Then after a time they levitated the table steadily and kept it in the air for several minutes, giving us the impression that they were practising. A further lull followed, and after a time a request from them that, although, the table was not levitated, we should try the flashlight, with the object, as it seemed to me, of discovering what would happen to their psychic system of equilibrium when the powerful light should suddenly burst forth. We decided that it would be well to expose a plate during the flash, although we did not expect any result. The circle was widened a little at the bottom end, Master Goligher and Miss Lily Goligher moving a little apart, though

keeping their hands joined in the usual way. The flashlight exposure was made (the reader is to remember that the table was not levitated). Then after a little the operators told us that they could do no more that evening owing to the condition of the medium. I did not think there was the least likelihood of anything being on the exposed plate, but a surprise was in store when it was developed.

F J

4* m

Fig. 8.

The matter is, in my opinion, worthy of being described in detail. . . . The following are my analysis and interpretation (fig. 8) : — From about the centre of the left forearm (A) of Master S. Goligher, who is in trance, is seen issuing a vertical column of whitish translucent material, about 4 inches in diameter. It comes from his arm at right angles to it, rises about a foot into the air, gradually bending over in the form of an arch (B) and proceeding to K, which is just on the camera side of the table (standing on the floor in front of the

medium), and about a foot above the floor. From K a column of about the same or a little greater diameter, and of the same whitish translucent colour, rises vertically into the air, and terminates at D, at a height of about 5 feet from the floor. Up to the point E the column is of uniform density throughout, and, though thin, has its boundaries well defined. The pattern of the wall paper is quite easily seen through it. From E upwards the column becomes denser and whiter, and at the summit D it becomes opaque, so that the wall paper can no longer be seen through it.

"At the top it. can be seen to be bending over and backwards, and it descends behind the upward column to the point E. The opacity at the summit is perhaps due to the eye looking through a double thickness of column, the ascending and descending portions, and to the fact that the psychic stuff has exhausted its velocity at the top. In its descent its outline is no longer uniform, but sinuous, and its density not uniform, but patchy. The descending column is easily made out behind the ascending one owing to this patchy appearance and wavy outline. At E the descending column branches off horizontally to'the left, and enters the top of the chest of the medium (F), Miss Kathleen Goligher.

"In the diagram I have drawn a dotted arch G from the medium's arm to the point K at the bottom of the column. This is not visible owing to the position of the sitters and to the table intervening, but I am assuming it is there. The very bottom part of the column K is also not visible

owing to an arm of one of the sitters being in the way; but the chances are, from the formation of the arch entering it, that it terminates well above the floor. Also from the point E of the column a very faint outline of about the column's diameter can be made out proceeding in the opposite direction to that of the medium, and presumably entering the chest of Miss Anna Goligher."

The above was written three years ago. I have a few further remarks to make, garnered from much recent experience of the phenomena at the circle; but I will first set down the opinion of a friend, who was present when the photograph was taken, regarding its authenticity and the unlikelihood of its being due to an accident of any kind. This friend has had considerable experience in photography:

"As far as I am able to judge, the abnormal markings are genuine psychic effects. I cannot trace any means whereby the 'flash' could have been reflected, as you will remember the 'flash' was placed on the camera and, as I should judge, about 9 inches behind the lens. If this position had been an error of judgment in placing the flash in position, viz. too near the lens, I should have expected to find a complete fog and over-exposure of the plate.

" We find a large column of light rising towards the ceiling to a height approximately the same height as the 'flash' would reach, but it also extends in a downward direction to the floor, throwing out, as it were, other arms, curved in shape. This, to my mind, destroys any theory of

reflection; indeed, I cannot find any reflecting surface other than the polished surface of the table top.

" You will, I am sure, have noticed a short horizontal arm joining the medium to the main column of light, and also have noted the added brilliancy at the head of the column. I am inclined to think that the 'flash' would have its greatest brilliancy at its base, diminishing in actinic value at its crown.

" The markings are certainly not likely to be caused by chemical action during development."

The photograph was taken by flash powder and not by a piece of magnesium ribbon, hence none of the curved structures visible could have been due to reflection of such ribbon. I have submitted the photograph to a very experienced professional photographer who has done a great quantity of flashlight work, but he can suggest no means whereby the visible structure could, under the circumstances, have been produced accidentally.

Also the print has been sent to one of the most experienced psychic investigators in France, and this gentleman sees much resemblance in the whitish translucent appearance of the column and curved arms to the appearance presented in the initial stages of materialisation phenomena, which he has personally investigated.

Finally, I have no doubt in my own mind that the photograph shows genuine psychic structures, for the reason that to a large extent the picture verifies the work of a year, carried out with

Fig. 9.

Fig. io.

mechanical apparatus. The reader should clearly understand that I did not base my psychic beam theory on the results on this photograph, but that the photograph was taken after the theory was enunciated. Furthermore, the operators distinctly stated that they set up the structure so that the camera could take a picture of it which would help me to an understanding of it.

Fig. 9 shows an enlargement of the photograph.

Fig. 10 shows an enlargement of the head and a considerable portion of the column.

As I have no doubt whatever, as I have said, that the column and curved arm shown on the photograph are an attempt by the operators to render something of their structures visible to the eye of the camera, I think it well here to note some of the more important points about these structures which the photograph reveals. In the first place, with regard to this particular structure, I think there has been combined action between two mediums. The emanation of the structure has in this case not been due only to Miss Kathleen Goligher, but her brother, Master Samuel Goligher, has also been partly responsible. The latter was thought for some considerable time to possess the mediumistic faculty, and, lately, rappings occurring in his presence when alone have placed the supposition beyond all reasonable doubt. It is rather a strange fact that pronounced mediumistic tendencies should thus be confined to the two youngest members of the family.

The structure seen in the photograph appears to be of the nature of a beam of irregular shape sup-

ported at the two ends, viz. by Master Samuel and Miss Kathleen Goligher. It is visible practically all over its length, but it is obviously most opaque and dense at the summit of the vertical column. Now, if this were really a working structure, such as that which might get below a table and levitate it, instead of being, as it is, a structure specially prepared for the camera and of little inherent strength, we would find, as I shall show later, that the free end or working portion was different from the remainder or body of the structure. What I wish the reader to note, then, is that the head (or what would correspond to the tangible working end of the phenomenal structure) is on the photograph somewhat different from the column and curved arm part of the structure.

(a) The head, or what corresponds to the working or gripping end of the structure, is denser and more opaque than the body.

The reader will also note that the head seems to be a differentiated portion of the structure, inasmuch as it is of quite different shape from the remainder and that there is a pronounced neck just before the head forms. This neck portion is best seen in figs. 9 and 10. Now, as I shall show later, this head part of the psychic structure is important, because it is capable of changing its shape and size, and even of sometimes bending round like a hook and gripping the legs of a table or chair.

In figs. 9 and 10 this hook-like shape can be observed.

(b) The head appears as though it were bending

round a narrowed portion or neck of the vertical column.

Fig. 10 shows a considerable portion of the column below the head. It will be noticed that the column here is not exactly rigid, but is sinuous in outline : that is to say, its boundary lines, though approximately parallel, are not straight. The fact that the boundary lines, though not straight, are parallel to each other, suggests that the column itself was originally cylindrical, but has become more or less twisted. The reader will also note that the part of the column near the bottom (where the curved arm enters it — figs. 7 and 9) is less twisted than the part near the top: also that the bottom part of the column is less dense than the top part. If we suppose that the white appearance of the structure is due to articles of some form of matter, then it would appear that the less dense this matter the straighter the boundary lines of the column. In other words,

(c) The less the degree of materialisation of the

column and curved arms, the more perfect in a geometrical sense their outlines.

I use the word materialisation to signify that some basic or underlying framework has been thickened with particles of matter: exactly in the sense that the word is used in psychic research generally.

There is no getting away from the fact that the photograph suggests an underlying invisible basic

framework which has been rendered visible by particles of matter being projected into it. There is every appearance of a built-up framework about the whole thing. The curved arm, the column, the straight arm, the connection of the two ends with the mediums, are too many coincidences to be due to chance. Particularly should the reader note that —

(d) It is possible that the structure as seen in the photograph consists of two parts: (1) an invisible part having the general outline shown, and (2) particles of white filling matter projected into the structure in order, in this case, to make it visible.

The reader should clearly bear in mind, while considering the results of this photograph and the conditions under which it was taken, that the structure shown is not under any stress except that due to its own weight. It was because of this that it was possible to take a photograph of it at all. The energy required to form it was therefore a minimum, and there was as little disturbance to the bodily functions of the principal medium, Miss Kathleen Goligher; nevertheless, when the flash occurred she trembled violently and her body jerked about spasmodically for ten minutes or longer. If the structure shown, or one like it, had been below the surface of the table levitating it, the structure would have been under considerable mechanical stress, much energy from the medium's body would have been required to organise it, and the resulting disturbance to the medium when the

flash occurred would have been much greater. For this reason the operators in the first years of the investigation never allowed us to take a flashlight photograph of the levitated table. The disturbance to the bodily organism of the medium would have been too great, and might possibly have been dangerous.

As this particular structure is therefore not under anything in the way of mechanical stress, it differs in detail from what it would be if it was under actual stress. For instance, the head of the column, or gripping end, would not appear soft and nebulous with indeterminate outline, but it would be firm and of sharp contour. Further, probably the only part of it which would be distinctly visible or "materialised" would be the head, or gripping end. The reader should note that this particular structure was erected simply to give us a general idea of the mechanism employed, and not to represent the exact shape and form of the structure under all conditions. An attempt has evidently been made to render as much of it as possible visible, by thinly materialising it; but it does not follow that an actual structure used to produce a powerful levitation would be similarly wholly visible to the eye of the camera.

I may say that I have compared the whitish, cloud-like appearance of the matter in the structure with photographs of materialisation phenomena in all stages obtained with many different mediums all over the world, and the conclusion I have come to is that this material very closely

resembles, if it is not identical with, the material used in all such materialisation phenomena. In fact, it is not too much to say that this whitish, translucent, nebulous matter is the basis of all psychical phenomena of the physical order. Without it in some degree no physical phenomena are possible. It is what gives consistence to the structures of all kinds erected by the operators in the seance chamber; it is, when properly manipulated and applied, that which enables the structures to come into contact with the ordinary forms of matter with which we are acquainted, whether such structures are ones similar to those with which I am particularly dealing, or whether they are materialisations of bodily forms like hands or faces. Further, to me it appears likely that this matter will be found eventually to be the basis of the structures apparently erected for the manifestation of that peculiar form of phenomena known as the "direct voice," while the phenomena known as spirit photography appear also to have it as a basis.

(e) The whitish substance appearing in the structure seems likely to be the stuff used in all physical phenomena to enable contact to be made with matter in the seance room, such as tables, chairs, etc.

It should be clearly noted that this matter is not the only component of a physical structure. It is the stuff with which the structure is mixed or manipulated to enable the basic part of the structure to act on ordinary matter. There is another component behind it in all cases, a component

which appears to be invisible, impalpable, and, generally speaking, outside the range of physical things altogether.

The elucidation of the mysteries of the psychic structures at the Goligher circle took several years to work out. The work was most difficult, troublesome, and laborious. Experiments had to be gone over again and again, the methods being slightly modified as circumstances required or as new knowledge was gained. The consequence was that, in reviewing the mass of data obtained, I found it almost impossible to set down the results of the research as a connected whole unless I could present a narrative which more or less described the experiments as they occurred in point of time, together with my contemporary observations. Accordingly, I have pretty closely followed this method in the present book. It will enable the reader to see just how the problem was tackled, and how knowledge was gained; how difficulties were met and countered; how wrong deductions were converted into correct ones ; how experiments performed at intervals of years shed fresh light on old facts, and so on. The reader will remember that I had to feel my way bit by bit with nothing to guide me. There was not a single signpost on the road.

The Tangibility of the Free or Working End of the Psychic Rod

The psychic rods which issue from the medium's body seem to vary in diameter at their extremities from about V2 in. to 3 or 4 in., and the free end of

each rod seems able to assume various shapes and different degrees of hardness.

As an example of a rod in what I consider its simplest form, i.e. without its end encumbered with design or modified in any of the several ways in which it can be modified, I append the following notes from Mr. Arthur Hunter of Ballycastle, Co. Antrim. He describes what such a rod appears like from the sense of touch: —

" Date— Friday, 5th December 1917.

" Circumstances of visit. — Accidental in the main.

" Room. — The floor and table were examined by two friends who accompanied me. They also tested the strength of levitations and resistances offered.

"Experiment 1

" Towards the end of the seance I asked the ' operators ' (having first obtained the permission of the leader of the circle) if they could place the end of the structure in one of my hands. On the reply ' Yes,' I went inside the circle, lay down on my right side on the floor alongside the table, and placed my gloved right hand between the two nearest legs of the table. Almost immediately I felt the impact of a nearly circular rod-like body about 2 in. in diameter on the palm of my hand, which was held palm upwards. (The back of my hand was towards the floor and at a distance of about 5 in. from it.) This circular rod-like body was flat at the end, i.e. as if the rod were sawn across. It maintained a steady pressure evenly

distributed over the area of impact, and was soft but firm to the sense of touch. I estimate the magnitude of pressure at from 4 to 6 oz. Without being requested to do so, the ' operators ' moved this rod-like structure until I felt the clearly defined edges of the circular blunt end. This was accompanied by a sensation of roughness, as though the edge were serrated, such a feeling, I believe, as would be given by a substance similar to very fine emery paper.

" Then I inquired if the * operators ' could touch my fingers separately with the rod. The question was not quite completed when this began, viz. : —

" Little finger — gentle but very distinct pressure with a much smaller rod, or by a contraction of the larger one described above. The pressure was not over the entire breadth of the finger, but in length — from top towards base — was about an inch.

" Finger next little finger — pressure intensified, but otherwise as described above.

" Middle finger — pressure further intensified, but otherwise as described above.

" I detail and emphasize my position inside the circle, also that of my hand, for about 3^ ft. distant was a fireplace (without a fire), over which (about &y2 ft. from the floor) there was a mantelpiece upon which rested a gas jet lighted and encased in panels of red glass. Thus I could clearly see my hand and the space around and beyond the table legs, but I could not see the psychic rapping rod.

" The impacts were upon the more sensitive side

of my hand. When my fingers were being touched or pressed it seemed as if another finger were causing the sensation — a finger of very great strength. During this experiment of pressure on the fingers there was no sensation of roughness, such as occurred and is described with the larger rod when I felt the edge of the circular end. My sight is very keen.

"(Sgd.) Arthur Hunter."

The chief points I wish to emphasize about the above narrative are the following: —

( 1 ) The end of the large rod — the one pressing on

the palm of the hand — was approximately circular in shape.

(2) The end of this rod was flat, as though the rod

were "sawn off."

(3) The circular edge was well defined and was

rough and hard, and appeared to be finely serrated.

(4) The area of the blunt end of the rod felt "soft

but firm," and the pressure seemed uniformly distributed.

Later on I will give photographs of impressions made on clay by the end of a rod such as described above, and the reader will see that these impressions agree most exactly with Mr Hunter's sensations obtained by his sense of touch.

With regard to the rod or rods which pressed on his fingers, the important points are as follows: —

(1) The rod was a much smaller one than that described above.

(2) It was a different rod from the above one, or a

contraction of the original one.

(3) The sensation experienced by the rod pressing

on the ringers was as though another ringer — a ringer of very great strength — were being used.

( 4 ) Neither the large rod nor the smaller ones were

visible, although Mr Hunter's hand and the space round about it were quite visible.

I now give my own sensations of a rapping rod or rods acting on the sole of my boot. The text is from notes taken at the time.

Experiment 2. — Baps on the Sole of one's Boot

The operators can rap on the sole of one's boot if it is held upright within the circle. They can also cause the "ball" to "bounce" on it, and can hit it in various ways with the end of their rapping rod. This is a valuable experience, because the experimenter can thus learn directly by the sense of feeling something of the nature of the end of the rod.

All sorts of raps were given on my boot. These mostly felt as if they were struck by a softish knob — a knob of matter, which, though on the softish side, was yet dense.

I asked for "harder" raps, when harder and more metallic blows were struck, i.e., the end of the rod became more rigid and lost some of its cushion or elastic aspects. A number of little hard raps were struck in succession, like blows from a tiny hammer. They were struck with

great speed, showing that the operators have great command over the striking rod — as much command, in fact, as we have over our hands and arms. It is now no longer remarkable to me that quick dances, reels, etc., can be rapped out, for my experience of the rod playing on my boot shows me that the rod is responsive to the slightest will of the operator. I asked for the "bouncing ball" on my boot, when the end of the rod immediately became softer, and struck my boot so that the sounds just resembled a ball. The feeling was as though the striking object was a blobby, rounded mass.

I then asked that the operators should press all over the surface of the sole of my boot with the kind of pressure they use to levitate the table (i.e. with the rod end used for that phenomenon) . Immediately the rod termination began to change — not instantaneously, but taking about half a minute — and a kind of plasma which was softish and elastic spread over the sole of my boot. It felt somewhat like a thick pancake. Then, when this plasm-like stuff was fairly over the area of the boot, a tremendous force was exerted upon it, a force so great that, do what I could, I was unable to prevent my foot being partly shoved back along the floor. During the great pressure exerted, the plasm-like ending of the rod did not become harder or more dense than it was at the beginning. To me there appeared to be something of the nature of a fluid pressing upon the plasm. As a rough analogy, the plasmic termination of the rod might be likened to the piston of a steam engine, and the

pressure exerted to the steam pressure behind the piston.

The important points about this experience are the following: —

(1) The end of the rod can change very quickly

from a soft, plasm-like state to a hard, metallic condition.

(2) The operators have great command over the

smaller rods, and can rap and strike at incredible speed.

(3) The condition of the end of the rod as regards

size and hardness is changed on demand.

(4) The rod termination was actually felt to be

increasing in size, its area enlarging at least three times: that is to say, the rod end has inherent powers of enlarging, and a separate and distinct rod is not necessary for each size of rod termination.

(5) The larger-sized rod terminations are usually

fairly soft to the feeling of touch, and it is only the comparatively small ones which become dense and hard. The large ones feel as though a skin containing a mobile dense fluid, such as mercury, were being used as rod termination.

As I have explained in my book Experiments in Psychical Science, the operators themselves, by means of a large number of questions and answers have given details of the shape and general characteristics of a cantilever structure used to levitate a table.

According to the operators, the dimensions and shape of the levitating cantilever are much as shown in fig. 11.

FLo©?e' Level.

Fig., n.

A. The top of the columnar part of the cantilever

is spread out into a broad, flat surface of area approximating the undersurface of the table. In other words, the summit of the cantilever is shaped like a mushroom, and even bears some resemblance to the boy's plaything known as a "sucker." , It grips the table by adhesion.

B. A fairly uniform vertical column of diameter

about 4 in. At K the direction changes from vertical to more or less horizontal. At K the structure is usually 3 or 4 in. above the floor.

C. Just before entering the body of the medium

the rod widens to a diameter of about 7 in.

Let us analyse this statement of the operators and see how far it agrees with actual experimental results. According to the operators: —

(1) The top of the columnar part of the cantilever

which grips the undersurface of the table spreads out into a broad, flat surface, something like a pancake or mushroom in shape.

Compare this statement with the sensation I experienced on the sole of my boot (p. 28) when I asked that the operators should press on it with the kind of rod end used to levitate the table. I have said that "the rod termination began to change — not instantaneously, but taking about half a minute — and a kind of plasma which was softish and elastic spread over the sole of my boot. It felt somewhat like a thick pancake."

Thus practical experiment agrees with the statement of the operators.

(2) The top of the column grips the table by a

suction or adhesive process.

This absolutely agrees with experiment, as I shall show later.

(3) The column itself is about 4 in. in diameter

nearly over all its length, and is of practically uniform cross-section.

This agrees with the photographic result.

(4f) There is a change of direction of the cantilever from vertical to more or less horizontal at a few inches above the floor.

In the diagram this change is shown as more or less gradual, but I have some reason to suppose

that it is, in fact, sudden. For one thing, the photograph indicates this.

In R.P.P.j p. 194, I describe briefly the sensation experienced by touches with a small rod in which the end has been made very hard. I say that this psychic touch "feels exactly as though the rounded end of a material rod was pushed on one's arm, or foot, or other part of the body. The 'solidity' of the touching body is what impresses the experimenter, for, no matter how carefully or softly the operators apply the touch, one feels as though the blunted end of a hard something — a something even made of metal — were being used."

I wish to add that this is only one kind of touching effect. The end of such a rod can be made as hard as iron. Another kind of touch feels as soft as the flesh on a baby's arm, and there are all intermediate varieties.

The following is an extract from the account of a seance by Mr E. W. Oaten of Worrall, near Sheffield:—

"Experiment 3.

"I was next obliged — by request — with some raps under the table, and, placing my hand beneath it (palm downwards), the impacts came upon my finger tips, and at my request crept slowly up to my wrist. I turned my hand over (palm upwards) and the blows were repeated. I got the sensation of a semicircular body about 8 in. across striking my hand, and the thought of a large boot came to me. I asked if the size of the 'rod' could be modified, and successive touches showed

a progressive diminution in the size of the object, until it was less than 1 in. across. It seemed about the size and shape of a thumb, but quite as solid as metal. I did not notice any alteration of temperature, though the thought was in my mind. As the object rested in my palm I closed my fingers around it, and held it. It appeared to be a round rod which had been slightly flattened, and it was solid for about 2 in. from the extremity, when it became intangible. The rod was, however, rigid when I pushed and elastic when I pulled, and although I held it tightly there seemed to be no reaction upon the medium. I next put my foot under the table (heel on floor, toe in air) and asked that the sole be struck. Taps were heard which synchronised with the blows experienced on the sole of my boot, and these blows increased in strength until they approximated to well over 10 lb., and I gave up the experiment, for it commenced to be painful."

The important observations in connection with this narrative are as follows: —

(1) The largest rod end seemed to be of a shape

more or less semicircular.

(2) The diameter of the rod decreased in a series

of graduations.

(3) The smallest rod end seemed about the size

and shape of a thumb, but it felt quite as solid and hard as meted.

(4) When the experimenter's fingers were closed

round the rod, it appeared to be a round rod slightly flattened.

(5) The rod was solid for about 2 in. from its end, when it appeared to vanish or to become intangible.

I now summarise and compare the sensations of myself and others with regard to the psychic rod terminations.

The rod end is sometimes quite flat, and its outline, especially with the larger sizes, is more or less circular. With the larger rod end the periphery appears to be hardened and finely serrated, though the ends themselves of these large rods are not hard, but appear to be softish and dense. The same rod end can greatly vary in diameter, and this changing in diameter can be felt while it is^ occurring, i.e. contraction and expansion can actually be felt taking place. The diameter of the rod end may vary from a maximum of 7 or 8 in. to a minimum of something less than 1 in. The termination of the smaller rods, i.e. rods up to about 3 in. in diameter, can be either hard or soft to the touch, and can be flat or convex at the end, according to the will of the operators.

The very small rods appear on the end often to be about the size and shape of a thumb, but they may be as rigid and hard as iron,, or, on the other hand, as soft as the flesh of a baby. The body of the rod itself, when felt, appears to be more or less circular, and seems solid for a few inches from the end, and then becomes intangible, though it resists pushes and pulls. As a general thing nothing can be seen, though the conditions

of light sometimes allow of the hand and environs being plainly visible.

Experiment 4. — Inherent Rigidity of the Psychic Rod

In an experiment previously referred to (Experiment 2) I held my boot still, and the operators hit it in various ways with the rod termination. At the conclusion of the test I asked that the process be reversed. I asked the operators to hold the rod still while I pushed the sole of my boot against its end. I was dubious if this could be done. However, I pushed inwards with my boot, and, sure enough, the rod was stationary a few inches up in the air and my boot came in contact with it. It felt softish but very dense. I kicked at it half a dozen times and always found it there.

This result is important, for it shows that the rod can be held suspended in the air in a rigid condition: that is, it can be kept rigid by its own inherent qualities, and does not require to be pressing on material bodies to become so.

Another example showing the self-rigidity of the rod is the following: — During one of the tests in which I was experimenting on the line of force between medium and table, I was poking about the floor in the medium's neighbourhood with a wooden rod when I accidentally came against the end of the psychic rod, which happened to be "out," and an inch or two up in the air. It was softish but dense, as described above, and offered much resistance to the force I was exerting in pushing

the wooden rod about the floor. But it vanished in a second or two. One cannot mistake the end of a large rod when one comes in contact with it. It has a "feel" all its own: soft, dense, plasmic, half solid, half liquid — impossible adequately to describe in words.

I have mentioned that the psychic rod grips the table by a suction process. This can be proved in various ways, but one of the most interesting verifications is afforded by the sense of hearing. 'The suckers can often, in effect, be heard slipping over the wood. In Experiments in Psychical Science I have given a case in point. I described how a table standing on the floor was first levitated upright in the usual way, and was then turned over in the air, bit by bit, and with j erks, until it finally remained levitated upside down. The whole phenomenon was accomplished without the table once touching the floor.

"While the table was inclined at about 45° in the air, the operators seemed to experience the greatest difficulty in carrying on this phenomenon. They seemed to have no trouble in levitating the table, and turning it over in the air to an angle of about 45°, but a halt always then occurred. Sometimes, even, the table dropped there, the completed phenomenon evidently being impossible despite the almost frantic efforts of the operators. At other times, after a brief halt and various shakings and jerkings in the air, the table was further turned over. At the critical point (angle 45° or thereabouts) sounds were often heard on

the surface and legs of the table, as though suckers were slipping over the wood or were being forced off or were taking new grips. There could be no mistaking these sounds, for they made quite an audible swish. On one or two occasions the table suddenly dropped 6 in. or so in the air, and simultaneously there was heard the swishing noise, the inference being that a sucker had been torn from its grip. The operators themselves say that during these abnormal levitations they have seen several psychic rods projecting from the medium simultaneously, and that they grip the surface, the legs, and the cross-bars (if the table possesses them) with the ends of these rods."

I may say also that often while the phenomenon mentioned above was going on (it sometimes took two or three minutes to complete) I stood right over the table. The light permissible while this phenomenon was occurring was very often quite strong (probably because the structures "out" were large and powerful), and all the floor space and the medium were quite visible. The medium was sitting quite calmly on her chair with feet on floor, while the table was tossing about in the air 3 ft. or so in front of her. It was a remarkable thing to hear the suckers gripping and sliding over the wood on the table, while absolutely nothing could be seen of the structures themselves. Yet, as I say, the whole floor space was under quite strong red illumination.

Study of the Working End of the Psychic Struct ore by Means of Impressions made by it on Clay or Putty

If a tin or box containing modeller's clay, or putty, be placed within the circle space the operators can, on request, make various marks on the clay, which marks are permanent and afford an indication of the shape and characteristics of the rod end which produces them. My purpose now is to make as complete a study as possible of these impressions so as to form a basis for deduction concerning the shape and form of the psychic rods. It has to be remembered that the structure itself is usually perfectly invisible all over its length in the red light, even at its termination, where it is palpable, although often one can see plainly all round its environs.

As the floor of some of the impressions seemed to be sometimes lined with marks which resembled stocking marks, and as others of the impressions were more or less like boot marks or shoe marks, and accordingly, there was the question to outsiders of conscious or unconscious fraud on the part of the medium or members of the circle, we decided that while investigating this matter the sitters should have their feet and legs so tied that no one could get within 18 in. of the clay while the impressions were being obtained. It is to be remembered that the medium and members of the circle were just as interested as I was, and that they readily assented to anything I proposed in

order to render the results as certain as possible and beyond any reasonable suspicion of doubt. Accordingly, when the medium had seated herself on her chair, I tied her ankles together very tightly with fine strong whipcord, using two or three 'separate pieces of cord; then I tied her ankles to the back bar under her chair. The consequence was that the medium could not get within 18 inches of the front of the vessel containing the clay. I always stood beside her, and her hands were tightly gripped by the sitters on either side of her during the whole seance. The strings and knots were always found intact at the end of the seance. Indeed, it usually took me five minutes or more to get her untied, and oftener than not the strings had to be cut. During the whole seance her chair did not move the fraction of an inch. Also, I tied the legs of the whole circle to their chairs with a strong rope, passing it round and round the legs of each member and round the legs of the chairs, so that any motion of the legs or feet of anyone was immediately evident by the pull on the end parts of the rope, which were tied to the chairs on either side of the medium. As, however, subsequent experiments showed, as was expected, that the whole of the phenomena was due to the medium only, it will readily be seen that the tying of the sitters was only a spectacular arrangement and of no consequence whatever. I always endeavour to let the phenomena prove themselves, as it were, by their own results. The general phenomena at the Goligher circle have for so long been subject to such close scru-

tiny by myself and others, and many of the experimental results are so impossible by fraud (see R.P.P. and E.P.S.) that it would have been quite unnecessary to take any means to prevent fraud, for no fraud has ever been attempted, and each phenomenon has been proved genuine over and over again to the smallest detail. But as the circle wished it in this instance, so the very rigorous system of tying above mentioned was carried out. As the reader will see later, in my development of the structure theory, I place no importance whatever on the tying. I let the phenomena speak for themselves, which is a method independent of any precautions of that sort. But just as an incidental fact, the reader should bear in mind that during many of the seances for these impression tests the medium could not, by any means whatever, even if she had wished it, get within 18 in. of the dish of clay with her feet while impressions were being made. At the beginning of each seance, after the tying, I allowed her by way of test to do her Utmost with her feet, but she was incapable of doing anything; and at the end of each seance I also experimented to see what she could do, but I invariably found that she could do nothing, and that the cords were, as I have said, intact and as tight as ever. Under these circumstances, then, the immediate impressions detailed below were obtained.

In case it might be thought that the vessel containing the clay was moved over to the feet of the medium by one of the members of the circle, a large rectangular slab of wood was prepared, a

narrow wooden edge was fix»?d around it, and it was then filled with clay. The size of this box was made such that it just fitted in tightly on the floor within the four legs of the table — so tightly that it could only be removed with difficulty at the end of the seance, as the legs of the table had to be slightly sprung to get round it, thus locking it in position. Impressions were obtained on this with as great facility as with a loose box, showing that the clay remained exactly where it was placed during the whole seance. Moreover, at the instant some of the larger and deeper impressions were made the sound of the blow was distinctly audible, and the place of origin was clearly on the clay under .the table.

I will later in this book examine, in connection with other experiments, impression marks obtained on clay while the medium's feet and legs were locked and screwed into a test box. The results were exactly similar to those I am now about to examine.

Generally speaking, the impressions obtained on the clay are of two types — (1) flat impressions, and (2) concave impressions. I will first deal with the former.

By flat impressions I mean that the floor of such impressions is perfectly flat, as though made with a smoothing iron. Such impressions vary greatly in size and considerably in shape, although there is a kind of sameness about the latter which seems to reveal, as it were, a common origin: that is to say, the variation in shape would not appear to be due to any great variation in the end of the im-

pressing rod, but to other causes which I shall specify later.

The following diagrams and photographs give the main details of various kinds of flat impressions : —

Fig. 12. — The extreme length was S1/^ in., and the extreme width 3 in. The impression was not

Fig. 12.

very deep and had no sharp edge, except along a small part of the periphery, where it was about tV in. deep. The whole was, however, slightly below the general level of the clay, and its outline could easily be made out, though, owing to the small depth of the impression, it would not photograph well.

Fig. 13. — The extreme length was 3% in., and extreme breadth 2% in. While this impression was being obtained the table was levitated above the box of clay, and the impression was due to the

~~ '• ■ y1 " ";* ■ "

■ ' ....It.1^

Fig. 13.

bottom end of the cantilever column resting on the clay while the top end of the same column was attached to the undersurface of the table and was levitating it. Consequently here and there the outline was somewhat smudged over, owing to the suction marks (which I will explain later) overlapping occasionally the margin.

Fig. 14. — Extreme length S1/^ in.; extreme width 2% in. In some places the outline was very sharp and clear (S and K), and at

others not so well defined (P), the pressure evidently not being quite uniform over the entire area.

Fig. 15. — The top impression in the photograph is a typical " flat " one. Its maximum length was about 4 in., and its maximum breadth about 2% in. It was not more than about tV in. deep, and was a little deeper in some places than in others. The floor of the impression was nearly level and appeared quite clean and plain.

Fig. 16. — The larger mark was a " flat " one, and was obtained while the seance table was levitated immediately above the clay. The photograph was taken from the clay. The levitation lasted for about a minute.

The smaller impression (a set of three, resembling finger or toe marks) was given in response to a request to the operators to give three impressions

with one rod close together, in order to show difference in size of rod terminations.

Fig. 17. — This was a large flat impression obtained in response to a request to the operators for an impression on clay made by a visitor to the

Outline not \)er\j

/a clear here

Fig. 14.

seance while the circle was in Glasgow. The photograph was taken from a plaster cast of the impression.

Suction Marks on some of the Flat Impressions On flat impressions where there has been considerable force applied, such as where the seance table has been levitated immediately above the clay and where the clay was moderately soft, the marks show signs that the end of the structure has been gripping the clay by means of suction, just as

V

Fig. 16.

Fig, 17.

a boy's sucker grips an object, for the suction marks are quite obvious where the structure end has been lifted from the clay. An example of this is seen in the large impression of fig. 16. Moreover, the type of suction marks shows that the suction end of the rod termination must be a fine, thin membraneous kind of skin, because the clay has not been raised in large lumps, but has been lifted in small, crater-like pieces. It is quite impossible to obtain such a mass of finely partitioned suction marks by means of any part of the bare foot being pressed into the clay and then raised, as the reader can easily discover by practical experiment.

I had known for a long time that the ends of some types of the rod grip by suction, for the " swish " of the rods could be distinctly heard as they gripped various parts of the table, or as they were forced from their grip on the floor if the force applied to them were too great (see p. 36).

Many such suction marks would appear to show conclusively, when taken in conjunction with other suction effects noted during the general course of the experiments (see E.P.S. and R.P.P.), that:

(1) When the free end of the psychic rod is flat it

can press on material substances and grip them by adhesion.

(2) The gripping action is a true suction one,

being due to a difference of air pressure, the air being squeezed out from the space between the flat end of the rod and the body on which it is contacting.

(3) In order to produce this suction effect, the end of the rod is covered with what appears to be a thin, pliable, skin. As a matter of fact the end of one of these large flat-ended rods often feels soft and plasm-like to the touch (see p. 36) . The very finely divided, craterlike appearance of most of the suction marks also shows decisively that the suction end of such rods must possess a soft, pliable surface.

Elastic Distortions of the Rod End

It is obvious from the diagrams and photographs given on other pages that there is a considerable variation in shape of the free end of the large flatended rods. Generally speaking the shape is more or less oval, at least in an unstrained condition of the rod end. But where any part of the flat end is subjected to a greater stress than another part, the boundary curve may considerably change. In impressions made on clay it was very seldom that the mechanical pressure was evenly applied all over the area of such impressions. Much oftener than not one edge of such impressions is somewhat deeper than the opposite edge, showing that the impressing force was not applied evenly over the area of contact, or that the applied force was not quite normal to the surface of the clay. I always asked the operators to press as evenly and uniformly on the clay as they could, but, as I say, there was nearly always some slight variation, so that the floor of the impressions was really not quite horizontal, but inclined a little or varied a little in depth.

If the reader will examine the diagrams and photographs on this point, the matter will become clearer to him. In fig. 12, p. 42, there are signs of a slight ridge along the periphery at M, and at just about this portion of the boundary the curve becomes nearly a straight line. That is to say, the applied stress along the lower part of the surface is greater than upon the higher part, with

Fig.JlS.

the consequence that the boundary near M has suffered some distortion. Probably had the force been applied evenly over the whole area the boundary would have taken a form somewhat similar to that given in fig. 18.

In fig. 13, p. 43, the two bounding lines towards the top have become practically straight, owing probably to the pressure being greater over the higher part of the area than the lower. If the pressure had been uniform the tapered end would probably have given place to a more oval form.

In fig. 14, p. 44, the outline is very clear round parts of the periphery at S and K. This means that near these places the pressure was greater than at other parts of the area of contact, with the con-

sequence that the boundary in the neighbourhood of P was pulled in, and instead of being more or less curved became nearly straight.

In the Glasgow impression (fig. 17), one side of the boundary is almost straight and even a little concave, and on this side the impression is considerably deeper than on the opposite side. The mechanical pressure over the area near the straight

Fig. 19.

edge was therefore considerably greater than the pressure over the more remote parts of the area. The consequence is that the boundary has become straight (and even slightly concave) there, so as to take up the position automatically to Tesist the greater stress. The dotted part of fig. 19 shows approximately what would have been the shape of this impression for uniform distribution of load.

On some of the large flat impressions there are two or more superimposed impressions, the boundaries clearly altering in shape with the slight variations in pressure over the area.

I have examined many of these flat impressions and there can be no doubt that if the rod termina

tion is applied quite normally to the clay and with a uniform pressure all over its area, the shape of the boundary is much as shown in fig. 20. In other words, the normal unstrained boundary is somewhat egg-shaped, with one end blunter than the other. The size may considerably vary, but in the unstrained condition the outline is symmetrical. It follows from the fact that the boundary line can alter its curvature under the action of uneven and non-uniform stress that it must be elastic. If it were perfectly rigid it could not alter its Fig. 20. shape in the least. It is therefore an elastic curve, and can be distorted to suit variation of stress over the area. Summarising the results obtained from varying shapes assumed by the boundaries of the larger "flat" impressions, we have —

(1) The normal boundary of the rod termination

is in shape very similar to the longitudinal cross-section of an egg, the opposite ends having different radii of curvature.

(2) If the pressure of the rod termination on the

clay is not uniform over the area, or if the pressure is applied normally to the clay over some parts of the area and more or less inclined to the clay over other parts of the area, the normal boundary suffers distortion, and parts of it may become straight, or even slightly concave, or on the rounded

portions the radii of curvature may increase or diminish, with the consequence that the normal unstrained, egg-shape periphery is more or less departed from.

(3) Although the normal unstrained boundary

appears to be of practically constant shape, the area enclosed by that boundary may greatly vary from about 4 sq. in. to 10 or 12 sq. in., according to the size of the rod termination.

(4) The flat area of the rod is bounded by an

elastic curve.

The Characteristics of the Elastic Curve which forms the boundary of the Larger Flat-ended Psychic Rods

If the reader will refer to p. 24, he will find recorded the sensation produced on the sense of touch by the boundary of the flat-ended rod. Mr Hunter says: "Without being requested to do so, the ' operators ' moved this rod-like structure until I felt the clearly defined edges of the circular blunt end. This was accompanied by a sensation of roughness, as though the edge were serrated: such a feeling, I believe, as would be given by a substance similar to very fine emery paper."

It follows, if the boundary line of the rod end produces this sensation of roughness and of being serrated to the sense of feeling, that the flat impressions produced on clay should also indicate this quality. And we find that it is so. On many of the clay impressions on the edge and in the

neighbourhood of the edge the serration marks are clearly seen. These marks are in general fine (in agreement with Mr Hunter's analysis), and although quite apparent on the clay, especially with the aid of a magnifying glass, do not show very well on photographs.

The Flat Impression obtained at Glasgow

This is an exceedingly interesting impression owing to its strength. There were many spectators present in the seance room on the occasion upon which it was obtained, and doubtless the operators had a greater and more varied amount of psychic stuff than usual upon which to draw. The experimenter placed a shallow circular tin vessel (similar to the ones I use), filled with putty (not clay), with its surface quite smooth and about 7 in. in diameter, under the seance table, while he himself stood within the circle on the side of the table remote from the medium, who on this occasion was not tied, but was free to place her foot in the putty if she had so desired.

Fig. 17 shows a photograph of a plaster cast taken from the putty mould. The impression is really due to the end of one of the largest rods thrown out from the medium's body, but to a careless eye, or to an eye which has not seen any other impressions taken at the circle, looks more or less like the mark of the sole of a lady's shoe. It will be observed that the left-hand edge of the photograph of the impression is almost a straight line, and that near the bottom left-hand end there are

a series of little holes somewhat resembling the stitch marks on a shoe sole. And again, the original impression had grit marks on the bottom of it (i.e. it was covered with particles of grit), more or less as though the sole of a boot had actually made the mark. The depth of the impression was about Vie in. on its deepest side (the straight line side),

and about Vzz in. on the other side. The "toe" part was not so deep as the rest. The plaster cast shows the dimensions given on fig. 23 (it is to be remembered that a certain amount of contraction has to be allowed for, perhaps 10 per cent., if the mould was allowed to dry before the cast was taken).

Naturally, at a first glance this looks as though the medium or one of the circle had managed to put a foot in the putty with the intention of fraudulently making the impression. But such a supposition is nevertheless entirely wrong, and it shows the danger of coming to a conclusion from insufficient data. Fig. 22 shows a photograph from a plaster cast of one of the actual shoes worn by the medium on the occasion of the seances at Glasgow. These shoes were bought in Belfast before the visit, and were worn at all the seances. The reader will see at once that the shape of

Fig. 2i.

Fig. 22.

fe

Fig. 24.

the medium's shoes is entirely different from that of the impression. On the real shoe there is no straight portion; the radius of curvature at the toe is much greater than that of the impression, and the shoe is altogether larger, even allowing for contraction. The stitch holes in the real shoe are seen plainly all round, and are entirely different from the small holes seen in the impression. In the impression the holes are proportionately nearer the edge than the stitch marks in the shoe, while in the impression " stitch " marks only occur perceptibly at one place and do not go completely round. It is not necessary to labour the point, as the general difference between the impression and shoe are obvious- to everyone. Besides the medium's shoe I also took impressions of all the shoes worn at the seance, and not one of them resembles in any detail the impression. The resemblance is only superficial, but sufficiently near to deceive anyone who only casually glanced at the impression. Later on I will show that the impression is the blunt end of one of the largest of the rapping rods.

Fig. 23 gives a view of the impression taken from a slightly different angle than fig. 19.

Fig. 24 shows an enlarged view.

Let us analyse the series of six or seven little holes visible near the bottom of the right-hand boundary line of the impression. These are seen under different aspects in figs. 17, 23, and 24. In the smaller photographs they look like separate and distinct holes evenly spaced, but an examina-

tion of the actual plaster cast taken from the putty and of fig. 24 indicates something very different. At the edge where the marks appear there is a series of little ridges going right across the edge (which is here very sharp), consisting of little hillocks and little hollows alternately. The ridge portions stand up between the hollows, and they do not show up very well in the photograph. What we have here is a thick and not very elastic skin stretched over a more or less elastic frame. At the position where the holes occur the depth is relatively great (about i5f in.}, and it is obvious that the skin has been under considerable pull (though not to the point of rupture). The consequence is that the skin has in that vicinity been stretched beyond its elastic limit, so to speak, so that the little holes really represent tiny bits of skin under less stress than the skin immediately round about. Over the edge of the framework, which is itself not quite smooth, the skin has been pulled into a state of " set," and the grooves between the serration marks are places where the natural elasticity of the skin has enabled it to take up positions in conformity with the state of particular stress round about them. In other words, all along the margin here the skin has local spots where it is stretched tightly and contiguous spots where it is not so tightly stretched, these spots occurring alternately, the net result being to give the appearance of little holes as shown in figs. 17, 23, and 24.

Although the photographs do not show them

plainly, the whole edge right down to the " toe " is thus serrated, but much more finely than the discernible serration at the bottom.

The reader should also note that in the neighbourhood of the holes the elastic boundary line has become straight, and even a little concave, due to the resisting pressure of the putty.

In fig. 24 it will be observed on the straight line side of the impression that the series of little marks near the edge, which at first are a little distance from the edge, gradually approach the edge and ultimately work into it. The reason for this is that where the marks are plainly visible the stress, as I have said, on the film covering the rod termination is large, and that this stress gradually becomes less as we proceed toward the "toe" of the impression. In this photograph the character of the elastic ridge which forms the boundary of the impression is clearly seen, and especially at the "toe" it is very plain, because at this point the whole covering film has completely broken away from the boundary ridge there. In the clay at this point the serrations can be seen extending downwards on the inside of the curved ridge for a considerable distance.

The reader should also note on the left side of the impression how very plain and sharp the ridge is. There the stress has not been sufficient to cause the film to break away from the enveloping ridge. But the reader should note how, as soon as the curvature begins to increase — all round the " toe " — the film has completely broken away. This

is an absolute proof, if such were needed, that nothing in the nature of a boot sole has made the impression, for in that case it is a physical impossibility to have a thin ridge standing isolated at the toe with a sharp depression on either side of it. The facts observable on the impression, on the other hand, are exactly compatible with a thick and more or less elastic film, stretched over a thin, somewhat serrated, elastic frame. The laws of stress on such a stretched film are exactly worked out.

The reader should examine the boundary curve shown in this photograph very carefully. The elastic serrated frame can be plainly seen under, and in some places separated from, the covering film. At the bottom, where the film is not ruptured, the small serrations can be plainly made out. Just at the commencement of the curved portion of the " toe " on the left, where the skin first begins to break away, a series of fine lines is seen where the film is being pulled over the sharp edge.

The Character of the Surface of the Flat Impressions

Sometimes the surface of the flat impressions was perfectly clean; sometimes it had dirt marks upon it; sometimes it had little pieces and flakes of what looked like coal dust upon it.

Many of the flat impressions had little particles of black grit upon them; very tiny particles for the most part, but by reason of their colour very

noticeable. There was no coal dust on the floor as far as could be discerned, and there was nothing resembling the black gritty particles on the sole of the medium's boots or shoes. Even when she wore special experimental shoes with the soles absolutely clean — as I took care to well ascertain beforehand, — on some of the flat marks these mysterious black particles appeared. I at length traced them down to small pieces of the black lacquering on the inside of the shoes near the top. The shoes were cloth ones, but round the top on the inside there was a band of cloth which was covered with black lacquer. Now here and there this was scraped away, and little pieces from it were found embedded on the flat marks. Needless to say the thing could not be done fraudulently. Supposing that the medium were desirous of making a mark with the sole of her soles on the clay and in some mysterious manner got her feet loose and applied the shoe to the impression, it would still have been impossible to leave the black gritty specks upon the impression, because the soles of her shoes had none of these specks on them, and to get them the lacquer from the inside of the shoe would have to be scraped hard and the tiny bits placed on the sole, which is impossible. It is little things like these which give the lie to superficial judgments of the more delicate aspects of psychic phenomena. Physical phenomena of the type I am considering are closely connected in their origin with various parts of the human body, and the utmost care is needed in

scrupulously and fairly dealing with them. Above all, no hasty generalisation may be assumed from immature data.

The place of origin of these black grit marks having thus been ascertained, the place of origin in the body of the medium of rods whose terminations left the pieces of grit in the surface of the impressions was strongly inferred. In brief, some of the rods have their origin round about the feet of the medium: or rather the end film of such rods has its origin there; the film, which is a fairly tough kind of psychic skin, issues from the feet, and in its passage upwards between the stocking and inside of the shoe scrapes off tiny flakes of black lacquer which adhere to it and are deposited in the impressions.

The reader should remember that the ends of these psychic rods, which look more or less like shoe marks, are usually fairly soft to the touch (not at all like leather), and that they are bounded by a hardish periphery, Neither the human foot nor a shoe sole is soft on the inside with a hard boundary round it. Neither conforms to both conditions.

I will not say anything further as to the place of origin of these psychic rods here, as I will have to go into the matter in detail later on.

Occasionally in the flat impressions small particles of dust were left. In such cases the flat rod termination had, previously to making the impression, been scraping on the floor or levitating the table by upward pressure on its undersurface, or

had twisted round a leg of the table in order to move it about, and had in consequence caused any dirt or dust particles to adhere lightly to its surface film. For the reader must remember that although the rod termination is generally quite invisible even in fairly good red light, it is nevertheless for all intents and purposes quite solid and like any ordinary material structure. In the language of the spiritualists, the end portion of the psychic rod is for the moment " materialised."

I have noticed that when the surface of the impression is quite clean, as it sometimes is, the impression has usually been made before other phenomena have occurred, i.e. before the particular rod used has had time to get dirty by contact with the dusty floor or table.

So far as could be seen by the naked eye, none of the flat impressions were covered by any kind of imprint. They appeared in most cases perfectly level and without design. All, or nearly all, the concave impressions were covered with what looked like marks such as would be made by a stocking pressing in the- clay. For a long time this lack of design on the floor of the flat impressions was extremely puzzling, and much thought and many seances were devoted to trying to evolve a reason for it, because by the time these experiments were well under way, I had come to certain conclusions with regard to the formation and shape of the psychic structure, and these conclusions did not accord with the apparent fact that the flat impressions were plain and unencumbered with

design. But, like most difficulties when strenuously tackled, this particular one surrendered before the attacks made upon it, as I will show in the proper place.

Summarising for the sake of clearness the results obtained : —

(1) The boundary line of the rod terminations

causing the " flat " impressions is much harder than the contained surface.

(2) This boundary line is made of elastic material,

and this material is finely serrated.

(3) The flat end of the rod consists of a film or

skin of matter stretched over the elastic boundary ridge.

(4) The skin is more or less elastic, but its elas-

ticity is strictly limited, for if subjected to too much stress it ruptures and leaves the serrated enveloping frame standing alone.

(5) The character of the skin or film covering the

rod end is such that small particles of grit and dirt adhere to it, if it has been in contact with such.

(6) The place of origin of some of the flat-ended

rods in the body of the medium is indicated by little flakes of black lacquer left in some of the impressions. These flakes adhere to the skin or film, as it is issuing from the foot of the medium, through the space between her stocking and the inside of her shoe. As it issues it touches and rubs against the black lacquer on the inside of the shoe, and some of this sticks to it.

(7) The floor of the flat marks is apparentlycovered by no kind of pattern, such as is the case with the concave impressions.

The Concave Impressions

I have now to deal with the second type of the impressions which have been obtained in clay. These are what I call the concave ones, to distinguish them from those with which I have already dealt, the flat ones.

The size of these marks varies from the size of a mark one could make with one's little finger to a size of 4 or 5 sq. in. The largest of them is less than half the size of the largest flat marks. The rod terminations responsible for them are sometimes quite soft to the touch and sometimes extremely hard, as hard as iron, for instance.

Nearly all these marks are covered with the imprint of stocking fabric.

If the operators are asked to give such an impression without proviso as to the nature of the imprint upon it, the floor of the cavity is usually lined with stocking marks. But it is not necessary that the floor should be so lined. On request to the operator, it can be made without the stocking marks lining. As I will show later, this lining of the impression with imprints from the stockings of the medium is an automatic process due to the issuing of certain types of psychic rods from various parts of the feet and legs of the medium, and affords a valuable contribution to our knowledge of the

structure of such rods, their place of origin in the medium and their general method of operation.

The Shape of the Concave Impressions There is every reason to believe that the standard shape, if I may so put it, of the concave impressions is the same as the non-distorted shape of the flat impressions, i.e. more or less oval. But as with the flat impressions, the boundary may be distorted in various ways, the chief cause of distortion, however, appearing to be brought about by great variation of pressure normal to the rod end. That is to say, in order to obtain the various kinds of

cavities desired, the end film

A B C ^as *° ^e Pressed out

with different degrees of

0 pressure over its area: a greater pressure near the centre parts, for instance, than near the edges, with the consequence that the FlG* 2S- boundary is often pulled in,

and the whole impression often becomes narrower the deeper the concavity. The following are some of the approximate shapes obtained with concave impressions (fig. 25) : —

A. Normal shape.

B. Boundaries pulled in owing to specially deep

concavity.

C. Distorted shape owing to the pressure being

non-uniformly distributed.

W^m

w

f

^^^Nj

r

J

Fir;. 26.

Fig. 27.

Fig. 26 shows a concave impression obtained in Glasgow (at the same seance at which the fiat impression, already referred to, was obtained). It is pretty nearly circular, and superimposed on it are two other smaller marks. The stocking imprint is plainly visible.

Fig. 15 shows two impressions taken on the same piece of clay. The top one is flat and has already been described. The lower one is concave and lined with stocking marks.

Fig. 27 shows three concave marks (obtained on one dish of clay) of different shapes and depths, all lined with stocking marks.

The following are sketches of concave impressions with data concerning them : —

Fig. 28. — The gusset mark of stocking is seen near the top of the impression.

Fig. 29. — Impressions of a small stocking-lined mark, only very slightly indented (about t« in.), near A.

Fig. 30. — A concave impression lined with stocking marks. Along the

periphery at A there seemed to be a slipping of the film. The blow was evidently a slanting one (left to right in the figure). The elastic framework at A has been dug into the clay further

Gussel" Line

Indent atton about

Straight

8 u»ide at tuidest part.

Fio. 28.

than the covering film could stand, so that the latter has evidently ruptured. The stocking

Fig. 29.

Fig. 30.

marks are seen going over and beyond the elastic framework.

Study of the Markings on the Floor of the Concave Impressions

As has already been mentioned, most of the concave impressions were found to be lined with what looked like stocking marks. The first matter that suggested itself, of course, was to make quite sure that the markings really were stocking marks and were not something that only looked like them. Accordingly stockings similar to those the medium was wearing were pressed into the clay, and the markings thus produced were found very similar to those obtained at the seances. Finally, the actual stockings worn at a seance by the medium were thus experimented with after the seance, — after a seance at which many such impressions were obtained — and it was

established beyond all doubt that the floor of the psychic impressions bore the imprint of a texture at first sight identical with the texture of the medium's stockings.

In spite of all that could be done in the way of tying up the feet and legs of the medium so that it was quite impossible for such parts of her anatomy to get within a couple of feet of the dish of clay, or for the dish of clay to be moved from its position under the table, these stocking-lined marks were obtained in great abundance. The thud of the rod which made the larger ones on the clay could be distinctly heard as it impacted the clay in the centre of the circle space, during which time I watched the springs under the medium's chair to see if they moved, and the ropes which bound the legs of the sitters to their chairs. But nothing moved, and, as I have already said, the tying was always found intact at the end of the experiments. The matter was as mysterious to the medium and sitters as to myself, and we sat night after night,' varying the systems of tying, but to no purpose. The marks were obtained on demand. The medium and sitters were only too willing to try anything I desired in an endeavour to probe the mystery, and they allowed me to tie the medium's legs and feet in any way I chose, submitting with a reasonable spirit and good humour to nights of trouble and inconvenience. I hereby thank them for the trouble they went to, and for their hearty co-operation in a part of a psychic problem which, if it had remained unsolved, might have

placed the totally false stigma of fraud upon the medium — at least in the estimation of persons who fail to understand the close connection between the body of the medium and physical phenomena in general.

I have said that I soon established that the floor linings of the psychic impressions bore imprints apparently similar to various parts of the stockings worn by the medium. The next thing to find out was whether the imprint was a direct or reserved one, i.e. whether it was a mark such as would be made by pressing a part of the ordinary outside of the stocking directly upon the clay, or whether it was one obtained by pressing the inside of the stocking upon the clay. It did not take long to discover that the former was the case and that the floor of the psychic concave impressions was lined with stocking marks almost exactly in the manner it would be lined if the ordinary outside of the stocking were pushed into the clay.

There is, however, one extremely important point of difference which will be explained in the proper place.

Solution of the Problem as to why the Floor of the Flat Impressions is apparently Unlined with Stocking Marks and the Concave Impressions are nearly always so Lined

As I have already said, when the floor of the flat impressions was examined by the unaided eye

Fie. 32.

or even by the help of a magnifying glass, no pattern of any kind appeared on it. Nothing resembling stocking marks was to be seen. It unfortunately happened that I had gathered together a collection of all kinds of psychic marks and that I spent weeks in examining them without resorting to photography. Having failed to reach a solution, I had all the impressions photographed. It is well known that photography will show up faint processes which are invisible to the eye, and in this way I obtained a hint as to the solution. Then I had some of the photographs of the flat impressions enlarged, when immediately all difficulties vanished.

Fig. 31 is an enlargement of the flat impression shown in fig. 15. The reader will notice on many places on the floor of the impression that the stocking marks are visible. Especially is this so at the lower end. A careful inspection will show that the marks are visible all over the floor, but that in most places the regular systematic arrangement of the stocking imprint has been distorted and partly covered over. The markings, instead of running in parallel lines everywhere, only do so here and there. They have been twisted, distorted, and thickened, and the interstices between the threads have been more or less filled in. But for all that, the stocking markings are there, which is the main point. To the eye the floor of this impression appeared quite smooth.

Fig. 32 is an enlargement of part of another apparently smooth flat impression. Here, also,

especially at the bottom and on the right-hand

side, the form of the stocking markings can be seen, but, as in fig. 31, the regular formation of these markings has become distorted. The individual threads have become twisted and thickened, and many of the interstices between them have been filled or partly filled in. Nevertheless there is no doubt that the stocking fabric is there but has suffered modification. fig. 33. An examination of every impression, concave or flat, was made by the unaided

eye, by magnifying glasses and by photography,

and the result is as follows: —

First Generalisation

When the medium wears stockings nearly every psychic impression is lined with stocking marks.

Points of Detail

