Many of the concave marks are lined with such perfection that at a first glance it would appear that the actual stocking had been in the clay. But the stocking marks can be greatly modified. The delicate pattern and tracery of the cotton threads can be distorted, thickened, partly covered over, or broken, but nevertheless in all such cases enough of the pattern is left to make it certain that the stocking pattern is present in nearly every kind of impression.

There remains the question: Why should the

impression on the clay sometimes have very clear stocking imprint and sometimes have the stocking imprint partly covered over or broken up? The reason is that the actual psychic structure is covered by a film of matter, which film is formed of psychic matter oozing round about the little holes in the stocking fabric. It is at first in a semi-liquid state, and it collects and partly sets on the outer covering of the stocking. It is of a glutinous, fibrous nature, and takes almost the exact form of the stocking fabric. It is pulled off the stocking by the operators, and is then built round the end of the psychic structure, which, when placed in a dish of clay, naturally leaves an imprint similar to a stocking. In a large flat impression the skin as it leaves the stocking of the medium would be too thin to withstand the heavy pulls and pushes it would be subjected to over such a large area, and accordingly it is thickened and strengthened by the operators applying more materialising matter to it. This additional psychic matter oozes round the regular imprint, distorts it, partly covers it, and twists the regular formation out of parallelism. Sometimes, for a very deep impression on the clay, such as the flat Glasgow one, the film has to be made so thick that nearly all the original skin bearing the stocking imprint is covered over so that only here and there can traces of the original imprint be seen. Nevertheless, as I have already said, the stocking fabric, clear or distorted, is apparent on nearly every impression, if at the time of the seance the medium is wearing stockings. I have said that though the imprint of the stock-

ing fabric on the clay is at first sight very similar to that which would be made by the medium's actual stocking impressing the clay, there is one important point of difference. It is as follows: — The psychic impression is altogether sharper than that which can be made by a stockinged foot. Any part of the latter, when pressed into the clay, leaves a good enough outline of the stocking fabric, but it is a dull, blunt outline owing to the solid foot behind the stocking exerting a squeezing effect, no matter how lightly it may be applied. The psychic impression, on the other hand, has little raised edges projecting upwards from the impression left by each thread, which effect, as many experiments have proved, it is quite impossible to obtain with the actual stocking. In short, a thorough series of tests shows that with a soft stocking no amount of juggling can get the actual sharp effect obtained by the real psychic structure,, This effect, however, could be exactly obtained if a fine viscous material were to cover the stocking fabric and were then to harden or "set" on it somewhat, and the mould being pulled off were then to be pressed in the clay. This, indeed, is what actually happens. The mould after it has "set" is not nearly so pliable as the actual stocking fabric, with the consequence that when it is pressed into the clay it leaves a sharp, clear impression which cannot be obtained with the actual fabric. Thus, while the psychic rod end and the stockinged foot both leave in the clay an outline of the stocking fabric, the quality of the one is distinct from that of the other.

I am now going to describe an experiment which was carried out to see if I could get any information showing in what part of the medium's body the psychic rods had their origin. It was fairly obvious, of course, that some of these rods issued from the neighbourhood of the feet and ankles of the medium, for the character of the stockinged lining of the floor of many of the concave impressions showed that to be the case. Moreover, during rapping I have intercepted with my bare hand the space in front of the ankles and feet of the medium, and I have distinctly felt a cold kind of breeze issuing from the neighbourhood of her ankles and region just above her shoes: a kind of breeze which appeared to be caused by material particles of a cold, disagreeable, spore-like matter. There was no solid body whatever beyond her ankle where I intercepted the flow of these particles, but nevertheless they were an integral part of the rapping rod, for immediately I intercepted them the rapping ceased and could not be resumed for quite a long period of time (see R.P. P., p. 225). As a matter of fact, I shall show later, what I was really doing was to cut across the psychic structure close to the body of the medium: the part of the structure which was not heavily materialised, as the end is, but which nevertheless appeared to contain within it and in motion outwards from the ankles of the medium material particles of some kind.

In order to render the purpose of the series of experiments about to be described intelligible to the reader, it is necessary that I should summarise

what was already known and what was conjectured about the psychic rods which issued from the body of the medium, and which were the instruments employed to produce the phenomena. In the first place, each psychic rod in the neighbourhood of its extremity was solid, i.e. built up of matter solid to the touch, and therefore presumably of matter with which we are ordinarily familiar. At a few inches or less, from its extremity this appearance of solidity vanished and nothing could be felt but a flow of what appeared to be material particles, if the line of the structure were intercepted by the hand of the experimenter. That is to say, from a distance only a few inches from its extremity right up to the body of the medium all appearance of solidity vanished, and nothing could be felt in the line of the structure but a flow of cold, spore-like particles. In other words, the solidity seemed to change to something resembling a gaseous state. Nevertheless — and let this be well marked and digested — the whole rod, apparently made up of a solid end and a gaseous body, operated exactly as if it were wholly solid from the body of medium outwards. It resisted pull, push, and shear stress of large magnitude. And in this sort of thing resides the chief mystery connected with the physical phenomena of spiritualism.

Each psychic rod structure is then to all intents and purposes a solid body at its free end (the end furthest from the medium). Also, the part of the rod connecting the body of medium to the solid end of the rod contains within it what appear to be solid material particles in a state of motion from

the medium outwards. So that each rod contains matter throughout which is cognisable by our senses. The question arises as to how and where, with reference to the body of the medium, the materialisation or solidity of the rod termination is effected. The rod moves straight into and out of the medium's body. Is the end materialised immediately it leaves her body, or is the structure first fully ejected and then materialised at the extremity afterwards? And when a developed rod, after producing phenomena, is pulled back into her body, is it pulled in integrally, or is the solid or materialised end first dematerialised ; and if the latter is the case, is the dematerialisation effected far from her body, or just when the solid end reaches her body? As the free end is, for all practical purposes and for the time being, an ordinary solid body, and as it has been shown to possess adhesive and suction qualities, it is reasonable to assume that, if the opportunity were presented, particles of suitable substance would adhere to it if such were placed in contact with it. And furthermore, if, when the rod was pulled into the body of the medium, dematerialisation really occurred just before entering the body, that such foreign matter, adhering to the solid end of the rod, would, on dematerialisation, be deposited at the spot where it occurred, and give important data as to the point of issue of the rod.

The above was the method of reasoning upon which I proceeded to carry out the tests about to be described.

I bought a special pair of stockings for the

medium's use. In these I cut a series of small holes, on the left-hand side of each, round the heels, at the lower part of the ankles, and at the toes. The medium put on the pair of shoes used at Glasgow, and I saw that they were tightly laced and the laces tied in three knots. Then she placed her feet together on the floor, and I tied her ankles tightly together with three separate pieces of whipcord, and then tied the whipcord round her ankles to the back rail of the chair underneath it. I let her see what she could do in the way of getting her feet or her shoes loose, but she could do nothing. At the end of the seance her ankles were as tightly tied as at the beginning, and likewise the laces of her shoes..

I placed a box of clay under the table, and by direct measurement found that with the extreme amount of stretch the medium could not get her toes within 18 in. of the front of it.

Then I took a tin dish some 12 in. in diameter, filled with extremely soft clay, so soft that it was in a plastic condition and placed it under the table. The surface of this was approximately smooth at the commencement of the test. I asked the operators to make any marks on this they wished, to do, in fact, anything they liked with it so long as they did things that would be helpful to me in solving the problem of the rods. I asked them to give three raps when they were finished with their experiments. The operators worked at the clay in this dish for ten minutes or so, evidently finding its soft state to their liking. However, at the end of that time the three raps were given, and I

Fig. 34.

proceeded to examine minutely the scene of their operations.

JL

Before, however, the three little raps were heard indicative of the fact that the operators had finished and were ready for me to examine the clay, Mrs Morrison had called out that she felt herself touched just below the ankle at the front of her foot on her stocking, exactly in the space left between the buckle of her shoe and the shoe proper. Mr Morrison also said that he felt himself being touched on the boot.

We examined the place on Mrs Morrison's stocking where she had felt the psychic touch, and on the spot indicated there was left a small mark covered with firm white granules in clay whose shape and size are approximately that shown in fig. 33. Mr Morrison says the touch felt very soft, just as though it was caused by something covered with flesh as soft as a baby's.

There was also found a small clay mark on Mr Morrison's boot at the place where he had felt himself touched.

Fig. 34 shows the state of the clay in the tin dish after the operators had finished with it. As the photograph clearly indicates, it had been pushed about and hacked in a variety of ways. Some of the holes were nearly an inch deep, and it was evident that the operators had not desired to make definite impressions so much as to use the semi-liquid clay to convey information to me with regard to the state of solidity, adhesive powers, and other data concerning the psychic arms. At the right-hand bottom edge of the clay there was a

long sharp -edged piece completely removed from the clay, as though cut out with a sharp knife. The sharpness of the edge of some of these concave impressions is extraordinary, and I shall have occasion to refer to it again. There were a great number of clay marks on the floor between the medium and the dish, and on either side of the dish. There were also marks on the undersurface and sides and legs of the table. On the floor at the side of the dish, remote from the medium, a little, almost spherical ball of clay was found.

There was a considerable amount of clay found on certain parts of both shoes of the medium, on her stockings, and on the whipcord with which her ankles were tied together.

The following is a summary — for convenience of reference — of the clay marks found on the medium's shoes and stockings. (The latter were carefully removed immediately after the seance, and submitted to most careful and prolonged examination. I will deal in detail with them later

"' Bight Shoe

(a) No clay on the sole or on the heel.

(b) On right-hand side, along the joint between

the sole and the cloth upper, for a distance of about 4i in., a thick layer of clay pushed into the seam as far as it could go ( fig. 35 ) .

(c) On the undersurface, at the arch between heel

and sole, a considerable amount of clay, striated, as though produced by something covered with stocking marks. These striated bands crossed the leather at about 45° (fig. 36).

These striated marks in the clay come from under the instep at A (fig. 37) and go up the outside

Thick Clay Line. Here, evidently Resting on Both Sides

OF THE SEAM & PULLED IN. Fig. 35.

On the undersurface here, much clay with

parallel structure marks crossing (he leather at about

45°. Markings similar to stocking marks quite plain On some of it

Fig. 36.

Fig. 37.

of the cloth to B, at top of shoe (there are traces of the path AB, but not very plain ones), and then down from B along the cloth on the inside of the

shoe to C, near the toe. (The path BC is shown dotted on the diagram. ) The whole of this striated path is very similar to the path that would be traced out by an actual toe covered with clay, which came from the region between the shoes of the medium, crossed the instep at about 45° in contact with the leather to A, moved up to B, in contact with the outside of the cloth, and then downwards from B to C, in contact with the cloth, but on the inside of the shoe. Needless to say, supposing the medium had been able to put her stockinged toe in the dish of clay, she could not have traced the very definite line along and underneath the instep and neatly up the side of the shoe. It is evident that the psychic rod which made the mark retired into the body of the medium from between her shoes, through the space at the instep, up the side of the shoe, down the inside and thence to the foot: i.e., it took the shortest line consistent with the fact of emerging and returning to the medium's foot. For instance, it did not go along the floor under the instep, but "hugged" the leather all the way.

(d) On the toe of shoe, on the outside of the cloth,

several particles and marks of clay surrounding an empty space.

(e) On the bow of the laces several particles of

clay. (/) On the inside of the holes for the laces, on the tongue, circular marks of clay, and also marks on the tongue between the lace crossings. No clay on the outside of lace holes or on the cloth in the vicinity.

(g) Inside the shoe, over the sole and heel, fine clay sticking to the leather, except in positions where parts of the medium's foot were pressing strongly on the leather. In other words, wherever the contact between her feet and the leather was not very close, i.e. wherever there was the slightest space, however minute, the inside of sole and heel was covered with fine particles of clay. Where the space was greater, i.e. in those parts of the shoe where the medium's foot was not pressing very tightly, there were flakes of clay adhering to the leather.

Right Stocking

(h) Clay in flakes adhering to the stocking round heel on the outside, but none where the flat of the heel rests on shoe.

(i) Some clay on the stocking at the toes, not very thick, but all over the top of toes, i.e. no clay marks on the stocking where the undersurface of the toes would press, but only on the top and front.

(j) All the rest of the sole of stocking, and up as far as the ankle, clean.

At the heel and toe, the marks of the clay were slightly perceptible on the inside of the stocking fabric, i.e. particles of the clay had gone through the interstices of the fabric.

Left Shoe

There was not nearly so much clay deposited as on the right shoe.

(k) On the right-hand side, on the seam between the leather sole and the cloth upper, for a distance of about 3 in., there was some clay heaped up round the seam and evidently tending to be drawn into the seam, as was also the case on the right shoe.

In neither case does the clay along the seam extend as far as the curve at the toe.

(Z) Flat of sole and of heel absolutely clean.

(m) On the cloth on the right-hand side near the heel some patches of clay slanting upwards, as though proceeding to the stocking in the neighbourhood of the ankle above the heel.

(n) The shoe was completely clean inside.

Left Stocking

(o) A large mass of clay on the right-hand side of the stocking on the ankle above the heel.

The psychic rod to which the above mark is due touched the stocking at the anlde.

(p) The whipcord which bound the medium's ankles together had a lot of clay on it at the front.

Every part of both shoes and stockings was photographed, and I hold a complete record of

Fig. 38.

the results. As, however, similar but more definite effects were obtained when the clay into which the psychic structures dipped was mixed with a larger proportion of water and was thus made much more fluid than in the present test, and as so many photographs have to appear in this book, I content myself with reproducing in this place fig. 38.

This shows an enlargement of the bottom of the medium's right shoe, at the instep. The striation marks on the clay are plainly seen, as though a film of matter having a stocking imprint on them and covered with clay had rubbed the leather here (see (c), p. 76).

Complete Analysis of the Results of this Experiment

The part of the medium's shoes which rested on the floor and which were in contact with it, i.e. part of the sole and flat of the heel, had not a particle of clay upon them. I examined them scrupulously with a magnifying glass, but there was no clay on them. Here and there over them were fine particles of mud which adhered to them from the street. These particles were very light and small and had certainly not been disturbed during the seance. A very slight rubbing sufficed to remove them. It is therefore certain that the medium's shoes at their base, i.e. on sole and heel had not been in contact with the clay either in the dish or on the floor, for the clay was in such a semi-fluid state that the least pressure of the shoe on it would have undoubtedly left traces. Also

the floor all round the medium's shoes was covered with patches of clay right up to her shoes. Where her feet rested on the floor was practically the only complete clean patch of floor between her and the clay dish a couple of feet away. And this shows, beyond cavil or dispute, that during the whole period of time this crucial experiment was in operation, say about fifteen minutes, the base of her shoes never left the floor, i.e. that her shoes remained planted on the floor exactly where I had placed them at the beginning. If she had moved them even an inch or two in a forward direction, even if she had slid them along the floor without raising them, there would certainly have been some white marks of clay visible on sole or heel; but, as I have said, even the light dirt marks from the street were undisturbed, and there was absolutely not a particle of clay upon them. So that, even if the medium's feet had not been bound to her chair, as they were, this one fact is sufficient evidence to show that the bottom of her shoes had not for an instant during the experiment been in contact with the clay.

A fact which is also significant is that round the edge of the sole of the shoe — and more especially the right shoe — where it curves upwards a little at the periphery from the flat of the sole, there were clay marks which extended a little way under the sole in an irregular manner for about % in. or so from the edge line. That is to say, the part of the leather of the sole which was in actual contact with the floor was perfectly clean, but particles of clay had been drawn into the narrow

space round the edge of the sole, which, owing to its curvature, was not quite touching the floor when the medium's shoes rested flat upon it. In other words, this is obvious proof that the medium's shoes had not moved during the whole time of the experiment, for the disposition of the narrow band of clay underneath the edge of the sole and its irregular outline correspond exactly, as is evidenced by actual trial, with the available space between under edge of sole and the floor when the shoe is placed firmly on the floor in its normal position. The psychic structure, covered with clay at its outer extremity, in being withdrawn into the feet of the medium, had been pulled along the floor and had deposited the clay all along the bottom of the boot on every available space. This clay coming in contact with the edges of the medium's shoes on the floor had been deposited on the edge of the sole and in the slight clear space between edge of sole and floor, but had not been able to penetrate further, because the rest of the sole was in actual contact with the floor. This kind of result is what I mean when I say that I prefer to allow physical phenomena to prove themselves to any elaborate tying up of the medium, though, in the present case, the medium was actually firmly tied.

The Marks on the Tongue of the Right Shoe

There were four lace holes on each side of the shoe, and the two halves were tightly laced together during the experiment. The lace holes were

therefore not filled by the laces, and there was a considerable part of the circular space empty. The tongue of the shoe lay immediately behind. On the tongue, behind the lace holes, little nearly circular marks of clay were found — circular marks of fine clay dust deposited on the tongue.

There were no clay marks or deposits of any hind on the two front parts of the cloth covering the tongue : that is, the exterior portion of the shoe in this neighbourhood was clean, but on the tongue, or on the interior of the shoe here, marks had been left.

Now, to anybody who takes the trouble to think, this is proof positive of two things : ( 1 ) That the medium's shoe in this neighbourhood had not been in direct contact with the clay, for, if it had, all the outside portion would have been covered, or at the minimum some marks would undoubtedly have been left on it; and (2) that the marks on the tongue had been really deposited by something covered with clay being withdrawn into the medium's foot apparently through the lace holes. In no other way then (2) could these marks have been produced under the conditions of the seance. Even if the medium had had her feet quite free and had been given full liberty to make the marks as best she could, she could not have produced them without much trouble and preparation. For, in order to make them artificially, it would have been necessary to possess an implement like a narrow cylinder of wood of the exact shape and size of the holes, to have covered the end of this cylinder with clay, and then to have introduced it

exceedingly neatly into the lace holes, and to have pressed it into the tongue behind. Furthermore, a part of each hole was occupied by the lace, so that the available space was in truth not quite circular, its boundary being irregular on the inside. So that the shape of the end of the hypothetical implement would not be so simple as a circle, but would have to present an appearance in which one edge is circular and the other irregular, owing to the lace being in the way, for the lace itself there was quite clean.

The laces, of course, crossed the two halves of the cloth front of the shoe. The consequence was that between the two halves, along the dividing line, there were places on the tongue not covered by the laces, and in these places light powdery clay had been deposited. The laces themselves, where they crossed the dividing line, were not touched by clay, only the spaces on the tongue behind.

The above is clear evidence that some part of the psychic structure had withdrawn into the feet of the medium through the lace holes and through the vacant spaces between the laces, along the dividing line of the two halves laced together. This structure (say a thin rod) had issued in the easiest way it could from the foot of the medium, and its path was approximately as follows : — From the neighbourhood of the toes of medium, then either straight through the soft cloth tongue of shoe, or round the edge of the tongue, and then through the lace hole to the outside. The rod had at the conclusion of the experiment come back via

the same route. No other theoiy whatever will satisfy the conditions. The rod being materialised or solid at its free end was covered with clay there, from its contact with the clay in the dish, and on its retiral through the lace hole had deposited the clay on the first substance with which it came into contact, viz. the material of the tongue of the shoe.

Likewise, this drawing in or suction effect is palpable from the facts I have previously related, where the clay was drawn in and deposited on the narrow irregular space of the sole of the shoe, which stood a slight distance above the floor when the sole as a whole was resting firmly on the floor.

The clay marks left on the left stocking of the medium, where clay patches were deposited round a more or less clean oval space (see o), are just such as would be produced by a rod of oval crosssection, about an inch thick, solid at the end, extruding from the ankle of the medium. If we suppose the curved surface of this rod, where it was solidified, had been manipulating the soft clay in the dish, and had therefore a coating of clay adhering to it, and that at the conclusion of the experiment the rod had been pulled back into the ankle of the medium, where its material had been re-absorbed, and that at the point of dematerialisation of the psychic stuff, just before entering the body of the medium, i.e. at the nearest point to the medium's skin, on the stocking, the clay had been deposited, we will have a close picture of what actually occurred. The path of this particular rod as it moved inwards to the ankle of the medium is

also plain. It evidently did not remain suspended in the air as it was pulled inwards, but part of its journey was evidently accomplished on the floor, for the mark of its passage is very plain up the side of the shoe of the medium. That is, the rod was pulled into the ankle of the medium from the neighbourhood of the floor, slantwise up the cloth of the outside of the shoe, and up a portion of the stocking fabric. When Mrs Morrison was touched during this experiment the mark left on her stocking at the place where she felt herself touched was very similar in size to the oval clear space on the stocking of the medium, although the shape of the impression is a little different. It is just possible that the rod we are considering made both marks. It touched Mrs Morrison's stocking with its end and left the impression described, and afterwards, in its retreat into ankle of medium, left the clear oval impression on medium's stocking surrounded by the deposited clay adhering to the cylindrical portion of the rod. The slight difference in the shapes of the two marks may be due to the curvature of the stockings on the feet and ankles of the two persons concerned.

I have already described the path of the rod which entered the region of the right toe of the medium. Its path is perfectly plain from the floor between her shoes, along the leather of the instep of shoe underneath, where it took the shortest path from between the shoes to the outside of her right shoe, up the side of the shoe, and thence down the inside of shoe to the region of the toe of the medium. Along the whole path stocking marks

were more or less visible: on the underneath portion of the shoe; on the outside and on the inside.

It is a very noticeable fact that practically the whole of the inside of the flat of the right shoe was covered with fine particles of clay wherever parts of the foot of the medium were not pressing tightly on the leather. The reader can easily experiment for himself and find that if he puts his foot in a shoe and sits on a chair and rests the foot on the floor the whole of his foot will not be in uniform and close contact with the bottom of the shoe. There will be places where the contact will be fairly light, other places where the contact will be weak, and again other places where there is not contact at all. And if he makes the experiment he will see something of what underlies my statement when I say that only on those places where there was no or poor contact was the clay deposited. In other words, this is corroborative testimony, if such were needed, that the medium had not moved her feet during the whole experiment. The contact at the spots of contact had been uniform all the time, for otherwise the clay would not have been reserved to those places where the contact was naturally bad. Furthermore, if the sole of the stocking had touched the clay it would naturally have left traces of the clay at the very places where the contact was a maximum. But the exact reverse was the case. And, in addition, the soles of the stockings of both feet was absolutely clean, not a speck of clay being on them. Where the clay was not deposited in powdery form it was adhering in small

flakes to the leather of the sole. The whole result is corroborative of what I have already shown with regard to this test, namely, that the clay found a path wherever there was a space in which it could be deposited, and that it was only in such spaces that it was deposited.

The same thing is seen with regard to the flakes of clay adhering to the top of the heel of the right stocking. This clay was deposited on the stocking well above the flat of the heel, in the space between cloth of heel of shoe and stocking. Wherever, in this neighbourhood, there was vigorous contact between the heel and the inside of the shoe, there was absence of the clay. In other words, wherever there were interstices the clay had been deposited. Of course, if the medium's stockinged heel had been used per se, the whole of the heel would have been covered, and not just the limited portion I have mentioned. This would have been unavoidable, as anyone can try for himself.

Also, with regard to the slight clay marks in the regions of the toes of the right stocking of the medium, the marks are not on the undersurface of the toes, but mostly on the top. On some of the small holes I had cut in the fabric of the stocking at the toes, particles of clay had evidently gone right through, for flakes were adhering to the interior edges of these holes.

The left shoe and stocking were not nearly so much affected as the right. It would seem that the psychic structures had chiefly extruded from various parts of the right foot of the medium, and possibly her left leg.

The chief results from the above experiments are as follows: —

(1) There is abundant internal evidence that the

medium did not move (a) either of her shoes from the floor where they were originally placed; (b) either of her feet from the soles of her shoes, during the course of the experiment.

(2) The psychic rods issue from various parts of

the feet and legs of the medium: (a) from the region of her toes ; ( b ) from the region of her heel; (c) from the flat of the sole (this I will prove later) ; (d) from the ankle.

(3) Dem&terialisation of the rod occurs as close to

the body of the medium as is possible. That is, the end — solid — portion of the rod is not dematerialised until that portion reaches the stocking or skin of the medium on the whole rod being withdrawn into the body of the medium. Likewise, as I shall show later, when the rod issues from the body of the medium, materialisation of the free end occurs very close to the body of the medium. An intangible rod is not first extruded for a distance of some feet, and then the end solidified. It seems absolutely necessary that the solidification of the terminal must be effected immediately it issues from the medium's body, and that desolidification must also occur at that place.

(4) The rods which are absorbed into various parts

of the feet of the medium are able to take indirect paths. They do not project outwards in absolutely straight lines from any one part of the foot. For instance, the rod which issued from the region of the right toes of the medium moved in a very circuitous path. It slanted upwards along the inside of shoe, down the outside, underneath the shoe, and then outwards into the circle space.

(5) There is evidence that some of the structures

do not issue entire from the foot of the medium, but come out separately the best way they can. Thus it seems that several parts of one rod have issued through the lace holes: at any rate there is strong evidence that they have returned to the foot of the medium through the lace holes, i.e. they have avoided the more solid parts of the shoe and have got into her feet the easiest way they could. Perhaps such parts of a rod reunite as soon as they have got free from the environs of the shoe and form one composite rod.

(6) It seems necessary for best effects that all

rods, from whatever portion of the feet and ankles they issue, shall first come into the space between the medium's feet. If necessary they have to take a turn under her boots to reach that neighbourhood.

(7) All the rods come from the medium only. No

other member of the circle is affected. For

there were no clay marks on the feet or legs of anybody but the medium, except on the stocking of Mrs Morrison and the boot of Mr Morrison, where they had felt themselves touched, as already described.

Marks of Clay on the Table.

As already mentioned, there were clay marks on the front, sides, legs, and undersurface of the seance table, which stood in the centre of the circle space, and under which on the floor rested the dish of semi-liquid clay.

Foreign Matter found in the Impression Marks

In addition to the tiny scale-like pieces of black substance which I have already mentioned as being sometimes (not always) found on the flat impressions, which matter I have explained was identified as having its origin in the lacquer covering the inside of the medium's shoe, pieces of wool, hairs, and fluff were sometimes found in the concave impressions. These small pieces of matter were identified as coming (a) from the medium's stocking; (b) from the furry lining inside the tongue of her shoes; (c) from the laces of her shoes. On one occasion I bound the ankles of the medium together with black silk bands, and she had on a new pair of brown stockings specially provided for her. Many black bits of hairs were found in the markings, and one long brown one. This showed that most of the stuff found in the markings was from the edge of the silk binding round the medium's ankles — stuff which might be fairly

easily detached by the passage of the psychic structure through or over it, for the binding was cut from an old silk blouse, and there were many loose pieces of thread on its edge. The one long brown thread, however, that was found was not a loose one: the stockings were new, and it could only have been detached from the medium's stocking by a considerable force. The long brown thread was found embedded in the floor of the impression, cutting a sharp but wavy line through the stocking marks. This thread began and ended exactly at opposite sides of the impression. It was too long to go straight across, and it was curled and twisted round the bottom of the cavity. The thread found in this instance would have required much force to detach from the stocking, as it was several inches long and was part of the woven fabric of the stocking. It is obvious that the passage of the psychic stuff over the stocking had removed it. No more pressing of the stocking in the clay would have left it where it was found. The structure had actually wrenched it from the fabric.

Pieces of white fluff from the inside of the tongue of the medium's shoe were sometimes found in the impressions. As I have explained, some of the psychic stuff, in issuing from various parts of the neighbourhood of the medium's feet, traversed this region and undoubtedly picked anything up it met in its path that was not firmly fixed.

Peculiar Fussling Noises near Mediums Ankles and Feet

Sometimes peculiar fussling noises were heard in the neighbourhood of the medium's feet and ankles just prior to phenomena. These noises occurred in spasms, and were probably due to psychic stuff being sent in fluxes down the material of the stocking. Many of these noises suggested the stocking being violently rubbed with something. Sometimes also during the preparatory work of the seance flapping noises were heard on the floor in conjunction with rubbing noises on the stockings. This would suggest that the psychic stuff was being removed from the medium's body in fluxes (see the weight experiments in connection with raps and decrease in weight of the medium, P.P. P.). The noise is caused by the friction of the psychic particles on the fabric of the stocking. The flapping noises heard just after the friction noises were probably due to the condensed psychic stuff striking the floor in the neighbourhood of the medium's feet.

It will perhaps be well to summarise , now the more important of the results obtained, so that the reader may have clearly before him the facts as they were elucidated at this stage of the research.

(1) The working end of the ps}rchic structure has different shapes and sizes: it can be felt by the sense of touch to increase or decrease in size at the will of the operators; it can change from a very hard state to a very

soft one in a short time; it is tangible and therefore material.

(2) The working end of the psychic structure is

often covered with marks which are very similar to the fabric of the medium's stockings. In many cases of impressions on the clay where the stocking marks are not at once apparent, they can be made out underlying the impressions, i.e. they are usually present, but more or less covered over and modified.

(3) At the conclusion of the seances various marks

are left by the clay on the medium's stockings and shoes.

(4) The medium, in spite of having her feet tied

up or otherwise restrained, manages to get them free, and by placing them in the clay makes the marks described.

This last is ruled out by the facts that (a) many of the marks on the clay are of such shape and size that they cannot be made by the human foot ;

(b) the imprint of the stocking fabric, while bearing superficially a very close appearance to the imprint made by the actual stocking, has one important point of difference (already explained) ;

(c) the medium's feet and legs can be felt in position while the raps and other phenomena are in operation; (d) when levitation or other phenomena are in operation the experimenter can cross the space between medium's feet and legs and the table with his hand, and he feels no solid body whatever: all he does feel is a flow of material par-

tides from the medium's ankles and legs, these particles being cold and disagreeable to the sense of touch.

Further Experiment on Clay Marks found on the Medium's Stockings and Shoes and on the floor of the seance room. (The medium's feet were free).

I placed a tin vessel containing very soft clay on the floor within the circle. The medium wore a pair of stockings of a different design on each leg. I asked the operators to place the end of a psychic rod in the clay, draw it over the floor, over the medium's boots and into the medium's legs, so that a visible trail would be left. They took about ten minutes to do this, and informed me by raps when the operation was finished.

The impression shown in fig. 39 was thus obtained. This impression consists of two marks, the large central one, and a much smaller one near the edge of the dish. It should be noted that as this vessel of clay was the only one available, all the marks found on the floor and on the, stockings and shoes of the medium must have been derived from the clay adhering to the end of the structures which made them, i.e. all the marks were due to two rod ends, at the most, being stuck each once into the dish. The marks were both lined with stocking print. The large one was about 1 in. deep at its deepest part, and about 2% in. long. The small one was about 2 in. long and very shallow.

Fig. 39.

fe

fe

J

Fig. 42.

-V

Fig. 45.

Both toes of the medium's shoes and both heels were touched in places by the clay (the photographs are, however, omitted in order to save space for more typical results to follow).

It appears as though something covered with clay had been drawn in between the toes and had then been pulled upwards, just touching the left shoe and advancing over the laces of the right one. The pulling and drawing actions are very perceptible when the actual shoes are inspected. It would seem that everything projecting, such as laces and rounded parts of the shoes, was caught by the advancing clay-covered substance, and accordingly had clay deposited on it.

The soles of both shoes were perfectly clear of clay.

The Right Stocking

Figs. 40, 41 and 42 show the clay marks on the right stocking.

It will be noticed on fig. 40 that there is a slanting mark just above the position where the shoe would come to, and this is evidently a prolongation of the mark which went up the front of the right shoe and over the laces. On the heel there is a large mark, a small mark under the toe, and a large diffused marking on the sole.

The left stocking shows a remarkable series of marks. Some of these are seen in figs. 43 and 44. As will be observed in fig. 43, the marks extend from halfway up the leg, right down to the toe, and after that they proceed under the sole for a distance of more than half the length of the foot.

Careful examination of this stocking shows: —

(1) That the clay marks on the leg above the

ankle (shown more clearly on fig. 44) are due to something covered with clay touching or being pulled over the stocking and catching on the little raised lurks of the stocking. On these lurks the clay has been thickly deposited, while on the flatter portions of the stocking there has only been a small amount of deposit, although a careful inspection shows that the whole front of the stocking has been more or less rubbed.

(2) That the peculiar zig-zag marks on the top of

the foot of the stocking (figs. 43 and 44) were caused in this wise: — The thin claycovered film of psychic matter endeavours to move down between the stocking and the inside of the shoe, and as the fit is fairly tight, it drags the stocking fabric along with it, forming a crease, the underside of which is not in contact with the film and hence with the clay. A little further on a new crease is formed, and so on.

(3) That the heavy clay marks at the toes are

between the toes and not on the toes, which shows that the clay-covered film had taken, as far as possible, the path of least resistance. In other words, wherever there was a loose space between the stocking and the shoe, the film had taken that path.

Fig. 45 shows the sole of the stocking. This marking is evidently a continuation of the mark-

ings shown on figs. 43 and 44. When the film had got as far as the toes, most of the clay covering it had been removed by contact, and consequently there was little left to mark the sole of the foot. In fact, only where the contact was very tight would the remnants of clay on the film be deposited. Accordingly, while it is evident that the whole front of the sole of the stocking to nearly the heel has been rubbed by the film, yet the clay has only been left on the central part where the contact between stocking and shoe was fairly tight. A close inspection of the toe part of the sole will show that the fluff of the wool fabric has been completely sheared off for a considerable distance down and over practically the whole width of the sole. In several places in fig. 45, the zig-zag marking is again perceptible, where the pulling action of the film on the stocking fabric had resulted in a crease. Although the marking does not visibly extend right to the heel, yet there can be little doubt that it does so extend, but that by this time no clay remains on the film and its path is not visible.

Further Experiment on Clay Marks on Medium's Stockings and other Tests to learn something of the nature of the Psychic Rod

Two vessels containing very soft clay were placed on the floor within the circle, and the operators were asked to place one of their rods in the clay, and then to lay the rod upon a flat piece of wood, in order that data might be obtained of the shape of the end of the rod. As well as the vessels

containing the clay, a piece of smoked glass, a photographic plate, and several clean wooden boards were placed within the circle space, which was covered with clean oilcloth.

The operators, without being asked, finished with the photographic plate and the smoked glass first, and told me to remove them from the circle, i.e. they did not dip a rod into the clay, and then lay it on the plate or glass, but of their own volition finished first with the articles not requiring clay.

In this experiment the medium had her feet free.

At a corner of the smoked glass (an old halfplate negative covered with turpentine soot) there were the impressions of the ends of two small rods ( I had asked the operators to make these particular rods small.) One was pointed, and the other a flat-ended impression. Their outline is determined by the fact that where the rods had lain on the glass, the soot had been removed.

The long sides of the square-ended impression were almost exactly parallel, and its end was exactly at right angles to the sides. (The clay impression of a rod of this shape was obtained a year ago on the ledge of the seance table.) The operators then made a large, nearly oval impression in one of the vessels of clay. This mark was lined with stocking imprint, and on a small portion of it, near one end, there was a space about the size of a shilling, which was covered with soot. From this it would appear that a portion of the covering of the rod used for this large impression had been used to make one of the small marks on the smoked glass, for no soot could have been obtained elsewhere.

The operators next endeavoured to make a mark on a piece of flat board with the end of the rod which had made the large stocking-lined impression mentioned above. This mark, however, was very faint.

The operators then made a large impression in the second tin of clay, and this impression was also lined with the stocking imprint. With the end of this impressing rod various marks were then made on the floor, and on the flat board.

At the edge of a piece of clean board there was a fine, thickly clay-covered mark made by what appears to have been one shape of the end of the rod. It was a blunt, taper-ended impression.

The medium wore a pair of special brown stockings, and she also had on soft rubber slippers. The front of both slippers, at the conclusion of the seance, were found covered with clay.

On the floor various marks were left. There were several more or less circular ones, which, judging by the size, were evidently made by the end of the rod which made the impression on the clay in the second tin.

On this occasion my wife formed one of the circle, and she was sitting nearly opposite the medium, some 6 ft. distant from her. As she told me afterwards, she mentally asked that her dress should be touched by one of the rapping rods. Several clay marks were found on her skirt, and it was rather suggestive that she was the only person touched.

Further Experiment to obtain Data concerning the Clay on Medium's Stockings, etc.

In order to make quite sure that the medium was so fixed that she could not use her feet, the box arrangement shown in fig. 46 was employed. This box had a hinged leaf open at the front. The medium placed her feet in it, the wooden bar was placed in position across her ankles and was locked on the outside, and then the piece of wood shown on the top of the box was tightly fitted round the tops of her ankles and was then screwed into the top of the box. The consequence was, that her feet were absolutely locked in position, and could neither be moved up or down, nor to and fro. In addition, every now and then throughout the test I felt to see if her feet were in position, and I always found that this was the case.

The operators were asked to bring out a rod through the front of the box, and to levitate the table with it.

After some time the operators were successful, and the table was fairly easily levitated. I entered the circle, felt and saw the levitated table, and put my hand below the levitated surface, but, as usual, encountered nothing. The light was good (a red electric light in position right above the circle space was employed) , and I could plainly see the test box during the whole time of the phenomena. But there was no visible structure. A tin dish filled with the clay and water mixed with methylene blue was placed on the floor within the circle about 3 ft. from the test box. This clay was really noth-

ing but water thickened slightly with clay, and was the most fluid substance I have employed in these tests. The methylene blue was to render the traces of the clay more visible than they otherwise would have been, on the floor, stockings of medium, etc. The operators were asked to dip the end of a structure in the clay and leave marks on the floor and on the test box, etc. They were not long in doing this, for the structure could be heard dipping into the watery clay. The sound was exactly similar to the noise made by a cat in lapping up milk. When more clay was required, the structure returned and dipped into the clay again, doing this three or four times.

Marks on the Hinged Leaf of the Test-box and on the bottom of the test-box. (All these marks were coloured a vivid blue, but have photographed white. )

On the hinged leaf on the front of the test-box there are two clear marks more or less indeterminate in outline, and evidently caused by the psychic structure slipping over the wood. (The photograph, fig. 46, does not show them well owing to the wood of the hinged leaf being of a light colour. )

Marks on the Bottom of the Test-box.

There is a large mark on the bottom of the testbox (seen in fig. 46). It is more or less oval in outline. This mark seems a continuation of the large mark on the hinged leaf. On the ledge between the hinged leaf and the bottom of the box the

clay has been deposited (see fig. 46) as though it had been scraped off as the structure advanced over the sharp edge. There is a considerable amount of clay on the locking rod (fig. 46) for a distance of about 4 in. over the left boot of the medium.

There was a blot of clay on the top of the box at the left-hand front corner, and also blots of clay on the inside right wall.

At the back of the box there were some marks, including a very peculiar straight one. It was perfectly straight, made an angle of about 35° to the horizontal top edge of the box, and was about 3 in. long and % in. wide.

Medium's Shoes and Stockings

Fig. 47 shows the front of the medium's shoes, from which it will be seen that there is a large clay mark extending over the toes and up between the shoes. There was no clay on any other portion of the shoes.

The Medium's Stockings

The whole sole from in front of the toe to near the heel of one stocking (fig. 48) was saturated with blue, watery clay. There were even traces of it extending to over the heel. The wool of the sole has evidently been violently rubbed, because little threads have been torn out and rolled over, as it were. The wool of the darned portions has also been greatly frayed.

Fig. 49 shows the other stocking. There is practically no clay on the sole, but much clay over

Fig. 46.

■/ V'w'

Fig. 47.

Fig. 48.

Fig. 49.

and round the toe and up the front. There was also. a little in the vicinity of the heel.

Loose pieces of the brown wool used in the darns were found sticking in the stocking at various places.

Analysis of Results

(1) The marks made on the soft clay are often

covered with the imprint of the stocking when the medium wears stockings.

(2) The imprint on some of these marks is modified

by having the pattern twisted, thickened, or partly covered over, but nevertheless in many cases the stocking fabric is visible.

(3) The marks made on the clay resemble (a) toe

marks, (b) heel marks, (c) sole marks, and (d) marks which do not resemble any portion of a foot.

( 4 ) Although the marks often resemble heel marks,

etc., these marks are often too small and too geometrically exact to have been made by the actual stockinged heel of the medium. Experiment shows that it is quite impossible for the medium to duplicate many of the actual " heel " marks, etc.

(5) The imprint of the stocking marks found in

impressions has one important point of difference from the marks that are made by an actual stockinged foot impressing the clay.

(6) Clay is always deposited on the medium's shoes

— usually (a) between the toes and up over the front, and (b) at the back of the two heels.

(7) Clay is always deposited on the medium's

stockings ; the sole of one or both feet is often covered; the front of the foot from ankle to toes is sometimes covered ; the space round the heel is often covered.

(8) The clay bands on medium's shoes and stock-

ings in all cases suggest a strong drawing action, as though a film of thin material covered with clay were drawn up the shoe and then down between the shoes and the stockings to various parts of the medium's feet.

(9) On considering how such a film as that men-

tioned in (8) would act, it is necessary to consider the variation of contact between shoes and stockings. Generally speaking, unless the shoes are tightly laced, there is ample space for a thin film to get down to the underside of the foot of the medium either at the side of the shoe or via the front behind the tongue. The chief points of contact of the stockinged foot with the leather of the shoes are at the toes, at the front of the sole, and at the heel. All the remainder of the foot is in loose contact or not in contact at all.

We find (a) that if the stocking is pressing fairly tightly on the leather of the shoe, the film as it pulls its way past leaves traces of the clay; (b) that where there is no contact between stocking and leather, the film does not touch the stocking at all, as in the middle part of the sole : that when the film

is very heavily charged with wet clay, only a few portions of the stocking are untouched by it, these portions being where there is quite a comparatively large space between stocking and leather : that every projecting piece of the stocking is heavily marked: and that where there is actual contact between stocking and shoe the rubbing action is apparent; (c) that surrounding the place where there is strong contact between stocking and shoe, the clay is usually fairly heavily deposited.

(10) An examination of much data suggests that the whole of the base of the medium's foot, together with a portion of the heel region and the front of the foot about half way up to the ankle, is involved in the psychic action. The clay marks may not always cover all this space, but this is due to the causes already enumerated — (a) the clay on the film becomes used up as it advances ; ( b ) the film often does not touch a portion of the stocking where there is not actual contact between stocking and leather.

Effect of Encasing the Medium's Feet in High-legged Boots, and other Tests of a like nature

Experiment A.

The medium's feet were laced into tightly fitting boots reaching half way up to her knees. Her feet were then placed on the test-box (fig. 46) and the

oval part fixed round her ankles and screwed down. Her feet were so tightly wedged as to be absolutely immovable. Nevertheless, on several occasions, hard, soft, and various intermediate qualities of raps were given on the floor well behind the box.

Unknown to anyone present I had covered the undersurface of the table with soot from a turpentine flame. In spite of the control applied to the medium the operators made a couple of good-sized marks on the soot (the table was standing in the middle of the circle).

Each of these marks is seen on close inspection to be made up of series of fine lines, and examination with the magnifying glass shows the well-known stocking fabric effect. Thus, notwithstanding that the medium's feet were tightly laced into highlegged boots and her feet wedged into the test-box, the usual stocking effect was obtained on the psychic mark made on the undersurface of the table.

Experiment B.

The medium wore a very high pair of boots which were laced tightly, and her feet were locked up in the test-box as in Experiment A. The oval piece on the top of the box was on this occasion moved forward a little and an end piece of wood was screwed to the rear of it, so that the size of the holes was exactly the same as in the previous test. It was absolutely impossible for the medium to get a foot out of the box, but the new arrangement prevented her feet being wedged together and allowed them to move a little inside the box.

For about an hour there were periodical conimo-

tions within and around the box, and it was evident that the operators were trying hard to overcome the severe conditions.

In the end practically all the usual phenomena were produced, with the exception that their magnitude was less than when the medium's feet were free. The medium was under considerable stress, as was evident to me, who was beside her all the time. Marks were made on the soot on the undersurface of the table (none of the sitters knew the soot was there). Mr Morrison and I both heard the structure lapping itself round a near leg of the table.

Mrs Morrison said that she felt a hook-like structure brush round her knee (her knee was near a leg of the table, and she felt the hook twist itself round the leg: she said it appeared to be about l^-in. diameter and felt quite rough).

Experiment C.

The medium wore a special pair of grey stockings which I had provided, her feet were laced into high boots which fitted like a glove, and her feet were then locked in the test-box as in Experiments A and B.

At the conclusion of the seance I examined the stockings. Although no clay was used at this sitting, a series of marks was found on one of the stockings. Patches of a darker colour than the ordinary grey of the stocking were visible here and there: (1) on the sole, (2) under the toes, and (3) up the centre of the front, especially at the curve of the ankles. These marks were not due to wetness or dirt, but to the surface of the fabric

being scraped or burred at these places. At the curve of the ankle the fabric was distended and scraped and little holes were left as though something had forced its way between the stocking and the leather and had damaged and permanently distended the fabric. In several places where the fit was very tight, the interstices between the stocking threads had been permanently enlarged, as though a glutinous fluid had entered them as it pushed its way out of the boot.

On the bottom of the sole of the stocking the maker's name had been fixed to the wool in gilt lettering. After the seance small particles of this gilt were found on the scraped portions of the stocking right up to the place corresponding to near the top of the boot, suggesting that the psychic matter. in its passage from the sole of the foot, over the toes, and up the front of the boot had detached these particles, which had then been deposited here and there on the stocking fabric, where the fit between stocking and boot was close.

Experiment D.

The medium wore a special pair of bluestockings I had provided, and her feet were tightly laced up in high boots. On this occasion, in order to vary the tests, her feet were not placed in the test-box.

Raps were given of all varieties; the "bouncing ball" was very perfect. The quality of the phenomena was as usual, but the magnitude somewhat less than when her feet were encased in shoes.

I placed two tins of soft clay on the floor within the circle space and asked the operators to make

marks on the clay. I wished to see the character of these marks, i.e. if they were stocking-lined and if any clay would be deposited on the stocking of the medium well inside the boots, despite the fact that she had on long-legged boots which were tightly laced.

The operators duly made an impression on the clay in each tin.

On both impressions, by the aid of a magnifying glass, the stocking marks, distorted, irregular, and flattened, could be plainly made out, showing conclusively that the film of psychic matter, in traversing the tight places between boot and stocking on its way to the open air, had had the pattern of the stocking flattened. This is exactly what one would expect. One sees, therefore, that in order to obtain good stocking marks on the clay there must be little rubbing of the psychic film as it emerges from the foot of the medium, and hence that the best marks are obtained when the medium's feet are encased in loose shoes or are not encased at all.

The Effects on the Medium's Stockings

At the conclusion of the seance, the medium's tightly-laced long-legged boots were unlaced, when it was found that both stockings for a considerable distance down the front, inside the boot, were marked with clay. One stocking, over the curve of the ankle and nearly to the toe, was impregnated with fine particles of wet clay. The other stocking had not so much clay on it, but was quite wet over the curve of the ankle. Small clay particles were even found on the inside of the stockings at the toes.

The water on the stockings was evidently due to wet clay-covered particles of psychic matter being drawn in between boots and stockings right down the front of the foot: the very close contact had scraped off most of the clay or had pulverised it into very fine powder, leaving the moisture on the stockings. In addition, the fabric of one stocking was badly ruffled and distended as though it had been severely mauled by the transit of the psychic matter through the extremely narrow passage between boot and stocking. The psychic path in the case of each stocking seemed to be from the region of the sole, over the toes, and up the front of the foot until the top of the boot was reached. Under the toes of one stocking there were decided discoloured marks where the wool fabric had been sheared. Most of the moisture and clay particles were left at the curve of the ankles, where contact between boot and stocking was most close, and accordingly where the psychic film must be dragged in with considerable force. At the ankle bends more particles of clay were found on the inside of the stocking than on the outside, indicating that the pressure had been so great there that the clay had been forced through the interstices of the stocking.

On the sole of both stockings the wool fabric had been actually ripped and torn, and in some places strands of wool had been pulled out. There were clay marks on the boots right up to the top, exactly as in the case where shoes were worn.

Needless to say, it was quite impossible for the medium to get her feet out of the boots. Her hands were held and were visible all the time, and the

boots were tied and laced at the end of the seance exactly as they were at the beginning.

On the sole of one of the stockings I had carefully rubbed some brown pastel chalk. At the conclusion of the seance small particles of this chalk were found embedded in the fabric of the stocking along the path taken by the psychic stuff, i.e. over and above the toes and up the front of the stocking. This test was made on the assumption that, if the incoming clay-covered psychic stuff deposited the clay along its path, the outgoing stuff would also drag particles of a foreign matter along with it if placed in its track.

Experiment E.

The medium sat in long-legged boots, with the laces doubly knotted at the top. Her feet were placed on an electrical test apparatus. If she raised either foot a bell would ring. She wore a pair of new silk stockings. On the sole of one stocking, near the toe, I carefully rubbed yellow crayon, and on the sole of the other green crayon, in order to see if there would be any disturbance of this at the end of the seance.

Result — On one stocking especially the path of the outgoing psychic stuff is plainly seen. The coloured crayon particles were pulled right over the toe, deposited there, and up the front of the stocking, over the curve of the ankle to the top of the boot, and even some way above the boot. Not a few, but numerous, particles were left bedded in the stocking fabric; also, in this case, backwards along the sole, up and over the heel, and up the

back of the stocking to the top of the boot there were many particles, indicating a path both along sole, over toe, and up the front of the stocking, and also a path along sole, under and up over heel, and thence out of the boot.

The other stocking was not so plainly marked, but there was still a well-defined track of coloured particles under and over the toes, up the front of the stocking, and out. There were no particles on the heel of this stocking.

Both stockings had their fabric severely stressed and extended along the path of the psychic stuff.

Experiment F.

The medium sat in long-legged boots, with the test electrical apparatus. She had on a pair of new brown stockings. On the inside sole of each shoe I had carefully rubbed a little oil paint, red on the left shoe and blue on the right. This paint did not extend as far as the toe, and the medium did not know it was there when she put on the shoes.

Result. — At the conclusion of the seance it was found that the red paint from the sole of the left shoe had been drawn up the inside of the front of the shoe and was adhering in small patches to the edge of the tongue at the top. Also it had been drawn up over the top of toe of stocking and was adhering there. Ordinary manipulation of the foot could not have caused the paint to be deposited in the spots in which it was actually found to be deposited.

The blue paint on the other shoe had not been affected.

A few small particles of the red paint were found

on an object placed under the table, an object which was psychically touched during this seance.

Experiments A to F clinch the question as to the place and manner of ejection and injection of the psychic stuff or plasma. Its place of origin is undoubtedly somewhere about the medium's foot. The plasma carries with it as it proceeds outwards particles of matter placed in its path and leaves many of these particles bedded in the stocking fabric along its path. Likewise, when the plasma returns to the foot of the medium it deposits along its path where there is friction any foreign matter adhering to it, such as water or clay. Thus both the outward and inward paths of the plasma can be traced.

So often did I carry out such tests as are detailed in Experiments A to F, and so uniform were the results, that the matter was placed beyond all dispute. The test by repetition became so simple and certain that results could be obtained at any sitting. Experiments showing the path of the plasma always succeeded, because no phenomena were possible unless the plasma was liberated from the medium, and phenomena of one sort or another occurred at every sitting. I intended to say nothing in this place about the quality of the matter which can force its way up the foot and leg of the medium between her stocking and a tightly laced longlegged boot, and which can likewise force its way back along the same path, leaving a well-defined trace of moisture and pulverised clay in its track right to the toe of the stocking. I wish only to point out to the reader that the experiments de-

tailed above show that this is actually the case, and that one of the most troublesome problems in the whole research is thus solved satisfactorily. Moreover, experiments such as I have described and others of a similar nature can be repeated with this medium at any time.

Evolution of the Plasma at the Commencement of the Seance, and the Phenomena connected therewith

Many persons interested in psychic matters have written to me proposing various test arrangements for the medium's feet. Most of these correspondents have assumed — I do not understand for what reason — that the evolution of the plasma is a quiet and tranquil process causing no disturbance to the medium, and being imperceptible to everybody concerned in the circle. These armchair critics imagine, for some unexplained reason, that the great and powerful structures which produce the phenomena at the Goligher circle appear magically from nowhere, and that their advent is unheralded by anything in the nature of labour. But experiment shows that nothing could be wider of the mark. As I have already explained in my earlier books, the muscles of the medium's feet and ankles are, during the occurrence of phenomena, in a state of much stress: they seem to be squirming. There is no bodily movement of the foot, but there is a whirlpool of internal muscular movement round foot and ankle and lower part of the calf.

Jf the reader thinks for a moment, he will see

that the evolution of the plasma in the way I have described must be accompanied by much friction between stocking and leather of shoe or boot. As a matter of fact, at nearly all seances the noise accompanying the birth pangs of the plasma is distinctly audible. Even when the medium sits without shoes in her stocking soles, the rubbing of the plasma along the stocking fabric is distinctly heard. With thin silk stockings this sound is accentuated; the friction of plasma on the threads as it disengages itself is unmistakable. If the medium's feet are encased in shoes the preliminary noise is usually greater, as the plasma finds a path for itself from the sole of the foot to the open air ; while if her legs are laced up in tight boots the preliminary noises may be quite prolonged, as is easily understandable. Nothing can be wider of the mark than to suppose that this initial process at the commencement of every seance — the bringing away of the plasma — is a silent, unforceful operation, analogous, say, to steam rising from the surface of boiling water. It is, on the contrary, as a little consideration will show, of necessity a most energetic process, and great forces are involved. I am now going to describe a series of experiments which will make the matter clearer and help to bring home the facts as they are really represented in nature, and not as they might be supposed from a priori considerations. I often employed an electrical apparatus to make sure that the medium did not lift her feet. It consists essentially of two long boards or foot-rests hinged at their back ends to an underboard, and separated by a dividing piece of wood more than

sufficiently high to prevent the medium placing one foot across both rests. Each of these foot-rests is separately connected to an electric bell circuit. There is a spring between the underboard and each foot-rest sufficiently strong to keep the electrical contacts together, so that if there is no weight upon the rest the bell rings. When the medium's feet are upon the rests the contacts are opened and the bell does not ring. But if either foot is lifted for an instant the bell rings. The springs under the rests can be adjusted for various degrees of pressure. The apparatus is so constructed that no amount of juggling with the feet will allow the latter to be raised from the rests without the bell vigorously ringing. The apparatus was tested at the beginning and end of each seance, and often during the course of the seance.

The experiments in which the medium's feet were totally enclosed in a box were quite satisfactory and conclusive, but it was thought that with the present arrangement there would be more room for reaction upon her feet and legs, and more freedom from cramping of the muscles, which are in a state of intense motion, and hence greater resulting magnitude of phenomena.

Experiment G.

Medium on electrical apparatus. Medium's chair screwed to floor. There were great creaking noises in the neighbourhood of the medium's feet for a long time after the seance opened. These fluxes of noise came in spasms. No ringing of the bell. These fluxes of noises, I wish to emphasise, were

intermittent, as though the operators made a great effort for a minute or two, and had then to rest for several minutes. After a long time there were faint raps on the foot-rests, and later fairly good raps of all kinds well out on the oilcloth of the floor, the bell not ringing during the phenomena. Many peculiar flopping noises were heard. The table, placed in the centre of circle, did not move.

Note. — I had long established the fact that when any new conditions were presented to the operators, the latter required time to overcome them. I have many times watched them experimenting.

Experiment H.

The electrical apparatus was altered a little. Upright pieces of wood were screwed to the outsides of the foot-rests, so as to prevent the medium putting the toe of her shoe over the side, while at the same time keeping the heel on the apparatus. These new boards were much too far apart to allow the medium's shoe to be placed over both simultaneously. The apparatus was not designed strictly against the production of spurious raps, but against spurious movements and levitations of the table, and of action generally well beyond the confines of the test apparatus.

The shoes worn by the medium at all these experiments (the seances were all held in my own residence) were kept in my house, and the medium put them on when she arrived, together with special stockings I provided.

The medium's chair was screwed to floor. The bell did not once ring during the whole seance.

After ten minutes or so there was considerable creaking of the boards of the electrical apparatus. The noises came in spasms, with considerable intervals between, as though the operators were resting. The dividing board between the rests seemed to be the chief difficulty to the operators. It would seem to get in the way of the materialising stuff as it was drawn from the medium's feet. On the top of this dividing piece of wood, for a length of about 6 in., there was found at the conclusion of the seance faint red paint marks, and similar markings were also found on various sharp edges of the apparatus. (I had painted a little red oil paint on the inside of the sole of one of medium's shoes, and the markings were due to the plasma detaching portions of this in its path upwards and outwards from the medium's foot. It was noticeable in this and other similar tests that the sharp edges of the apparatus in the region of the medium's feet were often abraded, suggesting that a film of matter was pulled energetically outwards from the medium's feet, and that this film was dragged over the edges and therefore abraded them. )

A small letter balance was placed on the floor with its nearest edge about 14 in. from the end of the electrical apparatus — much beyond the distance the foot of the medium could be pushed over the front of the test boards, and at the same time keep contact with them with the heel. The idea was that when the operators had overcome the initial difficulties and had got the structure " out," they would push the pan of the balance up and

down and the noise would let me know they were ready for experimenting. After the preliminary spasmodic noises round the medium's feet — due to the disengaging of the structure from her feet — were over, there ensued a period of silence lasting a minute or two, and then the pan of the balance was pushed up and down smartly. It is noteworthy that after the conclusion of the initial noises — due, as I say to the disengaging of plasma and to the building up of the psychic structures — there always followed a period of a few moments of quietness before phenomena commenced, to be compared, perhaps, to the noises accompanying the building of some piece of mechanism, such as an engine, and the calm following the completion of its erection before it is put to its destined use. The undersurface of the table had been covered with soot from the turpentine-filled lamp.

After a time the table began to move about and then levitated splendidly, keeping in the air for about a minute. It moved up and down in the air to a hymn sung by the members of the circle. During this time I examined the medium. I found she was sitting quite still, as usual, with her hands held, and the bell was not ringing.

During the levitation of the table, soot must have adhered to the end of the psychic structure causing the levitation. I therefore looked for traces of this soot on the medium's stocking, and found it, as I expected, thickly deposited over, round, and under the toe part of one stocking. A peculiar and significant thing about this deposit

was a series of inclined soot marks on the upper part of the stocking above the toes.

These inclined marks were evidently due to the soot returning to the neighbourhood of the toes, and going in between the toes, as far as possible, i.e. where there was space, and where the medium's toes were not pressing hard upon the leather of the shoe. The inclination of the marks, about 30°, was evidently due to an inclined pull inwards as the plasma returned to the foot, and there is little doubt that the high dividing board between the medium's feet was the cause of this. That is to say, this board was in the way of the structure as it returned to the medium, and its dematerialisation was hindered thereby. This board was always under much stress at the commencement of the seances, as the creaking noises amply testified. Its presence hindered the operations in the building up of the structures. During this seance there was an attempt made to write rough letters on the soot on the undersurface of the table, for several capital letters were afterwards plainly discernible.

I had also sooted the undersurface of the footrests. Small psychic marks were made on them in a position where it was impossible even to insert a finger. The medium did not know the soot was there. These small marks had the usual stocking configuration upon them.

The electrical apparatus was in perfect order at the conclusion of the seance.

Experiment I.

Medium on electrical apparatus and her chair screwed to floor. In order to obtain more data concerning the initial processes of disengagement of plasma from the foot of the medium, the springs under the foot-rests of the electrical apparatus were strengthened, so that it took a weight of 6 lb. at the extreme end of each rest to prevent electrical contact, and hence the bell from ringing. (The medium's shoes together weighed only 1*4 lb.) The consequence was that the medium had actually to press down slightly on the rests with her feet in order to keep the contacts open.

For about an hour the operators kept working at the feet of the medium ; but they worked lightly, evidently fearing to put any upward pull on her feet, and hence cause the bell to ring. (The operators, of course knew that they must endeavour to disengage the psychic structure without ringing the bell.) There were the usual intermittent creaks of the wood of the foot-rests, but these noises were modified on this occasion for the reasons stated. But as time went on it became evident that the operators were unable to get the plasma free by these feeble methods, so finally I told them to be more vigorous, and to get the structure out irrespective of the bell ringing. No sooner had I spoken than the creaking and scrubbing noises in the vicinity of the medium's feet greatly increased in intensity, and coincident with them the bell rang intermittently and jerkily over a period of about five minutes. The very smallest spasmodic movement of the medium's feet would

in this case cause the bell to ring, as the strength of the upward push of the springs below the footrests was so great that the medium, as I have said, had actually to press down on the rests with her feet to prevent the bell ringing. At the end of the time mentioned the noises ceased for a few minutes, and then the small letter-balance away out on the floor was pushed up and down, the bell not ringing.

Then I asked for levitation, which was easily accomplished, the levitation lasting fully half a minute, and the bell not ringing at all. Another levitation a little later was also accomplished without the bell ringing.

Experiment J.

The springs under the foot-rests were weakened and adjusted so that it took a weight of % lb. greater than that of the two shoes ( 1^4 1£>S- ) at the extreme edge of the rests to open the electrical circuit and hence prevent the bell ringing.

I found that if I demanded that the operators should get the structure " out " and produce phenomena without the bell ringing at all, they could do so, only in this case they had to work on the medium very gently, and the resulting preliminary creaking and swishing noises in the neighbourhood of her feet were correspondingly weak, and it took a long time, perhaps three-quarters of an hour, before phenomena started. But if I gave them the necessary time they could succeed. As soon, however, as I understood the process, I always told them to get the structure out as

quickly as possible irrespective of the bell ringing. Actual phenomena, of course, such as levitation, had to occur without the bell ringing.

Without the bell ringing the operators levitated the table, and made a good impression on a plate of clay placed 18 in. or so in front of the test apparatus. This impression on the clay was lined with stocking marks similar to the marks alreadjr described. An electroscope was also discharged. I several times examined the medium's feet, and always found them at rest on the apparatus.

Clay marks were, at the conclusion of the seance, found on the medium's shoes and stockings as usual. On one stocking there was a clay mark on the heel and a small mark on the underside of toes, the latter being in the space between the toes and traceable for a good distance along the sole. The thickest deposit of clay on the heel was where the medium's heel was not pressing tightly on the leather of the boot, and the very fine deposit where it was pressing tightly. This is exactly what always happened in the tests already described.

On the other stocking, in the neighbourhood of the ankle, there was a clay mark going downwards in a slanting direction to the shoe. There was decided evidence of tearing action on the wool of both stockings.

Experiment K.

The electrical apparatus was adjusted so that a weight of just over 2 lb. was required at the extreme edge of each foot-rest to open the circuit.

The medium's shoes together weighed l1/^ lb. The apparatus was tested at the end of the seance and found correct.

The usual shuffling, tearing, and pulling actions occurred near the medium's feet, and these increased in intensity as time went on. The bell only rang a few times, and then only for half a second or so. The structure was ejected and built up fairly easily. The table, placed well beyond the reach of the medium, was soon moving about without the bell ringing, and three fine levitations quickly occurred under the same conditions. One of these levitations was a high one. I looked right through the space below the table, but could see nothing.

The operators were practising all kinds of raps upon the floor well beyond the test apparatus. They were very successful. The magnitude of the rapping was not quite so great as when the medium's feet were not confined in a test apparatus, but it was very good nevertheless.

Once when the operators were scraping on the undersurface of the table, the boards of the foot apparatus were simultaneously creaking "(although the bell was not ringing), showing there was connection between the two ends of the structure.

An examination of the data from the experiments described and other similar ones which were carried out shows: —

(1) The first process is the ejection of the psychic stuff from the feet of the medium. This occupies a considerable time and is not a continuous action, but occurs in spasms,

which begin weakly, but gradually increase in intensity. Towards the period of completion of this operation the process is normally quite vigorous, and during its occurrence the medium's feet and legs are involuntarily slightly moving.

(2) The structure is " out," and it can act static-

ally, such as on a levitated table, without the medium's feet moving. It can also act kinetically, without her feet perceptibly moving, as in making raps, but this process is more difficult. Sometimes big kinetic movements would cause the bell to ring momentarily, as where the table was suddenly jerked along the floor. But the operators soon learned to avoid great accelerations of large bodies.

(3) There is a period of time between (1) and

(2) during which the psychic stuff or plasma is probably being moulded.

(4) On the withdrawal of the structure after the

occurrence of a burst of phenomena the medium's feet and legs are slightly affected; for after a levitation and similar phenomena the bell would ring slightly as the plasma was withdrawn into the feet of the medium, and the boards would slightly creak, and before phenomena could be obtained again process (1) went on as before, though not so vigorously, owing to the greater ease with which the structures could be ejected on second and subsequent occasions.

Visual Examination of the Psychic Structures

Fitful glimpses of the structures had been obtained off and on in the ordinary red light of the seance room, but this light was insufficient to enable them to be examined at leisure, as they were more or less transparent to the light, or there was some other condition connected with the structures themselves which usually prevented them from being seen. The reader will find at pp. 9 and 10 some remarks regarding the visibility of the structures at ordinary seances in the red light, and I do not intend to say anything more about this aspect of the subject here. Many years of experimental work had shown me that the psychic structures are acutely sensitive to light — a result which has also been arrived at in thousands of circles held with many mediums in many parts of the world.

On Saturday, 8th March 1919, I had the opportunity for the first time of examining one of these structures at the Goligher circle by means of the eye: the method adopted was simple. A sheet of cardboard about 1 ft. square was painted with luminous paint, exposed to sunlight for some hours, and then placed on the floor of the seance room within the circle space. I had tried this method in a haphazard fashion some years previously without any pronounced success, and I did not expect any great results on the present occasion. But either the phenomena had become more powerful and stable in the interim, or the operators had by practice improved their methods,

for the results obtained on the present occasion were unexpectedly good, and the use of phosphorescent paint in various forms placed a powerful instrument of research in my hands. In the dark seance room the luminous sheets of cardboard shone quite strongly.

Experiment L.

During the last half hour of the seance a sheet of luminous cardboard about 1 ft. square was placed on the floor within the circle space, just beyond the hinged leaf of the box apparatus (fig. 46).

The medium had her feet and ankles locked in the box. It was absolutely impossible for her to get her feet out. The operators were asked to bring out the structure from the box and to hold it over the phosphorescent sheet. I stood at the side of the medium looking down on the cardboard sheet.

In a short time a curved body somewhat like the toe of a boot advanced over the inner edge of the cardboard and then retired. It did this two or three times, as though the operators were testing the effect of the phosphorescent light. Evidently this light had little or no effect, for in a very short time the whole of the end of the structure was quite easily moved above the cardboard, to and fro, or forwards, as I desired.

The Working End of the Structure

Generally speaking, it resembles the toe part of a human foot in shape, without the heel. This

seems the normal unstrained shape of the structure. But, unlike the human foot, it is capable of extraordinary changes of form, which changes could be made on request. The operators made the structure end into many shapes for my edification, and I watched these changes occurring. The toe part could lengthen until the whole thing resembled a thin, pointed, straight rod. I watched the end portion contract, and then gradually lengthen, until the pointed shape was reached.

After the pointed stage was reached the pointed end would sometimes curl round into a hook. This hook-like end could evidently grip things, such as a table leg. It twisted and untwisted before my eyes. Or the structure could contract and spread out sideways until it resembled a mushroom or a cabbage leaf, the edges being somewhat irregular. Or one side would remain normal as regards shape and the other would bulge out.

The end portion of the rod, which could undergo the changes noted, seemed to be differentiated from the remainder or body of the structure. For one thing it appeared to be of a different degree of visibility, and seemed to consist of a long, absolutely straight portion proceeding into the mouth of the test-box. I asked that the tapered end be pointed straight up in the air and then straight downwards, and this was done; also the whole end was turned upside down on request. The flexibility was marvellous.

During the singing of the last hymn the

operators thrust a square-ended rod over the edge of the cardboard two or three times.

With regard to the power of the end of the structure to form itself into a hook with which to grip things, the reader will be interested to hear of an incident that occurred at a seance some little time before. At this seance no clay of any kind had been provided. The medium was on the test apparatus, her feet being locked in the test-box (fig. 46). Just before they levitated the table the operators kept rapping on it. Asked if they had a message to give us, they answered in the negative. All sorts of questions were then asked them by the sitters and myself, in an endeavour to get at what they wanted, but in vain; and as it was too laborious to spell out by raps, we let the matter rest.

After the seance was over I soon found out the meaning of the mysterious raps. They were given so that I should particularly examine the legs of the table. As no clay had been provided I had no intention of doing so, as I did not anticipate that any marks would be left. Nevertheless, when I looked at the front legs of the table I was surprised to see them lightly marked with clay. About a foot from the floor each leg was marked with white clay right round the four sides of the legs (the legs were of square section) : that is to say, the operators had levitated the table in this particular case by gripping each leg by a structure made into a hook-like form, a hook which had embraced the four sides of the table leg, thus forming a circle right round it. The mystery as

to where the operators had obtained the clay was cleared up when it was discovered that there were some small lumps of clay adhering to the floor from a previous seance. Before levitating the table the operators evidently rubbed their two structures on this clay, then rapped on the legs of the table to draw my attention to the legs, and then levitated the table by the legs with the hook-like form of the structure.

Mrs Morrison says that at one seance in the ordinary red light she saw two structures proceed outwards from the feet of the medium, and pass right under the table as far as the back legs, i.e. the legs remote from the medium. The end of each structure then twisted itself completely round a back leg, and the two structures moved upwards like a couple of arms and levitated the table. The body of each structure was a long straight rod about the thickness of the human wrist.

Experiment M.

The medium's feet were in the test-box. This experiment was carried out at the commencement of the seance, when the luminosity of ,the cardboard sheet was at a maximum (Experiment L was done at the end of the seance). Conditions were the same as in Experiment L, with the exception that the medium wore light grey stockings instead of black ones, in order to see if the colour of the structures would be affected.

The first appearance of a structure from the mouth of the test-box was as in the previous experiment, and the size was about the same as the

toe part of a human foot. The structure then advanced over the cardboard until a much larger part of it was seen. This was the working end of the structure, and it turned upside down on request. It seemed to be jointed about 6 in. from its termination.

On several occasions the working end was flattened out into a circular form, this being jointed to a thin, straight arm.

Sometimes this circular end spread out at the periphery until it became heart-shaped.

Once the structure lengthened out into a verypointed form.

On several occasions two psychic structures projected themselves simultaneously and placed themselves together over the cardboard. All the structures were projected over the cardboard at a height of 3 or 4 inches.

