Besides issuing over the cardboard straight out from the medium, a structure several times placed itself at right angles to her, i.e., parallel to the front of the test-box. On these occasions 5 or 6 m. of the rod portion could be seen.

All the structures appeared of even density this evening, and did not seem so flexible as at the previous seance. As viewed from above, they appeared black. Several times, however, I saw them from the front by the reflected light of the luminous paint, and on these occasions they appeared white. The colour of the medium's stockings seemed to have no effect on the colour of the structures.

A peculiar thing about the structures when the

two came out simultaneously was that the ends of both were exactly together — in contact — from the time they appeared to the time they were withdrawn into the medium. This phenomenon occurred at least six times, and always exactly the same thing happened. The structure ends, as they came from the mouth of the box, always kept exactly together in line and in contact, there never being any variation in the arrangement. They always came out exactly over the top of the testbox, and they exactly occupied the width of the test-box. Only on one occasion did any motion take place when this pair was out, and that was only a movement onwards of the two ends towards each other — a stiff and seemingly difficult motion. On all other occasions the pair of structures was perfectly rigid and always in the same relative position. They seemed to be structures prepared inside the test-box, and thickly covered over with materialising substance in order to withstand the light — armour - plated, as it were, beforehand. Their rigidity and incapability of movement was owing to the great thickness and density of their materialised covering. Owing to the great area of structure presented to the influence of the light (due to the two structures being out together), the degree of materialisation had to be made especially intense in order that the dismembering effects of the light should be inhibited.

I had subjected the phosphorescent cardboard to several days' exposure to daylight before this seance was held, and accordingly the intensity of the light from the cardboard was much greater

than at the previous seance. Moreover, larger sheets of cardboard were used. I expect that the effects of light on these psychic structures vary with the second or higher power of the light intensity, and therefore at this seance a much higher degree of materialisation was necessary. Hence, as this covering of the structure was in all cases thicker than at the previous seance, the structure was stiffer and less flexible. The case is analogous to that of a man who puts on gloves of varying thickness. With thin gloves his hand is quite flexible, but as the thickness of the gloves increases the flexibility diminishes until at a certain thickness the hand becomes perfectly rigid. This last corresponds to the case in which the pair of structures came out of the box simultaneously.

On one occasion at this seance, while a single structure was out, I asked the operators to touch the phosphorescent cardboard with the structure. Very slowly and gingerly the end of the structure lowered itself and gently scraped the surface of the cardboard. I was wondering why such evident care was taken, and did not remember that as the structure got close to the cardboard there would be the stronger disintegrating effect due to the light.

Experiment N.

In order to vary the tests the medium sat in shoes with her feet quite free. A large sheet of luminous cardboard was placed upright against a box outside the circle on the left of the medium, between her and her father, so that the light shone

into the circle space. I crouched below the table on the side remote from the medium in order to observe the structures.

The phenomena commenced with raps, which, as usual, gradually increased in intensity. After some time a couple of structures rose from the vicinity of the medium's feet to the undersurface of the table. They seemed about the thickness of one's wrist, and appeared to rise in an arc from about the medium's knees. They remained a few seconds, and then descended as though trying if they were capable of making the motions desired. During the time they emerged, the medium's skirts moved.

On one occasion I saw the pointed end of the structure push against a table leg and move the table about.

During the levitation of the table, although the light was good, I could see nothing, which may have been due to the structure end being immediately below the ledge.

I saw the end of the structure moving about on the sooted undersurface of the table, as though it was trying to write something. On examination afterwards wokd was found roughly scrawled on the soot.

Towards the close of the seance, the structure was seen to push its pointed end several times over a sheet of luminous cardboard placed on the floor, while another sheet was placed upright against the legs of Mr Goligher. The structure end on this occasion was much larger than usual, and it seemed to change in size considerably. It kept dodging

in and out to the medium, as though the light affected it, and as though it had to keep returning to her for " power."

Experiment O.

The medium was sitting in shoes on the electrical foot-rest, with the adjustments as described in previous experiments. I placed a large sheet of luminous cardboard on the floor within the circle, 1% shoe lengths at its nearest edge from the outside edge of the test apparatus. It was quite impossible for the medium to get her feet near it without causing the bell to ring. Yet the structure many times put its pointed end over the inner edge of the cardboard. On one occasion it went fully 4 in. over the edge, and on no occasion did the bell ring. As usual, the structure came and went quickly. It appeared, as viewed from the top, quite black and solid. It seemed too stiff and heavily materialised to move its parts about much.

Experiment P.

Medium on electrical apparatus. The nearest edge of the luminous cardboard was 14 in. from the extreme edge of the electrical apparatus.

The structure was repeatedly put over the cardboard without the bell ringing.

On this occasion two structures came out alternately. A structure would swing over from the left of the cardboard, would then retire, and then another structure would swing over from the right, It was quite obvious that these structures

were from each leg of the medium. Both appeared similar in form, with an irregularly pointed end, roughly moulded.

When the left structure first emerged, it made a dive across the cardboard and back with tremendous rapidity, as though testing the effects of the light.

I made a careful examination of the height of the structures above the floor, and found that it varied from about 8 in. to a foot.

The test apparatus was found perfect at end of seance.

Experiment Q.

This was an experiment carried out to try to photograph the structure as it rested over the phosphorescent cardboard. The medium was on the electrical apparatus. The cardboard was placed on the floor with its nearest edge 14< in. from the extreme edge of the test apparatus. The camera was focussed on the cardboard. Panchromatic plates were used in the camera, as it was thought these would be more sensitive to the phosphorescent light. I explained to the operators that it would be necessary to hold the structures for a considerable time over the cardboard.

The first structure came out and placed itself over the cardboard, and remained there about half a minute. It was of the usual broadly pointed shape. It placed itself in the most advantageous position for being photographed, for the camera was on the left of the medium, and the structure placed itself exactly between the cardboard and

the lens. Mr Stoupe, the photographer, says it was really remarkable how, without being asked, the structure placed itself in the direct line of sight.

I was sitting on the right of the medium, and when the structure returned to her, she gave an involuntary convulsive shudder.

I asked that for the second photograph a pointed structure should be used. Accordingly the structure emerged in a narrow pointed shape like a large carrot. Mr Stoupe mentally asked that it should remain in position for a minute, and he ticked over the seconds mentally. He says that exactly at the sixtieth second the structure disappeared. This second structure again placed itself in the line of sight of the camera. The medium shivered most violently when it returned to her.

The violent momentary shivering of the medium as the structures were withdrawn was evidently due to the structures being held for such a comparatively long time over the luminous cardboard. In ordinary cases the structures are fugitive, coming and going quickly, a condition of things evidently necessary to prevent undue strain on the medium. Unfortunately, it was found that the exposures were not sufficiently long to affect the plates. The apparatus, as usual, was tested at the end of the seance and found correct.

In order that the student of psychic subjects may have at hand all the data possible, I give below a brief account of experiments in which the plasma carried to and from the feet of the medium various substances. These experiments

were usually done in conjunction with others, of which they only formed a small part; but I think it more satisfactory to summarise all the results belonging to one class of test in one place than to spread them through the book haphazardly.

Experiment R.

The medium wore her seance shoes and a pair of new stockings, on the sole of which was imprinted in white particles the maker's trade mark: —

" Best Silk finish. Made in England."

After the seance it was found that the trade mark was practically obliterated, and that the white particles which made it up had been drawn all along the length of the foot, up and over the toes and up the front of the foot.

The feet of both stockings, all along their length, were covered with little silvery hairs from the tongues of the shoes.

Experiment S.

Some ordinary quarter plates as used in photography were, after they had been soaked' in water, placed near the feet of the medium. After the seance it was found that on one stocking, about 1 ft. from the ground, many yellow particles from the film were sticking. There were also some of the yellow particles down the front of the foot, and even one or two under the toes. Also on the left of right shoe (corresponding to this stocking) yellow particles of film were sticking. The operators had been asked to touch the wet plates

with their psychic structures. There were also

a few particles on the undersurface of the shoe near the toe, where there was no contact with the ground.

The path of the plasma was evidently up the

shoe to the middle of the foot, then up the leg about 6 in.

Experiment T.

Large blobs of brown oil paint were placed on the sole of the inside of each of the medium's shoes near the toe. At the end of the seance it was found that while there were practically no paint marks on one stocking, the other was heavily affected. On the sole there were traces of brown paint from the toes right to the heel. Also a welldefined mark started from near the toes and went up the front and side of the stocking halfway to the knee, the mark broadening out the higher it got.

The Shoes — On the left side of right shoe, at the top of the leather, was a brown mark evidently left by the psychic stuff as it emerged from the shoe. The whole top of the tongue of the left shoe was rubbed with brown paint, as though the plasma had issued in this shoe from the front, whereas in the right shoe it seemed to issue from the side.

Experiment U.

The medium had on a new pair of stockings with the maker's mark — " Cashmere finish " — written on one side of sole of each in gilt. At

the conclusion of the seance it was found that only one stocking seemed to have been much affected. The base of the sole of this was dirty, and the mark — "Cashmere finish " — had been badly rubbed. The heel also showed signs of much rubbing, while the stocking fabric up the front from the toe was much ruffled.

Experiment V.

A new pair of boots was bought for the medium. These went well above her ankles and were tightly laced. Eye hooks were screwed into the toes, strings attached to them and to hooks on the floor. This arrangement gave the medium's feet a little play, while at the same time no obstructions were on the floor. The legs of the medium's chair were screwed to the floor and her hands were held.

A letter balance was placed on the floor 8 in. beyond the reach of her toes as they were controlled by the strings.

Result. — The balance was moved up and down several times by the psychic structure.

A tin of soft clay was placed on the floor 12 in. beyond the reach of the medium's toes. The operators made a mark on the near side of the clay; they also lifted the heavy tin and thumped it about the floor several times. Immediately afterwards I examined the medium's feet. I found that the clay had gone up the front of the boots and on to the stockings in the usual way.

The Stocking 8. — A large, more or less circular mark on the left of right stocking towards the back, extending for a length of about 4 in. above

the boot. Both stockings were turned inside out and minutely examined. On the inside of both, right up the leg. there were many hairs and pieces of fluff evidently coming from the hairy soft sole of the boots. Also many very small particles of white clay were fixed to the fabric right up to the top. These chiefly commenced where the large clay mark was made on the stocking just above the boot, and went straight up the inside, being most conspicuous on the back seam. On one stocking there were a few clay particles on the inside of the toe. It is interesting to note that the mark made on the soft clay was in this case coloured a kind of indigo blue. Now this was the colour of the cloth uppers of the medium's boot (an indigo dye was evidently used in their manufacture ) . The plasma had rubbed over the uppers of the boots in its passage to the circle space, and the dye had adhered to it and had to some extent been left in the mould on the clay. This is another example of the viscous, adhering nature of the plasma.

Experiment W.

The medium wore the boots of the last experiment, which were fixed to the floor in a similar way. I filled a shallow tin dish with soft clay covered with methylene blue and fixed it to the floor well beyond the radius of action of the medium's feet. I poured some eucalyptus oil into the tin.

Marks were made in the clay by the psychic structure in the usual way. There was a smell of

eucalyptus oil on the cloth uppers of the boots near the top. Also there was a very small blue mark on the cloth at the toe.

Experiment X.

The medium wore the boots of the last experiment, with the toes tied to the floor. There was a tin filled with clay coloured with methylene blue fixed to the floor beyond the radius of action of her feet. Marks were made on the clay in the usual way.

The blue clay made a huge mark on the boots and went above them to the stockings in each case. All down the heel of one stocking and right along the sole and even up the front of the stockings, there were hundreds of tiny blue pieces of clay, too small to be seen by the eye and requiring a magnifying glass for their detection. These show that the psychic matter had been drawn down into the stocking at the heel and spread over the foot at the sole. Also, up the leg as far as the knee there were many tiny pieces of blue clay caught in the fabric, and some of these pieces went to the very top of stockings. Just at the point of the toe of one of the stockings there were many blue particles which had gone through to the inside. On the other stocking there were not nearly so many particles on heel and sole.

Experiment Y.

Medium had the seance boots on, and her feet were placed inside the test-box, which was tied at the back to hooks in the floor. The sole and toe

part of the medium's boots were carefully covered with powdered carmine. The bottom of the testbox was covered with powdered burnt cork. Experiment showed that it was quite impossible for the medium to get her feet out of the box. The medium wore new white stockings.

At the end of the seance the medium's boots and stockings were carefully examined. It was found that there had been a tremendous disturbance of the carmine placed in the front part of the sole and toes of the boots. The whole of the soles, to the very extremity of the heel, was covered and pressed in with carmine, i.e. the carmine had worked its way from the toe portion of the boots right along the soles to the heels.

The Left Boot. — There were carmine particles on the outside of boot right down the outside of the tongue and down the seam on to the toe; also on the outside of the heel down to the base. The paths by which the carmine-covered plasma left the foot were quite apparent by the tracks left on the inside and outside of the boot. The most prominent path was from the middle of the sole slanting up the inside of the boot to the top to the space between the feet. There was also a strong path up the heel of the boot. At the top of the heel the carmine had been caught as it issued, leaving thick deposits. The corresponding places on the stockings were also heavily coloured with carmine.

On one stocking a coloured track of the carmine could be seen going right up the back to the top of the stocking. It was not continuous, but

was as though something covered with carmine had been drawn up the leg and had left its mark on the stocking wherever it had touched it. On the other stocking the carmine path could be plainly seen to well above the knees.

There was much evidence of tearing action on the stocking fabric, especially in the paths up the leg. The magnifying glass showed that all round the region of the toe on the outside of the right boot was impregnated with carmine particles. On the outside of the heel of this boot there was also a big drag down of carmine particles, for the path was quite plain, and the glass showed hundreds of particles impregnating the cloth of the boots from the top right down to the heel along the path; especially were any little projecting parts of the boot affected.

The medium's boots were resting on a bed of burned cork powder inside the test-box. Above the boots on the stockings there were large black marks from this cork extending halfway to the knees.

Note on the Use of Carmine in Tracing the Paths of the Plasma to and from the Medium's Body. (From Light, March 6,

" I wish to draw the attention of those engaged in psychic investigation to a method of research which I have found useful. I may call it the ' staining ' method. It consists in the use of various coloured materials in the form of powder.

The material I have found most useful is powdered carmine.

" Whenever phenomena of the physical order occur, this method can be employed with advantage. In all such phenomena, a substance which we may call 'plasma ' issues from the body of the medium. The quantity may be large, as in materialisation phenomena, or small, as in telekinetic phenomena, but whether large or small, my experiments show that there is always some of it present. Of course, plasma is not the only component (so to speak) of a psychic instrument, but it is that part of the structure which has obviously material form.

"A problem such as the following might arise: From what part of the medium's body does the plasma issue, and does it return by the same or another route?

" Now, I have discovered that plasma has the property of adhering strongly to a substance such as powdered carmine, and that if the carmine is placed in its path it will leave a coloured track. For example, slightly damp carmine may be placed on any part of the medium's clothing in the vicinity of the place of her body whence the plasma is thought to issue, and the carmined path of the plasma, as it issues, will be left.

" Arrangements can also be made to let the plasma rub over carmine on the floor of the seance chamber, and the track can be followed, as the plasma returns to the body of the medium, by the trace left on the clothing.

" I have found this method a valuable instru-

ment of research. It can be employed in a great variety of ways.

" I have used methylene blue, soot, and many other substances, but I find carmine the best."

Experiment Z.

The medium had her feet on a specially modified electrical apparatus. She had her feet in the seance shoes and wore white stockings. The operators could be heard working away at the legs of the medium. After about twenty minutes they said they wished to deliver a message. This was taken by means of the alphabet and was to the effect that the white colour of the medium's stockings was affecting the plasma, and that it would be necessary for her to change into black ones. This was done, and phenomena soon commenced. A dish containing flour was placed well beyond the reach of the medium on the floor, and the operators pushed their psychic structures into it. At the end of the seance the shoes and stockings were examined.

Result— Only the right shoe and stocking were affected by the flour. On this stocking there was a large flour mark right across the interior side, just above the shoe, and there were marks and smudges on the stocking below the level of the shoe to the sole. The magnifying glass showed that the whole sole was covered with flour particles from end to end, and there were particles at the toes.

There was flour all up the front and over the laces of the right shoe, as though the plasma had retreated along the floor, up the front of shoe to

the ankle of the medium on the interior side, and then down between the stocking and the shoe to the sole of the foot. Also there were small particles of flour right to the top of the stocking.

Experiment A A.

Medium sat in her seance boots, with her feet on the electrical apparatus. Carmine powder was placed in the soles of the boots. At the end of the seance, on one stocking, there was clearly marked the path of the carmine up to just below the knee. That is, although the foot was tightly encased in a boot, the carmine had worked its way up from the sole, between the leather and the stocking, and up the stocking nearly to the knee.

Experiment B B.

Medium sat in her seance shoes. I had very carefully painted the inside sole portion of each shoe with gold paint. This was heavy stuff and dried easily, so that there was not so much chance of the particles being carried along as with the lighter materials.

Result. — At the end of the seance it was found that gold particles had been carried all up the front to just above the top of the shoe, while there were also particles carried along the sole to the heel and up the heel. On the other stocking some particles were pulled along the sole to the heel and also to the toes, and up the front to the top of the shoe. On the outside of right shoe (on the interior side) there was a well-defined path of gold particles sloping downward.

Experiment C C.

Medium had on shoes treated with gold paint, as in the previous seance. At the end many gold particles were found on one stocking along the sole to the heel and up over the heel. Also manyparticles were found on the stocking fabric to the very top of the stocking. A close inspection showed that there was a regular stream of gold particles right up both stockings to the top, this stream being most prominent about the region of the knees.

Experiment D D.

Just before the seance I rubbed a ring of (a) red, and (b) yellow crayon into the fabric of the medium's stockings a few inches from the top. A little carmine was placed in the toes of the medium's shoes.

At the end of the seance the carmine from the toe of each shoe had been drawn right along the sole and up the heel of each stocking. On the shoes the carmine had been drawn along both soles on the inside. The interior surface of one heel was very much affected, while there were many spots and patches on the outside of both shoes. There were many carmine particles on the floor in the neighbourhood of medium's feet.

The crayon rings round the top of the stockings were affected. These coloured crayon particles were found rubbed into the stocking fabric well above the original rings, and from 6 in. to 8 in. below them. There was evidence of strong rubbing action. The magnifying glass showed that

hundreds of tiny carmine particles were embedded in the fabric right to the top of both stockings, all the way up.

The distribution of the carmine inside the shoes is indicative of the manner of evolution of the ' plasma. It seems that the plasma clings chiefly to the stocking fabric, for very little carmine was left on the leather sole inside the shoe (its surface was smooth and polished) where the foot rested, but was heaped up round the edges of the sole on the inside of the shoe, right round to the heel; but wherever there was a little depression in the leather sole, such as a nail hole or a small crack, carmine had been deposited.

A careful inspection of each stocking showed that the whole sole was affected by the carmine particles from the toe to the heel and above the heel, but that the carmine had chiefly collected in places where contact between the foot and the shoe was not close, i.e. the carmine had gone chiefly to the side of the foot. The place where the heel rested was quite clean, but round the heel, wherever there was less close contact, it had collected.

It was now becoming apparent to me that, besides issuing from the medium's foot inside her shoe, there were plasma paths up and down the leg, because when any considerable quantity of carmine was put into the toes of the shoes, patches and particles of the dye were nearly always found on the stockings right to the top. Moreover, the crayon particles placed round the tops of the stockings had been considerably moved up and down.

Experiment E E.

Very carefully into the toe of each shoe was placed about half a teaspoonful of violet powder. The medium put on and took off her shoes in the seance room under my directions, and there was no movement of the powder along the shoes before the seance commenced or after it finished.

Result. — On one stocking the powder had gone all along the sole nearly to the heel and then up the side of the stocking. There were marks here and there on the stocking nearly up to the knee. Long horizontal powder marks were left just above the ankle, the powder-covered plasma having evidently caught in the stocking creases which always form in that neighbourhood.

On the other stocking the powder had been drawn along to heel and up above it, and a large white mark had been formed above the shoe on the inside of the ankle. This mark, while plainest on the inside of the ankle, went nearly round it, though on the outside the powder was not nearly so thickly deposited.

On the inside of the soles of each stocking I had, before the seance, brushed some gold paint. At the end it was found that particles of this paint were embedded in the fabric of both stockings right to the top. Round and above the heel of one stocking innumerable particles were deposited.

Experiment F F.

I carefully placed large quantities of carmine in the toes of the medium's shoes — none anywhere else. The medium carefully put on her shoes

under my direction at the beginning of the seance, and likewise so removed them at the end. The usual transference of carmine was found to have taken place all along the sole to heel and up the heel. Both stockings were carmine-covered more or less to above the knees.

The Stockings: Distribution of Carmine. — Along the sole, over the edges of the sole, and up the sides; along and over the heel and some inches above the ankle where it spread right round the stocking. The intensity of the carmine became less farther up, but plainly visible marks were left up to the knee. At the ball of the leg very intense carmine marks were left which went through the stocking and coloured the skin of the leg. Near the knee there were straight lines or narrow bands of carmine going completely round the stocking, slightly inclining downwards towards the front. On the other stocking there were broad belts of carmine completely encircling the leg near the knee, but lower down, near the ankle, not so much of the dye had been deposited. It would appear that as the plasma issues from the medium's foot it naturally comes into contact with her leg near the ankle, and, as it goes upwards, misses parts of the stocking and touches others.

Experiment G G.

Large quantities of carmine were placed before the seance in the toes of the medium's shoes. After the seance it was found that the stockings were carmine-smeared to the top, one more so than

the other. Just above the shoes the dye was rubbed into the fabric as though there had been strong abrasing action.

The data given above concerning the movement of powdered substances, such as carmine or flour, from the interior of the shoes of the medium up the sides of her shoes and up her stockings can only lead to one conclusion. The plasma must get into the medium's shoes in some manner or other. It either originates in her feet and makes its way to the outside by coming up between her shoes and her stockings, or it goes into her shoes first, accomplishes some process there, and then comes out again. It usually issues round the sides of the shoes, up from the middle of the sole of the foot, where the contact between shoe and stocking is slight, although usually there is also a considerable movement up the back of the heel. As I have already indicated, this outward and inward movement of the plasma occurs even if the medium's feet are laced up in long boots.

In many of the experiments already described, as well as a well-defined carmine path from the feet, there were visible distinct traces of carmine up the stockings as far as the knees, and even up to the top of the stockings. Usually these carmine paths were thickest and most plainly visible round about the ball of the calves at the back, and usually there was more carmine on the stockings between the legs than on the outside. The question then arose as to whether there was a flow of plasma from the medium's body down the legs, as well as

the flow from the feet upwards, or, indeed, whether the whole of the plasma did not come from the trunk of the medium, flow down the legs and then, in some peculiar manner and for some particular reason connect with the building up of the psychic structures, enter her shoes and fill up the space between stocking and leather. For, after all, it has to be remembered that our feet and legs are only pieces of apparatus to enable us to move about, analogous to the wheels of a cart, and that the great centres of nervous energy and reproductive activity are within the body proper.

In order, then, to properly trace the plasma paths up the legs of the medium, and to discover whereabouts in her body they originated, special arrangements were made.

Experiment H H.

The medium put on white calico knickers under my wife's supervision. Carmine powder was placed in her shoes. At the end of the seance it was found that there were carmine paths up to the top of both stockings and then inside the legs of the knickers to the join of the legs. The carmine was mostly up the front towards the inside of the legs, and left coloured bands 2 or 3 in. broad.

Thus, as I had suspected for some considerable time, it was abundantly clear that plasma issued from and returned to the body of the medium by way of the trunk.

The plasma had in the ordinary way got into the shoes, became coloured with the carmine, and had

left the track of its return path to the medium's body.

Experiment I 2.

The medium had on a pair of white knickers as in the last experiment. Plenty of carmine was placed in the toes of her shoes.

Result. — As in the last case, carmine was found on the inside of the legs of the knickers, in broad bands several inches long, curving in to the join of the legs.

Some of the carmine bands were as much as 414 in. long, evidently due to the plasma encountering creases in the cloth as it advanced upwards. The carmine paths to the top of both stockings were very plain.

Experiment J J.

The medium sat under test in clean white knickers and with carmine powder in her shoes. At the end of the seance, the medium's feet and legs were washed in order to remove the carmine on her skin which had come through from the stockings. Clean stockings were put on her, and then her knickers were removed. The knickers were found to be heavily marked with carmine up the inside of both legs as before.

Experiment K K.

The medium sat in clean calico knickers and clean stockings. Carmine was placed in her shoes as before.

At the end of the seance it was found that the inside of the legs of the knickers were marked with carmine as far as the join of the legs. Further, the results showed that the withdrawal of plasma up the legs of the medium must be a real physical action, because all round the edge of the knickers, on the inside, threads of cotton had been pulled out of the fabric. There was a raised band of embroidery just inside the legs of the knickers, and the plasma in its ascent had rubbed upon and pulled out the threads of this wherever it had touched.

The above results show beyond the shadow of a doubt that the plasma, after being used in the production of phenomena, returns to the medium's body via the trunk. The questions which then required solution were as follows: —

(1) Does the plasma also issue from the lower part

of the trunk as well as return by it?

(2) Is the trunk the only place from which the

plasma issues and by which it returns, or does the plasma also issue from the feet and return to the feet?

(3) Does the plasma, descending from the trunk,

go into the shoe, disturb the carmine there, and carry it with it as it comes out of the shoe and deposit it on the stocking as it moves upward, or does plasma originate in the foot, carry the carmine in the shoe with it as it ascends and deposit it on the stocking? If the latter were the case, the plasma

descending from the trunk would come into contact with the carmine deposited on the stocking by the plasma from the foot.

Experiment L JL.

To see if plasma issues from the lower part of the trunk as well as returns by it.

The experiments already recorded show conclusively that plasma returns by the trunk, but do not show that it issues thereby.

A little slightly damp carmine was carefully rubbed on the inside of the legs of the knickers some inches up, and the medium put the knickers on very carefully. At the end of the seance it was found that the carmine had traced paths right down the legs of the knickers, had spread out round the embroidery at the edge, had gone on to the stockings, made paths right down the stockings, mostly along the ball of the leg, and had even gone into the shoes, which were clean ones.

Therefore it is certain that plasma issues from the trunk as well as returns thereby.

The quantity of plasma must be considerable, for the carmine had spread round the medium's legs right to the posterior, and in between the legs to the base of the back-bone : i.e. the plasma had at one time or another during the seance occupied practically all the space which did not make close contact with her chair. This result suggests that during interruptions in phenomena, or when a light is temporarily lit during a seance, the plasma conceals itself round about the top of the medium's

legs under her clothing, and does not necessarilyall return to her body. If it always went back into her body, a considerable time would have to elapse between each burst of phenomena, but this does not usually occur. So long as the plasma is away from the temporary disturbing influence, such as rays of light, the purpose of the operators is served.

Experiment M M.

The medium wore clean knickers, clean black stockings, and clean shoes. On the ball of the leg of each stocking damp carmine was rubbed, beginning about 6 in. above the heel, for a distance upwards of about 4 in. Thus the only place on the medium where there was carmine was on the stockings at the ball of the leg.

Results at End of Seance. — No carmine on the outside of the knickers. On the inside of both legs, between the legs, there were the usual carmine marks indicating the course of the plasma as it was making for the trunk. The breadth round the bottom of the knickers affected by the carmine was about 6 in. Traces of the dye were apparent right to the join of the legs. On the carmine path over the embroidery near the bottom of the knickers numerous cotton threads had been pulled out of the fabric, and there was much fraying, showing that the plasma has a considerable rubbing action as it moves upwards. As before, the small projecting parts of the embroidery were most heavily marked.

Traces and tinges of carmine could be seen going right to the top of both stockings.

The whole foot of each stocking was affected by the dye. Carmine had gone in at the heel and sides of the shoes, then under the heel and along the sole and up over the toes. There were welldefined traces up the front of the foot inside the shoe. The parts of the foot most affected were the places where it was pressing most tightly on the shoe, such as the ball of the heel and the bearing surface near the toes.

The whole of both stockings looked as though they had been scraped by something adhering tightly to them, moving up and down, pressing into the wool and tearing little ridges in the wool. The deductions from this experiment are as follows : —

(1) The plasma comes from the trunk, goes down

the stocking, adhering closely to it and scraping it along its length.

(2) The plasma enters the shoe and goes right

round the foot of the medium.

(3) It is possible that no plasma originates in the

foot, but that it all comes downwards into the shoe from the trunk.

(4) The plasma must have considerable consist-

ency, for it has a strong tearing action on the stockings and knickers.

It should be noted that, in the above test, the carmine, as it moved downwards and struck the

region of stocking at the edge of the shoe, was thickly deposited on the fabric there, but that sufficient got inside the shoe to suggest that the action was a continuous one from leg, down stocking, and then in between the shoe and the stocking to the foot.

Experiment N N.

Medium wore clean white knickers, black stockings, and clean shoes.

A solution of methylene blue was rubbed on the inside of the legs of the knickers. Damp carmine was rubbed on the front of the stockings some 6 in. above the shoes.

Results. — At the end of the seance it was found that the methylene blue had been drawn downwards towards the foot of the knickers, and had also gone up nearly to the join of the legs. On the inside of the back of the knickers the blue dye had gone up between the legs as far as the base of the spine, and it had also gone between the buttocks and had spread under them to some extent and over the seat of the knickers.

The carmine was put on the front of the stockings to see if the plasma would go down between the front of shoes and stockings to the medium's toes. After the seance the carmine could be traced right down to the toes of both stockings: there was only a scuff of the dye in each case, as the shoes the medium had on were good tight ones. Thus from this and previous experiments it seems most likely that the plasma proceeds down the legs,

from the trunk, and enters the shoes at the front, back, and sides: i.e. it seems to surround the foot on all sides within the shoe. Probably, also, no plasma originates in the foot, and all the disturbance within the shoes is due to plasma entering from above.

Experiment O O.

The medium had on clean knickers, stockings, and shoes. Carmine was rubbed into the inside of legs of knickers. It was made damper than usual. At the end of the seance the customary result was obtained. The carmine had spread up and down the legs of the knickers and round the buttocks. There was in this case little on the stockings except at the top, probably because the carmine had been made too damp, and thus did not draw well.

Experiment P P.

The medium wore clean knickers and stockings. Carmine was put in the toes of the shoes. At the end of the seance much the usual result was obtained. There were smudges of carmine up both stockings to the top, and also up the inside of the right leg of the knickers. In this particular case there was no carmine on the left leg.

Experiment Q Q.

The medium wore clean knickers and stockings. Carmine was placed in the toes of the shoes, and also some on the inside of the seat of the knickers. As usual at the end of the seance, the knickers were

marked with carmine up the inside of both legs to the join. The stockings were also both marked. There seemed to be a chief carmine track from the shoes between the feet, up the ankles, and then round to the ball of the leg at the back.

In these tests I always found that at a spot about half-way between the ankle and the knee, the heavy carmine coloration always ceased, and only smudges and lighter marks were left up the remainder of the stockings and knickers. It would appear that the operators use the calves of the legs as a backing from which to operate their structures.

There was evidence of considerable up-and-down movement of the carmine placed in the seat of the knickers, round about the join of the legs.

Respiration, Pulse., and Temperature of the Medium during Levitation and other Phenomena.

For the purpose of carrying out these and other experiments, a new test device was arranged. A wooden frame was placed round the medium's legs, so that fraudulent levitation of the table was impossible. The cross-bar at the top prevented her raising her knees, while side pieces prevented the feet being spread out. The whole apparatus was screwed to the floor right up against the front of her chair. A large rectangular hole was cut in the table top, stretching right across the width of the table.

I thoroughly tested this apparatus before use.

164» THE PSYCHIC STRUCTURES

For fully half an hour I tried in every way I could to levitate the table, taking my seat for that purpose in the medium's chair, but I did not succeed in raising the table the fraction of an inch from the floor. I got many other people to try, but not one of them could get the table into the air, even after the most frantic efforts to do so. Yet in a few minutes after the medium took her seat, the table levitated quite easily.

A medical friend assisted in these tests. He stood by the medium taking her pulse, etc., while I entered the circle and attended to the levitations. The doctor used a red flash lamp, while in addition the red electric light was shining above the circle space. ,

Just before the seance —

Medium's pulse — 72. Medium's temperature — 98.0. Medium's respiration — normal.

The Seance

The table levitated splendidly between twenty and thirty times. The longest levitation was for about one and a half minutes, dead level, and about 6 in. high. The table usually first of all moved over the floor close to the medium, and the psychic structures seemed then to grasp it; it then moved straight out along the floor and levitated. During the levitations I saw that all was in order and that no part of the bodies of the sitters was in contact with any part of the table. The medium's hands

were quite visible. Sometimes the doctor took the medium's pulse from the wrist and sometimes from the neck artery. For respiration he put his ear to her chest.

The following is a resume of events as they occurred : —

Levitation — medium's pulse very rapid, went up to 90.

Levitation — pulse went up to 110.

After the levitation the pulse fell slowly.

During the levitation it rose steadily.

Two minutes after the last levitation the pulse was 84.

Five minutes after the levitation the pulse was steady at 80.

Levitation — pulse 126.

Levitation (shorter duration) — pulse 100.

Respiration (just after this levitation) — normal.

The respiration was then taken during the course of five or six levitations. It was always normal.

The temperature was then taken during a series of levitations — 98.4.

After a rest of ten minutes the pulse was taken

Then during another levitation — pulse 120.

During several levitations it was found that the pulse averaged 120.

The palm of the medium's hand was moist to the touch hut not cold.

A levitation lasting a minute — a little more moisture in the palm of the hand.

During a series of levitations the pulses of all the sitters were taken — all normal.

A sheet of luminous cardboard was placed on the floor and the operators placed their psychic structures over it — medium's pulse rose to 100.

Preparations were made for flash-light photography. Pulse 84. Just before the flash, pulse rose to 120, and after the flash the medium shivered and her pulse went gradually back to normal. The reason for the rise to 120 before the flash was because the operators were endeavouring to exteriorise a psychic structure to be photographed.

Just after the seance —

Medium's pulse — 72. Medium's temperature — 99.0. Medium's respiration — normal. Medium in good health — arteries firm.

The general result is that during all phenomena the pulse of the medium rises considerably, the palms of her hands get a little moist and the fingers a little cold. Neither the respiration nor the temperature seem to be affected to any degree. It is not only while doing external work, such as levitating the table, that the medium's pulse rises, it rises also while the operators are extending the structures from her body, and forming them, without any phenomena resulting.

Different Kinds of Marks obtained on various Substances due to the Application of the Psychic Structures

When the medium had carmine in her boots or shoes, particles or small patches of the dye were often found on the table legs, on the floor, or on articles touched by the structures. As a rule the amount of the carmine so deposited was slight and not comparable to the quantities on her stockings.

In order to obtain data concerning the shape of the ends of the structures and also of their methods of gripping the table, I often covered the undersurface and legs of the table with soot obtained from a turpentine lamp. In this way, wherever the structures touched, marks were left on the soot. It was soon found that there were two chief methods of levitating the table, viz. from the undersurface and by the legs.

Marks resembling Fingers

Finger-like marks were often obtained. The undersurface of the table which had the large rectangular hole in it was on several occasions covered with soot. The medium being in a test apparatus, levitations of the table were given by the operators. On examination afterwards, the edges of the hole were found marked as though with fingers.

Needless to say, neither the medium nor members of the circle had their hands near the table. Never more than four of these " finger " marks

were ever obtained on soot, and usually three was the number.

Impressions of the "ringer " were also obtained on ordinary photographic plates, due to the operators placing these " psychic " fingers upon the plate. These impressions show that the " ringers " are not really fingers in the strict sense of the word, but are temporary psychic projections which can assume various shapes and forms, more or less resembling fingers.

The legs of the seance table were often covered with soot. After levitations, marks were often found on the soot which indicated that the legs had been gripped for the purpose of levitation. These marks were usually on the legs of the table nearest the medium, and were often low down near the floor, though the grip was sometimes taken halfway or more up. Moreover, the marks showed that the gripping substance in most cases went right round the legs, just as though some kind of a tentacle had wrapped itself right round.

Condition of the Medium during Phenomena

The medium was sitting on a chair placed on the platform weighing machine. I asked the operators to take psychic matter from her in the ordinary way. I put my hand on the lower part of her back just above the buttocks. The rise and fall of her flesh was very apparent, as psychic matter was supposed to be taken from her and put back. I put my hand on her haunches just above the seat of her chair. The flesh seemed to become soft

and cave in. The medium did not seem to move bodily, but her flesh seemed to fall in. It could be distinctly felt filling out as the psychic stuff apparently returned to her.

To see if there was any volumetric decrease in the medium's legs during the psychic action, a string was fixed to one side of the seat of the medium's chair. It went over the seat, through an eye-hook fixed on the other side of the seat, and then up to a spring balance hanging from the roof.

The medium sat back in her chair, extended her legs straight out, with her legs and feet as close together as possible. The string was then tightened over the thighs of the medium and fixed to the balance, so that there was a tension of 4 lb. indicated. The medium did not know the purpose of the experiment. I asked her to remain perfectly still, which she did. I then asked the operators to take out psychic matter from the medium and put it on the floor.

Result. — The tension on the string decreased to 1 lb. as indicated on the balance. I felt the string and found it quite slack. Then the tension increased gradually until it reached the normal of 4 lb. as the operators returned the plasma to the medium. This occurred seven or eight times. On each occasion the tension always relaxed to almost exactly the 1 lb. mark as the plasma was removed, and always returned to the 4 lb. mark as it was put back. Moreover, both processes were gradual, and never sudden.

It should be noted that with this arrangement any normal involuntary movement of the medium's legs would have increased the tension on the string.

Thus it would appear that there was a decrease in volume of the upper parts of the medium's legs when psychic matter was removed from her body.

I then placed my hand across the medium's thighs as she remained in the position just described. I asked the operators to fcremove and return psychic matter from her body. When this process was going on I could feel a distinct fall and rise of the flesh in the thighs.

While the medium was sitting on her chair in the ordinary way, I placed my hands on the outside of her haunches. While psychic action was going on, parts of the flesh seemed to cave in. As the psychic stuff came back, little round lumps could be felt filling in on the backs of the thighs. This also is the case on the interior of the thighs.

I felt the medium's breasts during the occurrence of psychic action. They became very hard and full.

Generally speaking, it can be said that the evolution of plasma from the body of the medium is accompanied by strong muscular movements all over the body, and that there is strong evidence of decrease in volume of the fleshy parts of her body, especially from the waist downwards, while the plasma is extruded.

The Position of the Medium duking Levitation

In addition to the electric light hanging above the circle .space, a strong gas light enclosed in a red glass lantern was placed close to the medium, so that she could be thoroughly observed during phenomena.

I had often noticed the upright stiffness of the medium's body while phenomena were occurring, but I now made particular notes. Just before a levitation occurs she may be leaning comfortably back on her chair, but a minute or so before the actual phenomena takes place she sits vertically upright, her trunk even sometimes rises an inch or two, and her feet and legs go close together immediately below the chair. Sometimes during high levitations the upper part of her trunk swings forward towards the circle space. Needless to say, it is perfectly impossible for anyone sitting vertically upright in a chair to levitate a table normally. This can only be done (in a stilted kind of way) by leaning back on the chair, and taking a purchase on the sides with hands or elbows.

Flashlight Photography of the " Plasma " and Psychic Structures

Only within the last six months or so has it been found possible to photograph the stuff which issues from the medium's body (I call it "plasma" for want of any better word), and from which the psychic structures are built up that produce the

phenomena of raps, levitations, touchings, etc. For about a year I took a photograph each seance night in the hope that success might ultimately be obtained. The operators informed me by raps that success would finally come if I would be persistent enough.

The chief difficulty seemed to be in preventing injury to the medium. The operators said it was necessary gradually to work her up to withstand the shock of the flashlight upon the plasma; nor is this to be much wondered at when it is considered the plasma is part of her body exteriorised in space.

I tried all sorts of arrangements to obtain the desired result. One of these was to hang a black cloth in front of the lower part of her body and to get the operators to bulge the cloth out by structures acting from behind, when they would be considerably protected from the flash. This method was successful so far as it went.

After innumerable attempts, however, very small patches of plasma were obtained in full view between the medium's ankles. As time went on these increased in size and variety until great quantities of this psychic stuff could be exteriorised and photographed. Then the operators began to manipulate it in various ways, building it up into columns, or forming into single or double arms, moulding it into the different shapes with which I had been long familiar in a general way from previous investigation. Not only did they do this, but they showed unmistakably, by means of set photo-

graphs, from what part of the medium's body the plasma issued, and by means of ingenious arrangements devised by themselves brought out many of its properties.

By auxiliary experiments carried out chiefly by the aid of carmine dye (already described), I, by a totally distinct line of investigation, discovered the parts of the medium's body whence the plasma issued. I do not intend to say anything more about this here, except to remind the reader that the plasma has the property of adhering to various substances when it comes into contact with them. If it touches powdered carmine a distinct crimson trace is left upon the clothing and skin, as the plasma retires into the body of the medium.

The medium and members of the circle are open to any tests. I have gone to most elaborate precautions to make sure the results are genuine, and amongst others have called to my aid men and women of medicine. In order to prevent subconscious action affecting the moulding of the plasma, I withheld the photographs from the medium until the present series was obtained. When I at length showed them to her, she was vastly astonished and diffident about my publishing some of them.

The photographic results are not yet complete. They are complete in so far as the plasma in an unstressed state is concerned. The shock to the medium, evidenced by involuntary trembling and shivering which endures for a considerable time, is very much greater when the flashlight impinges on

the plasma under stress than on the unstressed stuff. For this reason no photograph of the completely levitated table has yet been obtained, though partial levitations have occurred and small rapping rods fairly rigid have been secured. The operators are gradually working up to full levitation.

Description of the Photographs

A — A photograph showing a peculiar exteriorisation (resembling a leg) from the body of the medium. The black cloth round the body of the medium was placed there at the operators' request.

B — -A plasmic column under the table. This method is used when very powerful levitations are required.

C — Another form. of the column.

D — Still another form of the column.

E — A side view of the column.

F — A column placed on top of a spring balance. ■The small piece of black cloth on the balance weighs about an ounce, and as the balance reads a little over a pound, presumably that part of the column resting on the balance weighs about a pound.

G — The cantilever method of levitation. A rough cantilever in position.

II — Another form of cantilever. I — Plasma collected near the feet of the medium forms into a lump and advances along the floor. From this lump the columns rise.

J — Or the plasma, after collecting at the medium's feet, begins to divide into two portions.

K — These separate portions elongate and finally form two long arms which grip the table legs.

L — Two psychic arms tied to the table legs by bands of plasma. A separate moulded lump of plasma on the floor.

M — Another view of a pair of plasmic arms.

N— Sometimes the plasma collects round the feet of the medium and forms two arms on the floor.

O — A heavy lump of plasma on the floor.

P — Plasma inside the medium's shoe.

Q — Plasma moulded round the leg of the medium.

R — A small rapping rod projecting.

S — Plasma collected at the feet of the medium.

T — Plasma exuding from medium's chest.

U — Another view of plasma exuding from medium's chest.

V — Table tilted and held in position by a braced cantilever constructed of plasma.

W — Side view of V.

X — Black and white plasma.

Y — Near view of the plasma.

Z — Near view of the plasma.

In addition to the photographs shown, I have many others which are scarcely suitable for publication in a popular book. They all indicate the

fact that once the plasma is extruded from the body of the medium, the operators can mould it into the various shapes and forms required to produce the phenomena.

