"It seemed in my dream that I stood at the open door of a bedroom in a house in Brighton, and that before me, by candlelight, I saw my father-in-law lying pale upon his bed, while my mother-in-law passed silently across the room in attendance on him. The vision soon passed away, and I slept on for some time. On waking, however, the nature of the impression left upon me unmistakably was that my father-in-law was dead. I at once noted down the dream, after which I broke the news of what I felt to be a revelation to my wife, when we thought over again and again all that could bear upon the matter, without being able to assign any reason for my being so strongly and thoroughly impressed. The telegraph from England to Simla had been open for some time, but now there was an interruption, which lasted for about a fortnight longer, and on the 17th (fifteen days after my dream) I was neither unprepared nor surprised to receive a telegram from England, saying that my father-in-law had died in Brighton on November ist. Subsequent letters showed that the death occurred on the ni^ht of the ist.

" Dreams, as a rule, leave little impression on me, and the one above referred to is the only one I ever thought of making a note of, or of looking expectantly for its fulfilment.

"R. VicARY Boyle."

I

Mrs. Boyle writes as follows: —

''6th August 1887.

" I well remember my husband telling me one morning, early in November 1868, when at Simla, in India, that he had had a striking dream (repeated) in which my father, then at Brighton, seemed to be dying. We were both deeply impressed, and then anxiously awaited news from home. A telegram first reached us, in about a fortnight, which was afterwards confirmed by letters telling of my father's death having occurred on the same night when my husband had the dream.

"ElilOnore a. Boyle.

Mr. Gurney adds the following notes on the case: —

"The following entries were copied by me from Mr. Boyle's diary: —

" ' Nov. 2, Dreamed of E.'s F[ather] early this morning.

" ' Written before dressing.

" * Nov. 17. Got telegram from L[ouis] H[ack] this morning of his father's death on ist Nov. inst.'

" The following notice of the decease of Mr. Boyle's fatherin-law occurred in the Times for 4th November 1868: —

"'On 1st Nov., at Brighton, William Hack, late of Dieppe, aged 72.'

"Mr. Boyle informed me that he is a 'particularly sound sleeper, and very rarely dreams.' This dream was a very unique and impressive experience, apart from the coincidence.

"There was a regular correspondence between Mrs. Boyle and her mother, but for several mails the letters had contained no mention of her father, on whose account absolutely no anxiety was felt. " E. G."

It appears that the death actually occurred at about 2 P.M. in England, which was, allowing for the difference in longitude, about nine hours before the dream.

In the next case the dream is of a more unusual character. The figure of the agent appears to have stood alone, whilst the impression made was such that the percipient is uncertain whether to class his experience as a dream or a vision. Indeed, in the absence of dream-background, and in the lifelike appearance of the figure, the dream bears a striking resemblance to a waking hallucination.

198 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

No. 57. — From CAPTAIN R. E. W. Campbell (2nd Royal Irish Fusiliers).

" Army and Navy Club, Pall Mall, S.W., February 2isi, 1888.

" I have much pleasure in enclosing you an account of a remarkable dream which occurred to me in the year 1886, together with three other accounts of the same, written by officers to whom the facts of the case are known. You are at liberty, in the interests of science, to make such use of them as you please.

" I was stationed at the Depot Barracks, Armagh, Ireland, on the 30th November 1886, and on the night of the same date, or early in the morning of the ist December (I cannot tell which, as I did not refer to my watch), I was in bed in my room, when I was awakened by a most vivid and remarkable dream or vision, in which I seemed to see a certain Major Hubbersty, late of my regiment, the 2nd Battalion Royal Irish Fusiliers, looking ghastly pale, and falling forward as if dying. He seemed to be saying something to me, but the words I could not make out, although I tried hard to understand him. The clothes he had on at the time appeared to me to have a thin red thread running through the pattern. I was very deeply impressed by my dream, and so much did I feel that there was something significant in it that on the ist December, when at luncheon in the mess, I related it to three brother-officers, telling them at the same time that I felt sure we should soon hear something bad about Major Hubbersty. I had almost forgotten all about it when, on taking up the Times newspaper of the following Saturday on the Sunday morning following, the first thing that caught my eyes was the announcement of Major Hubbersty's death at Penzance, in Cornwall, on the 30th November, the very date on which I had the remarkable dream concerning him.

" My feehngs on seeing such a remarkable fulfilment of my dream can be better imagined than described. Suffice it to say that on the return from ohurch of Messrs. Kaye and Scott I asked them to try and recollect anything peculiar which had happened at luncheon on the ist December, when, after a few moments' deliberation, they at once recounted to me the whole circumstances of my dream, as they had heard them from my lips on the 1st December 1886. On seeing Mr. Leeper a few days afterwards at his father's house, Loughgall, Co. Armagh, he at once remembered all I had told him about the dream on the 1st December, on my questioning him about it. I, of course, can assign no possible cause for the remarkable facts related, as apart from the difference of our standing in the

I

service, the late Major Hubbersty and I were in no wise particularly friendly to one other, nor had we seen very much of each other. I had not seen him for eighteen months previously. A very curious fact in connection with the dream is that it occurred to me in the very same room in the barracks as Major Hubbersty used to occupy when stationed at Armagh, several years previously."

In answer to an inquiry, Captain Campbell writes, on February 29th, 1888: —

" I do not dream much, as a rule, and cannot recall to my mind ever before having had a dream of a similar nature to that dreamt by me about the late Major Hubbersty."

Mr. A. B. R. Kaye, Lieutenant Third Royal Irish Fusiliers, writes on August 20th, 1887, from 62 Fitzvvilliam Square, Dublin: —

" I was stationed in the barracks, Armagh Depot, Royal Irish Fusiliers, in November and December 1886. On the ist of December at lunch there were present Lieutenant R. E. W. Campbell (2nd R.I.F.), Lieutenant R. W. Leeper (2nd R.LF.), Lieutenant T. E. Scott (4th R.LF.), and myself. During our conversation Major Hubbersty's name was mentioned, and Campbell told us that he had a dream about him the night before, how he had seen a vision of Major Hubbersty looking very pale and seeming to be falling forward, and saying something to him which he could not hear; also, he (Campbell) told us he was sure we would hear something about Major Hubbersty very soon.

" On the following Sunday, when Scott and I returned from church and went into the ante-room, Campbell, who was there, asked us both to try and remember anything peculiar that he had told us on the ist. After a little time, we remembered about the dream, and he (Campbell) then showed us the Times newspaper of the day before, containing the notice of Major Hubbersty's death, at Penzance, on November 30th, 1886, the same date as that on which he had the dream; also, I remember, he (Campbell) told us that in his vision he seemed to see the clothes which Major Hubbersty had on, and that there was a red thread running through the pattern of the trousers."

The two other friends mentioned by Captain Campbell, Messrs. Leeper and Scott, have written letters to the same effect.^

^ These letters are omitted for want of space. They are given in full in ih^ Journal of the S.P.R. for April 1888, pp. 255, 256.

200 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

From these letters there can be no doubt that the coincidence made a marked impression on each of those to whom the dream was related, and this fact, perhaps even more than Captain Campbell's own narrative, is a striking proof of the exceptional nature of the experience.

There is no reason in this case for supposing that the dream conveyed any other information than the fact of the agent's death. There is no evidence that the manner of death or the clothes worn by Major Hubbersty resembled what was seen in the dream. The clothes in which the figure appeared may have been a reminiscence of clothes which the percipient had actually seen worn on some occasion by the agent. But this explanation will hardly apply to the following case, where the dream included a representation, accurate in more than one particular, of the agent as he actually appeared at the time. It is true that we have to rely upon the percipient's memory after the interval of a fortnight for the details of the dream, but since the dream was sufficiently impressive to cause a note to be taken of it by a person not in the habit of making such notes, it seems not unreasonable to trust the memory to that extent

No. 58.— From Mr. E. W. Hamilton, C.B.

"Park Lane Chambers, Park Lane, W., April 6th, 1888.

"On Wednesday morning, March 21st, 1888, I woke up with the impression of a very vivid dream. I had dreamt that my brother, who had long been in Austraha, and of whom I had heard nothing for several months, had come home; that after an absence of twelve years and a half he was very little altered in appearance, but that he had something wrong with one of his arms; it looked horribly red near the wrist, his hand being bent back.

" When I got up that morning the dream recurred constantly to my thoughts, and I at last determined to take a note of it, notwithstanding my natural prejudices against attaching any importance to dreams, to which, indeed, I am not much subject. Accordingly, in the course of the day, I made in my little Letts' diary a mark thus: X, with my brother's name after it.

"On the following Monday morning, the 26th March, I received a letter from my brother, which bore the date of the 2 1 St March, and which had been posted at Naples (where the Orient steamers touch), informing me that he was on his way home, and that he hoped to reach London on or about the 30th March, and adding that he was suffering from a very severe attack of gout in the left arm.

" The next day I related to some one this curious incident, and I commented on the extraordinary coincidence of facts with the dream except in one detail, and that was, that the arm which I had seen in my dream did not look as if it were merely affected with gout: the appearance it had presented to me was more like extremely bad eczema.

" My brother duly reached England on the 29th, having disembarked at Plymouth owing to the painful condition of his arm. It turned out that the doctor on board ship had mistaken the case; it was not gout, but a case of blood poisoning, resulting in a very bad carbuncle or abscess over the wrist joint.

" Since my brother's return, I have endeavoured to ascertain from him the exact hour at which he wrote to me on March 21st. He is not certain whether the letter to me was written before noon or after noon of that day. He remembers writing four short letters in the course of that day — two before luncheon and two after luncheon. Had the note addressed to me been written in the forenoon, it might nearly have coincided in time with my dream, if allowance be made for the difference of time between Greenwich and Naples; for, having no recollection of the dream when I woke, according to custom, at an early hour on the morning of the 21st, I presume I must have dreamt it very little before eight o'clock, the hour at which I was called.

" I may add that, notwithstanding an absence of twelve years and a half, my brother has altered very little in appearance; and that I have not to my knowledge ever noted a dream before in my life."

On April 12th, 1888, Mr. Gurney inspected the diary with the entry (X, Clem) under Tuesday, March 20th, 1888, though, as Mr. Hamilton explained, "it was early the next morning that I had the dream, for I generally consider all that appertains to bed relates to the day on which one gets into it."

Mr. Gurney also saw the letter signed Clement E. Hamilton, and dated Naples, March 21st, 1888, which says " am suffering from very severe attack of gout in left arm."

202 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

The next case presents several points of interest In part, at least, it seems to have been a waking experience, possibly the prolongation of a dream. In this respect it resembles Mrs. Harrison's case, alreadycited (No. 54), and if correctly described, the incident possesses therefore a higher evidential value than a mere dream, however vivid. I have here classed it as a dream, however, because the percipient himself so describes it in his letter written a few days after the experience. The utterance of words by the percipient finds a parallel in the case of Archdeacon Bruce (Chapter VII., No. 51). But in the present case there is the additional feature that the percipient is conscious not only of the sound of his own voice, but of another voice in reply. The incident, it will be seen, though remote, is attested by letters written immediately after the event, and by the percipient's recollection of action taken in consequence of the dream-warning.

No. 59. — From Mr. Edward A. Goodall, of the Royal Society of Painters in Water-Colours.

'' May, 18SS.

"At Midsummer, 1869, I left London for Naples. The heat being excessive, people were leaving for Ischia, and I thought it best to go there myself.

" Crossing by steamer, I slept one night at Casamicciola, on the coast, and walked next morning into the town of Ischia [Mr. Goodall then describes an accident to his hand, which prevented him from sketching.]

" It must have been on my third or fourth night, and about the middle of it, when I awoke, as it seemed, at the sound of my own voice, saying: ' I know I have lost my dearest little May.' Another voice, which I in no way recognised, answered: * A^o, not May, but yowx youngest boy^

" The distinctness and solemnity of the voice made such a distressing impression upon me that I slept no more. I got up at daybreak, and went out, noticing for the first time telegraph-poles and wires.

"Without delay I communicated with the postmaster at Naples, and by next boat received two letters from home. I opened them according to dates outside. The first told me that

my youngest boy was taken suddenly ill; the second, that he was dead.

" Neither on his account nor on that of any of my family had I any cause for uneasiness. All were quite well on my taking leave of them so lately. My impression ever since has been that the time of the death coincided as nearly as we could judge with the time of my accident.

" In writing to Mrs. Goodall, I called the incident of the voice a dream, as less likely perhaps to disturb her than the details which I gave on reaching home, and which I have now repeated.

"My letters happen to have been preserved.

" I have never had any hallucination of any kind, nor am I in the habit of talking in my sleep. I do remember once waking with some words of mere nonsense upon my lips, but the experience of the voice speaking to me was absolutely unique.

"Edward A. Goodall."

Extracts from letters to Mrs. E. A. Goodall from Ischia: —

"Wednesday, August nth, 1869.

" The postman brought me two letters containing sad news indeed. Poor little Percy! I dreamt some nights since the poor little fellow was taken from us...."

^^ August i^th.

" I did not tell you, dear, the particulars of my dream about poor little Percy.

" I had been for several days very fidgety and wretched at getting no letters from home, and had gone to bed in worse spirits than usual, and in my dream I fancied I said: ' I have lost my dearest little May.' A strange voice seemed to say: 'No, not May, but your youngest boy,' not mentioning his name."

Mr. Myers adds: —

" Mr. Goodall has given me verbally a concordant account of the affair, and several members of his family, who were present at our interview, recollected the strong impression made on him and them at the time." ^

In the case which follows the agency is difficult to elucidate. The persons who were spectators of the scene represented in the dream can hardly be supposed to have been acquainted with the dreamer,

1 Ffoc. S.2\E., vol. v. pp. 453-455-

204 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

and assuredly would not willingly have revealed the secret. The dream appears to have been of a clairvoyant character. The account is taken from the Proceedings of the Am. S.P.R., pp. 454 et seq.

No. 60.— From Mrs. E. J.

"Cambridge (U.S.A.), Nov. 30, 1886.

"The dream I will endeavour to relate as clearly as possible.

" It occurred during the month of August, last summer, while we v/ere boarding with Mrs. H., in Lunenburg, where I first met the Misses W. I am a perfectly healthy woman, and have always been sceptical as to hallucinations in any one, always before having felt the cause of the experience might be traced.

" In my dream I arrived unexpectedly at the house of the Misses W., in Cambridge, where I found everything in confusion, drawers emptied and their contents scattered about the floor, bundles unrolled, and dresses taken down from the closets. Then, as I stepped into one room, I saw some boys in bed, — three or four, I cannot distinctly remember. I saw their faces distinctly, as they sat up in bed at my approach, but the recollection of their faces has faded from me now. I could not reach the boys, for they disappeared suddenly, and I could not find them; but I thought. These cannot be the people whom the Misses W. trusted to care for their house in their absence; and I was troubled to know whether it was best to tell them when I should return to Lunenburg. This is all there was in the dream,

" Thinking only to amuse them, I related my dream at the breakfast-table the following morning, and I regretted doing so immediately, for anxiety showed itself in their faces, and the elder Miss W. remarked that she hoped my dream was not a forerunner of bad tidings from home. I laughed at the idea, but that morning the mail brought a letter telling them that their house had been entered, and when they went down they found almost the same confusion of which I had been a witness the night before — with everything strewn about the floor. It was a singular coincidence, surely."

Miss W. writes: —

" 7 Street, Dec. 4.

" I am not quite sure whether the incident to which you allude in your note is worthy your attention or not, but I will give you the facts, that you may judge for yourself of its value.

" The burglary, we suppose, took place on the night of the 17th or 1 8th of August, I being at the time, for the summer, in the town of Lunenburg, Mass.

"Coming down to breakfast on the morning of the 17th, a lady said to me that she had had a strange dream. She thought she went to our house, finding it in the greatest confusion, everything turned upside-down. As she entered one of the sleeping-rooms she saw two boys lying in the bed; but she could not see their faces, for as soon as they saw her they jumped up and ran off. I said, ' I hope that does not mean that we have been visited by burglars.'

" I thought no more about it, till the eleven o'clock mail brought a note from the woman in charge of the house saying that it had been entered, — that everything was in great confusion, many things carried off, and she wished we would come home at once. The policeman who went over the house with her said he had never seen a house more thoroughly ransacked.

" We found that in the upper attic room the bed had evidently been used, and there was, perhaps, more confusion in this room than in any other.

"The lady who had the dream was Mrs. E. J., of Cambridgeport. I was told that she had been suffering for about a year from nervous prostration, and she was evidently in a condition of great nervous excitement.

" I forbore to speak to her of the occurrence, as one of the ladies in the house told me that it had made an unpleasant impression on her mind.

" The whole thing seems rather curious to me, but I do not know that you will find it of any value in your investigations."

A dream presenting similar features is recorded in t\\Q Journal of the S.P.R. for June 1890. Mr. William Bass, farm bailiff to Mrs. Palmer, of Tumours Hall, Chigwell, on Good Friday, 1884, "awoke in violent agitation and profuse perspiration " from a dream that something was wrong at the stables. He was at first dissuaded by his wife from paying any attention to the dream, but subsequently, at about 2 A.M., dressed and proceeded to the stables (a third of a mile off) to find that a mare had been stolen. The case has been investigated by Mr. T. Barkworth, of West Hatch, Chigwell, and by Mr. J. B. Surgey, of 22 Holland Street, Kensington. In a dream recorded in Phantasms of the Living (vol. i. p. 369), Miss Busk, of 16

206 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Montagu Street, W., dreamt that in a spot in Kent well known to her she stumbled over "the heads, left protruding, of some ducks buried in the sand, under some firs." The dream was mentioned at breakfast to Miss Busk's sister, Mrs. Pitt Byrne, and an hour later the ladies learnt from their bailiff that some stolen ducks had accidentally been found buried on the spot and in the manner described.



Chapter IX. On Hallucination in General.

Before proceeding, in the chapters which follow, to cite instances of hallucinations which purport to have been telepathically originated, it seems needful to glance briefly at sensory hallucination in general. To most persons, no doubt, the word connotes disease. Their ideas of hallucination are probably derived from vague reports of asylum experience and delirium tremens; or at least from the cases of Goethe's butt, Nicolai, the Berlin bookseller, and the Mrs. A. whose experiences are described in Brewster's Letters on Natural Magic, both of whom are known to have been under medical treatment for illness of which the hallucinations were regarded as a symptom. Indeed, until recent years the tendency of even wellinstructed opinion has been to regard a sensory hallucination as necessarily implying some physical or mental disorder. This misconception — for it is a misconception — has had some curious consequences. Since it does occasionally happen that a person admittedly sane and healthy reports to have seen the likeness of a human figure in what was apparently empty space, such reports have been by some perforce scouted as unworthy of credence, and by others regarded as necessarily indicating some occult cause — as testifying, in short, to the agency of " ghosts." There was indeed the analogy of dreams to guide us. Few educated persons would regard dreams, on the

208 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

one hand, as a symptom of ill-health, or on the other as counterparts or revelations of any super-terrestrial world; or, indeed, as anything else than purely subjective mental images. Yet dreams belong to the same order of mental phenomena as hallucinations, and are commonly so classed — such differences as exist being mainly due to the conditions under which the two sets of phenomena respectively occur. In fact, a hallucination is simply a hypertrophied thought — the last member of a series, whose intermediate terms are to be found in the mind's-eye pictures of ordinary life, in the vivid images which some artists can summon at will, and in the Faces in the Dark which many persons see before passing into sleep, with its more familiar and abundant imagery.

Of recent years, however, our knowledge of hallucinations has been largely augmented from two distinct sources. On the one hand, a systematic attempt has been made to study the spontaneous non-recurrent hallucinations occurring amongst normal persons; on the other hand, wider knowledge of hypnotism and the discovery of various processes for inducing hallucinations has afforded facilities for the experimental investigation of their nature, mechanism, and genesis, both in the trance and in waking life. The hallucinations, indeed, of the ordinary hypnotic subject, with which the public has been familiarised by platform demonstrations, are possibly not sensory at all. When a hypnotised lad eats tallow-candle for sponge-cake, drinks ink for champagne, or professes to see a lighted candle at the end of the operator's finger, we may conclude, if the performance is a genuine one, that a false belief has been engendered in his mind; but we have, in most cases, no evidence that this belief includes any sensory element. In many laboratory experiments, however, there can be little question that a complete sensory hallucination is induced, and that what the subject professes to see and hear is as real to him as the furniture or the person of the

Operator. One or two such cases have been quoted in a previous chapter (Chap. III., p. 68). The nature and reaction of these hypnotic hallucinations have been investigated with much ingenuity by various Continental observers.^ MM. Binet and Fdre, to quote the best-known series of experiments, have found, speaking generally, that the hallucinatory percept behaves under various conditions precisely as if it were a real percept. Thus, if the subject is told to see a picture on a blank card, he will not only see the picture at the time, but he will be able subsequently to pick out the card, recognising it by means of the hallucinatory picture impressed on it, from a number of similar cards. If the card is inverted, he will see the picture upside-down; if a magnifying glass is interposed, he will see the picture enlarged; viewed through a prism, it will appear doubled; it will be reflected in a mirror; and if the hallucinatory image consists of written or printed words, he will see the writing in the mirror inverted. Hallucinatory colours will develop after-images of the complementary colour, precisely as if coloured surfaces were actually present to the eyes of the hallucin^; and a mixture of these hallucinatory colours will produce the appropriate third colour. If other proof were needed of the sensory nature of the induced affection, MM. Binet and Fer^ find it in the observation that with cataleptic subjects who have lost the sensitiveness of the cornea and conjunctiva, this sensitiveness is restored when a visual hallucination is enjoined upon them. M. Pierre Janet, in L Autoniatisme Psychologique, has recorded a similar restoration of sensitiveness in a subject's arm by the imposition of a tactile hallucination.

It is right to point out that these experiments, by the authors' admission, succeed only occasionally, and that many of them have not yet been confirmed by other observers. In fact, according to the evidence

* See Animal Magnetism, by Binet and Fer^, in the International Science Series, and the references there given.

210 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

collected by the S.P.R., the results of applying such optical tests differ with each individual. Thus Mr. Myers succeeded by post-hypnotic suggestion in inducing two young men to see hallucinatory images in the crystal enlarged by the application of a magnifying glass {S.P.R., viii. 462, 463), and Miss X. (id, pp. 485, 486) reports that she sees hallucinatory pictures distorted in a spoon, reversed in a mirror, enlarged by a magnifying glass, and doubly refracted by Iceland spar. She believes herself also to have experienced complementary colours as the result of prolonged looking at a hallucinatory picture. But Mrs. Verrall (td, p. 474) finds the crystal pictures vanish when the magnifying glass is applied; and Miss A. (id., p. 500) finds that the superimposition of a magnifying glass does not affect the picture. In all these cases, it should be noted, the percipients were in their normal condition, and were more or less familiar with the nature of the optical effects following under similar circumstances with real percepts.

MM. Binet and Fere suppose that the appropriate reaction of the hallucinatory picture to the various tests described is due to the hallucination being built up round a fragment of actual percept, such as a mark on a card, which would conform to ordinary optical laws. This imaginary nucleus they name the pom^ de repere. It is not improbable that in some cases this may be the true explanation..But experience leads us to infer that suggestion would be competent to produce all the observed effects in cases where the subject, either from previous knowledge of the instrument or process, from the behaviour of the investigators, or from his own observations at the time, was aware of the nature of the effect to be expected. And it is not clear that MM. Binet and F^r6, and other investigators of this school, have been sufficiently on their guard against the abnormal receptivity of the hypnotised subjects with whom they have for the most part experimented. Miss X., it may be remarked, pro-

fesses herself uncertain whether or not to ascribe the results which she has recorded to self-suggestion. But to choose between these alternative explanations is not important for our present purpose. To whatever cause we may attribute the results observed, there can be no doubt either of the sense of reality conveyed by the false percept, or of its appropriate behaviour under favourable conditions.

An instance may be quoted in detail which illustrates at once the apparent attachment of the hallucination to an external object, and its successful competition with the impressions of waking life. A lady of my acquaintance, Sister L., was put into the hypnotic state by Mr. G. A. Smith in the spring of 1892. Whilst she was entranced, Mr. Smith, at my request, handed to her several blank cards, and told her that one of them (which had been privately marked on the back) bore a portrait of himself, and that she was to look at it ten minutes after waking. A few minutes later, when engaged in conversation and apparently completely awake. Sister L. picked out the card in question from the little heap of similar cards and showed it to me, remarking that it was an excellent likeness. Some half-hour later, when Sister L. was about to take her departure, I handed her the card and said that Mr. Smith would be glad if she would accept the photograph. She looked at the card, expressed her thanks for the gift, and placed it in her pocket. When I met her a few days later I learnt that on her arrival at home she had searched in her pocket for the photograph, and had been much surprised to find there only a blank card. In this instance there can be little doubt that a complete sensory hallucination was induced, and that it persisted, or was capable of being revived, for some 30 minutes or more after the original impression had been established.

This last example, it will be seen, belongs to the important class of post-hypnotic hallucinations — t.e.^

212 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

hallucinations enjoined on the subject in the hypnotic state, but realised only after waking. Special interest attaches to hallucinations of this kind, because the subject is in a condition which, if not fully normal, at least approaches in some cases very nearly to the normal, and is thus able to observe and describe his own sensations with care.^

A more striking form of the same experiment, the post-hypnotic production of a completely developed hallucination of the human figure, has been practised by Bernheim,^ Beaunis,^ Liegeois,* and others. Thus M. Liegeois, on the 12th October 1885, told a hypnotised subject that on the 12th October of the year following he would go to Dr. Liebeault's house, where he would also see M. Liegeois, and would thank them both for the good done to his eyes. He would then see a performing dog and monkey enter the consulting room, where they would perform many amusing tricks; ultimately he would see a gipsy enter with a

^ In many cases the post-hypnotic performance of an enjoined action, or the experience of a post-hypnotic hallucination, is associated with the partial recurrence of the hypnotic trance, or of some condition closely allied to it. Mr. Edmund Gurney has carefully investigated the question {Proc. S.P.R.^ iv. pp. 268-323. See also Delboeuf's article there quoted, "De la pretendue Veille Somnambulique," Rev. Phil., Feb. 1887), and has shown that, with some subjects, during the performance of the enjoined action a further command can be given, or a further hallucination imposed, and that the whole incident will have passed from memory a few seconds later. In the case of some persons hypnotised by Dr. Bramwell, and bidden to see after waking an imaginary scene in a crystal, I have myself observed that they retained no recollection a few minutes later of the scene which they had been describing; and in at least one case the subject at the time of the hallucination was apparently insensible to pain. On the other hand, as Mr. Gurney has pointed out {he. cit.y p. 270), "there are some cases in which no reason whatever appears for regarding the state in which the action is performed as other than normal," and the same remark apparently holds good of post-hypnotic hallucinations. And there are many persons who can see hallucinatory pictures in a crystal, a glass of water, etc., when in full health and in a perfectly normal condition. See Mr. Myers' article already referred to {S.P.P., vol. viii.).

" £)e la Suggestion^ p. 29.

^ La So7niiambulisme provoqui, p. 233.

* Rev, de V Hypnolisme, November 1886, p. 148.

i

bear, to reclaim the dog and monkey, and would borrow two sous from M. Liegeois to give to the gipsy. On the 12th October 1886 the subject entered Dr. Li^beault's consulting room and thanked him and M. Liegeois as arranged. He then saw a dog and monkey enter the room, and ultimately a gipsy. The bear he did not see, and the two sous, which were duly borrowed, he handed to the imaginary dog. With these exceptions the hallucinations enjoined a year before were exactly realised. Some experiments of a similar nature are recorded by Mr. Gurney {Proc. S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 11-13). The subject was a servant named Zillah, in the service of Mrs. Ellis, of 40 Keppel Street, Russell Square. In the first two experiments Zillah was told in the trance that at a certain hour on the following day she would see Mr. G. A. Smith. In each case the experiment succeeded.

The third and last experiment with this " subject " was made on Wednesday evening, July 13th, 1887. On this occasion S. told her, when hypnotised, that the next afternoon at three o'clock she would see me come into the room to her. She was further told that I would keep my hat on, and would say, " Good afternoon; " that I would further remark, "It is very warm; " and would then turn round and walk out. These hallucinations were suggested in another room, where Zillah was taken for the purpose, and neither Mrs. Ellis nor any other person, except S. and myself, knew their nature. Zillah, as usual, knew nothing about them on waking. On the second day after, the following letter was received from Mrs. Ellis: —

"40 Keppel Street, Russell Square, W.C, July id^th.

" Dear Mr. Smith,— Mr. Gurney did not ask me to write in case there was anything to communicate with respect to Zillah, but as I suppose you gave her a post-hypnotic hallucination, probably you will wish to hear of it. I will give you the story in her own words, as I jotted them down immediately afterwards — saying nothing to her, of course, of my doing so. She said: ' I was in the kitchen washing up, and had just looked at the clock, and was startled to see how late it was — five minutes to three — when I heard footsteps coming down the

214 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

stairs — rather a quick, light step — and I thought it was Mr. Sleep ' (the dentist whose rooms are in the house), ' but as I turned round, with a dish mop in one hand and a plate in the other, I saw some one with a hat on, who had to stoop as he came down the last step, and there was Mr. Gurney! He was dressed just as I saw him last night, black coat and grey trousers, his hat on, and a roll of paper, like manuscript, in his hand, and he said, ' Oh, good afternoon.' And then he glanced all round the kitchen, and he glared at me with an awful look, as if he was going to murder me, and said, ' Warm afternoon, isn't it? ' and then, ' Good afternoon ' or ' Good day,' I'm not sure which, and turned and went up the stairs again, and after standing thunderstruck a minute, I ran to the foot of the stairs, and saw like a boot just disappearing on the top step.' She said, ' I think I must be going crazy. Why should I always see something at three o'clock each day after the seance? But I am not nearly so frightened as I was at seeing Mr. Smith.' She seemed particularly impressed by the ' awful look ' Mr. Gurney gave her. I presume this was the hallucination you gave her.

"Amelia A. Ellis."

It is important to note that in cases of this kind there is no discoverable point de repere, at least in the sense in which the phrase is understood by its authors; and the nature of the effect produced — a moving figure, apparently occupying a position in solid space — makes it very difficult to suppose that the hallucination is attached to any external object, which must necessarily be fixed. But the whole discussion about the necessity of external excitation or oi points de repere seems beside the mark in such cases as these. For there can be no question that what in the first instance excites the hallucination is not a present sensation, but a memory. Whether for the full development of a sensory hallucination some external stimulus to the sense-organ is necessary is here a question of quite minor importance. The really interesting fact in its bearing on the question of telepathic hallucination is that some hallucinations are shown to be centrally, not peripherally, initiated. It should be further remarked that Zillah's astonishment at seeing the figure is typical, since in the case

of post-hypnotic hallucinations in general neither the injunction to see the figure, nor indeed any other incident of his trance life, is remembered by the percipient in the normal state; and he is therefore entirely ignorant of the chain of events which led up to the hallucination, and can only by inquiry and reflection ascertain that the apparition which he has seen is of his own manufacture.

From these experimental cases we may pass to the consideration of spontaneous hallucinations, and amongst them to that class with which we are more directly concerned, the occasional hallucinations of sane and healthy persons. Owing, amongst other causes, to their comparative infrequency, and to the difficulty of obtaining accurate contemporary records (since their occurrence cannot, as in the hallucinations of disease, be foreseen), phenomena of this class have hitherto attracted little attention amongst psychologists.^ Mr. Edmund Gurney, however, in 1884 and onwards conducted an inquiry, by means of a printed schedule of questions, amongst a circle of some 6000 persons; and during the last four years, at the request of the Congress of Experimental Psychology which met at Paris in 1889, Professor Henry Sidgwick, with the aid of a Committee of members of the S.P.R., has carried on a similar investigation on a larger scale. 17,000 adult persons, for the most part resident in the United Kingdom, have been questioned as to their experience of sensory hallucinations.^ In the result it

^ Professor Sully, to quote a recent instance, in his work on Illusions in the International Scientific Series (ed. 1887), devotes less than a page and a half to the discussion of the sensory hallucinations of normal life, and sums up the subject by saying that '* when not brought on by exhaustion or artificial means, the hallucinations of the sane have their origin in a preternatural power of imagination " (p. 1 17).

'^ The question, which was worded as follows: — Have you ever, rvhen believing yourself to be completely awake, had a vivid impression of seeing, or being totiched by a living being or inanimate object, or of hearing a voice, which impression, so far as you could discover, was not due to any external physical cause? — was printed at the top of a schedule containing twenty-five spaces for the names and other par-

2 16 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

appeared that 1684 out of 17,000, or 9.9 per cent. — to wit, 655 out of 8372 men, and 1029 out of 8628 women — had experienced a sensory hallucination at some time in their lives. In about one-third of the cases the percipient had more than one experience of the kind. The phenomenon, therefore, though not so common as dreaming, is less rare than is generally supposed, seeing that about one in every ten educated persons has such an experience in the course of his life. The inquiries of the Committee have revealed no general cause for the greater number of these' isolated hallucinations. In a small proportion of the cases there was a slight degree of ill-health, and in a rather greater number there was a certain amount of anxiety or other emotional excitement, to which the hallucinatory experience might with some plausibility be attributed.^ But in the great majority of the cases there was no obvious antecedent to be discovered either in the condition of the percipient or in the surrounding circumstances, and we are led to the conclusion that an isolated hallucination of this kind is as little incompatible with ordinary health as a blush or a hiccough. At the same time we are entitled to infer, from the relatively large proportion of cases occurring when the percipient is in bed, or alone, that quiescence and freedom from external stimuli are favourable conditions for the genesis of

ticulars of those answering. Collectors were instructed not to select those of whom the question was asked; and to record alike negative and affirmative answers. In the case of an affirmative answer being received, further particulars were sought. For a full discussion of the various sources of error incident to an inquiry of this nature, and the precautions taken to avoid them, and for details of the results obtained, the reader is referred to the Report of the Committee, presented in a condensed form to the Congress of Experimental Psychology which met in London in 1892, and to be published in full in the Proc. S.F.R.y vol. x., part 26 (forthcoming).

^ There was ill-health alone in about 5 per cent., anxiety alone in about II per cent., and both ill-health and anxiety in about 1.7 per cent, of first-hand cases.

I

hallucinations.^ They may, in short, be regarded as unusually vivid dreams, and have for the most part just so much interest and significance. The nature and variety of these casual hallucinations may be gathered from the table on the following page.

If we turn to the mechanism of hallucinations, we shall find that — like dreams — some are apparently originated by the condition of the bodily organs; others again appear to be mere automatic reverberations of recent sensation; whilst yet others cannot be referred. to any immediate external stimulus, and suggest the "spontaneous" activity of the higher cerebral centres. With the rudimentary hallucinations— singing in the ears, sparks and flashes of light, etc. — which are caused by transient conditions of the external organs of sense, we are probably all familiar. But experience shows that a small nucleus of actual sensation may enter into more fully developed hallucinations. Thus, to take the simplest case, it is known that " sparks " may develop into " Faces in the Dark," which are themselves on the border-line between mind's-eye pictures and hallucinations. (See St. James's Gazette, "Faces in the Dark," Feb. 10, 1882, and Proc. S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 171.) And in another recorded case {Proc. S.P.R., vol. i. pp. 102, 103) an artist was accustomed to see constantly at his studio the figure of a man, under circumstances which strongly suggest that a point de repere was furnished by those floating, motes in the eyeballs which are liable momentarily to cloud the vision when the position is abruptly changed after a period of immobility. And we find cases where the constructive impulse has so amplified and misinter-

^ Hallucinations occurring in the ambiguous state between waking and sleeping are called by some writers hypnagogic. For the purposes of our investigation, coincident hallucinations occurring at times when it is doubtful whether the percipient is fully awake, e.g., when he is in bed, are termed "borderland." Their evidential value is, of course, somewhat less than that of hallucinations occurring when the percipient is unquestionably awake. (See cases 57, 59, 65, 66, etc.)

2l8 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

§ »?

i

/• >>. - ^ V

•s^vIox

•UOT^TJDgiSS^jp

joj'paquosap;?nu9pijgnsui

°° 1 1 1 1 i M 1 1

'Sj

•seqono:; JO s?09fqo a^iugapui

;?"^ 1 I 1 I 1 ^ "

a

•s?q3ii

^^"11 1 1 1 1 1

t^

•s(joafqo a^'Btniu'Buj a^Togoo:

O 1 fO 1 M 1 1 1 '^ 1

VO

c a

•siBiuiuv

s 1 ^1 1 1 I r 1

•suoi';u'Bdd'B

snoj:)subui lo 'aiqu

-loq 'anbsa^ojo

^-^^ 1 1 1 1 1 1

CO

•snis'B(>utJqd

snoiSii^-i pu'B spSuv

2-11" 1 ^1 1 1

VO

■a

•(sainpid JO sauaos

^ 1 ^i 1 1 1 1 1 1

M

CI)

•SUOl^LIIJdd'B

podopAap iCia;)8lduxooui

O <-> fO"^ N ^111 1

Re-ilistic Human Phantasms

unrecognised.

O

5S

•sit ^^^^^ 1 0^^^ 1

ro

d

of livingi people

vOOt^r^iO M WVOVO 1

Visual

Visual and Auditory (vocal)... Visual and Auditory (non- vocal)

Visual and Tactile

Visual and Auditory (vocal) \

and Tactile J

Visual and Auditory (non- \

vocal) and Tactile... J

Auditory (vocal)

Auditory (vocal) and Tactile...

Tactile

Tactile and Auditory (non- "

vocal)........

I

e2

c

'■B

a

H



On Hallucination in General. 2t9

preted the data of normal sensation that we hardly know whether to class the result as hallucination or illusion. Thus, in a case given in Phantasms (vol. ii. p. 28), a young girl sees the face of a friend growing out of a yellow pansy; and an account of a similar incident has recently been furnished to me by Mr. H. Smith, of the Central Telegraph Office. The reference in the first line of the following narrative is to a rumour of the house being haunted, the remembrance of which possibly gave a definite form to the apparition: —

" Post Office, ^rdDec. 1892. " I had a turn last night, and for the moment thought I had caught the spook of my predecessor, but, alas! it all ended in smoke instead of spook. It gave me a turn, though, and made cold water run rippling down my back. It happened thus: — I had paid a good-night visit to the room of a dear little friend, a Callithrix monkey, whose lodgings are in a side building which has a door opening into the entrance hall. There was no light in the room of my friend, but a side light shone in through the door from the hall. (I was smoking.) On going out I looked back before shutting the door, and was startled to see just behind me, in the dark shade, the face of a human being — apparently an old man with grey hair. The face was perfectly distinct in every detail for an appreciable interval, and the eyes seemed to look sadly at me, and I looked sadly at him. The face moved, and the appearance, though a bit out of shape, still remained. I, however, saw what it was, and gave a gasp of relief which blew the old man's countenance into the shapelessness of the last remains of an extra strong puff of tobacco smoke I had left behind me."

Hallucinations of this kind, whose origin we can trace with more or less probability to some external sensation, may be in some respects compared with the visions seen on blank cards by the subjects of MM. Binet and Fere. But there are other hallucinations which cannot with any plausibility be referred to peripheral excitation. Such, as already said, are many hypnotic hallucinations, and the majority of the fully-developed hallucinations of normal life would appear to fall under the same category. Hallucinations of this class, like what may be

220 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

called hallucinatory^ dreams, are no doubt due to the spontaneous activity of the higher cerebral centres; they are simply ideas which take on sensory colouring. And just as the hallucinations of hypnotism, for the most part, are due to external suggestion, so it would seem that amongst the centrally initiated hallucinations of normal life there are some which owe their origin not to the spontaneous activity of the percipient's brain, but to an idea intruded from without — a suggestion not verbal but telepathic. The proof of this proposition — the proof, that is, of the operation in certain cases of some distant cause external to the percipient's organism — lies in a numerical comparison of those hallucinations which coincide with an external event — e.g.^ the death of the person seen — and those which do not For when the relative frequency of hallucinations has been ascertained the probability of chance coincidence in such cases can be exactly calculated. And should it appear that coincidental hallucinations are more frequent than chance would allow, it is certain that some other cause has to be sought for. And here we are met at the outset by a serious difficulty. It would appear from the results of the census just described that hallucinations even of a vivid and interesting character tend very quickly to be forgotten. Thus, to take only the cases of realistic apparitions resembling a living person, we find 157 cases recorded as occurring during the last ten years, and only 166 as occurring more than ten years ago; although, as the average age of our informants is about 40, we might have anticipated that the latter number would be about three times as great as the former.2 But the discrepancy becomes still more

^ As opposed to "dream-illusions," which depend on various organic sensations, or on the stimulation of the external organs of sense. The distinction is made by Professor Sully, loc. cit., p. 139.

2 These figures do not include second-hand cases. There are besides 29 undated cases, most of which probably belong to the remote period. See column I of table on p. 218 (visual cases).

ON HALLUCINATION IN GENERAL.

Striking if the figures are examined in detail. The subjoined table gives the number of apparitions resembling the human form recorded for each of the last ten years: —

No. of Years Ago-

land under

b'tw'n-1 and 2

.e

e.

9-10

Total.

Realistic "k Living...

Human J-Dead...

Apparitions J Unrecognised

2l'

It will be seen that the number of hallucinations recorded as occurring between nine and ten years ago is less than one-third of the number recorded for the last twelve months. Nay, if the analysis is carried still further, it is found that within the last year the number of hallucinations remembered decreases month by month as we recede further from the present. The inference is irresistible, that the great majority even of interesting hallucinations do not sufficiently impress the memory to be preserved for a few years. After a careful analysis of the figures the Committee are of opinion that the number of visual hallucinations actually experienced by their informants since the age of tea would be approximately secured by multiplying the recorded number hy four}

But if hallucinations in general are not remembered enough, coincidental hallucinations, at least those which coincide with the death of the person seen,^ would appear to be remembered too well, as will appear from the following figures. There are 13 such cases recorded during the last ten years. Now if we assume that this figure accurately re-

1 The calculation is based upon an analysis of the whole number of visual cases reported during the most recent month, which would indicate an annual rate of about 140. The figures for the most recent quarter indicate an annual rate of about 120.

2 A hallucination which coincides with a death is defined, for the purposes of this inquiry, as a hallucination which occurs within twelve hours of the death.

222 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

presents the number of such coincidences that have occurred in the experience of our informants during the last ten years, then, since the average age of our informants in this particular case is 46, we should expect to find for the whole period since the age of ten years 47 such coincidences reported; that is on the assumption that no death-coincidence is ever forgotten, and that the liability to such hallucination is practically uniform during the entire period. We do actually find 65 cases; from which it should, the Committee think, be inferred, not only that few or no death-coincidences are forgotten, — a result which is probably not surprising, — but also that a certain number of cases which are not death-coincidences have by the lapse of time grown to appear so.^ Nor is it difficult to conjecture the particular form of error. It is probable that in most of the 18 — more or less — spurious death-coincidences, there was an actual phantasm "and an actual death, but that the two events did not stand in close relation to each other. We have already (see Chap. VI.) seen reason to suspect a constant tendency to magnify the closeness of a coincidence of this kind. Seen from a distance the two events — like a binary star-system — are apt to coalesce into one; and a new spectral analysis is required to dissociate them.

Nor would it be safe to assume that the tendencies which have demonstrably operated to falsify the more remote records have been altogether inactive during the last ten years. The causes which tend to sophisticate narratives of this kind, as already shown, are many and difficult to detect; the kind of evidence required to place the alleged death-coincidence beyond

^ There is another possible explanation — viz., that some of the recent death-coincidences have been withheld from us, on account of the painful associations connected with them. That some cases — and recent would be more affected than remote examples— have been withheld on this account seems certain; but the explanation given in the text must, it is thought, be held primarily responsible for the discrepancy in the figures.

reasonable doubt has in some cases never existed; in others, through the destruction of documents, the death of friends, or the mere lapse of time, it is now unattainable. Of the 65 reported coincidences perhaps not more than one-fifth reach the evidential standard of the cases included in this volume. And whilst there is a strong presumption that some proportion of those, which from one or other of the causes suggested inevitably fall below the standard, yet represent facts with substantial accuracy, we have no test which will enable us to determine with precision what narratives and to what extent are worthy of credence. Many of the best-attested cases are printed in full in the Report already referred to, and any reader who is interested in the matter will be able to form an estimate for himself. Meanwhile, an attempt has been made, by means of a careful examination of each narrative in detail, to estimate its evidential value. In the result it would appear that about 44 narratives rest on evidence that may be regarded as fairly good. Of these 44 cases, however, 12 must be struck out, 3 as having been imported into the census,^ and 9 because a certain amount of anxiety may be presumed to have existed, and may be supposed — though the evidence for such action is very slight — to have caused the hallucination. We thus have 32 cases remaining, in which we have evidence of the occurrence of a hallucination, without apparent cause, within twelve hours of the death of the person seen.

The total number of recognised apparitions of living persons recorded at first-hand as occurring in the circle of 17,000 persons from which these deathcoincidences were drawn, is 322.^ But if, in order

^ Cases, that is, in which the collector is known or suspected to have asked the question of the narrator, because he knew that he was to receive an affirmative answer.

* The gross total of visual phantasms recorded at first-hand as representing a living human being, or part of a human being {e.g., a hand or a face), is 381. This total includes cases given in columns I, 4,

224 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

to allow for forgetfulness, as already indicated (p. 221), we multiply the number recorded by 4, we shall arrive at a total of 1288, as representing the probable number actually experienced by our informants since the age of ten. We have, therefore, 32 cases of hallucinations coinciding with the death of the person seen, in an estimated total of nearly 1300 recognised apparitions of living persons — or about i in 40. But the death-rate for England and Wales in the last completed decade being 19.15 per 1000 per annum, the average probability that any particular person will die on any

particular day is ^ = about i in 19,000. That

is, there is one chance in 19,000 that a man will die on the day on which his apparition is seen and recognised, supposing there to be no causal connection between the two events. Or in other words, for every hallucination which coincides with the death of the person seen, we should have to find about 18,999 similar hallucinations {i.e., recognised apparitions of living persons) which do not so coincide. But after making due allowance for forgetful-

and 5 of the table on p. 218. From this total we have deducted 31 cases where the percipient has had other experiences but has not enumerated them, and 28 cases which are estimated to have occurred before the age of ten, leaving the total given in the text, 322.

Of the gross total of 381, 80 are alleged to have coincided with the death of the person represented. Deducting in like manner 7 cases where the percipient has had other unspecified experiences, and 8 where the experience is believed to have occurred before the age of ten, we reach the total of 65 given above.

As, however, more care was no doubt taken to procure first-hand evidence in the case of apparitions coinciding with a death than in other cases, it would perhaps lead to more accurate results if in the larger total were included the second-hand non-coincidental cases, 38 in number. The reader can, if he prefer, work out the result for himself on this basis. But it will, of course, be understood that it is not practicable to sum up in a few pages the results of a long investigation; and those readers who are interested in the nature and distribution of casual hallucinations, and their relations to telepathic apparitions, are referred to the forthcoming Report, from which the figures in the text are quoted.

I

ness on the one hand, and for the creative activity of the imagination on the other, we find the actual proportion to be I to 40. In the face of these figures it would be preposterous to ascribe the reported cases of hallucinations at the time of death to chance. And the argument for some causal connection between hallucinations and external events is of course considerably strengthened if, in addition to (a) the coincidences of visual hallucinations with death, we take account of (d) the coincidences of auditory hallucinations with death, and (c) the coincidences of both visual and auditory hallucinations with other events than death, and {d) the cases in which the coincidence of the apparition with the death is nearer than twelve hours, the limit assumed in the above calculations.

It may not be superfluous to repeat (see anU, p. 27, footnote) that the calculation above given does not purport to establish thought-transference as the cause of these coincidences. The cause may be a greater prevalence of exaggeration and memoryillusion than the Committee have allowed for. What the calculation does is to bring us face to face with the problem: Here are certain phenomena, demonstrably not due to chance: do they reveal a new mode of communication between human minds, or merely a new source of fallacy in human testimony? It will hardly be disputed that, in either event, to find an answer to the question will justify much labour spent upon the search.

IS



Chapter X. Induced Telepathic Hallucinations.

In the present chapter we revert once more to experimental evidence. The cases now to be discussed should, in the logical order, have been included in Chapter V., and for a proper appreciation of their theoretic bearings and evidential value they ought to be considered in connection with the instances of thought-transference at a distance there recorded. It seemed best, however, to separate these instances of the experimental production of hallucinations at a distance, and reserve them for subsequent treatment, with the view of anticipating as far as possible the misconceptions to which this class of evidence is peculiarly open. In brief, until some attempt had been made to elucidate the nature of sensory hallucination in general, it seemed unwise to introduce matter so controvertible as apparitions of the human figure. For we are here assailing the last fortress of superstition; in discussing such matters even educated persons find it difficult to free themselves from the fetters of traditional modes of thought and speech. Men who would be ashamed to think of earth, air, fire, and water as elements, because they were so held a century ago and are now so styled in the language of the market-place, will often see no middle course between rejecting altogether evidence of the kind here dealt with, and accepting the existence of " ghosts." But those

who have followed the argument of the preceding chapters will see, if the possibility of thought-transference is granted, that the narratives now to be presented fall naturally into place as illustrating one of its modes of manifestation. That A. by taking thought should cause an image of himself to appear to B. need provoke no more surprise than that by the same means he should cause B. to see No. 27, or the Queen of Hearts. No one demands a spiritual entity corresponding to the Queen of Hearts, why then should any one believe in the other case that A.'s spirit had left its fleshly tabernacle to interview B.? The hallucinatory figure induced post-hypnotically in certain subjects presents an even closer parallel. It is recognised by all in such a case that the figure seen is a tJwiight fashioned by the subject's mind, with no more substance than any other thought. It is only the influence of an unrecognised animism which leads us to demand such a substantial basis when the figure seen represents a dying man. The impulse which led to the projection of the hallucination was in the one case conveyed by word of mouth, in the other by some process as yet not understood. But the mystery lies in the process rather than in the result.

The present chapter, then, will contain instances of the action of thought-transference in which the transmitted idea was translated in the percipient's mind, not, as in most of the cases described in previous chapters, into a simple feeling, or sensation, or dream, but into a hallucination representing the human figure. Readers of Phantasms of the Living will remember the accounts there given (vol. i. pp. 104-109) of some experiments made by a friend of ours, Mr. S. H. B. On several occasions Mr. B. succeeded by an effort of will in causing a phantom of himself to appear to acquaintances who were not aware of his intention to try the experiment. On one occasion the figure was seen by two persons

228 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

simultaneously. As at that time results of the kind were almost unprecedented, we felt, notwithstanding our full confidence in Mr. B., some reluctance in publishing an account of his experiments, lest isolated marvels of the kind might prejudice our whole case. But fortunately, while Phantasms of the Living was actually passing through the press, we received from an independent source an account of successful experiments of the same kind (see below, case 63), and within a few weeks of its publication a friend of the present writer was induced by a perusal of Mr. B.'s narrative to make on his own account a similar trial, which completely succeeded. This gentleman wrote to me on 1 6th November 1886 as follows: —

No. 61. — From the Rev. Clarence Godfrey.

" I was so impressed by the account on p 105 that I determined to put the matter to an experiment.

" Retiring at 10.45 [on the 15th November 1886] I determined to appear, if possible, to a friend, and accordingly I set myself to work with all the volitional and determinative energy which I possess, to stand at the foot of her bed. I need not say that I never dropped the slightest hint beforehand as to my intention, such as could mar the experiment, nor had I mentioned the subject to her. As the 'agent' I may describe my own experiences.

" Undoubtedly the imaginative faculty was brought extensively into play, as well as the volitional, for I endeavoured to translate myself^ spiritually, into her room, and to attract her attention, as it were, while standing there. My effort was sustained for perhaps eight minutes, after which I felt tired, and was soon asleep.

" The next thing I was conscious of was meeting the lady next morning (z.(?,, in a dream, I suppose?) and asking her at once if she had seen me last night. The reply came, 'Yes.' 'How?' I inquired. Then in words strangely clear and low, like a well audible whisper, came the answer, ' I was sitting beside you.' These words, so clear, awoke me instantly, and I felt I must have been dreaming; but on reflection I remembered what I had been ' willing ' before I fell asleep, and it struck me, ' This must be a reflex action from the percipient.' My watch showed 3.4Q a.m. Th? following is what I wrote

k

immediately in pencil, standing in my night-dress: — 'As I reflected upon those clear words, they struck me as being quite intuitive., I mean subjective., and to have proceeded yr^w within^ as my own conviction., rather than a communication from any one else. And yet I can't remember her face at all, as one can after a vivid dream! '

" But the words were uttered in a clear, quick tone, which was most remarkable, and awoke me at once.

" My friend in the note with which she sent me the enclosed account of her own experience, says: — ' I remember the man put all the lamps out soon after I came upstairs, and that is only done about a quarter to four.'"

Mr. Godfrey received from the percipient on the 1 6th November an account of her side of the experience, and at his request she wrote it down as follows: —

"Yesterday — viz., the morning of November i6th, 1886 — about half-past three o'clock, I woke up with a start and an idea that some one had come into the room. I heard a curious sound, but fancied it might be the birds in the ivy outside. Next I experienced a strange restless longing to leave the room and go downstairs. This feeling became so overpowering that at last I rose and lit a candle, and went down, thinking if I could get some soda water it might have a quieting effect. On returning to my room I saw Mr. Godfrey standing under the large window on the staircase. He was dressed in his usual style, and with an expression on his face that I have noticed when he has been looking very earnestly at anything. He stood there, and I held up the candle and gazed at him for three or four seconds in utter amazement, and then, as I passed up the staircase, he disappeared. The impression left on my mind was so vivid that I fully intended waking a friend who occupied the same room as myself, but remembering that I should only be laughed at as romantic and imaginative, refrained from doing so.

" I was not frightened at the appearance of Mr. Godfrey, but felt much excited, and could not sleep afterwards."

On the 2 1st of the same month I heard a full account of the incident given above from Mr. Godfrey,

and on the day following from Mrs.. Mrs.

told me that the figure appeared quite distinct and life-like at first, though she could not remember to have noticed more than the upper part of the body. As she looked it grew more and more shadowy, and

2^0 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

finally faded away. Mrs., it should be added,

told me that she had previously seen two phantasmal figures, representing a parent whom she had recently lost.i

Mr. Godfrey at our request made two other trials, without, of course, letting Mrs. know his intention. The first of these attempts was without result, owing perhaps to the date chosen, as he was aware at the time, being unsuitable. But a trial made on the 7th December 1886 succeeded completely.

Mrs., writing on December 8th, states that she

was awakened by hearing a voice cry, " Wake," and by feeling a hand rest on the left side of her head. She then saw stooping over her a figure which she recognised as Mr. Godfrey's.

In this last case the dress of the figure does not seem to have been seen distinctly. But in the apparition of the i6th November, it will be observed that the dress was that ordinarily worn in the daytime by Mr. Godfrey, and that in which the percipient would be accustomed to see him, not the dress which he was actually wearing at the time. If the apparition is in truth nothing more than an expression of the percipient's thought this is what we should expect to find, and as a matter of fact in the majority of well evidenced narratives of telepathic hallucination this is what we actually do find. The dress and surroundings of the phantasm represent, not the dress and surroundings of the agent at the moment, but those with which the percipient is familiar. If other proof were wanting, this fact would in itself seem a sufficient argument that we have to deal, not with ghosts but with hallucinations. It is to be regretted, however, that most recent experimenters in this direction have succeeded only in producing apparitions of themselves. But a crucial experiment of the kind desired is to be found in an account published in

^ These details are taken from notes made by the writer immediately after the interview.



Induced Telepathic Hallucinations. 23!

1822 by H. M. Wesermann, Government Assessor and Chief Inspector of Roads at Dusseldorf. He records five successful trials with different percipients, of which the fifth seems worth quoting in full.^

No. 62.— From H. M. Wesermann.

" A lady, who had been dead five years, was to appear to Lieutenant n in a dream at 10.30 P.M. and incite him to good

deeds. At half-past ten, contrary to expectation, Herr — — n had not gone to bed, but was discussing the French campaign with

his friend Lieutenant S in the ante-room. Suddenly the

door of the room opened, the lady entered dressed in white, with

a black kerchief and uncovered head, greeted S • with her

hand three times in a friendly manner; then turned to n,

nodded to him, and returned again through the doorway.

"As this story, related to me by Lieutenant n, seemed to

be too remarkable from a psychological point of view for the truth of it not to be duly established, I wrote to Lieutenant

S, who was living six^ miles away, and asked him to give

me his account of it. He sent me the following reply: —

"'... On the 13th of March, 1817, Herr n came to

pay me a visit at my lodgings about a league from A. He

stayed the night with me. After supper, and when we were

both undressed, I was sitting on my bed and Herr n was

standing by the door of the next room on the point also of going to bed. This was about half-past ten. We were speaking partly about indifferent subjects and partly about the events of the French campaign. Suddenly the door out of the kitchen opened without a sound, and a lady entered, very pale, taller

than Herr n, about five feet four inches in height, strong and

broad of figure, dressed in white, but with a large black kerchief which reached to below the waist. She entered with bare head, greeted me with the hand three times in complimentary fashion,

turned round to the left towards Herr n, and waved her

hand to him three times; after which the figure quietly, and again without any creaking of the door, went out. We followed at once in order to discover whether there were any deception,

^ Der Magnetismus und die allgemeine Weltsprache. A brief account of the five trials, quoted from the Archiv fur den thierischen Magnetismus^ vol. vi. pp. 136-139, will be found in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. pp. loi, 102. In the other cases the impression was produced in a dream. The distance varied from ^ of a mile to 9 miles in the case quoted in the text.

^ In Wesermann's book, as also in the account given in the Archiv^ the account is headed ** Fifth experiment at a distance oi nine miles/'

232 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

but found nothing. The strangest thing was this, that our nightwatch of two men whom I had shortly before found on the watch were now asleep, though at my first call they were on the alert, and that the door of the room, which always opens with a good deal of noise, did not make the slightest sound when opened by the figure. " ' S.

"'D n, January nth, 1818.'

" From this story (Wesermann continues) the following conclusions may be drawn: —

"(i) That waking persons, as well as sleeping, are capable of perceiving the ideas \Gedankenbilder\ of distant friends through the inner sense as dream images. For not only the opening and shutting of the door, but the figure itself — which, moreover, exactly resembled that of the dead lady — was incontestably only a dream in the waking state, since the door would have creaked as usual had the figure really opened and shut it.

" (2) That many apparitions and supposed effects of witchcraft were very probably produced in the same way.

" (3) That clairvoyants are not mistaken when they state that a stream of light proceeds from the magnetiser to the distant friend, which visibly presents the scene thought of, if the magnetiser thinks of it strongly and without distraction."

More philosophic or more successful than recent investigators, Wesermann, it will be seen, varied the form of his experiment. In the first he caused his own figure to appear, but in each of the subsequent trials he chose a fresh image, meeting on each occasion with equal success. It should be observed, however, that though Wesermann seems to have been a careful as well as a philosophic investigator, he has omitted to record -how often he made trials of this kind without producing any result, and it cannot fairly be assumed that there were no failures. But in comparing such cases as those here recorded with the experiments at close quarters described in Chapters II., III., and IV., it should be remembered that a failure which consists merely, as in Mr. Godfrey's second trial, in the absence of any unusual impression on the part of the percipient, detracts far less from the value of occasional success than failures attested by the production of wrong impressions; and further, that a sensory

J

hallucination being a much rarer phenomenon than an idea, the improbability of chance-coincidence between a hallucination and the attempt (unknown to the percipient) to produce it is greater in the same proportion.

Later experience has not confirmed Wesermann's third inference, as to the stream of light proceeding from the agent; there are no grounds for regarding such an appearance as other than subjective, due to the percipient's preconceived ideas of what he ought to see. 13ut another feature in the narrative is more significant. One is led to infer both from Herr S.'s description and from Wesermann's remarks in (i) that the figure seen resembled a deceased lady who was not known to either of the percipients. If this interpretation is correct, the figure seen cannot have been subjective in the same sense as the hallucinations described in Chapter IX. and Mr. Godfrey's apparition may be supposed to have been. The latter were, ex hypothesi, autoplastic — i.e., they were hallucinations built up in the percipient's own mind on a nucleus supplied from without But what Herren S. and n

saw was a heteroplastic image, a picture like that of a diagram or a card transferred ready-made from the agent's mind We should not of course be justified, on the evidence of a single narrative of somewhat doubtful import, in concluding that such an origin for a hallucination is possible. But there are a few narratives to be cited later (Chapter XIII.) which also suggest such an interpretation.

In Mr. Godfrey's trials, as also in those made by Mr. S. H. B., the agent was asleep at the time of the experiment^ In the two cases which follow the agent was in a hypnotic trance. In the first instance, it will be seen, there appears to have been a reciprocal effect, the agent himself becoming aware at the time of the percipient's surroundings, and of the effect pro-

* Wesermann unfortunately does not record his own state at the time of the experiments.

234 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

duced on her by his influence. The account was sent to us in January 1886.

No. 63. — From Mr. H. P. Sparks.

After describing various hypnotic experiments on a fellow-student, Mr. A. H. W. Cleave, Mr. Sparks continues: —

" Last Friday evening (January 15th, 1886) he expressed his wish to see a young lady living in Wandsworth, and he also said he would try to make himself seen by her I accordingly mesmerised him, and continued the long passes for about 20 minutes, concentrating my will on his idea. When he came round (I brought him round by just touching his hand and willing him, after i hour and 20 minutes' trance) he said he had seen her in the dining-room, and that after a time she grew restless, and then suddenly looked straight at him and then covered her eyes with her hands. Just after this he came round. Last Monday evening (January i8th, 1886) we did the same thing, and this time he said he thought he had frightened her, as after she had looked at him for a few minutes she fell back in her chair in a sort of faint. Her little brother was in the room at the time. Of course, after this we expected a letter if the vision was real; and on Wednesday morning he received a letter from this young lady asking whether anything had happened to him, as on Friday evening she was startled by seeing him standing at the door of the room. After a minute he disappeared, and she thought that it might have been fancy; but on the Monday evening she was still more startled by seeing him again, and this time much clearer, and it so frightened her that she nearly fainted.

" This account I send you is perfectly true, I will vouch, for I have two independent witnesses who were in the dormitory at the time when he was mesmerised, and when he came round. My patient's name is Arthur H. W. Cleave, and his age is 18 years. A. C. Darley and A. S. Thurgood, fellow-students, are the two witnesses I mentioned. " H. Percy Sparks."

Mr. Cleave writes, on March 15th, 1886: —

"H.M.S. Marlborough, Portsmouth. " Sparks and myself have, for the past eighteen months, been in the habit of holding mesmeric stances in our dormitories. For the first month or two we got no very satisfactory results, but after that we succeeded in sending one another to sleep. I could never get Sparks further than the sleeping state, but he

could make me do anything he liked whilst I was under the influence; so I gave up trying to send him off, and all our efforts were made towards my being mesmerised. After a short time we got on so well that Sparks had three or four other fellows in the dormitory to witness what I did. I was quite insensible to all pain, as the fellows have repeatedly pinched my hands and legs without my feeling it. About six months ago I tried my power of will, in order, while under the influence, to see persons to whom I was strongly attached. For some time I was entirely unsuccessful, although I once thought that I saw my brother (who is in Australia), but had no opportunity of verifying the vision.

" A short time ago I tried to see a young lady whom I know very well, and was perfectly surprised at my success. I could see her as plainly as I can see now, but I could not make myself seen by her, although I had often tried to. After I had done this several times I determined to try and make myself seen by her, and told Sparks of my idea, which he approved. Well, we tried this for five nights running without any more success. We then suspended our endeavours for a night or two, as I was rather over-exerted by the continued efforts and got severe headaches. We then tried again (on, I think it was, a Friday, but am not certain), and were, I thought, successful; but as the young lady did not write to me about it, I thought I must have been mistaken, so I told Sparks that we had better give up trying. But he begged me to try once more, which we did on the following Monday, when we were successful to such an extent that I felt rather alarmed. (I must tell you that I am in the habit of writing to the young lady every Sunday, but I did not write that week, it order to make her think about me.) This took place between 9.30 p.m. and 10 P.M. Monday night, and on the following Wednesday morning I got the letter which I have enclosed. I, of course, then knew I had been successful. I went home about a fortnight after this, when I saw the young lady, who seemed very frightened in spite of my explanations, and begged me never to try it again, and I promised her that I would not."

The two witnesses of the experiment last described write as follows: —

" I have seen Mr. Cleave's account of his mesmeric experiment, and can fully vouch for the truth thereof.

"A. C. Darley."

" I have read Mr. Cleave's statement, and can vouch for the truth of it, as I was present when he was mesmerised and heard his statement after he revived. "A. E. S. THURGOOD4"

236 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

The following is a copy, made by Mr. Gurney, of

the letter in which the young lady, Miss A,

described her side of the affair. The envelope bore the postmarks, " Wandsworth, Jan. 19, 1886," "Portsmouth, Jan. 20, 1886," and the address, "Mr. A. H. W. Cleave, H.M.S. Marlborough, Portsmouth."

" Wandsworth, Tuesday morning.

" Dear Arthur, — Has anything happened to you? Please write and let me know at once, for I have been so frightened.

" Last Tuesday evening I was sitting in the dining [room] reading, when I happened to look up, and could have declared I saw you standing at the door looking at me. I put my handkerchief to my eyes, and when I looked again you were gone. I thought it must have been only my fancy, but last night (Monday), while I was at supper, I saw you again, just as before, and was so frightened that I nearly fainted. Luckily only my brother was there, or it would have attracted attention. Now do write at once and tell me how you are. I really cannot write any more now."

It will be seen that Miss A fixes the date

of her first hallucination on Tuesday, whereas Mr. Sparks and Mr. Cleave speak of it as Friday. Mr. Gurney, in conversation with the experimenters, was unable to fix the actual date with any certainty, but there can be little doubt that if Tuesday was the day, it fell within the five days on which Mr. Cleave attempted to see Miss A. Of the second coincidence there can be no doubt.

The next case is recorded by Mr. F. W. H. Myers {Journal S.P.R., March 1891), who writes: —

No. 64.

"In 1888 a gentleman, whom I will call Mr. A., who has occupied a high public position in India, and whom I have known a long time, informed me verbally that he had had a remarkable experience. He awoke one morning, in India, very early, and in the dawning light saw a lady, whom I will call Mrs. B., standing at the foot of his bed. At the same time he received an impression that she needed him. This was his sole experience of a hallucination; and it so much impressed him that he wrote to the lady, who was in England at the time, and

mentioned the circumstance. He afterwards heard from her that she had been in a trance-condition at the time, and had endeavoured to appear to him by way of an experiment.

" Mr. A. did not give me the lady's name, supposing that she did not desire the incident to be spoken of; nor did he find an opportunity of himself inquiring as to her willingness to mention the matter."

Subsequently, on July 13th, 1890, the agent, Mrs. B., wrote of her own accord to Mr. Myers. Mrs. B. began by stating that she had submitted herself to be experimented upon by a lady friend, with the view of acquiring clairvoyant faculties. She then described how in the course of one experiment in 1886 she lost consciousness of outward things, and saw the figure of a tall woman, whom she recognised as a friend of her mother's, standing by her. Then she goes on: —

" I find myself seriously debating within myself what I should do to prove to myself, and for my own satisfaction, if I am indeed the victim of hallucination or not. I decided in a flash on a man whom I knew to be possessed of the most work-a-day world common-sense; his views and mine regarding most things were at the antipodes, very unreceptive, who would be entirely out of sympathy with me in my present experiment and experiences, at which I knew he would only laugh, while regarding me as a simple tool in tricky hands. Such a man was, I decided, the most satisfactory for my trial. The grey lady here impressed me with a desire to will; in her anxiety she appeared to move towards me. I felt her will one with mine, and I willed with a concentrated strength of mind and body, which finally prostrated me, thus: I will that [Mr. A.] may feel I am near him and want his help; and that, without any suggestion from me, he write to tell me I have influenced him to-night.

" The grey lady disappeared. I was seated in the chair, weary, but feeling naturally, and back in common-place life. We put down the date and the appearance of the grey lady, and I spoke to none of what had happened. Some weeks passed, when I received a letter from [Mr. A.], asking how had I been employed on a certain July evening at such and such an hour, mentioning to what hour it would answer in London — day, date, and hour were those on which I had made my proof trial — saying that he was asleep, and had dreamed something he would tell me, but that he awoke from the dream feeling I wanted something of him, and asking me to let him know if at the time he so carefully mentioned I had been doing anything

23S APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

which had any reference to him. I then, and then only, told him what I have here related."

Unfortunately Mr. A., on being again appealed to, refused to write an account of his own experience, on the ground that his memory for details might by lapse of time have become untrustworthy. The case is therefore defective, not merely by the length of time which passed between the incident and the agent's record of it, but by the absence of any direct testimony from the percipient. It will be seen that Mrs. B. writes of Mr. A.'s impression as a dream. It seems clear, however, that Mr. A. did not himself regard his experience as a dream.

An interesting account is given by Miss Edith Maughan {Journal S.P.R.) of a similar experiment made by her in the summer of 1888. She was reading in bed when the idea occurred to her of "willing" to appear to her friend. Miss Ethel Thompson, who occupied the adjoining room. After concentrating her attention strongly for a few minutes she " felt dizzy and only half-conscious." On recovering full consciousness she heard Miss Thompson's voice speaking in the next room. The time was about 2 A.M, As a matter of fact. Miss Thompson, who was fully awake, was disturbed between 2 and 3 A.M. by seeing at the bedside the figure of Miss Maughan, which disappeared instantly on a Hght being struck. It is not perhaps possible under the circumstances, in view of Miss Maughan's own statement that she was only semi-conscious during part of the experiment, absolutely to exclude the hypothesis that the figure seen was that of Miss Maughan in some state analogous to somnambulism, and the case is not therefore given in full; but it is important to note that both ladies — and we have reason to know that they are good observers — are convinced that the figure seen was not that of Miss Maughan in the flesh, and the rapidity of the disappearance is a further argument against such a supposition.

In the cases so far dealt with the agent, when his state is recorded, was asleep or entranced at the time of the experiment, whilst the percipient appears as a rule to have been awake. In the cases which follow the agent was awake, but the percipient, in two of the cases — if not also in the third — seems to have seen the hallucinatory figure in the borderland state on awaking from sleep. In two of the cases the agent, no doubt intentionally, chose a time when he had reason to believe that the percipient would be asleep; in the third case, whilst the experiments at night failed, success was obtained when the percipient had fallen asleep unexpectedly in the day-time. In view of the absence of any well-attested cases in which both agent and percipient are shown to have been fully awake immediately before and at the time of the experiment, — in case 62 (Wesermann) the state of the agent, and in case 66 (VViltse) that of the percipient, is not clearly shown, — it is difficult to resist the conclusion that the condition of sleep or trance in one or both parties to the experiment is favourable to transference of this kind. That sleep, or rather the borderland which lies on either side of sleep, is peculiarly favourable to the production in the percipient, not only of hallucinations in general, but of telepathic hallucinations in particular, has already been shown. But the instances cited in the present chapter would seem to indicate that in the agent also sleep and trance (or possibly a trance selfinduced in sleep or in waking) may facilitate such transmissions.

No. 65.— From Dr. von Schrenck-Notzing.

We received the following case from Baron von Schrenck-Notzing, some of whose experiments have been already quoted (No. 9, p. 54). Dr. von Schrenck-Notzing first gave an account of the incident verbally to Professor Sidgwick at Munich, and subsequently,

240 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

at his request, sent in June 1888 the following written narrative: —

"In the winter of 1886-87, I think it was in the month of February, as I was going along the Barerstrasse one evening at half-past 11, it occurred to me to make an attempt at influencing at a distance, through mental concentration. A.S I had had, for some time, the honour of being acquainted with the family of Herr, and thus had had the opportunity of learning that his daughter, Fraulein, was sensitive to psychical influences, I decided to try to influence her, especially as the family Hved at the corner of the Barerstrasse and Karlstrasse. The windows of the dwelling were dark as I passed by, from which I concluded that the ladies had already gone to rest. I then stationed myself by the wall of the houses on the opposite side of the road, and for about five minutes firmly concentrated my thoughts on

the following desire:— Fraulein shall wake and think of

me. Then I went home. The next day when I met Fraulein ^"s friend on the ice, I learned from her (they shared a bedroom between them) that something strange had happened to the ladies during the preceding night. I remarked thereupon to Fraulein Prieger (such was the friend's name) that the time when the occurrence took place was between halfpast II and 12; whereat she was greatly astonished. Then I obtained from the lady an account of the circumstance, as she herself has written it out on the accompanying sheet of paper. For me the success of this experiment was a proof that under certain circumstances one person can influence another at a distance.

"Albert Freiherr von Schrenck-Notzing."

The percioient. Miss, writes on May nth,

1888:—

"There is not much to tell concerning the incident of which you ask me to give an account. It happened thus: — Baron Schrenck was returning home one night in March 1887 (or April, I am not sure as to the date), about 11.30, and stood for some time outside my bedroom window, which looked onto the street. I was in bed at the time, lying with closed eyes, nearly asleep. It seemed to me as if the part of the room where my bed was had become suddenly light, and I felt compelled to open my eyes, seeing at the same time, as it appeared to me, the face of Baron Schrenck. It was gone again as quick as lightning. The next day I told my friend Fraulein Prieger of this occurrence; she went skating that same day, and met Baron Schrenck on the ice. They had scarcely conversed

together five minutes before he asked Fraulein Prieger if I had seen ' anything last night. Fraulein Prieger repeated what I had told her, whereupon Baron Schrenck said that, at the time of my seeing him, he was standing outside my window, trying hard to impress his presence upon me. This never occurred again, and I believe Baron Schrenck did not have occasion to repeat the experiment."

In a further letter Miss adds (i) that the

blinds of her room were drawn down, (2) that she has experienced no other hallucination of any kind.

Fraulein Prieger, whose account was enclosed in Dr. von Schrenck-Notzing's letter of June 1888, writes: —

" The winter before last, shortly after Christmas, I was suddenly awakened in the night, between 11 and 12 o'clock, by my friend

, who asked me in an excited manner if I also saw Baron

