In the second division, {b\ of our experiments come those in which a glass screen was placed over the subject's hands. For the first four of these we used a framed window pane which happened to be handy. Then we obtained and used a sheet of 32 oz. glass, measuring 22 by 10 inches and Ye inch in thickness. This was supported on two large books placed beyond the subject's hands on each side, and in this position the upper surface of the glass was 2X inches above the surface of the table, so that there was ample room for the hands to rest underneath without touching the glass. Mr. Smith held his hand in the usual position over the selected finger, above the glass and not touching it. Under these conditions we tried 21 experiments with P., of which 18 were successful, and 6 with Miss B., all successful. In the case of the 3 failures with P., no effect was produced on any finger. In one successful case, the time taken was long, and we interrupted the experiment by premature testing in the way explained above.

Division {c) includes those experiments in which Mr. Smith did not approximate his hand to that of the subject at all, but merely looked at the selected finger from some place in the same room as the subject, but out of his sight. The distances between him and the subject varied from about 2>^ to about 12 feet. Under these conditions we tried 37 experiments with P., 18 in 1 890, of which 6 were failures, and 2 only partially successful, and 19 in 1892, of which 10 were failures. The proportion of success was, it thus appears, much less than under the previously described conditions, but still much beyond what chance would produce. Of the 6 failures in 1890, one was a case in which Mr. Smith made a mistake as to which finger we had selected, but succeeded with the one he thought of. In another case the left thumb instead of the right thumb became insensitive. In the other 4 cases no finger at all was affected.

104 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Of the lo failures in 1892, no effect was produced in 4 cases; in another the right (viz., the little) finger of the wrong hand became insensitive;Mn 4 cases an adjoining finger was affected — once only slightly — instead of that selected, and in the remaining case a finger distant from the selected one was slightly affected.

Six experiments were made with Mr. Smith looking at the finger through- the opera-glass at a distance of from 22 to 25 feet'; in three cases the experiment succeeded, in three another finger was affected instead of that selected. Fourteen experiments were made with a closed door intervening between percipient and agent; 2 only succeeded, and in 8 a wrong finger was affected, no effect at all being produced in the remaining 4 cases. In a further series of 4 trials Mr. Smith held his hand near the percipient, and willed to produce no effect. The trials were successful. In all these experiments P. was the percipient.

The rigidity was tested, as before, by asking the subject to close his hands; the anaesthesia, as a rule, by touches or the induction coil. Tested by the latter means it was found, as the current was gradually increased to the maximum, that the insensibility was not always complete. Flexibility and sensation were usually restored, for economy of time, by means of upward passes; but a few trials made later in the series served to show that the finger could be restored to its normal condition by a mere effort of will on the part of the agent. In some cases when their attention was specially directed to their sensations the subjects were able to indicate beforehand the finger operated on, by reason of the feeling of cold in it. But as a rule they appeared to be unaware which finger was affected. It is perhaps needless to point out that no conscious effort on their part could have produced the results described.

^ It happened on another occasion under these conditions that the right little finger was slightly aflfected when the left little finger, which had been selected, was so in a more decided manner.

^€^"^



Experimental Production of Telepathic

EFFECTS AT A DISTANCE.

In the cases so far described, where success has been attained, the agent and percipient, if not actually in the same room, have been separated by a distance not exceeding at the most 25 or 30 feet. The analogy of the physical forces would, of course, have prepared us to find that the effect of telepathy diminishes in proportion to the distance through which it has to act. And in fact we have but few records of successful experiments at a distance. Yet, on the other hand, we are confronted by a large body of evidence for the spontaneous affection of one mind by another, and that at a distance frequently of hundreds of miles. It is difficult to resist the conclusion, in view of the close similarity, in many cases, of the effects produced, that the force operating in these spontaneous phenomena is identical with, or at least closely allied to, that which causes the transfer of sensations or images from agent to percipient within the compass of a London drawing-room. It is probable, indeed, that the non-experimental evidence, for reasons already alluded to, and discussed at length in the succeeding chapter, should be generously discounted. But it is not easy for an impartial inquirer to reject it altogether. Nor indeed is any such summary solution required by the results

I06 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSJ^ERENCE.

of experimental telepathy. It is true that experiments at a distance have seldom succeeded, and that we have no record of any long-continued series of such experiments at all comparable to those conducted, e.g., by Mr. Guthrie or Mrs. Henry Sidgwick at close quarters. But it is also probably true that such experiments have been comparatively seldom attempted. And if account be taken of the various drawbacks incident to experiments at a distance, the amount of success already achieved, though no doubt less in proportion to the number of serious and wellconceived attempts than is the case with experiments conducted under the more usual conditions, is yet far from discouraging. For trials at a distance are tedious; they consume much time, and call for long preparation and careful pre-arrangement. The difficulties of securing the necessary freedom from disturbance are probably increased when agent and percipient are separated. The interest in such experiments is difficult to maintain apart from the stimulus of a rapid succession of trials with an immediate record of the results. Lastly, such experiments would generally be undertaken only after a series of trials at close quarters; after, that is, some portion at least of the original stock of energy and enthusiasm has been exhausted. And even when such considerations have no effect upon the experimenter, it is likely, as has been already pointed out, that the novel conditions would of themselves affect unfavourably the imagination of the percipient, and thus prejudice the results. That, notwithstanding these various drawbacks, there have been several successful series of experiments at a distance is a matter of good augury for the future.

It is much to be desired that investigators should give attention to obtaining more results in this branch of the inquiry. For independently of the fact that results of the kind form an indispensable link between instances of thought-transference at close quarters

and the more striking spontaneous cases at a distance, it is important to observe that in experiments of the kind described in the present chapter the gravest objection which is at present urged, and may fairly continue to be urged, against most experiments at close quarters — viz., the risk of unconscious apprehension through normal channels — is no longer applicable. Moreover, the results can only be attributed to fraud on the extreme assumption that both parties to the experiment are implicated in deliberate and systematic collusion.

Induction of Sleep at a distance.

Some of the most striking experimental cases, which are concerned with the production of hallucinations, are reserved for later discussion. (See Chapter X.)

But perhaps the most valuable body of testimony for the agency of thought-transference at a distance is to be found in the experiments recorded by French observers in the induction of sleep. It is not a little remarkable that this, one of its rarest and most striking manifestations, should have been among the first and, until recently, almost the only form of telepathy which attracted attention amongst French investigators. Moreover, of late years at any rate, this particular form of experiment has rarely succeeded except in France, and with hypnotic subjects. But as the number of physicians who practise hypnotism increases in other countries, we may no doubt hope to see the observations already made confirmed and enlarged. The analogy of the experiments in the induction of anaesthesia by thought-transference, recorded in the last chapter, would perhaps have prepared us to accept the induction of sleep as a not improbable effect of telepathy. But we are not without more direct testimony. The opening

Io8 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

sentences of Professor Janet's account of the experiment with Madame B. show us that, in this case at all events, the conscious will of the operator was necessary to produce the hypnotic trance, even at close quarters. When, therefore, we find that the same cause, operating at a distance, is constantly followed by a like effect, there can be no reasonable ground for refusing to recognise the operator's will as in this case also the cause of the sleep; unless, indeed, we are prepared to attribute all the results to chance.

No. 29. — Experiments by MM. Gibert and Janet.

In the autumn of 1885 Professor Pierre Janet of Havre witnessed some trials made by Dr. Gibert of the same town on Madame B., a patient of his own. Madame B., whose fame has now reached beyond her native land, is described by Professor Janet as an honest peasant woman, in good health, with no indications of hysteria. She has been hypnotised since childhood by various persons, and is occasionally liable to spontaneous attacks of somnambulism. One of the most remarkable features presented by Madame B.'s induced trances is that she can be awakened by the person who hypnotised her and by no one else; and that his hand alone can produce partial or general contractures, and subsequently restore her limbs to their normal condition.

" One day," to quote Professor Janet (" Note sur quelques Phenom^nes de Somnambulisme," Revue Philosophique^ Feb. 1886), "M. Gibert was holding Madame B.'s hand to hypnotise her {pour Pendorfnir), but he was visibly preoccupied and thinking of other matters, and the trance did not supervene. This experiment, repeated by me in various forms, proved to us that in order to entrance Madame B. it was necessary to concentrate one's thought intensely on the suggestion to sleep which was given to her, and the more the operator's thought wandered the more difficult it became to induce the trance.

This influence of the operator's thought, however extraordinary it may seem, predominates in this case to such an extent that it replaces all other causes. If one presses Madame B.'s hand without the thought of hypnotising her, the trance is not induced; but, on the other hand, one can succeed in sending her to sleep by thinking of it without pressing her hand."

Of course in experiments of this kind no precautions could exclude the chance that some suggestion of what was expected might reach the percipient's mind through the gestures, the attitude, or even the silence of the experimenter. But, acting on the clue thus given, MM. Gibert and Janet succeeded in impressing mentally on Madame B. commands which were punctually executed on the following day. During the same period Dr. Gibert made three attempts, all of which met with partial success, in inducing the hypnotic trance by mental suggestion given at a distance. Subsequently, during February and March 1886, and again during April and May of the same year, these trials were repeated with striking results. During one of the trials which took place in April Mr. F. W. H. Myers and Dr. A. T. Myers were present, and from their contemporary record the following account is taken. Throughout these trials, it should be stated, Madame B. was in the Pavilion, a house occupied by Dr. Gibert's sister, and distant about two-thirds of a mile from Dr. Gibert's own house. The distance intervening between agent and percipient in this series of experiments was in no case less than a quarter of a mile or more than one mile. In the first trial described by Mr. Myers (18 in the subjoined tabic) Madame B. actually went to sleep about twenty minutes after the effort at willing had been made; but as some of the party had in the interval entered the house where she was and found her awake, it seems possible that their coming had suggested the idea of sleep. In the second case (No. 19) an attempt to will Madame B. to leave her bed at 11.35 P.M.

no APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

and come to Dr. Gibert's house had failed — the only result, possibly due to other causes, being an unusually prolonged sleep and a headache on waking. Subsequently, to quote Mr. Myers' account,

" (20) On the morning of the 22nd we again selected by lot an hour (11 a.m.) at which M. Gibert should will, from his dispensary (which is close to his house), that Madame B. should go to sleep in the Pavilion. It was agreed that a rather longer time should be allowed for the process to take effect; as it had been observed (see M. Janet's previous communication) that she sometimes struggled against the influence, and averted the effect for a time by putting her hands in cold water, etc. At 11.25 we entered the Pavilion quietly, and almost at once she descended from her room to the salon^ profoundly asleep. Here, however, suggestion might again have been at work. We did not, of course, mention M. Gibert's attempt of the previous night. But she told us in her sleep that she had been very ill in the night, and repeatedly exclaimed: ' Pourquoi M. Gibert m'a-t-il fait souffrir 1 Mais j'ai lave les mains continuellement.' This is what she does when she wishes to avoid being influenced.

"(21) In the evening (22nd) we all dined at M. Gibert's, and in the evening M. Gibert made another attempt to put her to sleep at a distance from his house in the Rue Sery, — she being at the Pavilion, Rue de la Ferme, — and to bring her to his house by an effort of will. At 8.55 he retired to his study; and MM. Ochorowicz, Marillier, Janet, and A. T. Myers went to the Pavilion, and waited outside in the street, out of sight of the house. At 9.22 Dr. Myers observed Madame B. coming half-way out of the garden-gate, and again retreating. Those who saw her more closely observed that she was plainly in the somnambulic state, and was wandering about and muttering. At 9.25 she came out (with eyes persistently closed, so far as could be seen), walked quickly past MM. Janet and Marillier without noticing them, and made for M. Gibert's house, though not by the usual or shortest route. (It appeared afterwards that the bonne had seen her go into the salo7i at 8.45, and issue thence asleep at 9. 15: had not looked in between those times.) She avoided lamp-posts, vehicles, etc., but crossed and recrossed the street repeatedly. No one went in front of her or spoke to her. After eight or ten minutes she grew much more uncertain in gait, and paused as though she would fall. Dr. Myers noted the moment in the Rue Faure; it was 9.35. At about 9.40 she grew bolder, and at 9.45 reached the street

in front of M. Gibert's house. There she met him, but did not notice him, and walked into his house, where she rushed hurriedly from room to room on the ground-floor. M. Gibert had to take her hand before she recognised him. She then grew calm.

"M. Gibert said that from 8.55 to 9.20 he thought intently about her; from 9.20 to 9,35 he thought more feebly; at 9.35 he gave the experiment up, and began to play billiards; but in a few minutes began to will her again. It appeared that his visit to the billiard-room had coincided with her hesitation and stumbling in the street. But this coincidence may of course have been accidental....

" (22) On the 23rd, M. Janet, who had woke her up and left her awake,^ lunched in our company, and retired to his own house at 4.30 ( a time chosen by lot) to try to put her to sleep from thence. At 5.5 we all entered the salon of the Pavilion, and found her asleep with shut eyes, but sewing vigorously (being in that stage in which movements once suggested are automatically continued). Passing into the talkative state, she said to M. Janet, 'C'est vous qui m'avez fait dormir k quatre heures et demi.' The impression as to the hour may have been a suggestion received from M. Janet's mind. We tried to make her believe that it was M. Gibert who had sent her to sleep, but she maintained that she had felt that it was M. Janet.

" (23) On April 24th the whole party chanced to meet at M. Janet's house at 3 P.M., and he then, at my suggestion, entered his study to will that Madame B. should sleep. We waited in his garden, and at 3.20 proceeded together to the Pavilion, which I entered first at 3.30, and found Madame B. profoundly sleeping over her sewing, having ceased to sew. Becoming talkative, she said to M. Janet, 'C'est vous qui m'avez commande.' She said that she fell asleep at 3.5 P.M." {Proc. S.P.R., vol. iv. pp. 133-136.)

The subjoined table, taken, with a few verbal alterations, from Mr. Myers' article, gives a complete list of the experiments in the induction of trance at a distance {somvieil a distance) made by MM. Janet' and Gibert up to the end of May 1886: —

1 An experiment of another kind, the description of which is here omitted, had been made on the morning of this day.

112 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Date.

Operator.

Hour when given.

Remarks.

H

1885.

October 3

Gibert

11.30 A.M.

She washes hands and

■wards off trance.

do.

11.40 A.M.

Found entranced 11.45.

do.

4.15 P.M.

Found entranced 4.30: had been asleep about

15 minutes.

1886

i

Feb.

Janet

She washes hands and wards off trance.

do.

5 P.M.

Asleep at once.

i»

do.

Mere discomfort observed.

March

do.

do. do.

do.

3 P.M.

Found asleep at 4: has

slept about an hour. Will interrupted: trance

do.

coincident but incom-

plete.

do.

5-8.10 P.M.

Found asleep a few minutes afterwards.

Gibert

8 P.M.

Found asleep 8.3.

do.

Success— no details.

Janet

3 P.M.

Success— no details.

Gibert Janet

9 P.M.

Brings her to his house: she leaves her house a few minutes after 9.

Found asleep in 10

April

minutes.

i>

Gibert

4 P.M.

Found asleep 4.15.

do.

8 P.M.

Made to come to his house.

do.

5.50 P.M.

Asleep about 6.10: trance too tardy.

do.

11.35 P.M.

Attempt at trance during sleep.

do.

11 A.M.

Asleep 11.25: trance too tardy.

do.

9 P.M.

Comes to his house: leaves her house 9.15.

Janet

4.30 P.M.

Found asleep 5.5, says she has slept since 4.30.

do.

3 P.M.

Found asleep 3.30, says she has slept since 3.5.

May

do.

Success— no details.

do.

Success— no details.

We have then in 25 trials 18 complete and 4 partial or doubtful successes. In two of the latter Madame B. was found washing her hands to ward off the trance, and in two others the trance supervened only after an interval of twenty minutes or more, and under circumstances which rendered it

doubtful whether telepathy were the cause. It is important to note that during these earlier visits of Madame B. to Havre, about two months in all, she only once fell into ordinary sleep during the daytime, and twice became spontaneously entranced; and that she never left the house in the evenings except on the three occasions (14, 17, 21), on which she did so in apparent response to a mental suggestion. There is little ground, therefore, for attributing the results above given to chance.

A further series of trials with the same percipient was conducted by Professor Janet during the autumn of T«86. The results, communicated by him to Proi sor Richet, were published by the latter in the Proceeaings of the S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 43-45.^ In order to facilitate comparison I have thrown these later results also into tabular form. In the later trials it will be observed that there is a tolerably constant retardation of the effect. The exact degree of the retardation it was not always possible to ascertain, as it was not practicable to keep Madame B. continually under observation, and to have let those at the Pavilion into the secret, and to have asked them to exercise special vigilance at the time of the experiments would have entailed the risk of vitiating the results. Moreover, in order to avoid giving any suggestion by the hour of his arrival, M. Janet made it a rule during a great part of this period to come to the house at the same hour — 4 p.m. in most cases — for several days consecutively. When an early hour, therefore, had been chosen for the experiments, the exact degree of success could only be determined if Madame B.'s movements had chanced at the right time to come under the observation of those in the house. During the period of the trials Madame B. fell asleep in the daytime spontaneously only four times.

^ An account of these experiments is also contained in an article by M. Richet in the Revue de V Hypnotisme for February 1888.

114 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Date.

Hour when given.

Remarks.

iJ

1 886.

I

8th Sept.

3 P.M.

Found asleep at 4 p. M. M. J. entered unseen and without knocking...

9th Sept.

3P-M.

Madame B. complained of headache

F.

nth Sept.

9(?A.M.)

Found at 10, "troublee at etourdie",

F.

14th Sept.

4 P.M.

M. J. enters at 4. 15. Madame B. says she was asleep, but wakened by ringing of door-bell

iSth Sept.

3.30 P.M.

Found asleep at 4 P. M.; states she was put to sleep at 3.30

S.

19th Sept.

3 P.M.

Went to sleep at about 3. 15

S.

23rd Sept.

2 P.M.

She was out walking

F.

24th Sept.

3-iSP-M.

Found asleep at 4. Had been seen awake at 3. 15...

26th Sept.

3 P.M.

Walking in garden..

F.

lO

27th Sept.

8.30 P.M.

Commanded by M. Gibert to come to his house. Left the Pavilion, entranced, at 9.5 P.M. [in the account in the Revue de V Hypnotis7ne the latter hour is given at 9-i5\

S.

II

29th Sept.

3. 50 P.M.

Found asleep at 4.5 [given in Kevue as _S-5\

S.

30th Sept.

3.30 P.M.

F.

1st Oct.

2. 40 P. M.

She was out walking

F.

5th Oct.

4 P.M.

Fell asleep suddenly at 4.5, whilst talking with nurse in garden

S.

6th Oct.

3 P-M.

F. ■

i6

9th Oct.

3.15 P.M.

F.

loth Oct.

3.20 P.M.

Found asleep at 4. 5

i8

1 2th Oct.

3 P.M.

F.

13th Oct.

5 P.M.

Found asleep. Executed a mental command given at a distance— viz., to rise at M. J.'s entrance...

S.

14th Oct.

2.30 P.M.

Found asleep at 3.20

i6th Oct.

3 P.M.

Found asleep at 3. 30

S.

^ M. Richet also took part in these two experiments.

EXPERIMENTS AT A DISTANCE.

Date.

Hour when given.

Remarks.

24th Nov.

2.30 P.M.

F.

3rd Dec.

4.10 P.M.

F.

5th Dec.

4.10 P.M.

F.

6th Dec.

4.10 P.M.

Found awake, washing her hands

7th Dec.

2. 30 P. M.

Found asleep at 3.5

loth Dec.

4.20 P.M.

She was out walking

F.

nth Dec.

3.15 P.M.

13th Dec.

4.5 P.M.

Found asleep at 4.25. Had been seen awake a few minutes after 4 P.M.

S.

14th Dec.

1 1. 30 A.M.

F.

1 8th Dec.

F.

2 1 St Dec.

F.

22nd Dec.

F.

23rd Dec.

3 P-M.

Found asleep at 3.40

25th Dec.

3-15 P-M.

She was out walking. Bad headache came on at 3.20. Returned hurriedly, and at once fell asleep in the salon.

S.

Throughout the series, except in case 10, M. Janet was the operator. It will be seen that in the 35 trials there were nine cases in which Madame B. was found asleep within half-an-hour of the attempt being made to entrance her. In six other cases she was found asleep after a longer interval, but there is nothing to indicate that the sleep did not actually supervene at the right time. In one case she was found awake within fifteen minutes of the trial, but stated that she had been awakened by the ringing of the bell which announced M. Janet's arrival. In one other case she was found washing her hands to ward off the trance. Of the 17 failures Madame B. was out walking in four cases at the time of the trial, a circumstance which no doubt diminished the chances of success. In two cases headache or disturbance were produced; of the remaining 1 1 trials no details are given, and it is presumed that no unusual

1 16 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

effect was observed, and that there was no apparent cause for the failure. Of course, experiments carried on under these conditions, the trials being confined for the most part within a narrow range of hours, and the subject liable to spontaneous trance, offer some scope for chance coincidence. But as Madame B. actually fell asleep spontaneously on only four occasions during the period over which the trials extended, it will probably be considered that the number of coincidences, imperfect as they were, was considerably more than could plausibly be attributed to accident or self-sugcrestion.^

In January 1887 M. Richet made some experiments of the same kind on Madame B. Of 9 trials, however, two only could be described as completely successful, and three more as doubtful. A few further trials, in December 1887 and January 1888, were even less successful. M. Richet has attempted on several occasions to influence other subjects at a distance, but no series of successful results was attained; and isolated coincidences of the kind have, of course, little evidential value {loc. cit.^ pp. 47-51).^

No. 30.— Experiments by Dr. Dufay.

In a paper published in the Revue Philosophiqiie of September 1888, M. Dufay, a physician formerly in practice at Blois, and now a Senator of France, records several instances in which he has himself succeeded in producing sleep at a distance. In one case he hypnotised from his box in the theatre, as he believes without her knowledge, a young actress who had been a patient of his, and caused her, whilst in the state of lucid somnambulism, to play a new and

^ It is not stated whether the hour of the experiment was chosen by lot, but this precaution was taken in many of the earlier experiments.

"^ An account of these experiments was also contributed by M. Richet to the Rcvm de t Hypnotisme, Feb. 1SS8.

difficult part with more success than she would have been likely to achieve in the normal state. In this particular case, however, it seems possible that the subject may have received some intimation of Dr. Dufay's presence in the house, and that the hypnotic state may have been due to expectation. Another case was that of Madame C, who had been for some time treated hypnotically by Dr. Dufay for periodical attacks of sickness and headache. So sensitive did this patient become to his suggestions that she would fall into the hypnotic sleep as soon as the bell rang to announce his coming, and before he had actually entered the house. The circumstances under which Dr. Dufay first made a deliberate attempt to influence Madame C at a distance were as follows: — He was in attendance on a patient whom he was unable to leave, when he was unexpectedly summoned by Monsieur C. to hypnotise Madame C, who was in the height of an attack. He assured Monsieur C. that on his return home he would find Madame C. asleep and cured, as proved actually to be the case. However, here also, as Dr. Dufay points out, self-suggestion is a possible explanation. The following case seems less open to suspicion on this ground: —

" On another occasion," Dr. Dufay writes, " Madame C. was in perfect health, but her name happening to be mentioned in my hearing-, the idea struck me that I would mentally order her to sleep, without her wishing it this time, and also without her suspecting it. Then, an hour later, I went to her house and asked the servant who opened the door whether an instrument, which I had mislaid out of my case, had been found in Madame C.'s room.

" ' Is not that the doctor's voice that I hear?' asked Monsieur C. from the top of the staircase; ' beg him to come up. Just imagine,' he said to me, * I was going to send for you. Nearly an hour ago my wife lost consciousness, and her mother and I have not been able to bring her to her senses. Her mother, who wished to take her into the country, is distracted,..'

" I did not dare to confess myself guilty of this catastrophe, but was betrayed by Madame C, who gave me her hand, saying, ' You did well to put me to sleep, Doctor, because I was going to

Il8 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

allow myself to be taken away, and then I should not have been able to finish my embroidery.'

" ' You have another piece of embroidery in hand? ' " ' Yes; a mantle-border... for your birthday. You must not look as though you knew about it, when I am awake, because I want to give you a surprise.'

" I repeated the experiment many times with Madame C, and always with success, which was a great help to me when unable to go to her at once when sent for. I even completed the experiment by also waking her from a distance, solely by an act of volition, which formerly I should not have believed possible. The agreement in time was so perfect that no doubt could be entertained.

" To conclude, I was about to take a holiday of six weeks, and should thus be absent when one of the attacks was due. So it was settled between Monsieur C. and myself that, as soon as the headache began, he should let me know by telegraph; that I should then do from afar off what succeeded so well near at hand; that after five or six hours I should endeavour to awaken the patient; and that Monsieur C. should let me know by means of a second telegram whether the result had been satisfactory. He had no doubt about it; I was less certain. Madame C. did not know that I was going away.

" The sound of moanings one morning announced to Monsieur C. that the moment had come; without entering his wife's room he ran to the telegraph office, and I received his message at ten o'clock. He returned home again at that same hour, and found his wife asleep and not suffering any more. At four o'clock I willed that she should wake, and at eight o'clock in the evening I received a second telegram: 'Satisfactory result, woke at four o'clock. Thanks.'

" And I was then In the neighbourhood of Sully-sur-LoIre, 28 leagues — 112 kilometres — from Blois."

Similar experiments have been recorded by, amongst others. Dr. J. H6ricourt,^ a colleague of M. Richet in the editing of the Revue Scientifique, Dr. Dusart,^ and Dr. Dariex.^ In the last case there were only five trials, the experiments being then discontinued at the request of the patient. The first three trials were completely successful, the sleep supervening within,

1 Revue Philosophique, February and April 1886. A translation of these accounts is given in the Pfoc. S.P.R.y vol. v. pp. 222, 223. ' Annales des Sciences Psychiques^ vol. iii. pp. 257-267.

at most, a few minutes of the time chosen by the agent.

The following narrative resembles those cited above in its general features. But in view of the nature of the effect produced — a painful hysterical attack — it is perhaps hardly a matter for regret that the case is without any exact parallel.

No. 31.— By Dr. Tolosa-Latour.

In this account, taken from a letter written to M. Richet by Dr. Tolosa-Latour on the 5th March 1891 {Annates des Sciences Psychiqiies, Sept. -Oct. 1893), Dr. Latour explains that he had repeatedly hypnotised a lady who was seized in September 1886 with hysterical paralysis, and had ultimately succeeded in effecting by this means a complete cure. Prior to his treatment, in 1885, she had suffered for some time from daily hysterical attacks, and when she came under Dr. Latour she was still occasionally subject to them, and found relief in the hypnotic sleep. Both symptoms had at the time which he writes almost completely disappeared.

" I had made some very curious experiments, but I had never thought about either action at a distance or clairvoyance. It was while leaving Paris and reading your [M. Richet's] pamphlet in the carriage that the idea occurred to me of sending Mdlle. R. to sleep. It was Sunday, October the 26th, the very day of my departure. I remember the hour too; it was just before reaching Poitiers, where some relations of my grandmother were expecting me. I told my wife that I was going to try the experiment, and begged her to say nothing about it to any one. I began to fix my thoughts about six o'clock, and during the journey from Poitiers to Mignie (where we stayed several days) I again and again thought of this question, especially during the intervals of silence which always occur during a journey.

" I wished to cause a violent hysteric attack, as I knew that she had not been dangerously ill for a long time. So on Sunday, October the 26th, from six till nine o'clock in the evening, I fixed my thoughts intently on the experiment

1 20 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

"Then, on my return, I asked my brother if Mdlle. R. had called him in, as she always did when she was ill. Among the patients' names I did not find hers. It seemed almost certain that my experiment had failed. A week afterwards I called on her, and was agreeably surprised to learn that, on the contrary, it was a success, as you will judge by her letter. She does not fix the day, but her sister and the nurse have told me that it was the second Sunday after the festival of St. Theresa — that is to say, after Wednesday the 1 5th; the first Sunday being the 19th, the second is of course the 26th.

" This is the letter:—

^^ From Mdlle. R. to M. Tolosa-Latour.

^^ March lyd^ 1891.

"My excellent Friend and dear Doctor, — I wanted to write to ycu yesterday to give you the particulars of the attack I had about the middle of last October, but I was not able to do so till to-day.

" As I told you, it was about the middle of October; I do not remember the date, but I recollect very well that it was a festival day, and at half-past six in the evening.

" We had just been to see my sister and brother; we had had luncheon with them. I was perfectly well, without any excitement; it was five o'clock, and I reached home all right, but when I was sitting down, in the act of eating, I found myself unable to speak or open my eyes, and, at the same moment, I had a very severe, long, and violent attack, such as I do not remember to have had for a long time.

" I was so ill that I thought of sending for Raphael,^ and my sister proposed it, but I thought that I ought not to disturb him, for, knowing that you were away, nobody could stop the convulsions and the excitement.

" I suffered horribly, for it was an attack in which I experienced, so to say, all my previous sufferings combined. I was completely broken down, but I have had no other attacks since, not even a spasm."

No. 32.— By J. H. P.2

The next case records the execution by the subject of a simple command to approach the operator, as in some of M. Gibert's experiments already described, and the partial execution of an order of a more

^ Dr. Lntour's brother, house-surgeon at the hospital. ^ See No. 23, chap. iv.

EXPERIMENTS AT A DISTANCE, 121

complicated kind, given from a distance of more than twenty-five miles: —

It is possible to give M. a command in the waking state, but she must be quiet at the moment when she receives it.

We had never made experiments of this kind until R. one day proposed that we should try to make M. come to the room where we were. M. was in a neighbouring house, and could not know that we were actually in a kiosk at the end of the garden.

For three minutes I gave her the mental command to come. I began to think that I had failed, and continued energetically for three minutes more; she did not come, however.

We were just thinking that the experiment had failed when the door opened suddenly and M. appeared.

" Well, do you think I have nothing else to do I Why do you call me? I have had to leave everything."

" We wanted to say ' good morning ' to you."

" Very well! I am going away now."

She shook hands with us and went away quickly; whereupon it occurred to me to make her stop just at the gate.

(Mental command) — " I forbid you to go out. You cannot open the gate; come back." And back she came, furious, asking if we were laughing at her.

Now, to send this last command I had not moved at all from my place, and M. was completely invisible behind the garden wall; moreover, I was a long way from the window. I told her that this time she could open it, and let her go.

I will finish with another experiment of the same kind, which only partly succeeded, but which will serve to show the intensity of the mental transmission between M. and me, I went away, one morning, without thinking of M. I had to be away all day, 38 kilometres from her. At 2.30 it occurred to me to send her a mental command, and I repeated it for ten minutes,

" Go at once to the dining-room; you will take a book there that is on the mantelpiece; you will take it up to my study, and you will sit in my armchair before my writing-table." I reached home at night. The next day, as soon as I saw M,, and even before saying good morning to me, she cried: " I did a clever thing yesterday. I must be losing my wits, I suppose! Just imagine! I came down without knowing why, opened the dining-room door, then went up to your study, and sat in your armchair. I moved your papers about, then I went back to my work."

The command had then been understood; but she did not go into the dining-room, and she did not take the book from there.

J, H, P. {Annales des Set. Psych., May -June 1893,)

122 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Transference of Simple Sensatiofis.

We may now pass to experiments in the transference of simple impressions of the same kind as those dealt with in Chapters II. and III. The following is a record of a series of trials in the transference of auditory impressions: —

No. 33.— From MiSS X.

Miss X. is a lady resident in London, who is known personally to the present writer and other members of the S.P.R. She has experienced all her life frequent interchange of telepathic impressions with some of her friends. At the request of Mr. F. W. H. Myers, Miss X. and a friend D., also living in London, throughout the year 1888, with the exception of three months during which they were living in the same house, kept diaries in which any incident or feeling which might seem to be telepathically connected with the other was recorded. The ladies during a great part of the time saw each other constantly, and compared notes of their experience. In D.'s diary for the year there are thirty-five entries of the kind, of which twenty are believed to have been recorded before it was known whether or not there was any actual event to correspond with the impression. Of the twenty entries fourteen refer to hearing music played by Miss X., and two to reading books at, as D. believed, her telepathic instigation.

The entries in D.'s diary are given in italics. The degree of correspondence with the entries in Miss X.'s diary is indicated in the words included between brackets.'

{i) Jan. 6th. Tried several books...finally took to ''Villelter

^ Miss X.'s notes have been in some cases slightly abbreviated, in order to save space. Full details of the experiments will be found in Proc. S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 377-397.

(From Miss X.'s diary it appears that she willed D. to read The Professor^ also by Charlotte Bronte.) {2) Jan. 2'^rd. Sonnets^ E.B.B. 10.30 P.M. (In Miss X.'s diary, written at about 10 P.M., appears the itry, " Sonnets viii.-ix., E.B.B.")

(3) March 6fh. Hellers, 7.30. {i.e., D. had an impression of hearing Miss X. playing". Miss X. states that she was actually l)laying Hellers at the time, but there is no note in her diary of the fact.)

(4) March 7th. Beethoven waltzes^ 10. (Correct— recorded in X.'s diary after seeing D.'s entry.)

(5) March Zth. No practice. (/.<?., X., contrary to her custom, was not playing at this hour: correct.)

(6) March ()th. Music 7.30-8. (Correct.)

(7) March loth. "iMusic 9.30-10 A.M. (Correct. Miss X. had told D. that she would be out at that hour, and had subsequently changed her plans, so that the music was unexpected to D., hence the note of interrogation.)

(8) March 13//^. 7.40. Music. (Correct.)

(9) March i/^th. 9.30 A.M. [Music] Evening of same day. Nothing but organs and bands^ popular airs and Mikado. } Flash of Henselt 9 (p.m.)

(10) March i^th. 9-10. "i Faint Henselt.

(Miss X. writes: — " I remember that when D. showed me these entries I was specially interested. I was practising at the time some music of Henselt's she had never heard, and was playing this on all five occasions. D. notes it on the first three vaguely as * Music,' something which she did not recognise. On the 14th I played it over to her, and afterwards she recognised it imperfectly. I was practising it for her, knowing she would like it, so that she was much in my mind at the time.")

The following entries were made whilst D. and X. were in different and distant counties: —

(11) August i^th. Hellers, g.io-2S. (Correct.)

(12) August lyth. Slumber Song, y.sSS'^- (Correct. D. wrote of her two experiences, and X. read the letter aloud to her hostess, who remembered that X. had actually played the music named above at the time referred to.)

(13) September i^th. Halld, 9 A.M. (Incorrect. X. was not playing.)

(14) November iZth. Chopin Dead March, War March Athalie, 7.15-8 p.m.

(15) November 2Sth. Lieder, 7.30.

{16) November 26th. Lied, never gets finished. 5.15-20. (Miss X. writes: — " On each of the above three occasions D.

124 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

asked me next day what I had played and found she was right. My playing of the Lied on November 26th was interrupted by the arrival of visitors, and the unfinished air naturally haunted me. D. writes: — On the day in question H. and I were together. I said to her that I could hear you [Miss X.] playing — a Lied we both associated with you — but that you never got beyond a certain part, which seemed to be repeated. H. replied, ' It is strange you should say that. I can't hear her, but I have been seeing her at the piano for some minutes.' H. corroborates this.")

It will thus be seen that in these 16 cases there were only two instances (i and 13) in which D.'s impression failed to correspond with the facts. The remaining four entries (out of 20 recorded beforehand) relate to impressions which also appear to have corresponded with the event, but the degree of correspondence is more difficult to estimate.

In Miss X.'s own diary there are 55 entries during this period, of which 27 were made before the event was known. Of these 3 are failures, and in two other cases it is doubtful whether the impression was actually telepathic, or whether the coincidence should not be attributed to accident. In the other 22 cases of correspondence, presumably telepathic, Miss X. was sometimes the agent, sometimes the percipient. The impressions relate to events of various kinds, such as meeting particular persons, receiving letters, and playing music. Of the veridical impressions four were visual and one was a dream.^

No. 34. — From M. J. Ch. Roux.

The following record is taken from a paper by M. Jean Charles Roux, medical student, published in the Annates des Sciences Psychiques (vol. iii. pp. 202, 203). These experiments in thought-transference at a distance were preceded by a series of fairly successful trials with playing-cards at close quarters, and by some other experiments designed to test clairvoyance.

^ Miss X. kindly submitted her diaries for inspection to Mrs. Sidgwick, who has carefully examined them.

I

(i) Mar. 15,

1892

(2) „ 18,

3J

(3) » 27,

(4) » »

(5) » „

'V/

(6) „ „

J)

(7) „ „

J)

(8) Apr. 6,

(9) „

J>

Third Series: Experiments at a distance.

Lemaire is in his room, I in mme, with two rooms intervening. At an hour previously fixed on, I suggest a card to him.

Date. Card thought of. Card guessed.

4 hearts... red, hearts; low number, five 10 hearts... 3 diamonds 6 spades... 6 clubs Kg. diamonds... Knave diamonds ace diamonds... 5 clubs (Agent had failed to concentrate his attention.)...Queen spades... King spades 4 clubs... 6 clubs 3 clubs... 5 clubs 2 spades... 2 spades

Fourth Series.

The account of the following six trials at a distance in space and time, which are imperfectly recorded in the Annates, is taken from a letter received from M. Roux, dated the 19th December 1893: —

(10) Paris, 2nd April. — Lemaire having gone out I drew a card from the pack, the 9 Hearts, and tried to transfer it to him. Then I wrote a note to the following effect: " Guess the card that I am thinking of as I write these words," and left it on the table. A few minutes after Lemaire entered and guessed the 7 Hearts.

(11) 3rd April. — Lemaire was out. I drew a card from the pack, the ace Hearts, and tried to transfer it to him. As on the previous day, I left a note on the table and went out immediately. When I came back at midnight I found a line from Lemaire saying he had guessed the ace Hearts.

The four other experiments took place in a country town, at Chateauroux. We lived about 500 or 6co yards apart.

(12) 13th April. — In the morning I saw Lemaire and said to him, " At 2 o'clock you must guess a card that I shall suggest to you." I went home, and at a quarter to twelve I drew from the pack the 5 Hearts. I saw Lemaire again in the evening. He had guessed the 6 Hearts. He was walking in the street with a friend. At about two minutes to 2 P.M. he looked at his watch, remembered the experiment, and immediately the idea of Hearts came to him. A few minutes later, when alone, he tried to guess the exact card, and decided on the 6 Hearts.

126 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

(13) 13th April. — I said to Lemaire that on the 14th April, at 9 A.M., he was to guess a card. After going home on the 13th April, at 10 P.M. I drew a card from the pack — 4 Clubs. Next day, at 9 A.M., Lemaire guessed 2 Clubs.

(14) July 17th. — Lemaire was to guess a card at 9 o'clock. At 10 minutes to 9, from my house, I tried to transfer the 4 Spades. (I have forgotten to make a note of whether I merely thought of this card or whether I drew it from a pack.) At 9 o'clock Lemaire guessed 5 Spades.

(15) 30th July. — This experiment is more complicated but none the less interesting. On the 30th July, at 11 A.M., Lemaire was to guess a card which I had tried to suggest to him on the 26th July. This card was the Knave Diamonds. But he forgot to do it, and did not remember to guess the card till 7 P.M. on the 30th July. Now on this same day, the 30th July, from 6 to 6.30 P.M. I was myself engaged in guessing a card by clairvoyance, and after many attempts I decided on 7 or 8 ClubSj and Lemaire, guessing the card at 7 P.M., also decided upon 7 Clubs. So that I had suggested the card to him unconsciously.

Thus, omitting the last trial as of doubtful interpretation, we find that in 14 trials the card was guessed correctly twice, the number alone once, and the suit alone nine times, or three times the probable number.

Transference of Visual Impressions.

In the four cases which follow the impression was of a well-marked visual character; reaching, indeed, in the two last to the level of actual hallucination. It should be observed that in none of these four cases is the possibility of chance coincidence so entirely precluded as in many of the experiments at close quarters already cited. In the first of the cases recorded by Dr. Gibotteau (No. 40), and in some of Mr. Kirk's experiments (No. 37), the luminous patches seen by the percipients are not unlike rudimentary hallucinations of a sufficiently common type, and their resemblance in these instances to the objects actually looked at or thought of by the agents should not therefore be pressed very far. In the other cases, however, the percipient received a well-marked im-

I

pression of a definite object. But here there is a flaw of another kind. The coincidences may have been due, as indeed Miss Campbell (No. 35) is careful to suggest, to a lucky shot on the part of the percipient at the object the agent would be likely to choose. The very distinct nature of the impression produced in each case upon the percipient, as contrasted with the vague images called up, e.g^ in Miss Campbell's case, by more or less conscious conjecture, is, however, against this interpretation; and the fact that in the first narrative the experiments quoted were the culmination of a successful series of experiments at close quarters tells in favour of a telepathic explanation for these also.

No. 35. — By Miss Campbell and Miss Despard.

A series of experiments in thought-transference at close quarters had been carried on by the narrators at intervals from November 1891 to October 1892. In sending the account of these experiments at a distance, Miss Campbell explains that in the trial on October 25th, "there was first an auditory impression, as if some one had said the word ' gloves,' and then the gloves themselves were visualised."

(No. I.) '"'■June 22nd, 1892.

"Arranged that R. C. Despard should, when at the School of Medicine in Handel Street, W.C., between 11.50 and 11.55, fix her attention upon some object which C. M. Campbell, at yj Chesterton Road, W., is by thought-transference to discover."

I Percipient's Account.

" Owing to an unexpected delay, instead of being quietly at home at 11.50 A.M., I was waiting for my train at Baker Street, and as just at that time trains were moving away from both platforms, and there was the usual bustle going on, I thought it hopeless to try on my part; but just while I was thinking this I felt a sort of mental pull-up, which made me feel sure that Miss Despard was fixing her attention, and directly after I felt 'my — compasses — no, scalpel,' seemed to see a flash of light as if on bright steel, and I thought of two scalpels, first with their

128 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

points together, and then folding together into one; just then my train came up.

" I write this down before having seen Miss Despard, so am still in ignorance whether I am correct in my surmise, but as I know what Miss Despard would probably be doing at ten minutes to twelve, I feel that that knowledge may have suggested the thought to me — though this idea did not occur to me until just this minute, as I have written it down.

"C. M. Campbell.

" ^^ Chesterton Road, W."

Agent's Account.

"At ten minutes to twelve I concentrated my mind on an object that happened to be in front of me at the time — two scalpels, crossed with their points together — but in about five minutes, as it occurred to me that the knowledge that I was then at the School of Medicine might suggest a similar idea to Miss Campbell, I tried to bring up a country scene, of a brook running through a field, with a patch of yellow marsh marigolds in the foreground. This second idea made no impression on Miss Campbell — perhaps owing to the bustle around her at the time.

"R. C Despard."

(No. 2.) " October i^th, \%(p..

"At 3.30 P.M. R. C. Despard is to fix her attention on some object, and C. M. Campbell, being in a different part of London, is by thought-transference to find out what that object is."

Percipient's Account.

"At 3.30 I was at home at 'j'j Chesterton Road, North Kensington, alone in the room.

" First my attention seemed to flit from one object to another while nothing definite stood out, but soon I saw a pair of gloves, which became more distinct till they appeared as a pair of baggy tan-coloured kid gloves, certainly a size larger than worn by either R. C. D. or myself, and not quite like any of ours in colour. After this I saw a train going out of a station (I had just returned from seeing some one off at Victoria), almost immediately obliterated by a picture of a bridge over a small river, but I felt that I was consciously thinking and left off the experiment, being unable to clear my mind sufficiently of outside things."

Agent's Account.

"At 3.30 on October 25th I was at 30 Handel Street, Brunswick Square, W.C. C. M. C. and myself had arranged beforehand to make an experiment in thought-transference at that

I

hour, I to try to transfer some object to her mind, the nature of which was entirely unspecified. I picked up a pair of rather old tan-coloured gloves — purposely not taking a pair of my own — and tried for about five minutes to concentrate my attention on them and the wish to transfer an impression of them to C. M. C.'s mind. After this I fixed my attention on a window^ but felt my mind getting tired and therefore rather disturbed by the constant sound of omnibuses and waggons passing the open window.

"R. C. Despard. '' October it^th, 1892."

Miss Campbell writes later: —

" Tj Chesterton Road, North Kensington, W., November 2/[th^ 1892,

" With regard to the distant experiments, the notes sent to you were the only ones made. In the first experiment (scalpels) I wrote my account before Miss Despard's return, and when Miss Despard returned, before seeing what I had written [she] told me what she had thought of, and almost directly wrote it down.

" In the second experiment ■ (gloves), I was just going to write my account when Miss Despard returned home, and she asked me at once, 'Well, what did I think of?' and I told her a pair of tan gloves — then sat down and wrote my account, and, when she read it through, she said, 'Yes, you have exactly described Miss M.'s gloves, which I was holding while I fixed my attention on them,' and then she wrote her account."

The next account is taken from the Annates des Sciences Psychiques, vol. iii. pp. il 4- 11 6. M. Hennique, the agent, had acted as agent in four experiments at a distance with another percipient in the previous year {Annates, vol. i. pp. 262-265). I" the first the percipient saw vague lights, and finally a vase of flowers (very clear); the agent was looking at a lamp covered by a transparent shade, with a vase of flowers painted on it. In the second the percipient again saw vague lights, and then a luminous sphere; the agent was looking at the lamp globe placed on the table in full light. In the third, the percipient only saw brilliant lights, like stars or jewels; the agent was looking at the word Dieu, in big letters. In the fourth the percipient, to his astonishment, saw nothing;

1 30 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

the agent had willed him to see nothing. In each case the percipient's impression was recorded in writing before any communication was received from the agent. In the present case, it will be seen, the percipient received, not the impression which the agent wished to transfer, but the image of another object within the agent's field of vision, and which had entered his thoughts in connection with this veryexperiment.

No. 36. — From M. Leon Hennique and M. D.

" On Friday, the 8th of July last, my friend Hennique and I made a further experiment in telepathy. Hennique was away from Paris, and separated from me by a distance of 171 kilometres. At midnight I wrote to Hennique the following letter:—

'' ' Paris, July Zth, 1892, midnioht.

" ' My dear Hennique, — A friend came unexpectedly to dinner. At 10.30, looking through the open window at the blue sky under the full moon, I thought all of a sudden of the experiment planned by us, of the telepathic meeting that we had fixed for eleven o'clock this evening, and my brain received at the same time the impression of a puppet. It seemed to me that you were trying to show me a little cardboard man fitted with strings to make his arms and legs move.

" ' Reminded by this impression of my telepathic duty, I said good-night to my friend, and at eleven o'clock I waited, with my eyes closed, in the darkness of the dining-room. Nothing happened till twelve or fifteen minutes past eleven, when there appeared to me for an instant a small black silhouette, a Chinese shadow, as if you had cut out a little black figure and placed it in front of a light; for the round part, which seemed to be its head, was surrounded by a bluish halo. It was mostly this little black sphere — which I thought was a head — that I saw; the body I rather deduced than saw. ' D.'

" M. Hennique replied to me as follows: —

"'RiBEMONT (Aisne), Sunday, lolhjuly 1892.

"'My DEAR Friend,— It was a bottle full of water, surmounted by its cut-glass stopper, a large stopper, very bright, that served for our experiment. But the most curious part of the affair is that about four inches from the bottle there was actually hanging on the wall a nigger-doll, of the kind which you describe, belonging to my daughter. Was it reflected on the crystal? A mystery! For one second, but scarcely for a

I

second, I had intended to telepathise the jumping-jack to you before choosing the water-bottle. It is certainly very odd!

" ' Leon Hennique.'

" M. Hennique added to this letter a water-colour drawing of the above-mentioned 'nigger-doll.' The head is a black circle, in which only the lips are red; the arms and legs are black; the chest is white, crossed with red; arms, thighs, and legs are jointed, and can be worked by a string.

" I wrote to my friend to ask him if, at 10.30— that is to say, at the moment when I had conceived of a jumping-jack, he had not, on his part, thought at the same moment, of the same object. He answered me: —

"'RiBEMONT, \/:\^thJuly 1892.

" ' No; at 10.30 I was not thinking in the least of the jumpingjack; but, if I remember rightly, once or twice last year I wished to make use of it. It was only at the moment of choosing a simple object for the experiment that for an instant the idea of that little man came into my head; it was, you see, before beginning our experiment. This puppet was not four inches, but only two inches away from the water-bottle. There is something very curious in it, a physical or psychical effect, which I can't account for. The more so that this doll, in cardboard mounted on strings^ is always fixed to the wall, above the table from which I am sending you my good wishes. It must have been about 9 o'clock, while tidying the before-mentioned table, that I had the idea of transmitting to you the image of the jumping-jack.

'Leon Hennique.'"

No. 37. — By Mr. Joseph Kirk and Miss G.

Durinfj the year 1890 and onwards, Mr. Joseph Kirk, of 2 Ripon Villas, Plumstead, has carried on with a friend. Miss G., a series of experiments in thought-transference at a distance varying from 400 yards to about 200 miles. Some account of these experiments will be found in \hQ Journal of the S.P.R. for February and July 1 891 and January 1892. There are 22 ^ trials in the transference of diagrams, etc., there recorded. The object looked at by Mr. Kirk was generally a square or oblong card, or a white disc with or without a picture, diagram, or letter on it. The object was always illuminated by a strong light. ^ Excluding two in which the distance was only a few yards.

132 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Notes of the experiments were in every case made independently in writing by agent and percipient. In each case, with the exception of two occasions (on which Mr. Kirk's notes record his anticipation of failure), the percipient saw luminous appearances, often taking the form of round or square patches of light, in correspondence with the shape of the surface looked at by the agent. When Miss G. was at Pembroke or Ilfracombe (Mr. Kirk remaining at Plumstead) the correspondence did not go beyond this; but in two or three cases, when Miss G. was also at Plumstead, at a distance of only 400 yards, the percipient appears to have seen some details of the diagram on the card, and in one instance a fairly accurate reproduction of the diagram was given. Mr. Kirk on this occasion, 5th June 1891, was trying to impress three percipients — of whom Miss G. was one — and used three diagrams, viz., a Maltese cross, a white oval plate with the figure 3 on it, and a fullsized drawing of a man's hand in black on white. Miss G.'s report is as follows: —

"5/6/91. Sat last night from 11. 15 to 11.45. After a few minutes wavy clouds appeared [these are drawn as a group of roundish objects], followed by a pale bluish light very bright in centre. [This is drawn of an indefinite oval shape with roundish white spot in centre.] Near the end of experiment saw a larger luminous form, lasting only a moment but reappearing three or four times; it had lines or spikes about half an inch wide darting from it in varied positions."

Appended are reproductions of Miss G.'s original drawings of her impression, which bear, it will be seen, a marked likeness to a man's hand.

I

It should be added that Miss G. has not had any hallucinations of the kind except at times when Mr. Kirk was experimenting; and the amount of correspondence between her visions and the images which Mr. Kirk endeavoured to transfer would certainly seem beyond what chance could produce.

No. 38.— By Mr. Kirk and Miss G.

A further series of seven trials with the same percipient in April-June 1892 produced some interesting results. Full notes of the experiments were, as in the previous cases, made by Mr. Kirk and Miss G. independently. Mr. Kirk wrote his notes immediately after the conclusion of the experiments, which were made late in the evening, at a time previously agreed upon. Miss G, who was in the dark, and as a rule in bed, wrote her notes on the following morning before hearing from Mr. Kirk. No diagrams were used in this series, "the object being," in Mr. Kirk's words, " to test the possibility of influencing the imagination, and inducing the percipient to visualise hallucinatory figures of persons or animals thought of by the agent." Miss G. knew only that diagrams would not be used. The distance between agent and percipient was about 400 yards.

In the first three trials (April loth, 17th, and 24th, 1892) Mr. Kirk pictured to himself some ducks in a room, a witch, and other figures. On the 17th Miss G. saw at one time a small sunlike light, but with this exception she had no impression at all on any of the three occasions.

At the fourth trial (ist May) Miss G. records the same night that she saw "a broken circle U, then only patches of faint [light, not cloudlike, but flat, which alternated with vertical streaks of pale light." Afterwards, however, she had another vision, which she thus records on the following morning before meeting Mr. Kirk: —

134 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

" Soon after lying down last night, I had a rapid but most realistic glimpse of Mr. Kirk leaning against his dining-room mantelpiece; the room seemed brightly lighted, and he looked rather bothered, and just as I saw him he appeared to say, 'Doctor,^ I haven't got my pipe.' This seems very absurd, the more so as I do not know whether Mr. Kirk ever smokes a pipe. I see him occasionally with a cigar or cigarette, but cannot remember ever seeing him with a pipe; if I have, it must have been years ago. I do not know whether my eyes were open or closed, but the vividness of the impression quite startled me. This occurred just after the expiration of time appointed for experiment (10,45-11.15)."

Mr. Kirk reports in his account of the trial, written on the 1st May, that he tried to transfer an image of himself, sitting on a low chair, and also the part of the room facing him in the light of the lamp. But after seeing Miss G.'s report, he adds —

" The fact that I had another experiment to make [z'.e.y after the trial with Miss G.] enables me to trace minutely my actions before beginning it. Immediately the time had expired with Miss G., I got up and rapidly lit the gas and three pieces of candle, which I had ready in the cardboard box-cover, to illuminate the diagram. The room was therefore brilliantly lighted. I now rested with my right shoulder against the mantelpiece, with my face towards Miss G., but with my eyes bent on the carpet. In this position I thought intensely of myself and the whole room, and feeling really anxious to make a success, for at least six minutes. By this time my shoulder was aching very much with the constrained attitude and the pressure on the mantelpiece, and I broke off, using words (talking to myself) very similar to those given by Miss G. What I muttered, as nearly as I can remember, was, ^ Now, Doctor, I'll get my pipe.'... Until within the last few weeks I have not smoked a pipe for many years, and I do not think it probable that Miss G. has ever seen me use one; but it is an absolute certainty that she was not aware I had taken to smoke one recently."

In the fifth experiment of the series, made on the 9th May, the impression which appears to have been transferred was fortunately recorded beforehand. Mr. Kirk's report of that date, after describing an attempt to transfer an image of the room, and of an imaginary witch, runs as follows: —

* A familiar name given to Miss G. by Mr. and Mrs. Kirk.

"Continued to influence her some minutes after limit of time for experiment (11.30 p.m.). During this time I was much bothered by a subcurrent of thought, which I in vain strove to cast off. In the morning, just before time to get up, I had a vivid dream of my lost dog (* Laddie')-^ I dreamt he had returned, and that my wife, Miss G., and myself, made much of him. I thought of him all day, and tried to suppress the thought, fearing it would interfere with the success of experiment; feel worried and irritated at this, being really anxious to make an impression. Do not expect favourable result. Written same night " J. K."

Miss G.'s report is as follows: —

" Experiment last night (9-5-92) most unsatisfactory. Saw only a glow of light and once for a few seconds a figure [of a vase]. Some minutes after 11.30 (time for conclusion of experiment) it seemed as if the door of my room were open, and on the landing I saw a very large dog, moving as though it had just come upstairs. I cannot conceive what suggested this, nor can I understand why I thought of Laddie during time of experiment. I do not think we have mentioned him recently. My door was locked as usual. " L. G."

The sixth experiment (15th May 1892) was, in the words of Mr. Kirk's contemporary report, " devoted to making hypnotic passes, done with great energy and concentration of mind. The passes were made, not only over Miss G.'s [imagined] face and arms, but specially over her hands," with the view of inducing hypnotic sleep.

Miss G. reports that she " fell asleep before the time arranged had expired. But it was only to awake again very soon, through dreaming I was in a basement room... making frantic efforts to strike a match, prevented doing so by some one behind clasping my wrists. The sensation was so unpleasantly real that it awoke me." The time fixed for the experiment had then passed. This was the only occasion in this series on which Miss G. went to sleep during an experiment.

1 Mr. Kirk explains later that this dog had been lost six years before. They had all been much attached to him, and his loss was still an occasional topic of conversation and of dreams by Mr. Kirk.

136 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

In the seventh experiment (5th June 1892) Mr. Kirk again made passes to send Miss G. to s'leep. Miss G., on her side, saw only something " like the varied but regular movements one sees in turning a kaleidoscope, only without the colouring; it was simply luminous, and lasted more or less distinctly from 15 to 20 minutes." This impression may conceivably have been due, as Mr. Kirk suggests, to the regular movements of his hands in making the hypnotic passes.

In estimating the value of the coincidences between Mr. Kirk's thought and Miss G.'s impressions in the fourth and fifth trials, it should not be overlooked that the percipient's impressions were not vague images, such as are wont to crowd through our minds on the near approach of sleep, but clear-cut visions, approximating to visual hallucinations.

No. 39. — By Mr. Kirk and Miss Prickett.

Mr. Kirk conducted another short series of experiments in March 1892, with Miss L. M, Prickett, the distance between agent and percipient being about twelve miles. The results are given below. It is to be noted that the percipient's impressions in this series seem generally to have been deferred. But in weighing the amount of correspondence between the diagrams and the percipient's reproductions, it should be observed that of the four diagrams employed, three were reproduced with substantial accuracy, and in their chronological order; and that even on the second and third evenings the percipient's impressions — rectilinear figures inscribed in a circle — bore a general resemblance to the diagram actually selected. It is perhaps unfortunate that three out of the four diagrams included circles or figures akin to circles, but as the percipient had not seen any of the diagrams beforehand, this circumstance does not in any way invalidate the results, though it weakens the argument against chance-coincidence.

AT A DISTANCE.

one but

two

resac-

-25 =

)articularly all light, ntre, with a   one or of bright c I diagrams

ital E inscri •ther form v ry indistinc

s

r

fe « o* «Io

p

JO

■ft

rote,"Sa le, at fii tie a dark e on it; the shap Drew roi

re like a c;; also on nes, "all

■g

srcipient w clear circ after a litl or triangl flakes in cents." cordingly.

5 ®;=!

P

pQ

-s

ieu

o.

S

M

_^ ^ •

a o §

.S"

^^Pii^

a.£p.s

^r^ ^^k

'C 0,„

IK

«"Sl

i 1

o c

■ IB

* '^ S)

o £,

■ 1 ■

1 ' 1 '

•-■ bO

■ 1 ■

"o"g 03

m 1

a<!

V y

V

y

to

^L ^^

'^'o © 2

c«

-^-' >- S f3

^r

d <!> <-i o

W

S

^^^^^

(MS t^

o^S

cq a

Tuesday, 1st March, 189 10.30 to 11.0 P.:

White circle with border, about diam.— cross in tre blue.

coS

vjuauiuadxa

v_.^^. -y



Jo Cm

iH

(N

GO

138 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Drew first a, then b; "then several times I saw your eyes, and that was all." Later on percipient sent diagram c. "These spots represent what I called in my letter your eyes; not two, for there appeared more." [b, it will be observed, is a reproduction of the diagram looked at by the agent on the 1st and 8th March.]

CO

s

as

"Knowing you were not sitting, I tried to reproduce what you intended on Tuesday [15th inst.], with the result shown here." [The first figure, it will be seen, is a partial reproduction of 8.]

h

•- 3.

0. B

M



X Co

H (0 X 06

a

h

5S1

In blue on white, about 4^" in longer diam.

In blue on white about 4" high.

&. IS

pi

• 0 • •

ots painted in blue raised disc of whit ing on white cardboa about 14" X 12".

ft

c4 a

go

•querauadxa }o'-ON

y V.1

la

—;? 1

I

Mr. Kirk has conducted several other series of experiments in the transfer of diagrams and ideas and in the induction of hypnotic sleep at a distance, with Miss G., Miss Porter, of 16 Russell Square, Mr. F. W. Hayes, and others. In one case the percipient was at Cambridge, a distance of more than fifty miles from Plumstead. The results in nearly all these cases raise a certain presumption of thought-transference, though the presumption is in most cases — owing partly to the conditions of the experiments — not so strong as in the two series last quoted. It is to be remarked that the series of experiments between Plumstead and Cambridge were perhaps the least successful of any, a result which may perhaps be attributed partly to the distance, partly to the fact that the agent and percipient were not personally acquainted.

It should be recorded that Mr. Kirk is strongly of opinion, as the result of a careful analysis of the experiments conducted by him, that telepathy, in these cases at any rate, operates as a rule subconsciously, and that we ought to be prepared to find the most striking proofs of its action in such undesigned coincidences as are quoted in Nos. 4 and 5 of the second series with Miss G.

No. 40.— From Dr. Gibotteau.

Dr. Gibotteau, in the year 1888, made the acquaint ance, at a creche in connection with a Paris hospital, of a peasant woman named Bertha J. Bertha was a good hypnotic, and Dr. Gibotteau succeeded on many occasions in inducing sleep at a distance. But Bertha claimed also to have the power of influencing others telepathically — a power which in her case seems to have been hereditary, as her mother had a reputation for sorcery. Bertha professed to be able, by the exercise of her will, to cause persons to stumble, or to lose their way, or to prevent them from proceeding

140 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

in any given direction. She gave Dr. Gibotteau several illustrations of these powers, and he believes her pretensions to be well founded {Annales des Sciences Psychiques, vol. ii. pp. 253-267, and pp. 317-ZZ7)' The following instances of hallucinatory effects of a more ordinary kind are taken from the same paper. In the last case, it will be observed, the experience was collective. In none of the three cases were the percipients aware of Bertha's intention to experiment. It will be seen that in the second case she succeeded in producing the emotional effect desired, though the imaginary object by which she intended to inspire terror was hardly of a kind calculated to frighten a hospital surgeon. Dr. Gibotteau writes: —

" I am a good sleeper, and I do not remember ever waking of my own accord in the middle of my sleep. One night, about 2 or 3 o'clock, I was abruptly awoke. With my eyes still shut I thought, ' This is one of B.'s tricks. What is she going to make me see?' I then looked at the opposite wall; I saw a circular luminous spot, and in the centre a brilliant object, about the size of a melon, that I stared at for several seconds, being wide awake, before it disappeared. I could not distinguish any form clearly, nor any detail, but the object was round, and parts of it appeared to be less luminous. I imagined that she had wished to show me a skull, but I could not recognise it; the wall was lighted up in that place as if by a strong lamp; the room was not completely dark, because the window had outside blinds, and the curtains were drawn back; but this brilliant object did not seem to give out any hght beyond the area of which it occupied the centre on the wall. That was all. I waited a moment without seeing anything else, then I went fast asleep again. The next day I found Bertha, who had come to visit the hospital, and I questioned her cautiously. She had tried to show me first of all some dogs round my bed, then some men quarrelling, and finally a lantern. That was all. It will be seen that though the first two attempts failed, the third succeeded perfectly.

" After that, Bertha very often tried to hallucinate me; but I have never either seen or heard anything.

" I was more sensible to transmissions of a vague and general character. I have written elsewhere of illusions of the sense of space: I had a complete illusion of this kind, and P. a very

I

I^Bcurious commencement of an hallucination. 1 have also de-I^Hscribed the causeless terror that Bertha could inspire. 1^^ " Here is another account of a fright. One evening I was entering my house, at midnight. On the landing, as I was putting my hand on the door-handle, I said to myself, ' What a nuisance! here is another of B.'s tricks! She is going to make me see something terrifying in the passage; it is very disagreeable.' I was really a bit nervous. I opened the door suddenly, with my eyes shut, and seized a match; in a few minutes I was in bed, and, blowing out my candle, I put my head under the bed-clothes, like a child. The next day Bertha asked me if I had not seen a skeleton in the passage or in my room, and been very much frightened. It need hardly be said that a skeleton was the last thing in the world that could frighten me; and frankly, I think that I am not more of a coward than the common run of men."

On another occasion Dr. Gibotteau was in the company of a friend, M. P. They had just parted from Bertha.

"After having deposited B. near her home, we went back to the Latin Quarter with the carriage. On reaching the Rue de Vaugirard, before the gate of the Luxembourg, I felt myself seized by a terror intense as it was absurd. The street was admirably lighted, there was not a single passer-by, and the Quarter at that hour (just about midnight) is perfectly safe. Moreover, this fright did not seem to depend on any cause. It was fear just for fear. ' It is absurd,' said I, ' I am frightened, very much frightened; it is certainly a trick of B.'s.' My friend laughed at me, and almost immediately, ' Why, it is taking hold of me also. I am trembling with fear. It is very disagreeable.' The impression lasted until we were in front of the gate of the Luxembourg Palace; we got out of the carriage at the corner of the Rue Soufflot and the Boulevard Saint-Michel. As soon as we set foot on the ground: ' Look,' said P., ' don't you see something white floating in the air, there, just in front of our eyes; it has gone.' I saw nothing, but I felt very strongly the influence of B.

" The next day I met her at the hospital. ' Well! you saw nothing? ' I begged her to tell me what we ought to have seen. This was her answer: ' First, your driver lost his way — oh! not you, you felt nothing; he took you by all sorts of queer ways.' It is a fact that our carriage, from the Rue de Babylone, had gone by a very complicated way, and one which, at the time, did not seem to me the right one, but I should not like to say anything definite about it. 'After that you were frightened.' (Which of us?) ' You at first, M. P. afterwards.

142 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Oh, yes! afraid of nothing at all, without any reason, but you were very frightened. Then you saw some white pigeons flying round you, quite near.' I had never heard her speak of this hallucination. As to the fright, that subject was familiar to her, and she has frightened me several times, deliberately, as I have related."

L



Chapter VI. General Criticism of the Evidence for Spontaneous Thought-Transference

TANEOUS THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

If the reader has been able to accept my estimate of the evidence brought forward in the preceding chapters, the possibiHty of the transmission of ideas and sensations, otherwise than through the known channels of the senses, must be held to be proved by the experiments there recorded. That proof can be impugned only on the ground that the precautions taken against communication between agent and percipient by normal means were insufHcient. For if the precautions are admitted to have been sufficient, there can be no question that the results were not due to chance. It is not necessary here to enter into nice calculations of the probabilities. If, for instance, the odds in favour of some other cause than chance for the results recorded on pp. 66-69 were to be expressed in figures, the total sum would compete with or outstrip the stupendous ciphers employed by the astronomer to denote the distance of Sirius, or the weight of the Sun. But the kind of evidence now to be considered — the coincidence of some spontaneous affection of the percipient with some event in the lifehistory of the person presumed to be the agent, as when one sees the apparition of a friend at the time of his death — is of inferior cogency in two ways. The coincidences are neither so numerous nor so exact; and the risk of error in the record is far greater. On the one hand, therefore, there is a greater probability that the percipient's affection,

144 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

even if correctly described, was unconnected with the state of the person supposed to be the agent; on the other hand we have, in most cases, less assurance that the description given of his experience is in its essential features accurate. The part played by coincident hallucination in the question of telepathy may be illustrated from another branch of scientific inquiry. For some years the " Germ Theory" rested mainly on observations of the distribution of certain diseases, their periodic character and their mode of propagation and development; phenomena which, though sufficiently striking, are not in themselves susceptible of exact interpretation. It was not until the minute organisms, whose existence had been so long suspected, had been actually isolated in the laboratory, and had been proved capable of reproducing the disease, that the connection of certain maladies with the presence of certain microbes in the body became, from a plausible hypothesis, an accepted conclusion of Science. So here it is important to bear in mind that dreams, visions, and apparitions, however captivating to the imagination, do not form the main argument for believing in some new mode of communication between human minds. If all the cases of the kind hitherto recorded could be shown one by one to be explicable by more familiar causes, — though the result would indeed be to add a remarkable chapter to the history of human error; though it would be a singular paradox that so many intelligent witnesses should have been so mistaken, and with such undesigned unanimity; and that a whole class of alleged phenomena should have sprung up without any substantial basis, — the grounds for the belief in telepathy would not be seriously affected; we should merely have to modify our conceptions of its nature, and restrict its boundaries. But in fact there is no reason to anticipate so lame a conclusion. The incidents, of which examples will be adduced in the succeeding chapters, though their value will be

I

differently estimated by different minds, are yet in their aggregate not such as can plausibly be attributed to misrepresentation or chance coincidence. And, first, it is important to note that the cases must be considered in the aggregate. Separately, no doubt, each particular case is susceptible of more or less adequate explanation by some well-known cause; and in the last resort it would be unreasonable to stake the credit of any single witness, however eminent, against what Hume would call the uniform experience of mankind. But as a matter of fact the experience of mankind is not uniform in this matter; and when we are forced by the mere accumulation of testimony to go on adding one strained and improbable explanation to another, and to assume at last an epidemic of misrepresentation, perhaps even an organised conspiracy of falsehood, a point is at length reached in which the sum of improbabilities involved in the negation of thought-transference must outweigh the single improbability of a new mode of mental affection. If to any reader that point should seem not yet to have been reached — and the position could scarcely be held an unreasonable one — I would remind him that the cases quoted in this book form but a small part of the evidence so far accumulated; and I would ask that he should reserve his judgment until he has studied the whole of the evidence recorded in Phantasms of the Living, in the Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical Research, the scattered cases appearing from time to time in the pages of various English and Continental periodicals dealing with this subject, and the evergrowing mass of testimony printed in the Proceedings and Journal of the Society for Psychical Research in this country.1 He will then perhaps be prepared to

1 Of the Proceedings of the S.P.R., published by Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner, & Co., three or four parts are published yearly. The Journal, which appears monthly, contains a record of recent cases of interest, unaccompanied, for the most part, by any critical com-

146 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

endorse the verdict of a shrewd and genial critic on the evidence presented in Phantasms of the Living, viz., that it " can only be rejected as a whole by one who is prepared to repeat at his leisure what David is reported to have said in his haste." ^

It is of course not possible with our present knowledge to estimate with any precision the probabilities for the coincidence by chance of such a vision as that recorded by Dr. Dupre (No. 47), or such a dream as Mr. Hamilton's (No. 58), with the event represented. Neither the nature of the percipient's impression in these and similar cases, nor the event to which the impression corresponds, are sufficiently well defined to admit of any numerical argument being based upon them. We can only recognise that whilst dreams and mind's-eye pictures are not very uncommon experiences, dreams and visions which faithfully reflect external events of an unlikely kind occur, if rarely, with sufficient frequency to give us pause. The common sense which in such cases leads us to infer a connection between the event and the corresponding mental experience is our only guide. But one large class of our spontaneous evidences is susceptible of more exact treatment. Sensory hallucinations are affections at once well marked and unusual. If we can ascertain their relative frequency it is possible to calculate with more or less exactness the probabilities of the coincidence by chance with some definite event. Such a calculation has been attempted in Chapter IX. with regard to hallucina-

mentary, and is privately printed for circulation amongst members and associates of the Society. Any reader, however, desirous of studying the subject may procure any number of the Journal referred to in this book on application at the Rooms of the S.P.R., 19 Buckingham St., Adelphi, W.C. Of the foreign periodicals referred to in the text, perhaps the most important is the Annales des Sciences Psychiques, edited by Dr. Dariex, and published by Germer Bailliere et Cie., Paris. Cases of interest are also to be found in Sphinx, a German periodical, to be obtained through Kegan Paul & Co.; in the Revue Spirite (Paris: 24 Rue des Petits-Champs); and elsewhere.

^ Professor C. Lloyd Morgan in Mind^ 1887, p. 282.

I

tions of a certain well-defined type coinciding with the death of the person represented. The conclusion there reached is that such coincidences are far too numerous to be ascribed to chance. This part of the evidence cannot therefore be summarily dismissed, as suggested by more than one recent critic, on the plea that hallucinations which coincide with a death may be set off against hallucinations which occur without any coincidence, and both alike be regarded as purely subjective and without significance. Our own estimate of the probabilities is, of course, provisional, and may ultimately prove to be wide of the mark. But, meanwhile, it is at least proof against assault by conjectural statistics or the obiter dicta of amateur psychologists.

But in fact the criticism commonly made is not that, happening as described, visions and hallucinations happened by chance; but that they did not happen as described. This objection deserves careful consideration. It must, I think, be admitted that a proportion, perhaps a large proportion, even of the cases obtained at first-hand are so far inaccurate as to have comparatively small value for scientific purposes; and of the residue, in which the central fact of an unusual subjective experience on the part of the percipient and its coincidence with some external event is fairly well established, it is possible that the details are frequently — and where the record is not made until some years after the event, generally — untrustworthy. In order to estimate the nature and probable extent of these defects, it is proposed briefly to pass in review the various kinds of error to which testimony is liable, and to note their bearings on the question at issue.

Errors of Observation.

Errors of observation are here of very little importance. The thing to be observed is, of course, the

148 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

percipient's own sensations. In subsequent conversation he may exaggerate the exceptional nature of the impression; but he can hardly make a mistake at the time in observing what is purely subjective. If a man calls green what we call red, we may conclude that he is colour-blind; and if he asserts that he sees a human figure where we see none, that he is hallucinated; but in neither case have we warrant for saying that he is making an erroneous statement about his own sensations.

Errors of Inference.

But his interpretation of what he sees is a different matter. Not indeed that the mistake commonly made of taking a hallucination at the time for a figure of flesh and blood, and subsequently for a hypothetical entity of another kind, directly affects the percipient's testimony. So long as the witness accurately describes what he saw, it matters little whether he believes in telepathic hallucinations, or in black magic, ghosts, or the Himalayan Brothers. But there are one or two errors of inference of sufficient importance to deserve notice,

A real figure seen under exceptional circumstances may at the time or in the light of subsequent events be regarded as a hallucination. Such a mistake is, as a rule, possible only out of doors; and the commonest form of it is when a figure is seen by the percipient resembling some friend believed to be at a distance, or in circumstances which make it difBcult to suppose that the figure was of flesh and blood. A curious instance came under my notice recently. It was reported to me that a lady had seen in a certain provincial town the ghost of a friend at about the time of her death. The figure, accompanied by another figure, was seen in broad daylight at a distance of a few feet only; it was clearly recognised, and the proof of its non-reality lay in the complete absence of

recognition in return. It was subsequently ascertained that the friend in question had actually been present in the flesh, with a companion, at the spot where the figures were seen, but that for sufficient reasons she desired to avoid recognition. Her death within a few days of the encounter was merely an odd coincidence. Another kind of erroneous inference is worth noting. Cases are not infrequently quoted, as presumably telepathic, of a dream or vision embodying information demonstrably not within the conscious knowledge of the percipient. The inference that he cannot have obtained the information by normal means is clearly unsound, unless it can be shown that it was impossible for the information to have been received unconsciously. For it is well established that intelligence, even of events closely affecting the percipient, may enter through the external organs of sense and lie latent for days before emerging into consciousness. It is obvious that, for instance, many of the cases quoted in which an invalid became aware of news {e.g.^ of the death of a relative) which had been studiously withheld from him by those around may be thus explained. Whispers heard in sleep, or hints unconsciously received, may have betrayed the secret.^

Errors of Narration.

Of much greater importance than errors of observation or inference are those due to defects either in narration or memory. Deliberate deception amongst educated persons is no doubt comparatively rare, though it would perhaps be unwise to hold out any

1 See the case recorded by Miss X. [Proc. S.P.R,, vol. v. pp. 507, 508). In this instance Miss X. saw in the crystal a notice of a friend's death in the form of an extract from the obituary column of the Times, in which journal she had almost certainly seen the news, without perceiving it, the day before. There is a dream recorded in Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. pp. 687, 688, which may probably be explained as the emergence in dream of intelligence unconsciously received a few hours before.

I 50 APPARITIONS AND TPIOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

pecuniary inducement for the production of evidence. But there are those, like Colonel Capadose in Mr. Henry James' story The Liar, who tell ghost stories for art's sake, and on a slender basis of fact build up a large superstructure of fiction. And there are many more who, with a natural and almost pardonable desire to appear as the hero, or at least the raconteur^ of a good story, or from the mere love of the marvellous, allow themselves to exaggerate the coincidences, adjust the dates, elaborate the details, or otherwise improve the too bare facts of an actual experience. This kind of embellishment, however, is probably more frequent in second-hand accounts, where the narrator speaks with less sense of responsibility, and, it may be added, of reality.

Again, a common form of inaccuracy is to quote as the experience of a friend one of those weird stories which are passed on from mouth to mouth in ordinary society — the inconvertible currency of psychical research. We all know these old friends — at a distance, for no one has ever succeeded in making their nearer

acquaintance. There is the ghost at No. 50 B

Square; the driver of the dream-hearse, recognised a year later in a lift, which fell straightway, with all its passengers, to the bottom of the hotel; the Form which accompanies the priest, or Quaker, or godly merchant to save him from robbery on his lonely nocturnal journeyings; the young lady who took part in some tableaux vivants whilst her body was lying cold in death — and all the rest of the phantom throng. Only a few months ago I heard one of them — it was the ghost of the lift — from the son of a doctor, who assured me that the incident occurred to one of his father's patients, and gave me the name of the foreign hotel which had been the scene of the disaster.^

^ I have before me as I write one case of the kind which will serve as a sample. A told us the story, and induced B to write to us about it. B informed us that he heard it from his brother C, a F. R. S,, who had Received it from D, to whom it was told by E, who had it from the lips

I

