added the horizontal diameter. The percipient was drawing at the same time at table b^ sitting on chair 5, with her back to the closed door of communication. Question from the next room, ' Are you ready 1 ' Answer, * Stop,' as I am about to open the door. Then, ' Now.' I open the door and enter the room. The two drawings agree except that the circle and the horizontal diameter are wanting. Even the perpendicular of the triangle, which has become obtuse angled, is prolonged beyond the base, just as in the original. This prolongation and addition of the perpendicular cannot be explained by any tendency of ideas to recur (diagram-habit). Only the fact that a triangle was drawn might, taken alone, be explained in some such way."

Figures of the original diagrams in this case are given in the Proceedings of the S.P.R.

Some experiments with diagrams, conducted in July 1890 by Drs. Grimaldi and Fronda, have been published by Lombroso.^ The subject was a young man of twenty, subject to hysterical attacks and spontaneous somnambulism. The first experiments were made in the hypnotic state, with numbers, and met with only moderate success. Later, however, the trials were made in the normal state. At the first sitting diagrams were tried. The subject had his eyes firmly bandaged and his ears plugged with cotton wool. The diagrams were drawn at a certain distance {ad una certa distanzd) from the subject, and behind him. Under these conditions the first five experiments were completely successful; the subject reproduced in turn a rhomb, a circle, a triangle, an irregular pentagon, shaped something like the profile of a barn, and a cone. The next experiment failed, only a formless scribble being obtained. The subject was much exhausted, and fell into a semicataleptic state as soon as the bandage was removed.

Some success was obtained in later sittings, in the guessing of names and in the execution of mental commands. But the experiments had soon to be abandoned, on account of the health of the percipient.

Other experiments with diagrams, in addition to

^ Trasmissione del Fensiero, etc., Naples, 1 89 1.

I

those above referred to, will be found in the Proceedings of the S.P.R., vol. i. pp. 161-215, by Mr. Gurney, the writer, and others; vol. ii. pp. 207-216, by Mr. W. J. Smith. The paper on Thought-transference, etc., by Professor C. Richet, Proceedings, vol. v. pp. 18-168, should also be consulted in this connection.



Chapter III. Experimental Transference of Simple Sensations with Hypnotised Percipients

TIONS WITH HYPNOTISED PERCIPIENTS.

As already stated, the hypnotic state offers peculiar facilities for observing the transmission of thought and sensation. It is possible that the superior susceptibility of the hypnotised percipient is in some measure due simply to the quiescence and freedom from spontaneous mental activity very generally induced by the state of sleep-waking. There are indications, moreover, that the hypnotic state itself may present in many cases a specialised manifestation of that rapport which would appear to exist generally between Agent and Percipient in thought-transference. But the close association of the telepathic activities with the consciousness which emerges in hypnotism and allied states suggests an explanation of a more general kind, and may possibly throw light on the evolution of the faculty itself.^ However this may be, there can be no question that the most remarkable results in experimental telepathy so far recorded are those given in this and the following chapters with hypnotised percipients.

Transference of Tastes.

The fact that notwithstanding this recognised facility comparatively few observers have experimented with hypnotised subjects, except in one or two direc-

^ See the discussion on this question in Chapter XVI-

I

tions, calls for some explanation. There are, indeed, innumerable records of the transmission of sensations of taste and pain in the hypnotic state. The uncertainty attending any experiment in the first direction with subjects in whom special exaltation of any particular sense is not merely possible, but even under the conditions of the experiments probable, has been already pointed out. Such trials, conducted with a variety of substances nearly all of which are in some degree odorous, must necessarily lie under suspicion. To the references quoted in the preceding chapter (p. 2 1 ) and to the experiments of this nature recorded in the Proceedings of the S.F.R} it will suffice here to add one further instance, in which the hypothesis of hyperaesthesia seems hardly an adequate explanation of the result. In a communication to the Revue Philosophiqiie in February 1889, Dr. Dufay quotes the following passage from a letter received by him from Dr. Azam, the veteran historian of F61ida X.: —

No. 10. — By Dr. Azam.

" I myself, and I believe many other medical men, have observed cases of this or of a similar nature. I will quote two, in which I think I took all necessary precautions before being convinced of their truth.

"ist. About 1853 or 1854, I had under my care a young woman with confirmed hysteria: nothing was easier than to put her to sleep by various means. I consider myself entitled to state that, while holding her hand, my unspoken thoughts were transferred to her, but upon this I do not insist, error and fraud being possible.

" But the transmission of a definite sensation seemed to me to be absolutely certain. This is how I proceeded: Having put the patient to sleep, and seated myself by her side, I leaned towards her and dropped my handkerchief behind her chair; then, while stooping to lift it up, I quickly put into my mouth a pinch of common salt, which, unknown to her, I had beforehand put into the right-hand pocket of my waistcoat. The salt being absolutely without smell, it was impossible that the patient should have known that I had some in my mouth; but as soon

^ Vol. i. pp. 226, 241; vol. ii. pp. 17-19.

6o APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

as I raised myself again I saw her face express disgust, and she moved her lips about. ' That is very nasty,' she said; ' why did you put salt into my mouth? '

" I have repeated this experiment several times with other inodorous substances, and it has always succeeded. I report this fact alone because it seems to me to be certain."

Transference of Pain.

Experiments with sensations of pain, as has been pointed out, stand on a different footing. There is no special source of error to be guarded against. The following trials, conducted by Mr. Edmund Gurney, with the assistance of the present writer and others, on two evenings in the early part of 1883, will perhaps suffice to indicate the possibility of such transmission. The percipient was a youth named Wells, at the time of the experiments a baker's apprentice. He was hypnotised by Mr. G. A. Smith. During the trials Wells was blindfolded, and Mr. Smith stood behind his chair. On the first evening Mr. Smith held one of the percipient's hands; and throughout the series it was necessary for Mr. Smith to hold communication with Wells; the only words used, however, being the simple uniform question, "Do you feel anything?"i

No. II. — By Edmund Gurney.

First Series, fanuary ^th, 1 883.

1. The upper part of Mr. Smith's right arm was pinched con-

tinuously. Wells, after an interval of about two minutes, began to rub the corresponding part on his own body.

2. Back of the neck pinched. Same result.

3. Calf of left leg slapped. Same result.

^ It is a frequent experience that hypnotised subjects are incapable of responding to any voice other than that of the person who has hypnotised them. The difficuUy can, indeed, generally be removed by asking the hypnotiser to place some other person in rapport with the subject — i.e., to give the subject the suggestion that he should also be able to hear the person indicated. At this e.irly stage of our experiments it would appear, however, that this device had for some reason not been adopted.

I

Lobe of left ear pinched. Same result.

Outside of left wrist pinched. Same result.

Upper part of back slapped. Same result.

Hair pulled. Wells localised the pain on his left arm.

8. Right shoulder slapped. The corresponding part was cor-

rectly indicated.

9. Outside of left wrist pricked. Same result.

10. Back of neck pricked. Same result.

11. Left toe trodden on. No indication given.

12. Left ear pricked. The corresponding part was correctly

indicated.

13. Back of left shoulder slapped. Same result.

14. Calf of right leg pinched. Wells touched his arm.

15. Inside of left wrist pricked. The corresponding part was

correctly indicated.

16. Neck below right ear pricked. Same result.

In the next series of these experiments Wells was blindfolded, as before; but in this case a screen was interposed between Mr. Smith and Wells; and there was no contact between them. During two or three of the trials Mr. Smith was in an adjoining room, separated from Wells by thick curtains.

Second Series. April loth^ xZZz-

17. Upper part of Mr. Smith's left ear pinched. After a lapse

of about two minutes, Wells cried out, " Who's pinching me? " and began to rub the corresponding part.

18. Upper part of Mr. Smith's left arm pinched. Wells indi-

cated the corresponding part almost at once.

19. Mr. Smith's right ear pinched. Wells struck his own right

ear, after the lapse of about a minute, as if catching a troublesome fly, crying out, " Settled him that time."

20. Mr. Smith's chin was pinched. Wells indicated the right

part almost immediately.

21. The hair at the back of Mr. Smith's head was pulled. No

indication.

22. Back of Mr. Smith's neck pinched. Wells pointed, after a

short interval, to the corresponding part.

23. Mr. Smith's left ear pinched. Same result.

After this, Mr. Smith being now in an adjoining room. Wells began, as he 'said, "to go to sleep;" and said that he "didn't want to be bothered." He was partially waked up, and the experiments were resumed.

[Four experiments with tastes are here omitted.]

28. Mr. Smith's right calf pinched. Wells was very sulky, and for a long time refused to speak. At last he violently drew up his right leg, and began rubbing the calf.

62 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

After this Wells became still more sulky, and refused in the next experiment to give any indication whatever. With considerable acuteness he explained the reasons for his contumacy. " I ain't going to tell you, for if I don't tell you, you won't go on pinching me. You only do it to make me tell." Then he added, in reply to a remonstrance from Mr. Smith, " What do you want me to tell for? they ain't hurting you^ and / can stand their pinching." All this time Mr. Smith's left calf was being very severely pinched.

To the onlooker the situation was rendered additionally piquant by the fact that the boy, at the very time when he was apparently acutely sensitive to pain inflicted upon Mr. Smith, showed no sign of susceptibility when any part of his own person was pretty severely maltreated. The only point in the trials which seems to call for special notice is the failure on two occasions to indicate the seat of pain when the agent's hair was pulled (7 and 21). Numerous trials with the same and other percipients have shown that this particular experiment rarely succeeds, possibly because the pain so caused is with many people not of an acute kind.^

Transference of Visual Images.

But when we leave these experiments in the transfer of the less specialised forms of sensation we find that but few observers have paid attention to the phenomena of telepathy in the hypnotic state. Probably this is in some measure due to one or two initial difficulties in conducting experiments on such subjects. Opening the eyes to permit the subject to reproduce a diagram will in many cases have the effect of wakening him. Again, with some persons it is a matter of difficulty to maintain the exact stage of the hypnotic trance when they are quiescent enough for the alien impression to meet with little risk of disturbance from the subject's own mental activities, and yet

^ Cf. No. 19 in the series of similar trials conducted with Miss Relph, p. 24.

I

I

sufficiently alert to prevent them from relapsing, as was frequently the case with Wells, the percipient just referred to, into a torpid sleep from which no further response could be elicited. But, after all, these difficulties when they occur can readily be overcome by the exercise of a little patience. If the study of thought-transference in the hypnotic state has been comparatively neglected, it is mainly because, as already suggested, with most persons the more salient phenomena of the trance — hallucination, anaesthesia, rigidity, etc. — have distracted attention from what may ultimately prove to be a more fruitful line of inquiry. For the following record we are indebted to Dr. Li^beault, of Nancy, who sent us the account in 1886.

No. 12. — By Dr. Liebeault.

[The first series of experiments were made on the afternoon of the loth December 1885, in Dr. Lidbeault's house at Nancy. There were present, in addition, Madame S,, Dr. Brullard, and Professor Li^geois, who acted as agent, and Mademoiselle M., the subject. The subject was hypnotised by Professor Li^geois, and experiments were made with diagrams, and in two cases the design — a water-bottle {carafe) and a table with a drawer and drawer-knob — was reproduced with exactness. Precautions had, of course, been taken to conceal the original design from the percipient. The account of the seventh and last experiment is quoted in full.]

"7. M. Lidgeois wrote the word manage^ Mdlle. M. then wrote 'Monsieur.' Then she said ' Decanter,— no — picture — no.' [What is the letter?] ' It is an /—no, it is an w.' Then after thinking for some minutes, ' There is an i in the word, an a after the rn — a g — another a — an e — there are six letters — no — seven.' When she had found all the letters and their places, ma iage, she could not find the letter r. After a few minutes it was suggested to her that she should try combinations with the different consonants, and finally she wrote jnariage."

[Further experiments were made by Dr. Lidl^eault, in conjunction with M. Stanislas de Guaita, on the 9th January 1886. The subject in this case was Mademoiselle Louise L., who was hypnotised by Dr. Liebeault. The first two experiments, which are not quoted here, suggest lip-reading or unconscious audition as a possible explanation; but the third experiment of this series and the two subsequent trials with Mdlle. Camille

64 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Simon present interesting illustrations of a telepathic hallucination superimposed upon a basis of reality.]

" 3. Dr. Liebeault, in order that no hint should be given even in a whisper, wrote on a piece of paper, 'Mademoiselle, on waking, will see her black hat transformed into a red one.' The paper was first passed round to all the witnesses, then MM. Liebeault and De Guaita placed their hands silently on the subject's forehead, mentally formulating the sentence agreed upon. After being told she would see something unusual in the room, the young woman was awakened. Without a moment's hesitation she fixed her eyes upon the hat, and with a burst of laughter exclaimed that it was not her hat, she would have none of it. It was the same shape certainly, but this farce had lasted long enough — we must really give her back her own. [' Come now, what difference do you see?'] 'You know quite well. You have eyes like me.' [' Well what? '] We had to press her for some time before she would say what change had come over her hat; surely we were making fun of her. At last she said, ' You can see for yourselves that it is red.' As she refused to take it we were forced to put an end to her hallucination by telling her that her hat would presently resume its usual colour. The doctor breathed on it, and when it became, in her eyes, her own again, she consented to take it back. Directly afterwards she remembered nothing of her hallucination....

"Nancy, 9th January 1886.

" Signed, A. A. LlEBEAULT.

Stanislas de Guaita." ^

" We had one very successful experiment with a young girl of about fifteen, Mdlle. Camille Simon, in the presence of M. Brullard and several other persons. I gave her a mental suggestion that on waking she should see her hat, which was brown, changed to yellow, I then put her en rapport with all the others, and I passed round a slip of paper indicating my suggestion, and asking them to think of the same thing. But, by a lapse of memory not unusual to me, I did not think after all of the colour which I had written down; I had a distinct impression that she would see her hat red. On awaking her I told her she would see something representing our common thought. When she was wakened she wondered at the colour of her hat. ' It was brown,' she said. After having thought for a long time, she assured us that really it did not look at all the same, that she could not quite define the colour, but that it seemed to her a sort of yellow-red. Then I remembered my

^ Quoted in Le Sommeil ProvoquS^ etc,, by Dr. Liebeault, Paris, 1889, pp. 29s, 296.

aberration. In the present case the others thought of yellow, I of red: thus the object appeared yellow and red to the awakened somnambule; which proves that the mental suggestion may be the echo of the thought of many minds."

[The following experiment, made with the same " subject," and sent to us by Dr. Liebeault on June 3, 1886, is an interesting example of temporary latency of the telepathic impression: — ]

" In another experiment with the same young girl it was suggested to her, mentally, by several persons that on awaking she would see a black cock walking about the room. For a considerable time after waking, nearly half-an-hour, she said nothing, although I told her she would see something. It was about half-an-hour afterwards that, having gone into the garden and looked by chance into my little courtyard, she came running back to us to say, 'Ah, I know what I was to see: it was a black cock. This came into my head when I was looking at your cock.' My cock is greenish-black on the wings, tail and breast; everywhere else he is yellowish-white. Here we have an idea caused by the sight of a real object associated with a fictitious idea mentally transmitted by the persons present."

Between the beginning of July and the end of October 1889 a series of trials in the transference of numbers was conducted by Mrs. H. Sidgwick, with the assistance of Professor Sidgwick and Mr, G. A. Smith. The conditions were as follows: — Some small wooden counters, belonging to a game called Loto, and having the numbers from 10 to 90 stamped on them in raised figures, were placed in a bag. From this bag, which it will be seen contained 81 numbers in all, Mr. G. A. Smith drew a counter, placing it in a little wooden box, the edges of which effectually concealed it from the view of the percipient. The percipient, who had been previously placed in the hypnotic state by Mr. Smith, sat with his eyes closed and guessed the number drawn. The remarks, if any, made during the experiments, and the results, were recorded by Mrs. Sidgwick. After the first few days it was arranged, in order to avoid all possibility of bias in recording the numbers, that Professor Sidgwick should draw the counter from the bag and hand it to Mr. Smith, and that Mrs. Sidgwick should

66 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

be herself ignorant of the number drawn. Throughout the experiments, although eight or more other persons tried to act as agent, Mr. Smith alone was successful. Mr. Smith himself failed to produce any result when the percipients were not hypnotised. The following detailed account of part of the experiments on one day, July 6th, 1889, will give a fair idea of the whole; but it should be added that in later experiments Mr. Smith kept complete silence, and that on several occasions a newspaper was placed over P.'s head. These precautions do not appear to have affected the success of the experiment.

The percipient was Mr. P., a clerk in a wholesale business, aged about nineteen, who had been frequently hypnotised by Mr. Smith, and now passes into the hypnotic state very quickly, his eyes turning upwards as he goes off, before the eyelids close. He is a lively young man, with a good deal of humour, and preserves the same character in the sleep-waking state.

No. 13. — By Professor and Mrs. Sidgwick.

DRAWN.

NUMBER GUESSED, AND REMARKS.

87... S.: "Now, P., you're going to see numbers. I shall look at them, and you will see them." P. (almost immediately): "87. You asked me if I saw a number. I see an 8 and a 7." (Number put away.) P.: "I see nothing now."

19... P.: "18. What are those numbers on? I see only the

letters like brass numbers on a door; nothing behind them."

24... P. (after a pause): " I keep on looking.... I see it! an 8 and a 4 — 84."

35... P.: "A3 and a 5—35." S.: "How did that look?" P.: "I saw a 3 and a 5, then 35."

28... P.: "88. One behind the other, then one popped forward, and I could see two eights." (Illustrated it with his fingers.)

20... P.: " I can't see anything yet." S.: " You will directly. "

P.: "23." S.: "Saw that clearly?" P.: "Not so plain as the other." S.: " Wjiich did you see best? " P.: "The 2."

TRANSFERENCE IN HYPNOTIC STATE.

I

DRAWN.

. P.

. P.

. P.

. P.

S.:

P.:

NUMBER GUESSED, AND REMARKS.

' I can see 7, and I think a 3 in front of it. I can sec the 7." S.: " Make sure of the first figure." P.: "The 7's gone now."

' Here's another one, P." (This remark, though not always recorded, almost always began each experiment, until July 27th, when, to avoid the possibility of unconscious indications, Mr. Smith adopted the plan of not speaking at all.) P.: ** Another two, you mean. You say another one, but there are always two." S.: "Yes, two." P.: " Here it is. You said there were two! There's only one, an 8." Some remarks here not recorded. We think that Mr. Smith said there were two, and told him to look again. P. said he saw a 4. Mrs. Sidgwick: "Which came first?" P.: "The 8 first, then the 4 to the left, so that it would have been 48. I should like to know how you do that trick."

' A 2 and an 0; went away very quickly that time."

•71."

'3.... 36."

' I might turn round. Should I see them just the same over there? " (Changed his position so as to sit sideways in the chair, and looking away from Mr. Smith.) S.: " Well, you might try." P.: "I don't think I see so well this way." (He did not move, however.) " I see a 7 and a 5 — 75. Why don't you let them both come at once? I believe I should see them better if you let me open my eyes." (No notice was taken of this.)

Now then, P., here's another. " P.: " Put it there at once." (Then, after some time:) " You've only put a 4 up. I see 7." S.: " What's the other figure?" P.: "4... the 4's gone." S.: "Have a look again." P.: "I see i now." S.: "Which way are they arranged?" P.: " The 1 first and the 7 second."

Here's another." P.: "52. I saw that at once. I'm sure there's some game about it." (He had said something about this before, when the number was slow in coming. He said Mr. Smith was making game of him, and pretending to look when he was not looking.)

'76."

It will be observed that P. always speaks of "seeing" the figures, but as a matter of fact his eyes were closed, or appeared to be closed, throughout the experi-

6S APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

ments, and the pupils, as already stated, were introverted, at least at the commencement of the trance. That the impression was of a visual nature there can be no reasonable doubt. This may have been due to Mrs. Sidgwick's suggestion to the percipient that he would see the figures: though it seems equally probable that it was owing to the fact that Mr. Smith's impression was a visual one. That the vision in most cases was perfectly distinct seems equally clear. It is difficult to decide whether impressions received under such circumstances, with the eyes closed, are properly to be classed as hallucinations.^ That under appropriate conditions the percept was capable of rising to the level of an externalised sensory hallucination, the following experiments, which took place later on the same day, July 6th, seem to show: — A blank sheet of paper was spread out on the table. P. was told that he would see numbers on it, and was then partially awakened and his eyes opened. He was at once told to look at the paper and see what came, but saw nothing for some time. Different stages of the hypnotic trance frequently exhibit different and mutually exclusive memories, and P. now had evidently forgotten all about the previous state in which he had been guessing numbers, and appeared so wide awake that it was hard to believe that he was not in a completely normal condition. Mr. Smith stood behind him.

DRAWN.

NUMBER SEEN ON THE PAPER, AND REMARKS.

l8... P.: "23." S.: "Is that what you can see?" P.:

*' Yes" (but he added later that he did not see

it properly). 87... P.: "A 7,0. Oh, no, 8, 78. Funny! I saw a 7 and

a little o, and then another came on the top of

it, and made an 8." 37... P.: *' There's a 4, 7." Asked where, he offered to trace

it,^ and drew 47 in figures l^ inches long.

^ For such impressions seen with closed eyes Kandinsky has proposed the name pseudo-hallucinations.

^ He had been, on previous occasions, asked to trace hallucinations.

DRAWN.

NUMBER SEEN ON THE PAPER, AND REMARKS.

44... P.: "No. I see 5, 4; it's gone again." S.: "All right, look at it." P.: "45." S.: "Sure?" P.: " There's a 4; — the other's not so clear." (Then quickly:) " Two fours; 44."

As he looked one of them disappeared, and he turned the paper over to look for it on the other side; then looked back at the place where he saw it before and said, " That's funny! while I was looking for that the other one's gone." When looking under the paper he noticed some scribbling on the sheet below and said, "Has that writing anything to do with it?" He seemed puzzled by the figures, which were apparently genuine externalised hallucinations. He could not make out why they came, nor why they disappeared.

37... P. (after long gazing): "37." S.: "Is that what you

see?" P.: " It's gone. I'm pretty sure I saw

37."

Mr. Smith then looked at the 37 again, and we told P. to

watch whether it came back, but after a little while he said he

thought he saw 29.

Similar trials were made with three other subjects, Miss B., T., and W. In all 644 trials were made with the agent in the same room with the percipient, of which 131 were successful, that is, both digits were given correctly, though in 14 out of the 131 cases in reverse order. The chance of success was of course i in 81, and the most probable number of complete successes was therefore 8. 218 trials were also made with Mr. Smith in a different room from the percipient, but of these only 9 succeeded, one having its digits reversed; 8 of these successes, however, occurred in the course of 139 trials with P., whilst 79 trials with T. yielded only one success. {Proc. S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 123-170.)

As regards the possibility of unconscious indications of the number thought of being given by the agent, it seems certain that no such clue could have been perceived through the sense of sight or touch, contact between agent and percipient having been absolutely excluded throughout the experiments. It remains to consider whether any indication could have been given by means of sounds. In the pres-

70 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

ence of two or more attentive and vigilant witnesses any indications by sounds — e.g., an unconscious whispering of the number by Mr. Smith — could only have been perceived by persons of abnormal susceptibility. We know, indeed, of no precise limit which can be set to the hyperaesthesia of hypnotised subjects. But, on the other hand, hyperaesthesia of any sense in such subjects is generally the result of suggestion, direct or indirect, on the part of the operator; and in these experiments the only suggestion given — a suggestion apparently acted on throughout— was that they should see the result. Since, indeed, hypnotised persons are apparently not necessarily aware of the channel by which information reaches them, this circumstance is not in itself conclusive; but taken with the fact that no direct suggestion to hear was given, it tends to make auditory hyperaesthesia less probable. It is perhaps more important to note that the experimenters, including Mr. Smith himself, were fully aware of this source of error, and on their guard against it; that no movements of Mr. Smith's lips, such as must have occurred if he had whispered the number, were observed; and that a careful analysis of the failures shows no tendency to mistake one number for another similar in sound — e.g., four for five^ six for seven, or five for nine.

Experivients zvith Agent and Percipient in different Rooms.

However, the later experiments by the same observers, recorded below, in which a marked degree of success was obtained with agent and percipient in different rooms, will no doubt be considered to render untenable any explanation of the kind above indicated. This further series was carried on through the years 1 890- 1 -2. Mrs. Sidgwick, aided by Miss Johnson, conducted the experiments throughout, with the

TRANSFERENCE IN HYPNOTIC STATE.

occasional assistance of Professor Sidgwick, Dr. A. T. Myers, and others. The percipients were P., T., Miss B., and three others, and Mr. G. A. Smith was in nearly all cases the agent Some of these experiments, as in the last series, were with numbers of two digits; but the percipient was now in a different room from the agent. At first the trials were carried on in an arch, fitted up with two floors, under the Parade at Brighton. On the ground-floor was a little lobby, kitchen, etc.; on the upper floor a sittingroom about 15 feet square. The staircase, which, as shown in the plan subjoined, led directly out of the upper room, was not enclosed above, but had a door

Upstairs Room

Back Room

^1 I-

Kitchen

Lobby -1 Door

-I I-

below, which was kept shut during the experiments. The floor of the room above was covered with a thick Axminster carpet. Even so the sound-insulation was not perfect; but it was found that words spoken in ordinary conversation on one floor were indistinguishable on the other unless the ear was pressed against the door or wall of the staircase. In the experiments carried on at Mrs. Sidgwick's lodgings in Brighton the percipient sat in the room at a distance from the door, which was closed, varying from 9 to 13 feet, and Mr.^ Smith was in the passage outside, Miss Johnson sitting between him and the door. Of course strict silence was observed by the agent. One of the ex-

72 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

perimenters, in most cases Miss Johnson, accompanied the agent, drew the number from the bag, and noted each as it was drawn. Mrs. Sidgwick, of course in ignorance of the number drawn, sat by the percipient and took notes of his remarks. As in the previous series, the- impressions received by the percipient, who in the first experiments was Miss B., appear generally to have been of a visual nature. Details of all the trials with Miss B. as percipient and Mr. Smith as sole agent are given in the following table:—

No. 14.— By Mrs. Sidgwick and others. (i) Place, the Arch. Percipient upstairs; Agent

DOWNSTAIRS.

Date 1890.

•a S

it.^0

Notes.

Jan. 6..

]\ 8'.'. „ 11.. „ 12.. Mar. 17.. „ 18.. „ 22..

.. 23.. Jvily 8..

„ 9.. Nuv. 6..

„ 10..

'i

'i

i

i It It

'i

i

i

i

S3

/ Professor Barrett present in addition to

\ the usual party.

This set was done under very unfavourable conditions, as there were three other percipients in the room guessing at tlie same time, which was very confusing.

Drs. Myers, Penrose, and Lancaster present in addition to the usual party.

Drs. Myers and Rolleston present in addition to tlie usual party.

Dr. Myers present.

Totals

(2) Place, the Arch.

Percipient downstairs upstairs.

Agent

Mar. 17..

„ 23..

June 16..

Miss McKerlie present.

Totals

* Two of these were given completely right first and then changed, t The first digit of the number drawn was guessed first.

TRANSFERENCE IN MYPNOTlC STATE.

f i

(3) Place, Mrs. Sidgwick's lodgings. Percipient in • ROOM, AND Agent in passage.

4J

Date 1890. '^

Q

Q M

c

Notes.

Mar. 19.. Dec. 17..

» 1J> •• „ 19..

„ 20..

It

These puesses were made by table-tiltln.-i, Miss B. normal, having her hands 011 the table. Miss Uobertson present on December 17, 19, and 20. §

Agent in room across passage, but only one

of the two intervening doors closed. rGuesses made verbally by Miss J?. hypnotised, having her hands on the

^ table. Guesses tilted by the table, at the same

[ time as the above. §

Miss B. hypnotised, guessing in the usual way.

Guesses made by table-tilting, MissB. normal, having her hands on the table. §

Totals

Totals of (l)(2)<fe(3) tof!;ether

I

X This was given completely right first and then changed. § See Chapter iv., pp. 96-100,

It will be seen that in 252 trials the number was guessed quite correctly 27 times, and with digits in reverse order 8 times — the most probable number of complete successes by chance being 3. Further, in the unsuccessful trials the first digit was correctly guessed no fewer than 85 times. The proportion of successes in a series of trials carried on during the same period with Mr. Smith in the same room with Miss B. was, however, much higher — viz,, 29 (three with digits reversed) out of 146 trials. It is noticeable that in the short series of trials with Miss B. in the lobby downstairs a very much smaller degree of success was obtained, a result attributed by Mrs. Sidgwick to the percipient's feeling ill at ease in her surroundings.

Another noteworthy point is the large proportion

74 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

of cases in which the first digit was correctly named.^ This disproportion is not found in the trials made with the agent and the percipient in the same room, and is possibly due, as suggested by Mrs. Sidgwick, to Mr. Smith in all cases concentrating his attention originally on the first digit. When in the same room with the percipient he would hear when the first digit had been named, and would then turn his attention to the other; but when out of the room he could not, of course, follow the process of guessing.

A further series of trials was conducted with the percipient under the same conditions, except that either P. or T. acted as agents jointly with Mr. Smith. In all 53 trials were made, resulting in 9 complete successes and two with the digits reversed. The proportion of successes, it will be seen, is much higher than in the experiments first described; but the series is too short to allow of a safe conclusion being drawn as to the superior efficacy of collective agency.

Experiments conducted under similar conditions with four other percipients yielded a slight but appreciable measure of success. A large number of trials — nearly 400 in all — were made with Miss B. as percipient, the agent or agents being at a still greater distance — viz., being either in a separate building, or with two closed doors and a passage intervening; but practically no success was obtained. Miss B. complained of the numbers being so far off. "They are all muddled up," she said on one occasion; "they seem miles off." It is not easy to account satisfactorily for this failure, but it may probably be attributed partly to a prejudicial effect exercised by the novel conditions on the agent's or percipient's anticipation of success, and partly to the tedious

^ As all numbers above 90 were excluded, and as o cannot come first, the first digit should, by pure chance, have been correctly named more often than the second; but the disproportion, it will be seen, is far greater than could be thus accounted for.

I waiting inseparable from experiments of this kind, where there is no ready means of communication at the end of each trial. {^Proc. S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 536-552.) Transference of Mental Pictures. By Mrs. Sidgwick and Miss Johnson. Later on, after various trials had been made with little success with letters, playing cards, and diagrams, a series of experiments was made in the transference of mental pictures. There were in all 108 trials, with 5 percipients — Miss B., P., and T., and two men, Whybrew and Major, who had been subjects of an itinerant lecturer on Hypnotism. The method of experiment was as follows: — A subject for a picture was written down by Mrs. Sidgwick or Miss Johnson and handed to Mr. Smith, who then summoned up a mental representation of the subject suggested, which he tried to transfer to the percipient. Occasionally, to aid his imagination, he drew on paper a rough sketch of the subject. During the experiment Mr. Smith was sometimes close to the percipient, sometimes behind a screen, sometimes in another room.

When in the same room it was occasionally necessary for Mr. Smith, in order to keep alive the percipient's interest and attention, to say a few words to him from time to time. These remarks were always recorded. In the earlier experiments the percipient's eyes were open, and he was given a white card or a crystal to look at; and he appears to have seen the pictures as if projected on these objects. In the later trials the percipient's eyes were closed, but this change in the conditions does not appear in any way to have affected the vividness of the impressions.

Successful experiments were made with all five percipients, full details of which will be found in the paper referred to.^ It will suffice here to quote

1 Proc. S.P.R.f vol. viii. pp. 554-577.

^6 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

a few illustrative cases of success, complete or partial.

The first experiments were made on July 9th, 1890. Miss B. was the percipient. I quote the account of the first two trials: —

No. 15.

The percipient, being in a hypnotic trance, had her eyes opened and was given a card and told to look out for a picture which would come on it.

The subject, chosen by Mrs. Sidgwick, was a little boy with a ball. Mr. Smith sat close to Miss B., but neither spoke to her nor touched her. Miss B. presently said: "A figure is coming — a little boy." Mrs. Sidgwick asked what he had in his hand, and Miss B. replied: "A round thing; a ball, I suppose."

For the next experiment Mr. Smith got behind a screen. The subject, a kitten in ajar, was again set by Mrs. Sidgwick. Miss B. said: " Something like an old cat — a cat — I think it's a cat." Mrs. Sidgwick: "What is the cat doing?" Miss B. (doubtfully): " Sitting down." Mrs. Sidgwick; "Is there anything else but a cat?" Miss B.: " No; only scratches about."

In all 21 experiments of the kind were tried with Miss B., of which 8, including the two above recorded, may be classed as more or less successful.

The following experiments were made with P. on November 5th, 1890. The notes of these cases were taken by Miss Johnson, who was herself ignorant of the subject, which was chosen by Mrs. Sidgwick.

The first experiment on this day was a failure.

No. 16.

Subject: A black kitten playino with a cork. P.: " Something like a cat; it's a cat." Mrs. Sidgwick: " What is it doing?" P.: "Something it's been feeding out of— some milk, is it a saucer? Can't see where its other paw is — only see three paws."

Subject: A sandwich man with advertisement of a play. P. said: " Something like letter A — stroke there, then there." Mrs. Sidgwick: " Well, perhaps it will become clearer." P.: " Something like a head on the top of it; a V upside down — two legs and then a head. — A man with two boards — looks like a man that goes about the streets with two boards. I can see



If Transference in Hypnotic State. Jj

a head at the top and the body and legs between the boards. I couldn't see what was written on the boards, because the edges were turned towards me." Mr, Smith told us afterwards that he had pictured to himself the man and one board facing him, thus not corresponding to the impression which P. had.

Subject: A choir-boy.^ P. said: " Edge of card's going a dark colour. Somebody dressed up in white, eh? Can see something all white; edge all black, and like a figure in the middle. There's his hands up" (making a gesture to show the attitude) " like a ghost or something — you couldn't mistake it for anything but a ghost. It's not getting any better, it's fading— no, it's still there. It might frighten any one." He also made remarks about the difficulty of seeing a white figure on a white card (the blank card he was looking at was white), which Mr. Smith afterwards said corresponded with his own ideas.

Subject: A vase %uith flowers. (Mr. Smith, still behind P., was looking at a blue flower-pot in the window containing an indiarubber plant.) P. said: " I see something round, like a round ring. I can see some straight things from the round thing. I think it's a glass— it goes up. I'll tell you what it is; it must be a pot — a flower-pot, you know, with things growing in it. I only guessed that, because you don't see things growing out of a glass. — It's not clear at the top yet. You see something going up and you can't see the top, because of the edge of the paper — it's cut off. I don't wonder, because it's no good wondering what Mr. Smith does, he does such funny things. I should fancy it might be a geranium, but there's only sticks, so you can't tell." Mrs. Sidgwick: "What colour is the pot?" P.: " Dark colour, between terra-cotta and red — dark red you'd call it." Here the somewhat confused impression, apparently corresponding to the struggle of ideas in Mr. Smith's mind between what he was seeing and what he was trying to think of, is an interesting point.^

In all 50 trials were made with P., 26 with agent and percipient in the same room, 24 with agent and percipient in different rooms. Of the former 14 were successful, of the latter only one. In the 35 unsuccessful experiments no impression at all was received in 14 cases, 7 of which occurred while agent and percipient were in the same room.

Two trials with Whybrew are worth quoting as illustrating the gradual development of the impression.

^ This was an idea extremely familiar to P., who had been a chorister and was still connected with the choir of his church. 2 Proceedings Soc. Psych. Research, vol. viii. pp. 565, 566.

78 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

The percipient's eyes were closed during these experiments. The first was made on July nth.

No. 17.

Subject: A man riding: Mr. Smith downstairs with Miss Johnson; Whybrew, upstairs with Mrs. Sidgwick, said, after some remarks on the former pictures: " There's another one — I think it's like the other two — a puzzle [to see]— if I can find the picture. I hope I'll be able to see it properly. A kind of a square — square shadow — blowed if I can understand what it's meant for — I don't know what to make out of that. I don't know if that's meant to be the lower part of a pair of legs. Do you see a picture? " Mrs. Sidgwick: " I see something." Whybrew • " I see them two spots, but I don't know what to make of them. If they're legs, the body ought to come. — Don't seem to come any brighter, but there's those two things there, that look like a pair of legs." Here Mr. Smith was asked to come upstairs and talk to him. He told him the picture was coming up closer and that he had turned the gas on to make it brighter. Whybrew: "There's them pair of legs there." Mr. Smith: "Yes" (doubtfully). Whybrew: "Why, there's another. I never see that other pair before. Why, it's a horse. I expect it's like them penny pictures that you fold over. That horse — that's plain enough; but what's that other thing?" Mr. Smith: " Yes, I told you there was something else." Whybrew: " Why, I see what it is now — it's supposed to be a man there, I expect." Mr. Smith: " Yes." Whybrew: " Riding him. But that ain't so good as the boy and the ball." Mrs. Sidgwick. " How is the man dressed? " Whybrew: " Ordinary."

The second took place on July i6th, 1891.

Mr. Smith having hypnotised Whybrew, sat by him, but did not speak to him at all after he knew the subject — a 7nan with a barrow of fish — given him by Mrs. Sidgwick. Miss Johnson, not knowing what the subject was, carried on the conversation with Whybrew. He said: "It's the shape of a man. Yes, there's a man there. Don't know him. He looks like a bloke that sells strawberries." Miss Johnson asked: "Are there strawberries there? " Whybrew. " That looks like his barrow there. What's he selling of? I believe he's sold out. I can't see anything on his barrow — perhaps he's sold out. There ain't many — a few round things. I expect they're fruit. Are they cherries? They look a bit red. Aren't they fish? It don't look very much like fish. If they're fish, some of them hasn't got any heads on. Barrow is a bit fishified — it has a tray on. What colour are those things on the barrow? They looked red,

but now they look silvery." He was rather pleased with this picture and asked afterwards if it was for sale.

Of 18 experiments with Whybrew 6 were successful. Of the 12 failures, 8 occurred when agent and percipient were in separate rooms. There were only two cases in which no impression was received — one with the agent in the same room.

Seven trials were made with Major, of which i wa^ completely and 2 partially successful. Subjoined is the record of the only complete success, which occurred on July 8th, 1891. The percipient was hypnotised and his eyes were closed; Mr. Smith sat by him, talking to him and telling him that he was to see a picture.

No. 18.

The subject given was a mouse in a tnoiise-trap. Regarding himself as a man of culture and being generally anxious to exhibit this. Major asked if it was to be an old master or a modern "pot-boiler." He was told the latter, and he then discoursed on "pot-boilers" and how he knew all the subjects of them — mentioning two or three — in a very contemptuous manner. He did not seem to see anything, however, and appeared to be expecting to see an artist producing a rapid sketch. Then, when told that the picture was actually there, he suddenly exclaimed: "Do you mean that deuced old trap with a mouse? He must have been drawing for the rat vermin people."

Thirty-two trials were made with T., of which only four were successful — two completely, one partially, one completely, but deferred — i.e., the subject of the preceding experiment, a black dog, came before his vision after the agent had already passed to another subject, the Eiffel Tower. T. had, of course, not been told the subject of the previous experiment. Instances of deferred impressions of this kind occurred also with Miss B. A few experiments were tried with another percipient, a man named Adams, but without success; his own imagination appeared to be so fertile that any telepathic impression must have been crowded out.

An analysis of the impressions showed that most of

So APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

them were reproductions of objects familiar to the percipient, in certain cases of hallucinations previouslyimposed upon them in the course of these or other experiments. With some of the successful percipients these spontaneous impressions showed a marked tendency to recur. Thus P, had a wrong impression — of an elephant — no less than four times in the course of the experiments; and T, of a woman and a perambulator three times. One of these coincided with the subject actually set, and the coincidence may perhaps therefore be attributed to chance. Speaking generally, however, this tendency to repetition amongst the percipient's native impressions constitutes an additional argument, if any such is needed, for attributing the frequent coincidences of the impression with the subject set to some other cause than the automatic association of ideas.

An instance of a quasi-experimental character, which closely resembles the cases above described, is recorded by Dr. A. Gibotteau: — ^

No. 19, — By Dr. Gibotteau.

" Madame P. complained of headache. I placed my hand upon her forehead, and in a few minutes she was in a light hypnotic sleep. Without deepening the trance I endeavoured to give her a sensation of calm and well-being, and to procure this sensation for myself in the first place, I called up a picture of the sea, in which air and water were full of sunlight. ' I feel a little better,' she said; 'how fresh the air is!' I then proceeded to imagine myself walking along the Boitlevard Saint Michel^ in a slight rain. I saw the hurrying people and the umbrellas. ' How strange it is! ' said Madame P.; 'I seem to be at J:he corner of the Boulevard Sahit Michel and the Rue des ILcoles^ in front of the Cafe Vachette'' (the exact spot I pictured); ' it is raining, there are a great many people, a hurrying crowd. They are all going up the street, and I with them. The air is very fresh. It gives me a pleasant, restful feeling.' With these words she opened her eyes and gave me further confirmation of her impressions.

" I should add that this scene took place in the provinces; I

^ Annates des Sciences Psychiques, vol. ii. pp. 334, 335.

I

had not been in Paris for some months, nor Madame P. for several years.

" There had been no mention of the subject in the course lif our conversation that day."

It will be seen that Dr. Gibottcau attempted to transfer to the percipient only the general sensation of calm and rest induced in himself by the imagined scene, and that the success obtained was therefore of a kind by no means anticipated.

Another experiment of the same nature is recorded by Dr. Blair Thaw in the article already referred to (p. 31). The percipient was Mrs. Thaw, Dr. Thaw and Mr. Wyatt were the agents. We are not told whether in this instance, as on some other occasions, the percipient was actually hypnotised, but judging from previous experiments it may perhaps be inferred that she was at least in a condition called by Dr. Thaw " a passive state," not easy to distinguish from the lighter stages of sleep-waking. The experiment took place on the 28th April 1892.

No. 20. — By Dr. Blair Thaw.

is^ Scene. Locomotive running away without engineer tears up station. — Missed.

2nd Scene. The first real Flying Machine going over Madison Square Tower, and the people watching. — Percipient: /see lots of people. Crowds are going to war. They are so excited. Are they throwing water? (Percipient said afterwards she thought it was a fire and that was the reason of the crowd.) Or sailors pulling at ropes. Agent said, "What are they doing?" Percipient; They are all lookiiig up. It is a balloon or some one in trouble up there. Agent said, " Why balloon? " Percipient: They are all looking up. Agent said, " I thought of a possible scene in the future." Percipient: Oh., iVs the first man flyitig. ThaVs what he's doing up there. Agent: " Where is it? " Percipient: /// the city.

An account of a similar instance of the transfer to a hypnotised percipient of an imagined scene has been recorded by Mr. E. M. Clissold and Mr. Auberon Herbert.!

1 See Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii. pp. 677, 678.



Chapter IV. Experimental Production of Movements and Other Effects

OTHER EFFECTS.

In the two preceding chapters we have discussed experiments where the impression received by the percipient may be interpreted as having been a more or less accurate reproduction of the sensation experienced by the agent, or at most a translation of it into some other simple sensation. There have now to be considered various cases in which the transmission of thought is productive of other results in the percipient than the simple duplication or translation of a sensation. The most usual case is where the telepathic impulse leads to some action on the part of the percipient It was frequently stated by the older mesmerists^ that the operator, by a silent act of will, could induce a good subject to do or refrain from doing some prescribed or customary action. Isolated observations on such a point are little likely to compel belief; the vanity or the credulity of the recorder may be supposed to have led to his overlooking the negative instances, and attributing to his own peculiar gifts a result in reality due to chance. But, following on the clue thus

^ Cases are recorded in the Zoist and other publications of the period. See the instances, quoted in Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. pp. 89-91, of the Rev. J. Lawson Sisson, Mr. Earth, Mr. N. Dunscombe, and Mr. H. S. Thompson. Traditions of the marvels wrought by the lastnamed gentleman still linger in Yorkshire society, and will no doubt demand the serious attention of future students of folk-lore.

I

obtained, the Committee on Mesmerism appointed by the S.P.R. in 1882, to some of whose work reference has ah-eady been made (Chapter III., p. 60), succeeded in obtaining results less open to question.

Inhibition of Action by Silent Willing.

The first experiments of the kind were conducted on our friend Mr. Sidney Beard, who was for some time an Associate of the Society and took an active interest in its work. Mr. Beard, who was easily hypnotised, would be entranced by Mr. Smith, and sit in a chair with closed eyes. Then, to quote the account of a single experiment, a list of twelve Yeses and Noes in arbitrary order was written by one of ourselves and put into Mr. Smith's hand, with directions that he should successively will the subject, to respond or not to respond, in accordance with the list. A tuning-fork was then struck and held at Mr. Beard's ear, and the question, "Do you hear?" was asked by one of ourselves. This was done twelve times in succession, Mr. Beard answering or failing to answer on each occasion in accordance with the " yes " or " no " of the written list — that is to say, with the silent will of the agent. Similar trials on other occasions with Mr, Beard were equally successful. The percipient's own account of the matter is as follows: "During the experiments of January ist [1883], when Mr. Smith mesmerised me, I did not lose consciousness at any time, but only experienced a sensation of total numbness in my limbs. When the trial as to whether I could hear sounds was made I heard the sounds distinctly each time, but in a large number of instances I felt totally unable to acknowledge that I heard them. I seemed to know each time whether Mr. Smith wished me to say that I heard them; and as I had surrendered my will to his at the commencement of the experiment, I was unable to reassert my power of volition whilst under his

84 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE,

influence." {^Proceedings of the Soc, Psych. Research^ vol. i. p. 256.)

No. 21.— By Professor Barrett.

Further trials of the same kind were carried on in November 1883 by Professor Barrett, at his own house in Dublin. The hypnotist and agent was again Mr. G. A. Smith, the percipient a youth named Fearnley, a stranger to Mr. Smith. In the first series of trials Professor Barrett asked Fearnley, " Now will you open your hand? " at the same time pointing to " Yes " or " No," written on a card, and held in sight of Mr. Smith, but out of view from the percipient. Mr. Smith, who was not in contact with the subject, directed his silent will in accordance with the written indication. In twenty experiments conducted under these conditions there were only three failures Later, to quote Professor Barrett,

"The experiment was varied as follows: — The word 'Yes' was written on one,, and the word * No ' on the other, of two precisely similar pieces of card. One or other of these cards was handed to Mr. Smith at my arbitrary pleasure, care of course being taken that the 'subject' had no opportunity of seeing the card, even had he been awake. When ' Yes ' was handed Mr. Smith was silently to will the ' subject ' to answer aloud in response to the question asked by me, ' Do you hear me?' When ' No' was handed Mr. Smith was to will that no response should be made in reply to the same question. The object of this series of experiments was to note the effect of increasing the distance between the wilier and the willed, — the agent and the percipient. In the first instance Mr. Smith was placed three feet from the ' subject,' who remained throughout apparently asleep in an arm-chair in one corner of my study.

"At three feet apart, 25 trials were successively made, and in every case the ' subject' responded or did not respond in exact accoi;dance with the silent will of Mr. Smith, as directed by me.

" At 6 feet apart six similar trials were made without a single failure.

"At 12 feet apart six more trials were made without a single failure.

"At 17 feet apart six more trials were made without a single failure.

I

" In this last case Mr. Smith had to be placed outside the study door, which was then closed with the exception of a narrow chink just wide enough to admit of passing a card in or out, whilst I remained in the study observing the ' subject.' To avoid any possible indication from the tone in which I asked the question, in all cases except the first dozen experiments, I shuffled the cards face downwards, and then handed the unknown 'Yes' or 'No' to Mr. Smith, who looked at the card and willed accordingly. I noted down the result, and then, and not till then, looked at the card.

"A final experiment was made when Mr. Smith was taken across the hall and placed in the dining-room, at a distance of about 30 feet from the 'subject,' two doors, both quite closed, intervening. Under these conditions, three trials were made with success, the 'Yes' response being, however, very faint and hardly audible to me, who returned to the study to ask the usual question after handing the card to the distant operator. At this point, the 'subject' fell into a deep sleep, and made no further replies to the questions addressed to him."

Further trials were made under different conditions, the results being almost uniformly successful.

In interpreting these results there is no justification for assuming direct control by the agent over the organism of the percipient. Nor does the current phrase, endorsed as it is in the first case by the percipient himself, that the operator's will dominated the will of the subject, give an adequate account of the matter. When, as in the case of experiments previously described, the percipient's impression reproduces the sensation of the agent, there is nothing to indicate that the impulse transferred directly affects the external organs, or even the intermediate sensory centres. In the absence of any direct evidence it is at least equally probable that the higher brain centres only are concerned in the transmission in the first instance, and that the transmitted idea is reflected downwards, until it actually assumes, as in some of the experiments recorded with P, and Miss B., the form of a sensory hallucination. Upon this view no fundamental distinction need be drawn between the results before described and those now under discussion. In the latter case the question is not one of

86 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

transference of will or of a motor or inhibitory impulse. What is actually transferred from the agent is probably only a simple idea. Its subsequent translation into action, or the inhibition of action, is as much the work of the percipient's mind as, in the other case, the transformation of the idea of a number into a visual hallucination. As regards the particular effect produced, it must be remembered that the prime characteristic of the hypnotic state is its openness to suggestion, and especially to suggestion coming through a particular channel. It is the establishment of this suggestible state, which consists essentially in the suppression of the controlling faculties which normally pass judgment on the suggestions received from without, and select those which are to find response in action, that Mr. Beard describes as the surrender of his will. So that when Mr. Beard answered our questions he did what his natural courtesy led him to do; when he maintained silence his tendency to respond to the stimulus of our questions was momentarily overcome by the stronger stimulus of the idea received from the agent. But the superior efficacy of the idea so transferred resulted not from any impulsive quality in the idea itself, but from the previously established relations between agent and percipient. The fact that experiments of this kind have rarely succeeded in the waking state is no doubt due to the inferior suggestibility of that state..

Actions originated by Silent Willing.

In the paper already referred to {supra, p. 31) Dr. Blair Thaw records some experiments which present us with a modification of the Willing Game, but without contact. In most of the experiments the person who was willed to perform a certain action — the nature of which had been previously communicated to the other experimenters in writing — was in the

same room as the agents. But the agents did not follow the percipient about the room, nor did the percipient look at the agents for guidance. The percipient appears to have been awake throughout the experiments, but it seems probable that her condition was not that of complete normal wakefulness.

Of 26 experiments conducted under such conditions, 10 were completely and 12 partially successful. When, however, as in this case, there are several agents, all of whom are actually watching the movements of the percipient, it is impossible to feel convinced that no indication by the movements of the eyes or by breathing was given to the percipient to show her whether or not she was moving in the right direction. In the last four trials of the series, however, the percipient was willed to fetch an object from another room which was out of sight from the agents, and it is difficult to conceive that any indication could have been given to her of the object selected.

No. 22. — By Dr. Blair Thaw.

April Tth^ 1892.

Mrs. Thaw, Percipient. Mr. M. H. Wyatt and Dr. Thaw, Agents. In the next four experhiients an object was selected in another room, and then the percipient sent in for it. No clue was given as to what part of the room.

\st Object Selected. A WoODEN CuPiD, from a corner-piece in room with eight other objects on it. — Percipient first brought a photo from the lower shelf of corner-piece, then said: " It's the wooden Cupid."

ind Object. Match-box on mantel. — Percipient seemed confused at first and brought two photos, then said: " It's the brass match-box on mantel."

yd Object. A Vellum Book on table, among twenty other books, chosen; but a bag under one window was thought of first. — Percipient went to table, put her hand on the book, then went to the bag and took it up, then back to the table and took the vellum book and then the bag, and appeared with both. Percipient was in sight of agents during this time, but did not see them.

88 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

4M Object. Book on small table, among ten others. — Missed.

In commenting on these experiments, Dr. Thaw is himself inclined to attribute some of the results to " an indistinct motor impulse of some kind, leading the percipient near the object." But in the experiments above recorded, at any rate, it is sufficient, probably, to suppose the transference of the idea of the object.

Experiments of a somewhat similar nature are recorded by Dr. Ochorowicz {La Suggestion mentale, pp. 84- II 7). The subject in this case, Madame M., was sunk in the deep hypnotic state {I'etat aidiique), a condition in which she would usually remain motionless until aroused by the doctor. Under these circumstances Dr. Ochorowicz conducted upwards of forty experiments in conveying mental cornmands, a large proportion ©f which were executed by the subject with more or less exactness. These trials have the drawback above indicated, common to all experiments of the kind with the agent in the same room; moreover, each experiment appears to have extended over a considerable period, and the command— e.g.^ to rise from the" chair and hand a cake from the table to Dr. Ochorowicz — was frequently executed in stages. In judging of the results, however, it should be remembered that Dr. Ochorowicz has elsewhere shown himself to be acute in criticism and accurate in observation.

Some experiments made by Dr. Gibert on Madame B., and recorded by Professor Pierre Janet,^ seem open to a similar objection. Dr. Gibert communicated the mental command by touching Madame B.'s forehead with his own whilst concentrating his thoughts on the ideas to be conveyed. It is difficult to feel sure that the success of the experiment under such conditions was not due to the command having been

* Bulletin de la Soc. de Fsychologie Physiologiqucy 1885.

I

I

f

unconsciously mutLcred by Dr. Gibcrt within the hearing of the percipient. In the following account, however, thought-transference would seem to be the simplest explanation of the results. The narrator, unfortunately, remains anonymous; he is, however, personally known to Dr. Dariex, the editor of the periodical from which the account is extracted, and the experiments were obviously conducted with carc.^ In this case it seems clear, since the command, though understood, was on more than one occasion disobeyed, that the idea telepathically intruded into the percipient's mind was not necessarily associated with an impulse to action.

No. 23.— By J. H, P.

[On the 6th December 1887], having placed M. in a deep trance, I turned my back upon her, and, without any gesture or sound whatever, gave her the following mental order: —

" When you wake up you are to go and fetch a glass, put a few drops of Eau de Cologne into it, and bring it to me."

On waking up, M. was visibly preoccupied; she could not keep still, and at last came and placed herself in front of me, exclaiming —

" What an idea to put in my head! "

" Why do you speak so to me? "

" Because the idea that I have got can only come from you, and I don't wish to obey,"

"Don't obey unless you like; but I wish you to tell me at once what you are thinking of."

" Well, then, I was to go and look for a glass, put some water in it, with some drops of Eau de Cologne, and take it to you; it is really ridiculous,"

My order had then been perfectly understood for the first time. From that moment, December 6th, 1887, till to-day, with only two or three exceptions, the mental transmission, whether in the waking or sleeping state, has been most vivid. It is only disturbed at certain times, or when M, is feeling very anxious.

On the loth of December 1887, unknown to M., I hid a watch, that was not going, behind some books in my bookcase. When she arrived I put her to sleep, and gave her the following mental command: —

^ Annales des Sciences Psychiques^ vol. iii. pp. 130-133.

90 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

"Go and fetch me the watch that is hidden behind some books in the bookcase."

I sat in my armchair with M. behind me, and was careful not to look in the direction where the object was hidden.

M, suddenly got up from her armchair and went straight to the bookcase, but could not open it; making energetic movements the while, whenever she touched the door, and especially the glass.

" It is there! it is there! I am certain: but this glass burns me! " _

I decided to open it myself; she rushed at my books, took them out, and seized the watch, delighted to have found it.

Similar trials have been made with commands that one of my friends passed to me, written beforehand, and not in the presence of the subject, and the success has been complete; iDut if the person who passes me the order is unknown to her, she refuses to obey, saying that the command is not mine.

M. N., who was convinced that mental transmission is a fraud, assured me that I should never be able to transmit an order from him to M.

I invited him to come to my house, at five o'clock in the evening, with a command written, which he was to give me only when M. was asleep, and outside my study.

At 5,10 N. arrived and we went out, leaving M. in a trance; when we were separated from my study by the two intervening rooms, with all the doors shut, N. pulled out a small paper and said —

"You will read this command, we will both come back to M., and without any gestures, you will communicate it to her."

" Certainly."

In the note was written, " Give the mental command to M. to count out loud from 5 to i; 5, 4, 3, 2, i."

We came back to my study; I sat at my desk as usual — I am in the habit of making notes during the progress of the experiments, so as to report them with scrupulous accuracy — and I sent N.'s mental command, while pretending to write. M. suddenly exclaimed —

" Doubtless, you imagine that I cannot count! I can count from I to 50,000, if I wish."

Mental command — " Count from 5 to i."

" No, I will not obey a strange command; it is not a command of yours."

All my efforts were useless; we had to abandon the experiment. The command was certainly understood; but M. N. retired, convinced that it had not been understood, and that even the trance was a sham I

Automatic Writing.

Sometimes the working of the telepathic impulse is of a more apparently mysterious kind. We have seen that Mr. Beard was fully conscious of the action of a restraining force; and Mrs. Thaw, who was in a condition little if at all removed from the normal, appears also to have been aware of what she was doing, if perhaps without explicit recognition of her motives at the time of performing the prescribed actions. But in the various cases now to be described the telepathic impulse seems never to have affected the normal consciousness of the percipient at all; and the results produced through the agency of his organism were due to no recognised volition on his part. The intelligence directing his hand was an intelligence working below and apart from his ordinary life.

Now this subterranean intelligence presents many points of analogy with the secondary consciousness of the hypnotic subject; in both states we find indications of thought and will distinct from those of waking life, and of a memory not shared with that life. Moreover, it has been shown experimentally, by Mr. Edmund Gurney,^ Professor Pierre Janet,^ and others, that the consciousness which makes itself known through planchette is, in certain persons at any rate, identical with the consciousness found in the hypnotic trance, so far as the test of a common memory can be relied upon to prove identity. The superior susceptibility to telepathic influences, already referred to, of the hypnotic subject, may perhaps, therefore, in the light of these later experiments, be found to indicate a superior susceptibility of those parts of the brain whose workings lie below the ordinary consciousness, and reveal themselves only in the activities of trance and automatism.

^ See the account of his experiments on *' Peculiarities of certain Post-hypnotic States," Proc. S.P.R., vol. iv. pp. 268-323. ' "L'Automatisme Psychologique."

92 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

The following is an illustrative case. The account is derived from contemporary notes, made by the late Mr. P. H. Newnham, Vicar of Maker, Devonport, of a series of experiments conducted by himself and his wife during eight months in 1871.^ Mr. Newnham would write, in a book kept for the purpose, a question of the purport of which Mrs. Newnham was in ignorance; and Mrs. Newnham, holding her hand on a planchette, would write an answer to the question. The conditions of the experiments are described by Mr. Newnham, in an account written in 1884, as follows: —

No. 24.

" My wife always sat at a small low table, in a low chair, leaning backwards. I sat about eight feet distant, at a rather higher table, and with my back towards her while writing down the questions. It was absolutely impossible that any gesture, or play of features, on my part, could have been visible or intelligible to her. As a rule she kept her eyes shut; but never became in the slightest degree hypnotic, or even naturally drowsy."

In all 309 questions with their answers were recorded under these conditions, before the experiments were finally abandoned on account of their prejudicial effect on Mrs. Newnham's health. The extracts from Mr. Newnham's note-book given below show that Mrs. Newnham throughout had some kind of knowledge, not always apparently complete, of the terms of the question. 2 But she was not herself consciously aware of the purport either of the question or of the answer written through her hand.

January 2()th. 13. Is it the operator's brain, or some external force, that moves the Planchette? Answer "brain " or "force." A. Will.

^ Proc. Soc. Psych. Research^ vol. iii. pp. 6-23.

^ Mr. Newnham explains that "five or six questions were often asked consecutively without her being told of the subject that was being pursued."

14. Is it the will of a living person, or of an immaterial spirit,

distinct from that person? Answer "person" or " spirit." A. Wife.

15. Give first the wife's Christian name; then, my favourite

name for her. (This was accurately done.)

27. What is your own name? A. Only you.

28. We are not quite sure of the meaning of the answer.

Explain. A. Wife.

Failing to get more than this at the outset, we returned to the same thought after question 114; when, having been closely pressed on another subject, we received the curt reply — " Told all I know."

February \Zth.

117. Who are you that writes, and has told all you know? A. Wife.

118. But does no one tell wife what to write? If so, who? A. Spirit.

119. Whose spirit? A. Wife's brain.

120. But how does wife's brain know (certain) secrets? A. Wife's spirit unconsciously guides.

121. But how does wife's spirit know things it has never been

told? A. No external influence.

122. But by what internal influence does it know (these)

secrets? A. You cannot know.

Mr. Nevvnham, who was a Mason, took the opportunity on several occasions of questioning the planchette on details of the Masonic ritual and archaeology — of which Mrs. Newnham was of course ignorant — with very surprising results. It will be seen from the extracts which follow that Mrs. Newnham's answers showed not only an acquaintance with the terms of the question, but even a fragmentary knowledge of the correct answer — knowledge which under the circumstances could hardly have been derived elsewhere than from the questioner's brain.

94 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

March 26th.

166. Of what language is the first syllable of the Great Triple

R. A. Word? 1 A. Don't know.

167. Yes, you do. What are the three languages of which

the word is composed? A. Greek, Egyptian, Syriac first syllable {correctly given), rest unknown.

168. Write the syllable which is Syriac. A. (First syllable correctly written.)

169. Write the syllable which is Egyptian. A. Second.

170. Can you not write the syllable itself? A. Third Greek.

174. Write down the word itself.

A. First three and last two letters were written correctly, but four incorrect letters, partly borrowed from another word of the same degree, came in the middle.

176. Why do you write a word of which I know nothing?

A. Wife tried hard to tell the word, but could not quite catch it.

177. Catch it from whom? A. Not quite sure.

178. Not quite sure of what?

A. I know nothing. Wife doesn't quite know, 182. Write out the prayer used at the advancement of a Mark Master Mason.

A. Almighty Ruler of the Universe and Architect of all worlds, we beseech Thee to accept this, our brother, whom we have this day received into our most honourable Company of Mark Master Masons. Grant him to be a worthy member of our brotherhood; and may he be in his own person a perfect mirror of all Masonic virtues. Grant that all our doings may be to Thy honour and glory, and to the welfare of all mankind.

This prayer was written off instantaneously and.very rapidly. It is a very remarkable production indeed. For the benefit of those who are not members of the craft, I may say that no prayer in the slightest degree resembling it is made use of in the Ritual of any Masonic degree; and yet it contains more than one strictly accurate technicality connected with the degree of Mark Mason. My wife has never seen any Masonic prayers,

^ Previous questions had been asked on the same subject, and the first syllable had already been correctly written. On a subsequent occasion the same question was repeated and a wholly incorrect answer was given.

whether in " Carlile," or any other real or spurious Ritual of the Masonic Order.

183. I do not know this prayer. Where is it to be found? A. Old American Ritual.

184. Where can I get one?

A. Most likely none in England.

185. Can you not write the prayer that I make use of in my

own Lodge? A. No, I don't know it.

Wc have to remark here not merely the exhibition of a will and an intelligence differing from the writer's normal self, but the display of a yet more alien disingenuousness. Similar evasions and inventions occur more than once in the course of these experiments. Indeed, a certain degree of moral perversity is a frequent and notorious characteristic of automatic expression.

Some interesting experiments of the same kind were conducted, in the winter of 1892-93, by Mr. R. H. Buttemer, of Emanuel College, Cambridge, and Mr. H. T. Green. Throughout the series the questions were, as in the preceding case, written down, so that the percipient was completely ignorant of their purport. The following is the record of the last experiments of the series.

No. 25. — By Mr. R. H. Buttemer.

February 1 8th, 1893, 8 P.M. Mrs. H., Miss B., Mr. and Miss M. present, in addition to Mr. Green, and Messrs. S., W., and Buttemer.

Mr. Green, as usual, operated Planchette, and on this occasion sat with his back to all the other persons present.

Q. (from Mr. M.): What was I doing this afternoon?

A. i. the sun (all else illegible), ii. Enjoying the

fresh air of heaven. •

Q. What was Mr. Rogers doing in Cambridge?

A. i. (Irrelevant, or possibly connected vaguely with the question.) ii. Ask another, but Mr. Rogers came up on important business connected with the Lodge. (Correct.)

96 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Q. Where has Mrs. M. gone?

A. i. (Irrelevant.) ii. Far, far away, but more next time, iii. Her mother has gone to — oh, what a happy place is London! iv. All change here for Bletchley. (Mrs. M. had possibly passed this station on her journey.)

Q. Who has won the Association Match to-day?

A. i. (Illegible.) ii. O ye simple ones, how long will ye love simplicity.'' Why, Oxford, of course. [This fact was known to some persons in the room, but not to Mr. Green.]

One of the company then suggested the attempt to get the name on a visiting card transmitted, and the question was written, "Write name on card." Mr. Green did not know that this experiment was about to be tried, and the card was picked from a pile at random. The name was John B. Bourne. A sentence was written by Mr. Green, which proved to be, "Think of one letter at a time and then see what will happen." We did so.

A. i. ] for Jerusalem, O for Omri, H for Honey, and N for Nothing, ii. B for Benjamin, O for Olive, U for Unicorn. (The remaining letters were given incorrectly.)

Q. How many of the Society's books are here? (There were two volumes oi Proceeding;s ox\ the table.)

A. i. (Irrelevant.) ii. The answer is 100-98.

Q. What is 2 x 3?

Two irrelevant answers were given, possibly owing to a slight disturbance in the room. The third answer was — "When that noise has ceased and S. has finished knocking the lamp over, I say 6."

A trial shortly after this, February 19th, gave no results, and the power of automatic writing appears to have entirely left Mr. Green for the present. {Proc. Soc. Psych. Research., vol. ix. pp. 61-64.)

In this, as in Mr. Newnham's case, the mode of expression is again characteristic of the automatic consciousness. It is explained by Mr. Buttemer that when two or more answers are given, the operator had been simply told to write again, after the first irrelevant answer, without being shown the question.

Table Tilting.

No. 26. — By the AUTHOR.

We pass on to experiments in which the ideas transmitted from the agent find other subterranean channels

I

in the percipient's organism for their expression. Of all forms of intelligent automatism writing, next to speaking, is probably in an educated percipient the easiest, because in normal life the commonest. In the cases, therefore, recorded below the actual movements involved, though of a relatively simple kind, as being unaccustomed called possibly for the exercise of a degree of mental activity as high as would have been the case had writing been the vehicle of expression. In the preceding chapter it was recorded, in the experiments with numbers, that some of the answers were given through the movements of a table on which the percipient's hands rested (p. 73). A series of experiments of this nature was made by the writer in November and December 1873, with the assistance of a few friends, amongst whom were Mr. F. H. Colson, now Head Master of Plymouth College, and the Rev. W. E. Smith, of Gorton, near Lowestoft. The following is a description of the methods adopted. Three or four of us would sit round a small centre-legged table, cane-bottomed chair, waste-paper basket, or metal tripod, with our hands resting on it. We found that in a few minutes the table (or other instrument) would tilt on one side, or move round and round, with considerable freedom. When these motions had once been fairly established, one or two of those present in the room would retire to a distance, keeping their backs to the table, and think of a letter of the alphabet. The table would move freely up and down, under the varying pressure of the hands laid on it, in a succession of small tilts. Those sitting at the table would count the tilts — one tilt standing for A, two for B, three for C, and so on. Excluding second trials, there were 70 experiments conducted under these conditions. The right letter was tilted in 27 cases, and in two others the next succeeding letter was given. On some occasions the proportion of successes was much higher; thus, on the 28th November, out of a total of 16 trials, 10

98 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

were correct. On the ist December, on the other hand, lO trials were made without any success. It was the rule throughout that the agents should stand with their backs to the table at some distance from it, and after the first few experiments we found, or thought we found, that the thought-transference succeeded best with a single agent In order that the letter might not be guessed from the context, we generally took the initial or initial and final letters only of a word; in four cases only did the agent select as many as three consecutive letters of a word. If the letters had been arbitrarily chosen, the chances against the right letters being indicated would be 25 to I. But as the letters actually selected were in most cases constituent parts of a word, generally the initial letter, and as in some cases two or three consecutive letters were selected, the adverse chances would be reduced, roughly speaking, to something like 15 to I. But even so the results attained are sufficiently striking.^

In these experiments the percipient or percipients themselves counted the tilts; and it is probable that occasionally one or other of those seated at the table half-consciously guided its movements in conformity with his own ideas of what the letter would be. But in a modified form of the experiment, introduced by Professor Richet, the percipients, two or three in number, were seated at one table and a printed alphabet was placed on another table behind the percipients and out of their range of vision. When

1 There were nine sittings in all, but the records of one were imperfectly kept, and have not been preserved. In two cases the details given are insufficient; in the notes of the first evening it is stated that the person seated at the table "failed three or four times, succeeded once in giving word of {i.e., selected from) newspaper (which agent) held in his hand." These trials have been omitted altogether from the results given in the text. On the third evening there is a record, "gave S H but got wrong afterwards." The word thought of was Sherry. I have counted this trial as two successes and two failures, judging from the other experiments recorded that not more than four consecutive letters at most would have been attempted.

r

the first table tilted,^ under the automatic movements of the hands resting on it, it caused a bell to ring. M. Richet or some other experimenter sat at the second table and drew a pen slowly backwards and forwards over the printed alphabet. The letters to which the pen was pointing when the bell rang were noted, and it was found that they made up intelligible words and sentences, provided that in some cases the next letter or the next but one were substituted for that actually given.^ All necessary precautions were taken that the alphabet should be out of sight of the " mediums," who were in most cases personal friends of M. Richet, and whose good faith was, he believes, in all cases unimpeachable. Subjoined is an account of the results obtained on one evening. M. Richet appears from the account to have been one of those seated at the tilting table.

No. 27.— By Professor Richet.

" On the 9th of November we took the same precautions, but used an ordinary alphabet, not the circular one. The name of the ' spirit' who came to the table was given as V I L L O N-

^ In this case it will be observed the table tilted only once for each letter. The method adopted (after trial of the alternative) in my own experiments, though slower and more cumbrous, was apparently productive of more accurate results. It will be readily understood that it might be easier for the transmitted impulse to check a movement, at once uncertain and spasmodic, which had been already initiated, than to overcome, in a short space of time, the resistance of inertia and generate a new movement. The distinction may perhaps be illustrated by the difference between the amount of force required to start a railway truck at rest on the level, and that which would suffice to arrest one actually in gentle motion.

2 Of course substitutions of this kind considerably reduce the value of the results obtained, but it will be found that when full deduction has been made on this score, the coincidences remain overwhelmingly in excess of anything which could have been produced by chance.

2 In some previous experiments a circular alphabet had been used, with a view of preventing any of those seated at the first table from learning by the movements of the operator's hand what point of the alphabet he had reached. The other precautions described seemed, however, as M. Richet points out, sufficient to exclude all considerations of this kind.

100 APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

Then we made a great noise, we repeated poetry, sang, and counted to such good purpose that P., who was at the alphabet, could hardly follow the ringing of the bell. We asked for some French poetry. The reply was —

O U,SONT,LES,NEIGES,DANTAN

That is, *'0u sont les neiges d'Antan.?" — a verse of Villon's, obviously known to us all.

We then asked, what were the relations of Villon with the kings of France 1

L O U I S, L E,C R U E L

Louis le cruel.

What book ought we to read?

ESS A Y,SUR,D A EMONIOMANIE

The reader will understand that if I mention these experiments, it is not because the answers are interesting in themselves, but because the precautions taken seemed sufficient to prevent the medium from gaining any knowledge of the movements of the operator at the alphabet.... I add a few more rephes; but the number and intrinsic significance of these replies is a matter of but little importance.



Fest Inalente

I N F AN D UM,RE/INAJ U B E S



Reno Vare.dolorem

The old spelling of the word "Rejina" should be noticed. {Proc. Soc. Psych. Research, vol. v. pp. 142, 143.)

In this case it will be observed that P. alone was in possession of the knowledge, without which all the efforts of those at the table could have produced only a meaningless sequence of letters. In some other experiments of the series the procedure was more complicated. M. Richet, standing apart from both tables, asked a question, the answer to which was given by the percipients with a certain approximation to correctness. The results, though less striking than



Production of Movements. Loi

those already quoted, arc yet such as to suggest that they were not due to chance.^

Production of Local AncestJiesia.

We now pass to experiments of another kind, rcsembhng those last quoted, inasmuch as the effects were produced without the consciousness of the percipient, but differing in the important particular that no deliberate and conscious effort on his part could have enabled him to produce them. In experiments carried on with various subjects at intervals through the years 1883-87, at some of which the present writer assisted, Mr. Edmund Gurney had shown that it was possible by means of the unexpressed will of the agent to produce local anaesthesia in certain persons. (6'.P.i?., vol. i. pp. 257-260; ii. 201-205; iii. 453-459; v. 14-17.) In these experiments the subject was placed at a table, and his hands were passed through holes in a large brown paper screen, so that they were completely concealed from his view. Mr. G. A. Smith then held his hand at a distance of two or three inches from the finger indicated by Mr. Gurney, at ^ the same time willing that it should become rigid and insensible. On subsequently applying appropriate tests it was found, as a rule, that the finger selected had actually become rigid and was insensible to pain. In the last series of 160 experiments Mr. Gurney, as well as Mr. Smith, held his hand over a particular finger. In 124 cases the finger over which Mr. Smith's hand had been held was alone affected; in 16 cases Mr. Gurney and Mr. Smith were both success-I ful; in 13 cases Mr. Gurney was successful and Mr.

^B Smith failed. In the remaining 7 cases no effect at all ^B was produced. It is noteworthy that in a series of 41 ^B similar trials, in which Mr. Smith, while holding his I^B hand in the same position, willed that no effect

I^F * Rev. Phil.y Dec. 1884; see also S.P.R., vol. ii. pp. 247 ei seq.

102 APPARITIONS ANt) tHOUGHT-tRANSFERENCE.

should be produced, there was actually no effect in 36 cases; in 4 cases the finger over which his hand was held, and in the remaining case another finger, were affected. The rigidity was tested by asking the subject, at the end of the experiment, to close his hands. When he complied with the request the finger operated on — if the experiment had succeeded — would remain rigid. The insensibility was proved by pricking, burning, or by a current from an induction coil. In the majority of the successful trials the insensibility was shown to be proof against all assaults, however severe.

In these earlier experiments it seemed essential to success that Mr. Smith's hand should be in close proximity to that of the subject, without any intervening barrier. These conditions made it difficult to exclude the possibility of the subject learning by variations in temperature, or by air currents, which finger was actually being operated on; though it is hard to conceive that the percipient could by any such means have discriminated between Mr. Gurney's hand and Mr. Smith's. On the other hand, even if this source of error was held to be excluded, the interpretation of the results remained ambiguous. As a matter of fact, Mr. Gurney himself was inclined to attribute the effects produced, not to telepathy, as ordinarily understood, but to a specific vital effluence, or, as he phrased it, a kind of nervous induction, operating directly on the affected part of the percipient's organism. {Proc. S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 254-259.)

With a view to test this hypothesis further experiments of the same kind were made by Mrs. Sidgwick during the years 1890 and 1892, the subjects being P. and Miss B. already mentioned. The percipient was throughout in a normal condition. As before, he sat at a table with his hands passed through holes in a large screen, which extended sufficiently far in all directions to prevent him from seeing either the operator or his own hands. Mr. Smith, as before,

p

willed to produce the desired effect in the finger which had been intimated to him, either by signs or writing, by one of the experimenters. Passing over the trials, very generally successful, made under the same conditions as Mr. Gurney's experiments — i.e., with the agent's hand held at a short distance without any intervening screen from the finger selected — we will quote Mrs. Sidgwick's account of the later series performed under varied conditions. {Proc. S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 577-596.)

No. 28.— By Mrs. H. Sidgwick.

