in the garden for a quarter of an hour each day, and 1 Dom Guéranger,

ale

A Little White Flower

this recommendation was tor her a command, ae one afternoon how much the effort cost the invalid, Sister said to her: “Sœur ‘Chérése, you would as much better to take a rest; walking can do you no good when you are suffering so much, you are only tiring yourself.” “That is true,” she replied, “but do you know what gives me strength? | offer each step for some missionary, thinking that somewhere far away, one of them is worn out by his apostolic labours, and to lessen his fatigue I offer mine to God.”

One year the Sisters’ relatives, as also the servants of the convent, had sent bunches of flowers for the Mother Prioress’s feast. “Thérése was arranging them with great taste when a lay-sister said to her crossly: “It is easy to see that these larger bouquets were sent by your family; of course, those sent by the poor will be hidden behind!” A sweet smile was the only reply, and notwithstanding the unpleasing effect she put the flowers given by the servants in the most conspicuous place. Struck with admiration, the lay-sister went at once to the Prioress to accuse hori of her unkindness and to praise the Shgcuasael shown by Seeur Thérése. When after the latter’s death the body was laid out, this Sister touched the sacred remains with her fete once more asking forgiveness of her fauit. At the same instant she felt herself cured of a cerebral anemia which had for years prevented her from applying herself either to reading or to mental prayer.

Far from avoiding humiliations, Soeur Uhérése sought them with eagerness, and it was in this way she came to offer herse!f as “aid” to a Sister who was well known to be dificult to please. “The proposal was accepted and one day, after she had been tried by a great deal of fault-

274,

Epilogue

finding, a novice asked her why she looked so bright. Great was the novice’s surprise on receiving the reply: “It is because Sister N. has just been saylng disagreeable things to me. She has made me so happy I wish I could meet her now so that I might give her a smile.”... She was still speaking when the Sister in question knocked at the door and the astonished novice could see for herself how the Saints forgive. But Sœur Phérése soared so far above earthly things. that humilietions served only to strengthen her.

"Lo all these virtues she joined an unflinching courage. From her entrance into Carmel, at the age of fiftcen,. she was allowed to follow all the practices of its. austere Rule, the fasts alone excepted. Sometimes her companions in the novitiate, seeing how pale she looked, tried to obtain a dispensation for her either from attendance at Matins, or from rising at the usual hour in the morning, but the Mother Prioress! would never yield to these requests. “A soul of such mettle,” she would say, “ought not to be dealt with as a child; dispensations are not meant for her. Let her be, for God sustains her. Besides, if she be really ill she should come and tell me herself.” But it was always a principle with Thérése that “we should go to the end of our strength before we complain.” How many times did she not assist at Matins suffering from vertigo or violent headaches! “1 am still able to walk,” she would say, “and so | ought to be at my post.” “Phanks to this undaunted energy, she performed acts that were heroic.

It was with difficulty that her delicate stomach accustomed itself to the frugal fare of Carme!.? Certain dishes

1 Rev, M. Mary of Gonzaga who died December 17, 1994. [Carmet. | 2 Carmelites never touch meat. [Eb.]

ay >

A Little White Flower

made her ill, but she knew so well how to hide this fact that no one ever suspected it. One of the Sisters who sat near to her at table tells how she had tried in vain to discover the dishes Soeur ‘Thérése preferred. “The kitchen Sisters, too, finding her easy to please, invariably served her to whee was left, and it was only during her last illness, when she was put under obedience to say what disaeeee with her, that her mortifications came to light. After admitting how she had been tried, she added: “When Our Lord will have us suffer, there can be no evading it. For instance, when Sister Mary of the Sacred Heart! was procuratrix she looked after me with a mother’s tenderness. “lo all appearances I was pampered, and yet endless were the mortifications she imposed upon me by serving me according to her own taste which was entirely different from mine.”

‘Vherese’s spirit of self-sacrifice extended to everything; she always sought what was painful and disagreeable as her rig htful s share, and all that God asked of her she gave Him without bean or reserve. “During my postulantship,” she confessed, ‘it cost me a great deal to perform certain exterior penances customary in our convents, but I never yielded to my repugnance, for it seemed as though from the great crucifix in our garden Christ looked at me with beseeching eyes and begyed these sacrifices.” Her vigilance was such that she never failed to observe e any little recommendations of the Mother Prioress, or any of the smaller rules which render the religious life so meritorious. Having remarked her extraordinary fidelity on this point, one of the old nuns regarded her ever afterwards as a Saint.

1 Marie, her eldest sister.

Epilogue

Inspired by the Holy Ghost with the knowledge ‘that mortification of the mind and heart sanctifies much more surely than bodily penances, Thérèse practised but few of these beyond such as were prescrived by the Rule. It happened, nevertheless, that she fell il] through having worn for too long a time a small penitential cross, the § sharp iron points of which had entered into her fea “Such a trifle would not have caused this,” she said, “if God had not wished to make me understand that the great austerities of the Saints are not meant for me or for the little souls who are to walk by the same path of spiritual childhood.”

It was the want of a fire in winter that caused her the greatest physica! suffering, and it is easy to understand how a delicate constitution such as hers would be tried by the long Norman winters and the damp climate of Lisieux. When the temperature was lower than usual and she had spent the day half-frozen with cold, she would go in the evening, after Matins, to warm herself for a few moments in the communityroom. “lo make her way thence to her cell, she had to walk some sixty yards in the open air, under the cloisters, then, climbing the staircase, traverse a long icy penridns. so that by the time she peachod her room the little a she had so grudgingly allowed herself to gain was utterly lost. As she lay on her straw mattress, with two thin blankets for covering, sleep came to her only in snatches. Sometimes indeed it happened that she would pass the entire night shivering without ever falling asleep. If, from the beginning, ie had told the Novice ite a remedy would at once have been provided, but she preferred to accept this stern penance without uttering a complaint. It

A Little White Flower

was only on her death-bed that she revealed it, in these

expressive words: “Phroughout my religious life the

cold has caused me more physic al pain than any thing else—I have suffered from cold until L almost died of it.’

‘Though in her spirit of generosity she had embraced this austere penance with toy, she subsequently made known under obedience that such excessive suffering, though permitted by God, was not willed by Him, and that in future 1t would be well to guard against it. She considered that while the Rule should be enforced, differences of latitude and of constitution should be studied, and that to act otherwise was to sin against ee ee and to tempt God.

‘The reader will remember the call on Good Friday, April 3, 1896, when, to use her own expression, she heard “the distant murmur which announced the approach of the Bridegroom;”? But before the hour of her deliverance was to sound, long months of pain had still to be endured. On Gane Friday morning she made so little of the hemorrhage of the previous night that the Mother Prioress, blind to the real state of things, allowed her to practise ail the penances the Rule prescribes for that day. In the afternoon, when a novice saw her cleaning a window, her face was livid, and in spite of the energy displayed it was evident thee her strength was almost spent. At the sight of such exhaustion the novice, who dearly loved her young mistress, burst into tears and begged permussion to obtain for her some little reprieve, but Soeur Théreése strictly forbade it, saying she was well able to bear

Epilogue

this slight fatigue on the day when Our Lord had suffered so a for her. Tt was only in Ma AY, 1897, that her own sisters knew of this first warning, and when Mother Agnes of Jesus gently reproached her for keeping silent, the mee exclaimed: “ My poor little Mother, you must thank God I did not teil you, for had vou been aware of my state and seen me so Tittle cared for, your heart would have been very sore.”

Soon, a persistent cough made the Mother Prioress feel anxious; she ordered the sufferer a more strengthening diet and for some months the cough ceased. “ Sickness is too slow a tberator,” said Soeur Thérèse, “T can rely only on Love.” Strongly tempted to respond to an appeal from the Carmelites of Hanot, who were most desirous of possessing her, she began a novena to the Venerable Vhéophane V acid) to ohne her cure, but instead of getting better, she took a serious turn for the worse.

Like her Divine Master she had “passed through the world daing hee ike Him she had been forgotten, and misunderstood, and now, still following in His footsteps, she was to ea the ora hill of Cal vary. Accus-

1 The Blessed Théophane Venard was born at St. Loup, in the diocese of Po! ‘tiers, on the Peast of the Presentation of Our Lady, Nov. 21, 1829. He was martyred:t Kecho, Tong- King, on the Feast of the Piesankiien of Our Lord, Feb. 2, 15! 61,, at the age of 32. A Jong and delightful correspondence with his Rey: begun in his college days and completed from his “cage”? at Kecho, reveals a kinship of poesy as well as of

sanctity and of the love of home between the two “spring flowers.’ The be: auty of his soul was so visible in his boyish face that he was spared all torture during his two months in the “cage.”? In rgog, the year in which Thérése became “Servant of God” by the commencement of the Episcopal Process, her patron received the honours of Beatification. Another child of France-—Joan, its “ Martvr-Maid’’—-whose praises have been sung in affectionate verse by t the Saints of St. Loup and Lisieux, was beatified that same year. [Ev.]

A Little White Flower

tomed to see her always suffering yet always brave, the Mother Prioress allowed her to take part in the community exercises, some of which caused her extreme fatigue. At night she would courageously mount the stairs alone, pausing at every step to take breath. When after much difficulty she at last reached her cell, she was so exhausted that sometimes, as she admitted later, it took her an hour to undress. After all this exertion it was on a hard pallet that she had to take her rest. Her nights were very bad, and on being asked if she would not like some help during those hours of pain, she replied: Oh, no! Tam only too glad to be in a cell where the tore cannot hear me. [am delighted to suffer alone—the moment I receive sympathy and am loaded with attentions I am no longer happy.”

It often happened that painful remedies had to be applied to her side, and one day, having suffered from them more than usual, she was resting in her cell during recreation, when she overheard a ier i in the kiecney saying: “Sœur “Vhércse will not live long, and really [ wonder sometimes what our Mother Prioress will find to say about her when she dies. She will be are puzzled, for though the little Sister is very good she has certainly never done anything worth speaking about.” The infirmarian, who had also overheard what was. said, turned to Thérése and remarked: “If you relied on the opinion of creatures you would certainly be disillusioned to-day.” ‘Ihe opinion of creatures!”” she replied, “happily God has given me the grace to be absolutely nem to it, Let. me: tell: you some=

1 An Btuston to the obituary notice sent to each of the French Carmels when a Carmelite nun dies in France. In the case of those who die in the odour of sanctity these notices sometimes run to: considerable length. [Ep.]

Epilogue

thing that showed me once and for all how much it is worth. A few days after my clothing I went to our Mother’s room. ‘Mother,’ remarked a lay-sister who happened to be there, ‘this novice certainly does. you credit. How well she looks! I hope she may long be able to observe the Rule.” I was feeling really pleased at the ae when another Sister came in, and looking at me, said: ‘Poor Soeur “Thérése, how very tired you look, you quite alarm me. If you continue like this I am afraid you will not be able to keep the Rule very long.’ I was then only sixtcen,. but the incident made such an impression on me,. that I never again set store on the variable opinion of creatures.”

On another occasion someone remarked: “They say that you have never suffered much.” With a smile she pointed to a glass in which there was some medicine of a bright red colour. “Do you see this little glass?’ she said. ‘One would suppose it contained a most delicious draught, whereas in reality it is more bitter than anything I take. Well, it is the image of my lite. To others it has been all rose colour; they imagine that I have drunk of a most delicious wine, but to me it has been full of bitterness. I say bitterness, yet,. after all, my life has not been sad, because I have learned to find joy and sweetness in all chan is: bitters’) S-¥ ow are suffering just now, are you not?” “Yes,” she answered, “but I have longed so much to suffer.’

‘“‘ How sorry we are,” said her novices, “to see you in such pain, and to think you may have even more to suffer.” “Do not grieve,” she replied, “it has. come to this, that I can no longer suffer, because all suffering is swect. Besides it is a great mistake to

A Little White Flower

worry as to what trouble there may be in store; it is like meddling with God’s work. We who run in the way of Love must never allow ourselves to be disturbed by anything. If I did not simply suffer from one moment to another, it would be impossible for me to be patient; but I look only at the present, I forget the past, and I take good care not to forestall the future. When we yield to discouragement or despair it is usually because we give too much thought to the past and to the future. Pray for me, however: often, when I cry to Heaven for help it is kh I feel mast DS EE

“How do you manage,” continued the novices, “ not to give way i discouragement when you are forsaken in this way?” “T turn to God, and to all His Saints and I thank them notwithstanding: I believe they want to see how far I shall trust ne But the words of Job have not entered my heart in vain: ‘Even if Gad

should kill me, 1 would still trust Him? 1 admit that it has taken a long time to arrive at this degree of ee abandonment; but I have reached it now, and it is Our Lord Himself who has brought me there.”

“Our Lord’s will,” she confessed, “fills my heart ‘to the brim, and if anything else be added it cannot penetrate to any depth, but, like oi! on the surface of limpid waters, vlides easily across. If my heart were not already eee over, if it needed to be filled by ‘the feelings of joy one sadness that follow each other so rapidly, then indeed it would be flooded by bitter sorrow; but these quick-succeeding changes scarcely ruffle the surface of my soul, and in its depths there reigns a peace that nothing can disturb.’ Yet her soul

i Cf, Job xii. 15.

Epilogue

was enveloped in thick darkness, and her temptations. against Faith, always conquered but always returning, robbed her all feeling of happiness at the thought of her approaching death. “Were it not for this tr ial, which is impossible to understand,” she would say, “1 hin should die of joy at the thought of soon leaving the world.” By this means, however, the Divine Master wished to put the faichine pouches to her purification, and thus enable her not only to walk rapidly, but to run in her little way of confidence and abandonment. Have we not her own words for its “I desire neither death nor life. Were Our Lord to offer me my choice, | would not choose. [ only will what He wills, and T am pleased with whatever He does. I have no fear of the last struggle, or of any pain, however great, which my illness may bring. God has always been my help; He has led me by the hand since I was a child and I count on Him now. Even though suffering should reach its furthest limits I am certain He will never forsake me.”

Her confidence in God of necessity roused the tury of the devil, who at life’s close tries by every ruse to sow the sceds ie despair in the hearts of the dying. % Last night I was seized with a terrible feeling of anguish,” she once said to Mother Agnes or Jesus. “Lf was lost in darkness and from out of it came an accursed voice: ‘Are you certain God loves you! Has He come to tell you so Himself? “The opinion of a few creatures will not justify you - His sight.” “These thoughts had long tortured me, dear Mother, when your little note came like a message from Heaven. You recalled the special graces Jesus had lavished on me, and, as. though you had been given a revelation concerning

2.83

A Little White Flower

my trial, you told me I was dearly loved by God, and was on the eve of receiving ‘from His hae my eternal crown. Peace and ae revived in my heart. “Then the thought occurred that it was perhaps your affection which prompted you to write thus. Str aightway I was inspired to take up the Gospels, and opening the book at random, | lighted upon a_ passage which had hitherto escaped me: ‘He whom God hath sent, speaketh the Words of Ged, for God doth not give the Spirit by measure?! J fell ap. fully consoled. It is vou, dear Mother, whom God has sent me, and I must believe you, because your words are the Words of God.”

For several days during the month of August she seemed, so to speak, beside herself, and im stored that prayers might be offered for her. We had never before seen her in such a state, and we heard her nee repeating: “If people only knew how necessary i is to pray for those in their agony!” One Hoe she entreated the infirmarian to sprinkle her bed with Holy Water, saying: “The devil is beside me. I do not see him but I feel him; he torments me, holding ine with a grip of iron that I may not find one cramb of comfort, and adding to my sufferings that I may be driven to despair... And I cannot pray. T can only look at Our Blessed Lady, I can only say, ‘Jesus!’ How necessary is that prayer we use at Compline:

‘Far off let idle visions fly, No phantom of the night come nigh! Something mysterious is happening within me. I am

1 John iti, 34.

Epilogue not suffering for myself but for some other soul, and Satan is angry.” “Phe startled infirmarian lighted blessed candle, and the spirit of darkness fled, never to return; but until the end the sufferer remained in a state of extreme anguish.

One day while she was contemplating the beautiful heavens, some one said to her: “ Your home will soon be there, beyond the blue sky. How lovingly you look at it!’ She only smiled, but afterwards she said to Mother Agnes of Jesus: « Mother, the Sisters do not realise my ‘sufferings. Just now, when I was looking at the sky, IT was merely admiring the beauty of the material heaven—the real Heaven scems more than ever closed against me. At first their words troubled me, but an interior voice whispered: ‘Yes, you were looking

Heaven out of love. Since your soul is entirely delivered up to love, all your actions, even the most indifferent, are marked with this divine seal.’ I was consoled immediately.”

Ip spite of the darkness which enveloped the Servant of God, Our Divine Saviour sometimes left the door of her Rae ajar and in those moments her soul was consumed in transports of confidence and love. Once when she was walking in the garden, supported by one of her own sisters, she stood still to watch a little white hen sheltering its chickens under its wing. Her eyes filled with tears and turning to her sister she remarked: “TI cannot remain here any longer, let us go in!” eee when she reached her cell the tears continued to fall, and it was some time before she could ‘speak. At last she said, looking at her sister with a heavenly expression: ee thinking of Our Lord and of the touching comparison He ree in order to

A Little White Flower

bring home to us how tender He is. All my life long He has done that for me—He has completely hidden me under His wing. I cannot tell you all that has just stirred my heart; it is indeed well for me that God conceals Himself, only rarely allowing me to see the effects of His Mercy, and, as it were, from ‘behind the lattices.” Otherwise I could never survive the sweetness.”

Unable to resign ourselves to the thought of losing our treasure, we began a tervent novena to Our Lady of Victories, June 5, 1897, in the hope that once again she would miraculously raise the drooping Little Flower. But her answer was the same as. that given by the blessed martyr, “Phéophane Vénard, and we were forced to accept the bitter prospect of an approaching separation. At the beginning of July, her state became very scrious, and she was at last removed to the infirmary. Looking at the empty room to which she knew her sister would never return, Mother Agnes of Jesus remarked: “When you are no longer with us, how sad I shall fecl as I look at your cell!” “For consolation, little Mother, you must think of how happy I am in Heaven, and remember that a great deal of my happiness was acquired in this cell; for,” she added, raising her beautiful eyes to Heaven, “7 have suffered so much in it that I should be glad to die there.”

The miraculous statue of Our Lady had been brought to the infirmary, and as Soeur Thérése entered the room her eyes turned towards it. It would be

1 Cashing:

Epilogue

impossible to describe that look. ‘What is it you see?” asked her sister Maric, who had witnessed her miraculous cure as a child. neve has she seemed to me more beautiful”, answered the invalid, “ but to-day it is the statue, whereas that other day you know well it was not!”’ “How I love Our Blessed Lady!”” she exclaimed one evening. ‘‘How | would have sung her praises had I been a priest! She is spoken of as unapproachable, whereas she should be Sui aginy as imitable... She is more Mother than Queen! I have heard preachers say her splendour eclipses that of all the Saints as the rising sun makes the stars disappear. How ‘strange that a mother should take away the glory of her children! I think quite the contrary will happen, I am certain she will greatly add to the splendour of God’s redeemed... Our Mother Mary! How simple was her life!” aad ‘Thércse went on to draw a picture of the Holy Family such that all present were fost in admiration.

Before going to Join her Spouse a heavy trial awaited her. From August 16 till the day of her death, ‘September 30, she was unable to receive Holy Communion because of her continual sickness. Yct few have hungered for the Bread of Angels as did this seraph of ae again and again during the me winter of her life she had heroically risen at an early hour to partake -of the Heavenly Manna, even after, nights spent in almost intolerable pain. No price was too high tor the bliss of being united to her God. Previous to the great trial of being deprived of her Divine Food, Our Lord visited her often upon her bed of suffering. Her ‘Communion on July 16, feast of Our Lady of Mount “Carmel, was particularly touching. During the previous

A Little White Flower

night she composed the following lines which were to be sung before she received the Blessed Sacrament:

“Thou know’st the baseness of my soul, O Lord, Yet fearest not to stoop and enter me.

Come to my heart, O Sacrament adored!

Come to my ee.. It craveth but for Thee!

And when Thou comest, straightway let me die

Of very love for Thee; this boon impart!

Oh, hearken, Jesus, to my suppliant cry:

Come to my heart!”

In the morning, when the Holy Viaticum was carried to the it nfirmary, the cloisters were thickly strewn with rosc-petals and wild flowers. A young priest, who was to say his first Mass that same day in the chapel of the Carmel, bore the Blessed Sacrament to the dying Sister, oiile at her request, Sister Mary of

the Hee ooh ose voice was exceptionally sweet— sang the following couplet from a favourite hymn composed long before:

“Sweet martyrdom! to die of love’s keen fire:

The martyrdom of which my heart is fain! Hasten, ye Cher ubim, to tune your lyre; I shall not linger foe 4 in exile’s pain!

. °. a

Fulfil my dream, O Jesus, since I sigh Of love to die.”

A tew days later the dear invalid grew worse, and on July 30 she received the Last Anointing. Radiant with delight she said to us: “The door of my dark prison is ajar; { am overcome with joy, especially since our Father Superior has assured me that to-day my soul is like that of a little child after Baptism.”

Epilogue Two long months of martyrdom, however, had yet to run their course. “I entreat you, Mother, give me leave to die,” she said to the Prioress. ‘Let me offer my life for such an intention”—which she named. And when the permission was refused, she replied: “Well, I know that just at this moment Our Lord has. such a longing for a little bunch of grapes, which no one wants to give Him, that He will perforce have to come and steal it... I ask for nothing—that would be to stray from my path of self-surrender.. All I do is to beseech Our Lady to remind Jesus of the title of Thref; which He takes to Himself in the Gospels, so that He may not forget to come and steal me away.” % i Be % ¥ *%

One day she took from a sheaf that had been brought her, an car of corn so laden with grain that it bent on its stalk. After gazing upon it for some time she said to the Mother Prioress: “That car of corn, dear Mother, is the image of my soul, which God as loaded with graces for me and for many others, and it ts my earnest desire to bend always beneath the weight of His gifts, acknowledging that all comes from Him.”

She was right. Her soul was indeed laden with graces, and it was casy to discern the Spirit of God speaking His praises out of the mouth of the innocent child. Had not the same Spirit of ‘Truth dictated these words to the great Saint Teresa of Avila:

“Let those souls who have reached to a perfect union with God hold themselves in high esteem, with a humble and holy presumption. Let them keep unceasingly before their eyes the remembrance of the good

t Hence the ear of corn on the cover of this volume. [Ep.]

A Little White Flower

things they have received, and beware of the thought that they are practising humility in Not recognising the gifts of God. Is it not clear that the constant remembrance of gifts bestowed serves to increase the love for the giver? How can he who ignores the riches he possesses spend them generously upon others?”

But the above was not the only occasion upon which “jittle “Vhérese of Lisieux’? gave utterance to words that proved prophetic. In the month of April, 1895, while she was still in excellent health, she dene te one of the elder nuns that she would soon die. “T do not say that it will be in a few months, but in two, or three years at most; | know it by what is taking place in my soul.” At times, to the novices’ surprise, she read their intimate thoughts. ‘This is my secret,” she told them; “TI never reprimand you without fies invoking Gur Blessed Lady, asking her to inspire me with whatever will be for your greatest good. Often Iam myself astonished at what I say, but as I say it I feel I make no mistake, and that it is Jesus who speaks by my lips.” During her illness, one of her own sisters had experienced some moments of acute distress, amounting almost to depression, at

1 When asked before her death how they should pray to her in Heaven, Seur Thérése made answer with her wonted simplicity: “You wil} call me ‘Little Thérése’—petite Thérèse.’ And at Gallipoli (Italy) on the occasion of her celebrated apparition in the Carmel there, when the Prioress took her to be St. Teresa of Avila, and addressed her as * onr Holy Mother,” the visitor replied, adopting her official title, “Nay, Tam not our Holy Mother, Iam the Serwant of God, Saeur Thérése of Listeux.’ This, her own name of Seur Thérése, has been retained in the present translation, except where it was advisable to set down her name in full—Sister Teresa of the Child Jesus and of the Holy Face. The name of the “Little Flower,” borrowed by her from the Blessed Théophane

Venard, and used so extensively in the pages of her manuscript, is the -one by which she is best known in English-speaking lands. [Ep.]

Epilogue

the thought of the inevitable parting. She went straight to the infirmary but was careful not to betray any sign of grief, and what was her surprise when the sufferer said to her in a sad and serious tone: ‘We ought not to weep like those who have no hope.” “ How happy I should be,” thought one of our Mothers who had done her some trifling service on the occasion of a visit, “if this saint would only say, ‘I will repay you in Heaven!?” Simultaneously, Soeur Thérèse turning to her said: “ Mother, I will repay you in Heaven!”

She had an evident consciousness of the mission on which Our Lord had sent her. ‘The veil shutting out the future seemed lifted, and more than once she revealed to us its secrets, in prophecies which have already been realised: “TI have never given God anything but love,” she said to us, “it is with love He will repay:



After My Death



I Will Let Fall a Shower of Roses.”

At another time she interrupted a Sister who was speaking to her of the happiness of Heaven, by these sublime words: “It is not that which attracts me.” “What is it, then?” asked the Sister. “Oh! it is Love! To love, to be loved, and to return to earth to win love for our Love!” One evening when Mother Agnes of

1 “You will look down on us from Heaven,” they said to her, “No!’’ she replied, “Z will come down.’ That promise has been kept repeatedly during the past 18 years, by her visits to the tempted, the suffering, and the dying. Often, too, her presence has been distinctly felt, without any apparition being visible, and the spiritual grace or temporal favour follows, authenticating the “visit.” At other times it is merely a sudden perfume of flowers, or incense, or some heavenly fragrance, that precedes or accompanies one of her innumerable “roses.”” In her autobiography, however, Seur Thérése declares that she herself had no desire for such supernatural communications. [Ep. ]

A Little White Flower

Jesus went to the infirmary, Soeur Thérése welcomed her with an extraordinary expression of joy: “Mother!’” she said, “some notes from a distant concert have

just no my ears, and there has come to me the thought that soon [ shall be listening to the sweet melodies of Paradise. ‘This thought, however, gave me only a moment’s joy, for one hope alone m: fee my heart beat fast—the pa IT shall receive and the love I shall be able to give! IT feel that my mission is soon to begin—to make others love God as T love Him Cae to teach souls my /ittle way...



I Will Spend My Heaven

IN DOING GOOD UPON EARTH,

‘Uhis is not impossible, for the Angels keep watch over us while they enjoy the Beatific Vision. No, there cannot be any rest for me till the end of the world—til| the Angel shall have said: 6 Time is no more” Then I shail take my rest, then [shall betable to rejoice, because the number of ne elect will be complete.”

“And what is the ‘/tt/- way "ahar you would teach?

asked Mother Agnes of Jesus.

“Ir Is THE WAY OF SPIRITUAL CHILDHOOD, THE WAY OF TRUST AND ABSOLUTE SELF-SURRENDER..

[ want to point out to souls the means that I have always found so completely successful, to tell them there is only one thing to do here below—to offer Our Lord the flowers of /ittl: sacrifices and win Him by our caresses. “hat is how I have won Him, and that is why [ shall be made so welcome.”

b Agee a,

Epilogue

“Should I misguide you by my /tt/e way of love,’” she told her novices, “do not fear that I shall allow you to continue following it; I should very soon come back to earth and tell you to take another road.!' But if I do not return, then believe in the truth of these words: We can never have toa much confidence in our God whoa is so mighty and so merciful, As we hope in Him so shall we recetve,”

On the eve of the feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmel, a novice said to her: “If you were to die to-morrow, after Holy Communion, I think I should be quite consoled——it would be such a beautiful death!”’ “Die after Holy Communion!” she answered quickly, “upon a great feast! No, such will never be my lot. Little souls could never imitate me in that. In my ‘little way’ everything is most ordinary, for all I do must likewise be within their reach.”

When, as often happened, roses were sent to her she would pluck their petals one by one, touching her crucifix lovingly with each. Once when some of these precious relics fell to the ground she said to us: ** Gather up those petals carefully, they will serve one day to give pleasure to others. Do not lose a single one.” They have served indeed not only to give pleasure, but to work miracles.

Another time she said to her “little Mother”: ‘In

1 On January 16, 1910, during the first of her series of “visits” to the starving Carmelites of Gallipoli, in Italy, she said to the Prioress: “ My way ts sure, and I was not mistaken in following it.’ From January to August gifts of money, miraculously conveyed, proved to a strict court of enquiry that Seur Thérése had indeed “come down.” On January 16, 1911, she again sent a large sum to the Carmel of Gallipoli, approving in this way the Bishop of Nardo’s interpretation of the words quoted above. See 6 As Little Children,’ (Orphans’ Press—gqd,), for a full account of the

apparitions. [Ep.]

A Little White Flower

Heaven [ shall obtain many graces for those who have been kind to me. As for you, Mother, all I send will not suffice to repay you, but there will be much to ‘make you rejoice.”

A certain Sister had doubts as to the invalid’s patience, but going to see her one day, and noticing that her face wore an expression of unearthly joy, she sought to know the reason. “It is because the pain is so acute,” replied the Servant of God; “I tave always forced myself to love suffering and to welcome it gladly.”

“When I suffer much,” she would say, “when painful and disagreeable dies come my way, Instead ‘of looking sad | ereet them wiih asmile. At first I ‘did not always succeed, but now it has become a habit which I am truly glad to have acquired.”

“Why are you so bright this morning?” asked Mother Agnes of Jesus. “Because of two little crosses I have received,” she answered. ‘Nothing gives me ‘such joy as ‘little crosses” do.” And on another ‘occasion: You have had many trials to-day?” “Yes, but I love them!...I love everything God in His ‘goodness sends mc.” ‘Your sufferings are terrible!”’ “€No, they are not terrible: can a victim of Love find anything terrible that is sent by her Spouse? At each moment He sends me what I am able to bear—nothing if He increase the pain my strength is also ea But I could never ask for greater sufferings —I am too little a soul; besides, being of my own choice I should have to bear them without His help, and when leit to myself I have never been fit for anything.”

Thus spoke the wise and prudent virgin as she lay

tL CinP roy, seat:

Epilogue

on her death-bed; her lamp, filled to the brim with the oil of virtue, burned brightly to the end. If, as the Holy Spirit reminds us in the Book of Proverbs: “4 man’s doctrine is proved by bis patience,’' those who heard her may well believe in her doctrine, for she proved it by a patience which no test could overcome.. At each visit the doctor expressed his admiration, assuring us that her sufferings were intense and that ae had never seen anyone entine similar pain with such an expression of supernatural joy. We told him of our grief at the prospect of losing our treasure, but he replied: “T shall not be able to cure her, she was not made for this world.” In view of her extreme weakness he ordered some strengthening remedies, and because of their cost Sœur Thérése was at first distressed, but afterwards she admitted: “I am no longer troub led at having to take these expensive medicines, for I have read that when they were given to St. Gertrude she was gladdened by the thought that it would all redound to the good of her benefactors, since Our Lord has said: VV hatever you do to the least of My little ones, you do unto eee + am convinced that noremedies have the power to cure me,” she added, “but J have made a covenant with God that they may be for the benefit of poor missionaries who have neither time nor means to take care of themselves.’

Touched by the thoughtfulness of His spouse, Our Lord, who will never allow His generosity to be outdone, surrounded her with His loving attentions. At one time it would be in the form of flowers sent by some member of her family, at another in that of a little robin who would come and hop about

1 Matt. xxv. 40.

a5

A Little White Flower

her bed. ‘ Mother,” she would then say, “I feel deeply all these delicate proofs of God’s love. Outwardly I am laden with them... nevertheless I remain in the deepest gloom!... J am suffering intense:y— most intensely—and yet amid it all I am in a state of extraordinary peace. All my longings have been realised...I am full of confidence.” Shortly after this she related the following incident: One evening, during the ‘Great Silence,’ when I was in high fever and parched with thirst, the infirmarian put a hot-water

bottle to my feet and tincture of iodine on my chest. Whilst submitting to these remedies I could not help

saying to Our Lord: ‘My Jesus, Thou seest I am already burning, and they have brought me more heat and more fire. If instead, they had given me even half-a-glass of water, what comfort it would have been! My Jesus! Thy child is very thirsty! She is glad, however, to have this opportunity of resembling Thee more closely and thus of saving souls.’ Presently the infirmarian left me, and I did not expect to see her again until morning. What then was my surprise when she returned with a refreshing drink! ‘It has just struck me,’ she said, ‘that you may be thirsty, so for the future I shall bring you this every evening.’ I looked at her in astonishment, and when I once more found myself alone, I could not keep back my tears. How good Obt Lord) ist How tender ane loving! How easy it is to touch His Heart!”

On September 6, Sœur Thérèse received a proof of the love of the Divine Heart—a proof which sank deeply into her own. She had frequently expressed the wish to possess something which had belonged to her sainted friend, the Blessed Théophane Vénard, but

Epilogue

finding that nothing came of her desire she said no more. “Chat day, however, we received, quite providentially, « relic of the saint, and when the Mother Prioress brought her the coveted treasure she kissed it repeatedly, and would not part with it. It may be wondered why ‘Vhérése was so devoted to this young marty’. In an affectionate interview with her own sisters she explained her reason. “’Théophane Vénard,” she said, “is a Ztt/e Saint, and his life is quite ordinary. He had an ardent love of our Immaculate Mother, and likewise a great love for those at home.” Dwelling on these last words, she added: “And I, too, love my family with a most tender love; I fail to understand those Saints who do not love their dear ones, As a parting gift, | have copied for you some passages from his last letters home. — His soul and mine resemble each other, and his words re-echo my thoughts.” We give here a copy of the letter, which might well have been composed by herself:

“Nothing on earth can make me happy, for the desires of my heart are too vast, and nothing of what the world calls happiness can satisfy it. “Time for me will soon be no more; my thoughts are fixed on Eternity, and my heart is full of peace, like a tranquil lake or a cloudless sky. “Thirsting for the waters of Life Eternal, I leave the world without regret. Yet a little while and my soul will have quitted this earth, will have finished her exile, will have ended her combat. Heaven is won. I am about to enter the abode of the Blessed—to see what eye hath never seen, to hear what ear hath never heard, to enjoy those things which the heart of man hath not conceived.

“7 have reached the hour so coveted by us all. Itisindeed

A Little White Flower

true that God chooses the /itt/e ones to confound the great ones of the world, nor do I rely upon my own strength but upon Him who, on the Cross, vanquished the powers of. hell. Iam a spring flower which the Divine Master gathers for His pleasure. We are all flowers, planted upon earth, and God will gather us in His own good time—some sooner, some later... 1, a little fower of one day, am the first to be taken! But we shall meet again in Paradise, where we shall enjoy unending bliss. “SIstER “TERESA OF THE CHILD JEsus,

using the words of the angelic martyr -~Théophane Vénard.’” Towards the end of September, when someone repeated to her a remark made at recreation concerning the responsibility of those who are entrusted with the care of souls, she seemed to revive for a few minutes and gave utterance to these beautiful words: “¢To him that is little, mercy is granted? * It is possible to remain “tt/e even in the most responsible position, and besides is it not written that at the last day 6 The Lord will arise and save the meek and lowly ones of the earth’? He does not say ‘to judge’ but ‘to save!?”

Meanwhile the tide of pain was rising higher and higher, and Soeur Thérése became so weak that she was unable to make the slightest movement without assistance. Even when those about her spoke in whispers it added greatly to her suffering, and the fever and oppression were so extreme that it was only with the greatest difficulty she could articulate a word. Yet a sweet smile was always on her lips. The one fear that would bring a cloud was lest she should give the Sisters any extra trouble, and until two days betore

1 Wisdom vi. 7. aU, Ps. ixew, ae,

Epilogue her death she would never allow anyone to remain with her through the night. In spite of her entreaties,, however, the infirmarian looked in from time to time. Finding her, on one of these occasions, with hands joined and eyes raised to Heaven, she asked: “ What are you doing? You ought to try and get some sleep.” “I cannot, Sister, | am suffering too much, so I pray.” “And what > c >

ae

do vou say to Tesus?’”’ “I say nothing—IJ Jove Him. bi id ) g

“How good God is!’’ she often exclaimed. “He must indeed be very good to give me strength to bear all that I am enduring.’ One evening she sent to the Mother Prioress the following lines written in pencil with a trembling hand: “O my God! how good Thou art to the little victim of Thy Merciful Love! Even now, when Thou dost add these bodily pains to those of my soul, I cannot bring myself to say: ‘The anguish of death hath encompassed me.’* Rather do I cry out in my gratitude: “Z have gone down into the valley of the shadow of death, but I fear no evil because Thou, O Lord, art with

me!’’’2

Mother Agnes of Jesus once told her that some were under the impression that she was afraid of death. “That may easily come to pass,” she replied; a S10 not rely on my own feelings, for I know my frailty. But I wish to enjoy all the peace God gives me now, it will be time enough to bear that cross, if it come. When the chaplain asked me if I were resigned to die, I told him I needed more resignation to live, and that the thought of death brought me nothing but joy. a in my last moments I suffer a great deal and show no sign of peace, let it not trouble you, dear Mother. Did not Our Lord Himself die a victim of love: Yet

tC Pa KVL, 4s aCh Ps, sew.

A Little White Flower

sce how great was His agony!”

On the day before her death, September 20, at about nine o’clock in the evening, she and_ her youngest sister Céline (Sister Genevieve of St. Teresa), heard a fluttering of wings in the garden, and soon after, a turtle-dove from some unknown quarter lighted on the window-sill, where it remained for a considerable time, cooing all the while. Both sisters were deeply moved as they recalled the words: “ The voice of the turtle is heard in our land:... Winter is now past... arise my love... my beautiful one, and come |? 1

At last the day broke that was to be for Soeur ‘Therese the dawn of Eternity. On the morning of Thursday, September 30, 1897, her eyes fixed on Our Lady’s statue, she thus referred to her last night on earth: “Oh! with what fervour I have prayed to her!... And yet it has been sheer agony, without a ray of consolation... Earth’s air is failing me; when shall I breathe the air of Heaven?”

At half-past two she raised herself in bed, which she had been unable to do for weeks, and exclaimed: “Mother, the chalice is full to overflowing! I could never have believed it possible to suffer so intensely... IT can explain it only by my great longing to save souls...’ And a little while after, she added: “ All that I have written of my thirst for suffering is really true. Lf have no regret for having surrendered myself to Love.” ‘These last words she repeated several times, and a little later she continued: “ Mother, prepare me to dic a good death.” The Mother Prioress encouraged

Pilonk, (ihe SER iin eo

Epilogue

her with the words: “My child, you are quite ready to appear before God because you have always understood the virtue of humility.” “hen in these striking terms the martyr of Divine Love bore witness to herself: “Yes, I feel that my soul has never sought anything but the truth... I have understood humility of heart!” At half-past four, as she gave signs of entering on her agony, the community was summoned. From the moment our saintly child saw the Sisters gather round her she thanked them with the swectest smile; then, clasping the crucifix in her failing hands, she concentrated on the final combat all the powers of her soul. The sweat of death lay thick on her brow, and the “victim trembled... but as a pilot, when close to harbour, is not dismayed by the fury of the storm, so this brave heart, strong in faith, saw close at hand the beacon lights of Heaven and valiantly put forth every ‘effort to reach the shore. As the convent bell rang the evening Angelus, she gazed with inexpressible tenderness upon the statue of the Immaculate Virgin Star of the Sea. It was the moment to repeat her beautiful prayer:

«Q thou who cam’st to smile on me, in the morning of my life, Come, Mother, once again and smile—for lo! ’ts eventide! 774

A few minutes after seven, turning to the Prioress, she asked: “Mother is not this the agony? Am I not going tonite. © Yes, my child, it is the agony, but it may be that Jesus wills it should be prolonged for ‘some hours.? “Very well, then”—she answered

} From the last poem written by Seur Thérése. [En].

A Little White Flower

sweetly —“ very well... be it so... Ah! I do not wish to suffer less.” And looking at her a she continued: “OA!.. 1 ioe Him!. iy eae Peo. eA oe tS

These were her last words. Scarcely had she uttered them, when to our great Peles her whole frame drooped quite suddenly, the head inclined a little to the right, in the attitude of the Virgin Martyrs offering ieacei aes to the sword; or rather as a Victim of Love, awaiting from the ee Archer the fiery shaft by which she longs to dic. All at once she raised herself, as though called by a mysterious voice, and opening her eyes, which shone with unutterable joy, she fixed her gaze a little above the statue of Our Lady and so remained for about the space of a Credo, when her blessed soul, the prey of the “ Divine Eagle,” was borne away to the heights of Heaven.

A few days before, Sister ee of the Child Jesus had said: ‘* The: death of love>t desive is that ae Jesus upon the Cross.” Her wish was fully granted, tor darkness and bitter anguish were the lot of her soul throughout her last agony. Yet may we not apply to her also, that sublime prophecy of St. John of the Cross, referring to souls consumed by the fire of Divine Love?

“They die victims of the onslaughts of love, tn raptured ecstasies—like the swan, whose song grows sweeter as death draws nigh. Wherefore the Psalmist declares: $ Precious tm the sight of the Lord is the death of His Saints”) For then it is that the rivers of love Hyd nd Pager tpn oN

Epilogue burst forth from the soul and are lost in the ocean of Divine Love.”

No sooner had the soul of the sufferer taken flight than the joy of that last rapture imprinted itself on her brow and a celestial smile illumined her face. In her hand we placed a palm-branch, the same green branch which thirteen years later was found fresh and intact in the coffin when her sacred remains were exhumed.! Simuitaneously there began to occur in the convent certain extraordinary incidents of which the following may be mentioned as examples. The first— already alluded to—is that of a lay-sister who on kissing the feet of the Servant of God was instantly cured of cerebral anemia. Another nun was favoured with a very strong perfume of violets; while a third felt herself thrilled by a kiss bestowed on her by some invisible being. One Sister perceived a bright light in the heavens, and another saw a luminous crown which, rising from the earth, was soon lost in space.

All through the Saturday and Sunday people kept defiling past the grating of the nuns’ chapel to pay a final tribute to the “ Little Flower of Jesus.”” Hundreds of rosaries, medals, and even trinkets, were made to touch the “little Queen” as she lay in the majestic beauty of her last sleep. Amongst the crowd was a

1 The remains of the Servant of God were exhumed, for better preservation, on September 6, 1910, in presence of the entire Episcopal ‘Tribunal of the Beatification. As she foretold, nothing was found of her body but the bones, yet the palm-branch mentioned above was perfectly preserved and may be scen at the Carmel. (A full account of the ceremony, and of the “roses” which accompanied it, is given in “ds Litdle Children.’) It would seem as if God wished to emphasise her words: “ Fesus! Oh, I would so love Him! Love Him as He has never yet been loved! I desire at all casts to win the palm of St. Agnes; if it cannot be mine through the shedding of blood, it must be by Love.” [Ep.]

A Little White Flower

child of ten who perceived a strong perfume of lilies, a fact which could not be explained since only artificial lilies adorned the remains.

On the day of the runeral, October 4, there gathered in the chapel of our Carmel a goodly company of priests—an honour most assuredly due to one who had so earnestly prayed for those called to that sacred office. After a last solemn blessing, the hands of Holy Mother Church cast into the furrow this grain of priceless. wheat. Since then the words of the Divine Reaper have been magnificently fulfilled: “-dsmen, amen, I say to you, unless the grain of wheat, falling into the ground, die, itself remaineth alone. ‘But if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.’ ' Here on earth the fruit more often remains hidden, but in the case of Soeur Théreése,. Our Lord has forestailed the hour of eternal revelation, and desires us to contemplate the splendid harvest ripening all over the globe. Day by day news comes from many lands of the delicate charities from above, of her gracious visits, of her growing legion of little souls, and as the power of her intercession with her Spouse becomes more clear, there goes up from the hearts that love her a warmer tribute of praise to the Divine Mercy, the true fount of all good.

THE CarRMEL oF LIstEuXx.

t John xil. 24, 25.

jag Me Be Pa WORLD AND THE CLOISTER.-Seur Thérése to her sister Céline, September, 1894.

Dearest CeéLine,—TI am so glad that you do not teel any particular attraction at the thought of entering Carmel. “This is really a mark of Our Lord’s favour,, and shows that He looks for a gift from your hands. He knows that it is so much sweeter to give than to recetve. What happiness to suffer for Him who loves us ever unto folly, and to pass for fools in the eyes of the world! Men judge others by themselves, and, as the world will not hearken to reason, it calls us unreasonable too.

We may console ourselves that we are not the first. Folly was the only crime with which Herod could re-. proach Our Lord... and, after all, Herod was right. Tt was folly indeed, for the King of Glory, who sitteth above the Cherubitm, to seek out thrones for Himself in poor human hearts. Was He not supremely happy i the company of His Father and the Holy Spirit of Lover Why, then, come down on earth in search of sinners and make of them His closest friends? Nay, our folly could never exceed the foolishness of Christ, and our deeds are quite within the bounds of reason by the side of His. The world may leave us alone. I repeat, it is the world that is zwsane, because it will not heed what Jesus has done and suffered to save it from eternal damnation.

We are neither idlers, nor spendthrifts. Our Divine Master has taken our defence upon Himself. Remember the scene in the house of Lazarus: Martha was serving, while Mary had no thought of food but only

A Little White Flower

-of how she could please her Beloved. And, “ she broke her alabaster box, and poured out upon her Savisur’s Head the precious spikenard; and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment.”?

‘The Apostles murmured against Magdalen, and so do men murmur against us. Even fervent Catholics ‘think our ways are exaggerated, and that we ought to wait upon Jesus like Martha, instead of pouring out on Him the odorous ointment of our lives. Yet what does it matter if the ointment-jars be broken, since Our Lord is consoled, and the world in spite of itself is forced to inhale the perfumes they give forth? It has much need of these same perfumes to purify the unwholesome air it breathes.

For a while only, good-bye, dearest sister. Your barque is near to port. “Lhe breezes filling its sails are ‘the zephyrs of Love—breezes that speed more swiftly than the lightning-flash. Good-bye! in a few days we shall be together within these Carmel walls... and afterwards together in Paradise. Did not Jesus say during His Passion: “ Hereafter you shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the power of God and coming in the clouds of Heaven”?3... We shall be there!

THERESE.

Ae Dark ancy: 3 2 John xii. 3. 3 Matt. xxvi. 64. Nore. The letters and spiritual counsels of the Servant of God will _appear in a further volume, T.N.T.

Bu (a/7 ye 265

Thirhse, de Lisieux, Oe

A little white flower

TOS evo 6) oe

ae

eats

ae

aes

batt 44)

‘a Dey oe tke aaa’

s Be atypia poste

iat nth ais

dnd wh

ate

inate s

aaniad +5

haa

ae Ges

pea ares eared £5

id ihr ae Spy a oi i Spann rat eee a ene

seh

ae

abe i hae a0 95) se the ae nie

Ae Aes

Yih, coh

7 st ae ube as Race HEPARtene 6s arhee a Aes i ag

te Watees baiee,

M 4? id te aeAh APP tes em aylegp

Dg dd tes re } ie revert TNE ry AM aN: LMR ace b rade ened Patt x +f % (ads iad. in? 4a

? mean

ae ores ep

etek Re at

ise

: SATeetis  es Hit ake See ROT AL

Vai? a

fhe Read racine cS

+4 ones a

hades:

ESOL ety Ke

TF daa) adhe

Qi ates ithe i i

ane

Se

Mars es

Rtn be

x V3 vk a ed Secu

oo i

oer)

eee

i

Bee ara 3

% Bt

COR i i Bs ue ad

rete

os

ee eded

re eh

te a ne Bar

faite

New

os

itt. 3 nis ee ait & Beate

ioe

7, 4 > te! tOrER TH

ao eee

. ‘ suet

faa

Le, ¢ we

rag ie

os

ay

Tanty 2 ON

ee ae Soe ¥

coe +3 Sass isin ary? Biransten bestatys Wey

wy yrs Shaye?

i va Gas my My Ph Atal

winds ‘ rt i

aariate an aie

Sek,

oa

vi yey es a ie

sie t i ae oe:

epee

Rey bn bs by +

echo CADRE ae yuk

ise

i: 2

ae

Mat - aed uae ee a3 —

a Ay)

aihbe ih CLEy

x. = om Len = =

at

} sy si te S rt ay oe + aie}

= =o

i

¥4 baie Ty

Peta oe ie

at ee ate

ny Paras has tt bet

M3 a oF

pile sh

ae iia tay ebisea 4 oy)

es aay oh INGEN ae Pyhy, | 2S De arian is

oye t Fi. ebm ted hy nna e is iss Hepat

peel iy wh OF

as ut ater a ai aie Fay

ns ae ' 04 y

nee ate

vd crete he fi iveewcne ve 4

ae i aye pat spe hye

Beets = oe re acres oe

at i y ne He hee

wre - ce weed? aay

wag a

Beek toy

nati st si

ae PES tyes ES Ahi bvant eayaiees ine yeterurt baths bene Sphere, mira)! Men) va

iad N

Pee esti by ied kanal

, Bt, TATE ep

Prevarr et yrey cry

bee satan Hats

if 4 Buea Hoes 4 i chives; Lighway rs: j bet tt ie inane Ky: nee te gates: vith PNT Lue My wan tit Aes

Cusp teat ¥

& ae vines) Ba ii as

{ > rf itd & ahs Fi4 is RITE Gsere ayeye es bars Hepes eS eNGS ese ed we rs

Py

( dash)

oF aa? Puy iH} hae “Ps vo ue ’

‘ iy.

Vee ese ” NES Fy at ee ays i ay rane ses

nde

tape

ifat St ty. Ree ats ‘i Cg tere

” thers als o Hee

Fy WH faao a iM LXeces eaves eee we vey abibine de ae bar th Hiercriaays ah yge: hy aint iy

‘ Oh ‘ Eine TR

an

heey. Agi: vite ae

: ye hh ay

an Ke ebe Ve 1 q ua:

oye Ai }

te i farsu ye

agaus

Anes

/ rene ia) PNEC Vet ty bec me ty bee tae na ea {Tens ENK TAYE be

Mire’

‘ xed re bryese A De RAVEY oy Ree eae o)

hes ‘ Sierjate TKN A hin i vara arena! bs apt

aha herey, cesses get Rake fF Hh hey ayaa ray Ore ebabehalowee

