enough, however, to allow my neighbour to fold hers before me, for | knew it would please her to take my place. Noticing how deliberate I was, the portress said laughingly: “Ah! I thought you would not add this pearl to your crown, you were too slow.”” And all the community were left under the impression that I had acted according to nature.

I cannot tell you what profit | derived from this incident, and how indulgent it has made me towards others. It still keeps in check any feeling of vanity when I receive praise, for I reflect that since my small acts of virtue can be mistaken for imperfections, why should not animperfection be mistaken for virtue? And | repeat with St. Paul: “To me it is a very small thing to be judged by you, or by man’s day. But neither do I judge myself. He that judgeth me is the Lord.”’* Since, therefore, the Pais my Judge, I will try always. to think leniently of others, that He may judge me leniently—or not at all, since — Says: “Fudge not and ye shall not be jude ea

Returning to the Holy Gospels where Our Lord explains to me clearly in what His new Commandment consists, I read in St. Matthew: “You have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thy enemy: but I say unto you, Love your enemies and pray for them that persecute vou.’’®

PE Aue i. a4 * Lake, vi, 27; 3 Matt. v. 43, 44.

A Little White Flower

There are, of course, no enemies in Carmel; but, after all, we have our natural likes and dislikes. We may fee] drawn towards one Sister and may be tempted to go a long way round to avoid meeting another. Well, Our Lord tells me that this last is the Sister | must love and pray for, even though her manners might lead me to believe that she does not care for me. “/f you love them that love vou, what thanks are to you ¢ For sinners also love those that love them.’ Nor is it enough to love, we must prove our love. We take a natural delight in pleasing friends, but that is not charity; even sinners do the same.

Elsewhere Our Lord teaches me: “Give so everyone that asketh thee; and of him that taketh away thy goods, ask them not again.’* To give to everyone who: asks 1s less pleasant than to give spontaneously and of one’s own accord. Again, if a thing be asked in a courteous way consent is easy, but if, unhappily, tactless words have been used, there is an inward rebellion unless we are perfect in charity. We discover no end of excuses for refusing, and it is only after having made clear to the guilty Sister how rude was her behaviour, that we grant as a favour what she requires, or render a slight service which takes perhaps, one-half of the time we have lost in setting forth the difficulties and our own imaginary rights.

t Luke, vi. 32, 2 Luker vin ic.

The New Commandment

If it be difficult to give to anyone who asks, it is still more difficult to let what belongs to us be taken without asking to have it back. | say this is difficult but I should rather say that it seems so, for “The yoke of the Lord is sweet and His burden light.”' And when we submit to

that yoke we at once feel its sweetness.

I said just now that Jesus does not wish me to reclam what belongs to me. This ought to appear quite natural since in reality I own nothing and ought to rejoice when an occasion brings home to me the poverty to which I am solemnly vowed. Formerly | used to think myself detached from everything, but since Our Lord’s words have become clear, I see how imperfect lam. When starting to paint, for instance, if I happen to find the brushes in confusion, if a ruler or penknife be ie: I am sorely tempted to lose patience, and have strongly to resist the impulse to demand, and sharply demand, the articles required.

I may, of course, ask for them, and if | do so humbly I am not disobeying Our Lord’s command. On the contrary, I am like the poor who hold out their hands for the necessaries of lite and who if refused are not surprised, because no one owes them anything. To soar above all natural sentiment brings the deepest peace, nor is there any joy equal to that which is felt by the

bt), Matt, £1. 30,

A Little White Flower

truly poor in spirit. Should they ask with detachment for something needful, and be not only refused but an attempt be fade to deprive them of what they already possess, they follow the Master’s advice: “Tf any man take away thy coat, let go thy cloak also unto him.”

It seems to me that to give up one’s cloak is to renounce every right, pe look upon oneself as the servant, the ane of all. Divested of A clas however, fis easter to walker my so the Master adds: “e4ud whosoever will force thee one mile, go with him other two.” Hence its “not enough for me to give to oo ans; 1 ought to anticipate the wish; I should show myself honoured by the request for SErVICE, and if anything set apart for my use be taken away I should appear glad to be rid of it.

I cannot always, indeed, carry out to the letter the words of the Gospel, for occasions arise when I am compelled to refuse a request. Yet, when charity has taken deep root in the soul, it shows itself outwar dly, and there 1s always a way of refusing so graciously what one cannot give, that the refusal affords as much pleasure as the gift itself. It is true that people are more ready to beg from those who are most ready to give; still, on the pretext that I shall be forced to refuse, I oOug ht not to avoid an importunate Sister, since the Divine Master has said: “from

L Wiatts, ¥-40. 2 att, ea

The New Commandment

him that would borrow of thee turn not away.””? Neither should I be kind for the sake of being considered so, nor in the hope that the Sister will return the service, for once again it is written: “Tf you lend to them of whom you hope to receive, what thanks are to you? kor sinners also lend to sinners for to receive as much. But you do good and lend, hoping for nothing thereby, and your reward shall be great.” ”

Along this path it is but the first step that costs—even on earth the reward will be great. To lend without hope of return may seem hard; one would rather give outright, for a thing once given is no longer ours. When a Sister comes to you and says: “1 have our Mother’s leave to borrow your help fora few hours, and you may rest assured that later on I will do as much for you, we may be practically certain that the time so lent will never be repaid, and therefore feel sorely tempted to say: “I will give what you ask!” The remark would gratify self-love, it being more generous to give than to lend, and in addition, it would let the Sister feel how little reliance you put in her promise.

The divine precepts do assuredly run counter to our natural inclinations, and without the help of grace it would be impossible to understand them, far less put them in practice.

Ifear, dear Mother, that I have ‘expressed

¥ Matt, %-42. @ Luke vis 245 35s

A Little White Flower

myself more confusedly than usual, and I cannot think what you will find to interest you in these rambling pages. However, | am not writing a literary work and. it J Tee weariec ae by this discourse on charity you will at least find in ee proof of your child’s good will. I have to contess that I'am far from living up to the lights I have received, yet the mere desire of doing so brings me peace. i a | happen to stumble in the matter of ch rarity, i Hise again ImmeEC diately, and tor some months past I have not even had to strueele.. With our Father, St. John of the Cross, I have been able to say: “My house is entirely at peace,’ and that peace I attribute to a certain victory which | gained over myself. Ever, since: then,. the hosts of Heaven have hastened to my aid, not wishing me to be wounded after my valiant fight on the occasion { am about to describe. formerly, a holy nun of our community was a constant source of annoyance to me: the devil must have had something to do with the trial, tor undoubtedly it was he who made me see so many disagreeable points in her. Unwilling to vield to my natural antipathy, I romenneed that charity ought not merely to exist in the heart but also to show itself in deeds; so 1 endeavoured to treat this Sister as | should my most cherished friend. Whenever | met her I prayed for her, at the same time offering to God

Bi

The New Commandment

her virtues and her merits. I knew this would delight Our Lord exceedingly, for there is no artist who is not gratified when his works are praised, and the Divine Artist of souls is therefore well pleased when we do not stop at the exterior, but penetrate to the inner sanctuary He has. chosen for His abode and admire its beauty.

I dicl not rest satished with praying earnestly tor the Sister who gave me such occasions for self-maste ry; but | tried also ‘to. render her as many services as 1 could; and when tempted to mike a disagreeable answer, I made haste to smile and change the subject of conversation. The Jmitation says: “It is more profitable to. leave to everyone his way of thinking than to give way to contentious discourses;’’' and sometimes when the temptation was particularly violent, if 1 could slip away without her suspecting my inward struggle, I would run like a deserter trom the bat hen ad. The outcome of all this was that she said to me one day, with a beaming countenance: “Tell me, Soeur Thérése,, what it is that attracts you to me so strongly? I never meet you without being welcomed with your most gracious smile?” Ah! what attracted me was Jesus hidden in the depths of her soul, Jesus who makes sweet even that which is most bitter.

I spoke just now, Mother, of my last resource tor escaping defeat, namely...flight. It was Pim di Sxliv: 1. re

A Little White Flower

scarcely an honourable method, I confess, but whenever I had recourse to it during my novitiate, it was always successful. Here is a striking example which I think will amuse you.

For several days you had been ill with bronchitis and we were all very anxious. One morning in discharge of my office of sacristan 1 entered - your infirmary, very gently, to put back the keys of the Communion grating. Though | took care not to show it, I was inwardly rejoicing at the opportunity of seeing you. ° One of the Sisters, however, feared | should wake you, and Beat tly oe to take the keys from me. | told her, with all possible politeness, that I was as anxious as she that there should be no noise, adding that it was my duty to return them. I see now it would have been more perfect to yield, but I did not think so then and consequently tried to enter the room.

What she feared came to pass—the noise we made awoke you, and the blame was cast upon me. The Sister made a lengthy discourse, the point of which was that I was the guilty person. I was burning to detend myself when happily it occurred to me that if I began to do so, I should certainly lose my peace of mind, and that as I had not sufficient virtue to Keep silence when accused, my only chance of safety lay in flight. No sooner thought than done, and I fied... But my heart beat so violently, that I

PE bar!

The New Commandment

could not go far and had to sit down on the stairs to taste in peace and quiet the fruits of my victory. This is without doubt an odd kind of courage, yet I think it better not to expose oneself in the face of certain defeat.

When I think over my novitiate days I see clearly how far removed I was from perfection; some things there are that make me laugh. How good God has been to have trained my soul and lent it wings! All the nets of the hunter can no longer frighten me, for “4 net is Set in vain before the eves of them that ‘have wings.’

It may be that at some future day my present state will appear to me full of defects, but nothing now surprises me. Nordoes my utter helplessness distress me; | even glory in it, and expect each day to ees some fresh imperfection. Indeed these lights on my own nothingness do me more good fas lights on matters Shit. Remembering that “Charity covereth a multitude of sins,”? | draw from the rich mine which Our een has opened up to us in the Gospels; I search the depths of His adorable words, and I cry out with the Psalmist: “J have run in the way of Thy commandments since Thou hast enlarged my heart.”* And charity alone can widen my heart. O Jesus! ever since its sweet flame consumes me, I run with delight in the way of Thy new ‘Commandment, aa I desire so to run, until that

.: Dee, 1. FF: o Prov. m6 si 4. Vs, Cuviil. 42:

ohn

A Little White Flower

glorious day when with Thy retinue of virgins | shall follow Thee through Thy boundless realm, singing Thy new Ciiticle- ane Canticle of Love.

God in His infinite goodness has piven me, dear Mother, a clear insight ~~ the deep mysteries of are arity. If only I could express what I know, you would hear a heavenly music; but alas! I can only stammer like a child, and if the words of Jesus were not my support,. I should be tempted to beg leave to hold my peace.

When the Divine Master tells me to give to anvone who asks of me and to allow what is mine to be taken without asking it back, it seems to me that He Lanes not only of the things ot earth but also of the goods of Heaven. Neither: the one nor the other are really mine; | renounced the first by the vow of poverty and the others are gifts which are simply lent. If God withdraw them, | have no right to complain. But our own ideas, the fruit of our own mind and heart, we regard as a sacred and personal treasury upon which none may lay hands? tia instance, 1f | communicate to a Sister some light given me in prayer and she afterwards reveals it as though it were her own, it would seem she is appropriating what is mine. Or if during: recreation someone makes a witty remark, which her neighbour repeats to the community without

2 ek

The New Commandment

acknowledging whence it came, its originator will look on this as a sort of theft. At the time, she preserves an unwilling silence, but on the first opportunity she will insinuate delicately that

her thoughts have been borrowed.

Pee thee experienced ail “these “hoaniin weaknesses, Mother, I could not so well explain them. I should have preferred to believe myselt f the only one who endured such petty temptations, had you not bidden me to hear the novices’ difficulties and give them suitable advice. In the discharge of this duty IT have learnt much, and above all 1 have found myself forced to practise what I preached. I can say with all truth that now, by God’s grace, am no more attached to the vitts of the intellect than I am to material things. Should any thought of mine please my Sisters, | find it quite easy to Jet them regard it as ehiels own. It belongs to the Holy GI lost, not to me, for St. Paul assures us that “w¢thout ne Spirit of Love we cannot call God our Father,’' and is not the same Holy Spirit free to use me as a channel to convey a good thought to a soul, without my daring to look on that thought as my private property?

Besides, while I am far from depreciating beautiful thoug hts ae bring us nearer to God, I have long es of opinion that we must guard against over-estimating their worth. Even the

i Gh Rowe will. 1s.

A Little White Flower

highest inspirations are of no value without good works. Others may derive profit from these lights, provided they be duly grateful to Our Lord for allowing them to share in the abundance of one of His more privileged souls; but should that privileged soul take pride in her spiritual wealth and imitate the Pharisee, she becomes like a person dying of starvation before a well-spread table, while his guests enjoy the richest fare, and cast envious olances, perhaps, at the possessor ot so many treasures.

How true it is that God alone can sound the heart! How short-sighted are His creatures! When they find a soul whose lights surpass their own, they conclude that the Divine Master loves ‘Hen less. Yet when did He lose the right to make use of one of His children to provide others with the nourishment they need? That right was not lost in the days of P >haraoh, for God said unto him: “:4ud therefore have / ratsed thee, that 1 may show Mv power in thee, — My name may be spoke of throughout all the earth.” Centuries have pissed since these words were spoken by the Most High, but His ways have remained unchanged—He has ever chosen human agents to accomplis sh His work among souls.

t Exod. ix. 16.



Chapter XI. The Novice Mistress

ERE it given to an artist’s canvas to think and speak, certainly it would never complain of being touched and re-touched by the brush; and knowing all its beauty to be due to he artist, it i. not even feel envious of the brush. Mor could the brush boast of the masterpiece it had helped to produce, for it would understand that true artists are never at a loss, but play with difficulties and to amuse themselves, often make use of the most unlikely and the most defective instruments.

I am the brush Our Lord has chosen to: paint His likeness in the souls you have confided to my care. But an artist must have at least two brushes: the first, which is the more useful, gives the ground tints and rapidly covers the whole canvas; the other, a smaller one, is. employed for the details of the picture, Pou, my dear Mother, represent the valuable brush Our Lord holds lovingly in His hand when He wishes to do some great work in the souls of His children; and I am the little one He deigns. to use afterwards to fill in the minor details.

A Little White Flower

lt was about the 8th of December, 1892, that the Divine Artist first took up His little brush, and | shall always remember those days as a time of special grace.

When i entered Carmel | found se novitiate a companion who was about eight years my senior. In spite of this difference of age we became the closest friends, and to encourage an affection which gave promise of fostering virtue, we were saewea to converse together on Spiritu: J subjects. My tellow-novice charmed me by her innocence, as well as by her frank and open disposition; on the other hand I was surprised to find how her love for you differed trom mine, and in various ways her behaviour was a subject of regret. But God had already made me underad. that there are souls for whom in His Mercy He waits unweariedly, giving them His light little by little, and I was determined not to forestall Fish

One day, while thinking over the permission we had received to converse together so that we might—as our holy Rule tells us—“ incite one another to a more ardent love of our Divine Spouse,” it came home to me with sorrow that our conversations did not attain the desired end; and IT saw clearly that I must either speak out fearlessly, or put an end altogether to what resembled mere worldly talk. I begged Our [.ord to inspire me with words at once kind and

The Novice Mistress

convincing, or better still to speak Himself in my stead. He heard my prayer, for “those who look upon Him shall be enlightened,” and “to the upright a light is risen in the darkness.” The first of the texts I apply to myself, and the other to my companion who was truly upright of heart.

At our next meeting the poor little Sister saw well from the outset that my manner had changed, and blushing deeply she sat down beside me. I told her tenderly what was in my mind; then pointing out what true love really is, I proved to her that in loving Mother ee with such a natural affection, she was in truth simply loving herself. 1 confided to her the sacrifices. of this kind I had been obliged to make at the beginning of my religious life, and before long her tears were mingled with my own. She humbly acknowledged herself in the wrong and admitted that what I had said was quite true; then, begging as a favour that 1 would always point out her faults, she promised to begin a new life. From that day our love for one another became wholly spiritual and in us were fulfilled the words of the Holy Ghost: “4 brother that ts helped by his brother is like a strong city.”’*

You know well, Mother, that I had no intention of turning away my companion from you. My aim was to explain to her that true love feeds.

PAG Ps. RG, 3G. tide 3 Prov. xviii. 19.

A Little White Flower

on sacrifice, and that in proportion as our souls renounce natural satisfaction our affections becomes stronger and more unselfish.

J eae when I was a postulant there were times when I was so violently tempted to seek my own. satisfaction, some crumbs of pleasure, by having a od with you, that | was obliged to hurry past your cell and cling to the banisters to keep my self from turning back. Many were the permissions | wanted to ask, pretexts for yielding to my natural Ait ‘suggested themselves in hundreds. How glad am’ ‘that 4rom” the beginning I learned to practise self-denial! Already ] enjoy the reward promised to those who fight bravely, and I no longer feel the need of refusing all consolation to my heart, for my heart is set on God. Because it has loved only Him, it has grown, little by little,

till it can give to cake eh are te to Hines? far ‘deeper ovethaeihit were centred in a barren and selfish affection.

I have told you of the first piece of work which Our Lord deigned to accomplish, together with you, by means of His little brush, but that

as merely a prelude to the masterpiece you entrusted to it later.

Krom the moment I entered the sanctuary of

souls, [ saw at a glance that the task was beyond

my streneth, and “quickly taking refuge in Our

Lord’s arms, I imitated those babes who when pd 2,

The Novice Mistress

frightened hide their faces on their father’s eo cers: ~ (hou secst, Lord, © f cried;°™ that Iam too small to feed Thy little ones, bur through me Thou wilt give to each ne is suitable, then fill my h ands and without quitting the shelter of Thy arms, or even turning my head, I will distribute Thy treasures to the souls who come to me asking for food. When they find it to their liking Er “hall know that it 1s not to me they owe it, batt ae hee; while if on the contrary they compla tin, finding fault with its bitterness, I shall not be at all disturbed, but shal] try to perstiade them it comes from Thee, and will take care to give them none other.”

The knowledge that it was impossible to do anything of myself greatly simplified my task, and confident that the rest would be given me over and above, the one aim of my interior life was to unite myself more and more closely with God. Nor has my hope been ever deceived: each time I have needed sustenance for the souls under my charge I have always found my hands filled. Had 1 acted otherwise, and rehed upon my own strength, I should very soon have been forced to surrender.

In the abstract it seems easy todo good to souls, to make them love God more, and to mould them to one’s own ideas. But, when we put our hands to the work, we quickly oon that without God’s help it 1s as impossible to do good to them,

PP Te §

A Little White Flower

as to bring back the sun when once it has set. Our own tastes, our own ideas must be put aside, and in absolute forgetfulness of self we must guide souls, not by our way, but along that particular path which Our Lord Himself indicates. The chief difficulty, however, does not lie even here —what costs more than all else is to be compelled to note their faults, their slightest imperfections, and to wage a deadly war against them.

I was going to say: unhappily for me, but that would be cowardly, so I will say: happily for my novices, ever since I placed myself in the arms of Jesus I have been like a watchman on the look-out for the enemy from the highest turret of a fortified castle. Nothing escapes me; indeed my clear-sightedness often gives me matter for surprise, and makes me think it quite excusable in the prophet Jonas to have fled before the face of the Lord rather than announce the ruin of Ninive. I would prefer to receive a thousand reproofs rather than indict one, yet I feel ‘it necessary that the task should cause me pain, for if I spoke through natural impulse only, the soul in fault would not understand she was in the wrong and would simply think: “The Sister in charge of me is annoyed about something and vents her displeasure upon me, although I am full of the best intentions.”

But in this, as in all else, { must practise sacrifice and self-denial. When I writea letter I

Lad

The Novice Mistress

feel it will produce no fruit unless it cost an effort and the effort be made only out of obedience. So, too, when I am talking with a novice I am ever on the watch to mortify myself, avoiding all questions which would tend to gratify my curiosity. Should she begin to speak on an interesting subject, and leaving it unfinished pass on to another that wearies me, I am careful not to remind her of the digression, for no good can come of self-seeking.

Your little lambs tind me severe, I know, Mother, and if they were to read these lines they would say that, so far as they can see, it does not in the least distress me to run after them, and to point out how they have soiled or torn their beautiful white fleece. But whatever they may say, they know in their hearts that I love them with a very great love, and they need have no fear of my imitating “the hireling... who seeth the wolf coming and leaveth the sheep and fleth.”? I am ready to lay down my life for my novices, though my affection is so disinterested that I would not have them know it. By God’s help, I have never tried to draw their hearts to myself. J have always known that my mission was to lead them to Him, and to you, Mother, who on earth hold His place in their regard, and whom, therefore, they must love and respect.

I have already told you how much knowledge

1 Jobn oats,

A Little White Flower

I gained through guiding others. Krom the: beginning I realised: that all souls have more or less the same battles to fight, but on the other hand I saw that since no two souls are exactly alike, each one must be dealt with differently. With some I have to humble myself and not to shrink from confessing my own struggles and deteats; by this means they have less difficulty In acknowledging their faults, being consoled by the discovery that | ee of their trials from

my own experience. In dealing with others, my only hope of success a. sin being firm ae in never going back on what I have said, since

ie Bodie ke would hy mistaken for wedleness

Our Lord has given me the grace never to fear. the conflict, to as my duty no matter what the cost. Veg. than once it has been said to me: “If you want to do anything with me, you must treat me with gentleness, you will gain nothing by being severe.” But no one is a good judge in his own case. During a painful operation ot child would be sure to cry out and say that the remedy is worse than the disease, yet how great would be the little one’s delight if at the end of | a tew days he should find himself cured and able to run about and play. The same thing happens with souls: they soon recognise and confess that a little bitterness is preferable to a surfeit of” sweetness,

The change which takes place in a soul from

Pea)

The Novice Mistress

one day to another is sometimes really marvel-. lous. ‘You did well to be severe yesterday,” a novice said to me, “at first I was indignant, but after I had thought it over I saw you were right. I left your cell thinking all was at an end between us and determined to have nothing more to do with you. I knew, however, that the suggestion came from Setand 1 folk you were praying for me. Then, as I grew calm,

the light began to shine and now I have come back to cs all you have to say.

Only too happy to follow the dictates of my heart | hastened to serve some food less bitter to the taste. But I soon discovered that I must not go too far, lest a single word should bring to the ground the edifice that had cost so many tears. If I let fall the slightest remark that. might seem to soften the hard truths of the previous day, I noticed my Iittle Sister trying to take advantage of the opening thus afforded. Then I had recourse to prayer, I turned to Our: Blessed Lady, and Jesus was victorious. My whole strength lies in prayer and sacrifice: these are my invincible weapons, and experience has taught me that the heart 1s won by them rather than by words.

Two aes ago, during Lent, a novice said to

fe ier face radiant: “y ou would never ouess

what I dreamt last night, I thought I was with

my sister who is deeply attached to the world, a2

A Little White Flower

and wishing to withdraw her from its vanities I explained to her these words of your hymn:

Their loss is gain who all forsake To find Thy Love, O Jesu mine! For Thee my oneoe: jar L Grease. The perfume of my life is ‘Thine.

I felt that what I said sank deep into her heart and I was overjoyed. This morning it seems to me that perhaps Our Lord wants me to give Him this soul. Would you approve of my writing to her at Easter telling her of my dream and that Jesus desires to have her for His spouse?’’ I answered that she might certainly ask the permission.

As Lent was not nearly over you were surprised, Mother, at such a premature request, and clearly inspired by God you replied that Carmelites should save souls rather by prayer than by letters. On hearing of your decision I said to my little Sister: “Let us set to work and pray very hard: what a joy it will be if our prayers are answered by the end of Lent!” O infinite mercy of Our Lord! At the close of Lent one more soul had consecrated herself to God by nothing less than a miracle of grace, wrought through the fervour of a humble novice.

The power of prayer is indeed wonderful. It is like a queen, who having free access always to the king can obtain whatsoever she asks. To

The Novice Mistress

secure a hearing there is no need to recite set prayers composed for the occasion—were this the case | should indeed deserve to be pitied!

Apart from the Divine Office, which in spite of my unworthiness is a daily joy, I have not the courage to search through books for beautiful prayers; they are so numerous, that it would only make my head ache, and besides, each one is more lovely than the ontk Wade either to say them all or to choose between them, I do as a child vould who cannot read—lI say just what I wani to say to God, quite simply, and He never fails to understand.

For me, prayer is an uplifting of the heart, a glance towards Heaven, a cry of gratitude and of love in times of sorrow as well as of joy. It is something noble, something supernatural, which expands the soul and unites it to God. When my state of spiritual aridity is such that not a single good thought will come, I repeat very slowly the “Our: Pather” and ‘the’ Hail Mary,” which suffice to console me, and provide divine food for my soul.

But where am I? Once more I am lost in a maze of reflections. Forgive me, Mother, for wandering in this way. | admit that my story is like a tangled skein, but it is the best I can do. My heart is like a lake into which I cast my nets at random. I write down my thoughts as they occur.

ae aes

A Little White Flower

{ was talking about the novices. They often say to me: “ You have an answer for everything; we really thought we should puzzle you this time. Where do you find all you teach us?” Some are even simple enough to think I can read their souls because I have happened to make known to them—without revelation—the subject of their thoughts.

On one occasion the senior novice had determined to hide from me a great sorrow which was causing her much pain. Sne had spent a miserable night, but had kept back the tears lest her eyes should betray her. When she came to me her face was bright and she spoke in a cheerful tone. I said to her simply: “ I am sure you are in trouble.’ She looked at me with amazement, and her surprise was so great that it reacted on me, conveying an impression of the supernatural. 1 felt that God was there close to us, and that unwittingly—for I have not the gift of reading souls—I had spoken as one inspired. After that I was able to console her completely.

And now, dear Mother, I will tell you of my greatest spiritual gain in dealing with the novices. You know they are under no restriction and are therefore allowed to say anything they like to me. This is easy since they do not owe me the respect due to a Novice Mistress. I cannot say that Our Lord makes me walk in the way

The Novice Mistress

of exterior humiliation; He is content with humbling me in my oe soul. In the eyes of creatures. success crowns all my efforts, and—if the eras may be used of life in the Seicioe [ walk in the dangerous path of honour. In this respect I Widecond the design of God and of Superiors. If [ were looked upon by my Sisters as a useless member of the community, incapable and wanting in judgment, you could not employ me to help you,: pa theneeoee the Divine Master has thrown a veil over my shortcomings, interior and exterior. Many compliments come to me from the novices in consequence. The compliments are sincere tor | know they mean what they say but, the remembrance of my weakness iS SO constantly present to me,that there is no room for vanity. My soul, however, tired at times of this over-sweet food and longs for something other than praise. Our Lord then serves me with a salad well-flavoured and mixed with plenty of vinegar, the oil alone being wanting, which makes it still more to my taste.

At the moment when I least expect it, this salad is set before me by my novices. Lifting the veil that hides my faults, God allows them to: see me as I really am and they do not find me altogether to their liking. With a simplicity that is delightful they tell me how I try them

and what they dislike in me; in fact they are as frank as though it were a question of someone

‘oa at eh

A Little White Flower

else, for they know that it pleases me greatly when they are so outspoken. This delicious banquet does more than please me, it fills my soul with j joy. How can anything so contrary to nature afford such extraordinary pleasure? Had [I not experienced it I could not have believed it possible.

Once when I had an intense longing for some humiliation, a young postulant ‘eratified my desire so completely that I was reminded of the occasion when Semei cursed David, and with the holy king I repeated the words: “ Yea, it is the Lord who hath bidden him say all these things.”} This is how God takes care of me: unable to provide me always with the strength-giving bread of exterior humiliation, Heallows me from time to time to eat of “the crumbs from the table of the children.”” How magnificent are His mercies!

Since that infinite mercy is the subject of the song I am ‘trying to sig on earthy’ dea. Mother, | ought also to speak here of inte T real sant Lge ‘which I re: aped in the discharge of my little task. Formerly when I saw a Sister doing something I did not like, and seemingly contrary to our Rule, I used to think how elad I should be ‘ot could only warn her and point out her mistake. But since this burden has been laid upon me and it has become my duty to find fault, my ideas have

POh So Bines xvi, io. 2 Mark vii. 28.

The Novice Mistress

undergone a change. Now, when I chance to see something wrong I heave a sigh of relief. I thank God the guilty one is not a novice and that it is not my business to correct her; then I do all I can to find excuses, and to credit her with the good intentions she no doubt possesses.

Your devotedness throughout my illness, dear reverend Mother, has also taught me many a lesson of charity. No remedy seems too costly, and should one fail, you try something else. When | am present at recreation what precautions you take to protect me from the slightest draught! All this makes me feel that | ought to be as compassionate for the spiritual infirmities of my Sisters as you are, Mother, for my bodily ills.

| have noticed that it is the holiest nuns who are most loved; everyone seeks their company and 1s on the watch to do them a service without waiting to be asked. Virtuous souls who can bear to be treated with a want of respect and attention, find themselves surrounded by an atmosphere of love. Itis with great truth that our Hater, St. John.iof. the »Cross; says: ‘All good things have come to me since I no longer seek them for myself.”

Imperfect souls, on the contrary, are left alone. They receive, of course, the measure of politeness which the religious lite demands; but their company is avoided lest a word might be said which would hurt their feelings. When

A Little White Flower

I say imperfect souls, I do not mean souls with spiritual imperfections only, for the holiest will not reach perfection, till they are in Heaven. I mean those who being supersensitive or wanting in tact and refinement, make life unpleasant for others. Defects of this kind are, I know, incurable, but I know too how patient you would be in nursing and striving to relieve me, even were my illness to last for years.

From all this I conclude that 1 ought to seck the companionship of those Sisters for whom [ feel a natural aversion, and try to be their good Samaritan. It frequently needs only a word or a smile to impart fresh life to a despondent soul. Yet it is not merely in the hope of bringing consolation that 1 wish to be kind; if it were, I should soon be discouraged, for often wellintentioned words are totally misunderstocd. Consequently, in order that I may lose neither time nor labour, I try to act solely to please Our Lord by following this precept of the Gospel: “When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends nor thy brethren lest perhaps they also invite thee again and a recompense be made to thee. But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the blind, and the lame, and thou shalt be blessed, because they have naught wherewith to make thee recompense, and thy Father Who seeth in secret will repay thee.””'

What can I offer to my Sisters but the

1 Cf Lake, xiv/ Way fy 1a

The Novice Mistress

spiritual feast of sweet and joyful charity? I know of no other and I wish to imitate St. Pau] who rejoiced with those who rejoiced. It is true he also wept with those who wept, and at the feast which I desire to provide, tears must sometimes fall, but 1 shall always do my best to change them into smiles, for “ God loveth the cheerful giver.”' I remember an act of charity with which God inspired me while I was a novice, and though seemingly small, it has been rewarded already in this life by Our Heavenly Father “Who seeth in secret.”

Before Sister St. Peter became quite helpless someone had to leave the evening meditation at ten minutes to six and take her to the refectory. Aware of the difficulty, or rather the impossibility of pleasing the poor invalid, it cost me a great effort to offer my services. I was unwilling, however, to lose such a golden opportunity, remembering Our Lord’s own words: “ds long as vou did it to one of these my least brethren, vou did it to Me.”

I theretore humbly offered my help, which was accepted, though only after considerable persuasion. Every evening, when I saw her shake her sand-elass,® | knew it was the signal to start.

Summoning up all my courage I rose, and quite a ceremony commenced. First her stool had to be moved and carried in a particular way,

Pt ore O71. 2 Matt. xxv. 40. 3 tn a spirit of poverty, sand-glasses—-instead of watches—-are used by the Carmelites to measure the time. [Ep.]

A Little White Flower

without the least hurry, and then began the journey. Supporting the poor old Sister by her girdle I tried to acquit myself of the task as gently as I could; if by some mischance she stumbled, I was told I was going too fast and that she would certainly fall, when I tried to lead her more slowly she would say: “Where are you?... I don’t feel your hand... You are letting go your hold.) 1d) am going, fo fall).(i9 we right when I said you were too young to take cate Of Hie.

At last we reached the refectory without further mishap, but there fresh difficulties awaited me. Taking every care not to hurt the poor invalid, I had to install her, with some manceuvring, in her place; that done, I had to turn back her sleeves—always according to her own special rubric—and then I was free to go. Noticing, however, that it was with extreme difficulty she cut her bread, I would not leave her till I had rendered this last little service. As she had never expressed any wish that I should do so, the unexpected kindness touched her greatly. Through it—as I learnt later—and still more by bestowing on her my “sweetest smile” at the end of my task, I won her entire confidence.

A long time has elapsed since all this happened, but Our Lord allows the memory of it to linger with me like a perfume from Heaven. One cold winter’s evening when I was humbly lead-

Pag ae

The Novice Mistress

ing Sister St. Peter, there suddenly fell on my ears the harmonious strains of distant music. A picture rose before me ofa richly-furnished room, brilliantly lighted and decorated, and full of elegantly dressed young girls conversing together as is the way of the world. Then I turned to the poor invalid; instead of sweet music | heard her complaints, instead of rich gilding I saw the bare brick walls of our cloister, scarcely visible in the dim flickering light.

The contrast thrilled me, and Our Lord so illumined my soul with the rays of His truth, in the light of which the pleasures of the world are but darkness, that not for a thousand years of such worldly delights would I have bartered the ten minutes spent in my act of charity. And if now, in days of pain and amid the smoke of battle, the thought that God has withdrawn us from the world is so entrancing, what will it be when in eternal glory and everlasting repose we realise the favour He has done us here, by singling us out to dwell in His house, which ts the very portal of Heaven?

These transports of joy have not always accompanied my acts of charity, but from the beginning of my religious life Our Lord would have me understand how sweet it is to see Himself in the heart of His spouses, and therefore when I acted as guide to Sister St. Peter, it was with such love, that I could not have taken

A Lattle White Flower

more care had I been leading Our Divine Lord Pinnselt. But to prove, dear Mother wher a have just said about my difficulties in the past with regard to charity, I shall relate to you a few of my many struggles.

For a long time my place at meditation was near a Sister who idgeted incessantly, either with her rosary or with something else. Possibly I alone heard her because of my very sensitive ear, but I cannot tell you to what an extent | was tried by the irritating noise. There was a strong temptation to turn round and with one glance to silence the offender; yet in io heart | knew I ought to bear with her patiently, for the love of God first of: ill, and also to avoid causing her pain. I therefore remained quiet, but the effort cost me so much that sometimes I was bathed in perspiration, and my meditation consisted merely in the prayer of suffering. Kinally I sought 2 way of gaining peace, in my inmost heart at least, and so | tried to find pleasure in the disagreeable noise. Instead of vainly attempting not to hear it, | set myself to listen attentively as though it were delightful music, and my meditation—which was not the prayer of “‘quiet””—was passed in offering this music to Our Lord.!

1 See The Interior Castle of the Soul, by St. Teresa, where she shows how the Holy Ghost leads a soul from the simplest form of mental prayer through alternate stages of spiritual sweetness and desolation (the purgative way), to ie prayer of “quiet,” or recollection (the tlluminative way), and finally to the sublime prayer of “union” in its lower and higher form (the unitive way), [Ep.]

The Novice Mistress

On another occasion when I was engaged in the laundry, the Sister opposite to me, who was

washing handkerchiefs, kept splashing me cona ly with dirty water. My first impulse was to draw back and wipe my face in order to show her that | wanted her to be more careful. The next rnoment, however, I saw the folly of refusing treasures thus generously offered, and 1 carefully refrained from betraying any annoyance. On the contrary I made such efforts to welcome the shower of dirty water that at the end of half en hour I had taken quite a fancy to the novel kind of aspersion, and resolved to return as often as possible to the place where such precious treasures were freely bestowed.

You see, Mother, that | am but a very Aittle soul, who can offer to God only very /ittle things. It still happens that I frequently miss the opportunity of welcoming these small sacrifices which bring so much peace; but 1am not discouraged ane | ae the loss of a little peace and I try to a more watchful in the future.

How happy Our Lord makes me, how sweet and easy is His service in this fed He has always given me what I desired, or rather He has made me desire what He wishes to give. A short time before the terrible temptation against faith, I had been te how free I was from great outward trials, and that if interior suffering was to be my lot, God must alter my

aot

A Little White Flower

spiritual path, a change which did not seem to me Hkely.) ec 2 71en I could not go on always living in peace and quiet, and | wondered how God would act.

The answer was not long in coming and it showed me that He whom I love is never at a loss, for without altering my path He sent me this great trial, which soon mingled a salutary bitterness with all the joy.

to oo: Cr)



Chapter XII. The Apostle of Prayer

T is not only when He is about to send some trial that Our J.ord gives me warning and awakens my desires. For years | had felt a longing to have a brother a priest, though | knew my wish could not be realised. I used often to think that if my little brothers had not been taken to Heaven I should have had the happiness of seeing them at the altar, and I greatly regretted being deprived of such a joy. Yet God went far beyond my dream. 1 had only longed for one brother who would remember me each day at the altar, and He has united me in the bonds of spiritual friendship with two of His apostles. 1 should like to tell you, dear Mother, how Our Divine Master granted me this favour.

In 1895, our Holy Mother, St. Teresa, sent my first brother as a gift for my feast. It was washing day and I was busy at my work when Mother Agnes of Jesus, then Mother Prioress, called me aside and read to me a letter from a young seminarist, in which he said he had been inspired by St. Teresa to ask for a Sister who would devote herself specially to his salvation,

A Little White Flower

together with that of the souls one day to be entrusted to him. He promised that when he was ordained he would always remember in the Holy Sacrifice the one who should become his sister in Christ. And thus it was that I was hosen to have this future missionary for my brother. I cannot tell you, Mother, how happy I felt. Such an unlooked-for fulfilment of my desires awoke in my heart what | can only describe as the joy of a child, and it carried me back to those early days when pleasures were so keen that my heart seemed too small to contain them. Years had passed since I had tasted such happiness. It was as if some forgotten chords had been stirred within me.

Conscious of my new obligations I set to work to discharge them and strove to redouble my fervour. Now and again I wrote to my new brother. Beyond all doubt it is by prayer and sacrifice we can best help our missionaries, but sometimes, when Our Lord 1s pleased to unite two souls for His glory, He permits them to exchange their thoughts and so rouse one another to a greater love for God.

Such a correspondence must of course depend entirely on the express desire of those in authority, otherwise it seems to me it would do more harm than good—if not to the missionary, at least to the Carmelite, whose lite is so largely one of thought. For a correspondence carried

Whe Apostie ol Prayer

on at her own request, even at distant intervals, instead of uniting her to God would occupy her mind uselessly and perhaps lead her to believe that she was doing wonders, when in reality, under cover of ol: she was simply procuring

herself a needless Sietragn on

But here am J, dear Mother, launched, not upon a distraction but upon a dissertation equally superfluous... I shall never correct myself of these lengthy digressions which you must find most wearisome. Forgive me then, even it} begin again at the very eat opportunity.

Last year, at the end of May, it was your turn to give me my second brother, and when | represented that, having given all my slender merits to one Bice apostle, I feared they could not be given to another, you told me that Se cnce would double ee value. In the depth of my heart I had felt certain of this, and moreover, since the zeal of a Carmelite ought to a ies the whole world, I hope with God’s help to be of use to more than two missionaries. I pray for all, without forgetting our priests at home, whose ministry is often as full of difficulties. as that of the missionary preaching to the meatnen.... Like our, bloly, Mother, St. Leresa, | wish to be a true daughter of the Church, and to make prayer for all the intentions of Christ’s Vicar the one great aim of my life.

But just as I should have taken a special

A Little White Flower

interest in the work of my own dear brothers had they lived, without neglecting on that account the general interests of the Church, so now I unite myself in a special manner to the new brothers whom Jesus has given me. To each of them belongs all I possess, tor God is too good, too generous to divide my offering; He 1s so rich that He gives without measure all I ask, even though I do not lose myself in lengthy enumerations.

Since I have two brothers, as well as my little Sisters the novices, the days would be too short to ask in detail for the needs of each soul and | am afraid I might forget something important. Complicated methods are not for simple souls, and as I am one of these, Our Lord Himself has inspired me with a very simple way of fulfilling my obligations.

One day, after Holy Communion, He made me understand these words of Solomon: “Draw me: we will run after Thee to the odour of Thy ointments.» © my Jesus, there is no need then to say: In drawing me, draw also the souls that T love. The words: “Draw me” suffice. When a soul has been captivated by the odour of Thy perfumes she cannot run alone; as a natural consequence of her attraction towards Thee, all those whom she loves are drawn in her train.

As a torrent bears down to the depths of the

1 Cantcded.

The Apostle of Prayer

sea whatsoever it meets on its way, so likewise, my Jesus, does the soul that plunges into the boundless ocean of Thy Love bring with it all its treasures! My treasures, as Thou well knowest, are the souls it has ‘pleased Thee: to unite with mine, and which Thou Thyself hast confided to me. I dare, therefore, to borrow Thy own words, Thy prayer on the last night that

saw Thee still a traveller on this earth.

Omy Beloved!! know not when my exile will end... for many a night I may yet sing Thy mercies here below, but for me, too, will come the last night of all... and then | wish to be able to say:

“Tf have glorified Thee upon earth: I have finished the work which Thou gayest me to do. 1 haye manifested Thy Name to the men whom Thou hast given me out of the world, Thine they gl and to me thou gavest then; and they have kept Thy Ti Mord. Now they have known shat all things which Thou hil given me are tr om Thee: because the words which Thou gavest me I have given to them; and they have recerved them, and haye eee for certain that I came forth from 1 rm and they have belieyed that Thou didst send me. 1 pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them whom Thou hast given me, because they are Thine. And all mine are Thine, and Thine are mine; and I am glorified in them, And now I am no more in the world, and these are in the world, and I come to Thee. Holy Father, keep them in Thy name, whom Thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we also are one. -And now I come to Thee, and these things I speak in

A Little White Flower

the world, that they may have my jay filled in themselves. I do not ask that Thou take them away out of the world, but that Thou preserve them from evil. They are not of the world, as I am not of the world. And not for them only do I pray, but for those alsa who through their word shall believe in me. Father, { will that where I am, they also whom Thou hast given me may be with me, that they may see my glory which Thou hast given me, because Thou hast loved me before the foundation of the world. And I haye made known Thy Name unto them, and will make it known, that the loye wherewith Thou hast loyed me may be in them and I in them.)

Thus, dear Lord, would [ repeat Thy words before losing myself in Thy loving embrace. Perhaps I am very daring... and yet for a long time hast Thou not allowed me to be daring with Thee? Thou hast said to me as the Father of the Prodigal to his elder son: “U/ I have is thine.’? And therefore | may use Thy own divine words to draw down favours from Our Heavenly Father upon all the souls under my care,

My God, Thou knowest | have ever desired to love Thee alone. I seek no other glory. Thy love has gone before me from the days of my childhood. It has grown with my growth, and now it is an abyss the depth of which I] cannot sound.

Love attracts love, and mine, as it darts

| tr, Os John XVil. 2 hike xi 38s

ihe ‘Apostic of Prayer

towards Thee, would fain fill to the brim the Abyss that draws it, but alas! my love is not even a drop in that Ocean. To love Thee as Thou lovest me, I must borrow Thy own love—thus only can my desire be satisfied. O my Jesus, it seems to me that Thou couldst not have overwhelmed a soul with more love than Vhou hast poured out on mine, and that is why I care ask of Thee to love those Thou hast given me, even as Thou lovest me.

And if in Heaven 1 tind Thou lovest them more than Thou lovest me, I shall rejoice, for I acknowledge that their deserts are greater than mine; but here on earth I can conceive no love comparable to that with which Thou hast favoured me, without any merit of my own.

What I have just written, Mother, amazes me. I had no intention of saying such things. When I repeated this passage from the Holy Gospel: “The words which Thou gavest me 1 have given unto them,” | was not thinking of my brothers but only of my little Sisters in the Novitiate, for I do not consider myself capable of teaching missionaries. The words | wrote for them were those others from the prayer of Our Lord: “/ do not ask that Thou shouldst take them out of the world...T] pray also for them who through their word shall believe in Thee.’ Wow indeed could I overlook the souls they are to win by their sufferings and exhortations.

24.5

A Little White Flower

But I have not fully explained my thoughts on those words of the Canticle of Canticles: “Draw me—we will run!” Our Lord has said: “ No man can come to me except the Father Who has sent Me uraw himi” and further on He tells as. “ Everyone that asketh, receiveth: and he that seeketh, findeth, and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened.” 

Again He adds: “Uf you ask the Father anything iit "My Name He will give it you.’® No doubt it was for this reason that, long before the birth of Our Lord, the Holy Spirit dictated these prophetic words: “ Draw me—we will run!”

In asking to be drawn, we seek an intimate union with the object that has led our heart

captive. If iron and fire were endowed with reason, and the iron could say: “ Draw me!” would this not prove its wish to be identified with the fire to the point of sharing its substance f Well, such is precisely my prayer. I ask Jesus to draw me into the fire of His Love, and to unite me so closely to Himself that He may live

and actin me. I feel that the more the fire of love consumes my pee the more frequently ‘shall I cry: “Draw me! and the more also will those souls who come in contact with mine rua swiftly in the sweet odour of the Beloved.

They will run—yes, we shall run together, for souls that are on fire can never remain inactive.

They may certainly, like St. Mary Magdalen,

1 John vi. 4 2 Matt. vii. 8. 3 John xvi. 23.

The Apostle of Prayer

sit at the feet of Jesus listening to His sweet and burning words, but though appearing to give Him nothing, they give far more than Martha, who was “troubled about many things.» It is not,, of course, Martha’s work that Our Lord blames, for His own Blessed Mother humbly devoted herself to the self-same duty, having to prepare the meals for the Holy Family. W that Fle does

blame is Martha’s excessive solicitude.

The power of prayer has been understood by all the Saints, and abe perhaps, by those who have illumined the world with the light of Christ’s teaching. Was it not in prayer as ey ah Paul, St. Augustine, St. Thomas Aquinas, St. John of the Cross, St. Teresa, and so many other friends of God, acquired the wonderful knowledge which has enthralled the loftiest minds?

“Give me a lever and a fulcrum on which to lean it,’’ said Archimedes, “and I will lift the world.” But what this scientist could not obtain because his request had merely a material end without reference to God, the Saints have obtained in all its fulness. The Almighty has given them asa fulcrum to lean upon, Himself— Himself alone—and for a lever, the prayer that inflames with the fire of love. And thus they have uplifted the world—thus do the Saints who still combat on earth continue to raise it and will continue to raise it till the end of time.

t Luke.z.: ¢t.

A Little White Flower

lt now remains for me to tell you, dear Mother, what 1 understand by the sweet odour of the ‘beloved. Since Our Lord is in Heaven | can only follow Him by the traces full of light and fragrance which He has left behind Him. But as soon as J open the Holy Gospels, I breathe the perfume exhaled by the life of Jesus, and 1 know which way torun. It js not to the highest place but to the lowest that I hasten. Leaving the Pharisee to go forward, I repeat with all confidence the humble prayer of the publican. Most of all do 1 imitate the behaviour of Maedalen, for her amazing—or rather I should say her loving-——audacity, which delighted the Heart of Jesus, has cast its spell upon mine.

itis not merely because I have been preserved from mortal sin that I lift up my heart to God in trust and in love. I am certain that even if I had on my conscience every imaginable crime, I should lose nothing of my confidence, but would throw myself, my heart broken with sorrow, into the arms of my Saviour. I remember His love for the prodigal son, I have heard His words to St. Mary Magdalen, to the woman taken in adultery, and to the woman of Samaria. No—there is no one who could frighten me, for I know too well what to believe concerning His Mercy and His Love.

In the Lives of the Fathers of the Desert it is told how one of them converted a public sinner

24.8

The Apostle of Prayer

whose evil deeds were the scandal of the whole country. Touched by grace, the sinful woman followed the Saint into the eee to perform a Meerous penance. On the first night of the journey, before even reaching the place of her Perement, the vehemence ot her: love and sorrow broke the ties that bound her to earth, and at the same instant the holy man saw her soul borne by Angels to the Bosom of God. This is a striking ‘Hlustration of what I want to say, but the reality itself is beyond the power of words to express.!

1 Here ends the second manuscript, written by the Servant of God for Mother Mary of Gonzagz, who was twice her Prioress, The three MSS—combined into one--- were originally published as if addr eeset to this Reverend Mother. [Ep. }

CHAP EMM Xitr



A Canticle of Love

Y beloved sister,' you have asked me to leave you some token, and with our Mother’s permission I am glad to. talk awhile with you who are doubly my sister, with you who lent me your voice when 1 oui not speak, promising in my name that [ would serve Jesus only. The child who writes these lines to-night,, dear godmother, is the child whom you offered to Our Lord and who loves you as a child loves its mother. In Heaven only will you be able to fathom the gratitude that fills my heart.

You wish to learn the secrets which Jesus confides to your godchild, and yet I know these secrets are already yours, for it was you who taught me to listen to His teaching. I will try, however, to tell you something, though only too conscious how impossible it is for human speech to put into words what the heart itself can scarcely realise.

Do not think that I am overwhelmed with consolations. Far from it! My joy consists in

1 This chapter reproduces the third manuscript of Seur Thérése,. which was addressed to her eldest sister Marie—Sister Mary of the: Sacred Heart. [Carmer.]

A Canticle oF Love

being deprived of all joy here on earth. Jesus. does not guide me openly; I neither see nor hear Him. Nor ts it through books that I learn, for I do not understand what I read. Yet at times I am consoled by some chance words, such as the following, which I read this evening after a meditation passed in utter dryness. ‘ Here is the Master I give thee, He will teach thee all that thou shouldst do. 1 wish to make thee read in the Book of Life wherein is contained the science of love.” 1 The science of love—how sweetly do these words re-echo in my soul! | wish for no other knowledge and like the Spouse in the Canticle of Canticles, “having given up all the substance of my house for love, I reckon it as nothing.”’® JY understand clearly that through love alone can we become pleasing to God, and my sole ambition is to acquire it.

Jesus deigns to point out to me the only way which leads to Love’s divine furnace, and that way is self-surrender: it is the confidence of the little child who sleeps without fear in its father’s arms. Through the mouth of Solomon, the Holy Ghost has said: “Whosoever is a little one, let him come unto me,’  and elsewhere the same Spirit of Love declares that “to him that is little, mercy is granted.’ In His name, too, the Prophet Isaias reveals how on the last day the

1 Our Lord to Blessed Margaret Mary. 2% Cont, Wii, a Tey, 1%. '4. 4 Wisdom vi. 7. Zo)

A Little White Flower

Lord “shall feed His flock like a shepherd: He shail gather together the lambs with His arm, and shall take them up into His bosom.” }

And as though all these proofs were insufhcient, the same Prophet, whose inspired gaze penetrated the depths of eternity, cried out: “Thus saith the Lord? *You shall be carrie the breasts and upon the knees they shall caress vou. «Ts one whom the mother caresseth, so will I pnp yon.

O my beloved sister, after such words one can only be silent and weep for very love. If all weak and imperfect souls such as mine felt as | do, none would despair of reaching the summit of the mountain of Love, since Jesus does not look for deeds, but only for gratitude and _ selfsurrender.

Does He not say: “J wll not take the he-goats

fron sut of thy frocks, j for all the beasts of the forest are mine, the cattle on he hill and the oxen. I know all the fowls of the air. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee, for the world is Mine, and the fulness thereof. Shall I eat the flesh of bullocks, or shall | drink the blood of goats? Offer to God the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.” ®

This is all Our Lord claims of us. He needs our love, He has no need of our works. True, the same God who declares He has no need to tell us if He be hungry, did not disdain to beg

£416, 2 3: Dis, eva ee q Ps. xlixs 9-14;

A Canticle of Love

a little water from the Samaritan woman, but when He said: “Give me to drink,’' He, the Creator of the Universe, was asking tor the love of His creatures. He thirsted, indeed, but He thirsted for love.

And Our Divine [.ord’s thirst is more intense to-day than ever. Among the disciples of this world He meets with nothing but indifference and ingratitude, and alas! among His own how few are the hearts that surrender themselves without reserve to the intinite tenderness of His Love.

Happy indeed are we who are privileged to understand the intimate secrets of Our Divine Spouse. If you would but set down in writing all you know, what beautiful pages would be given us to read! But you prefer to keep she secrets of the King” hidden in the depths of your heart... To me you say it is “honourable to reveal and confess the works of God,’® yet I think you do well to keep silent, for no words of earth can communicate the secrets of Heaven.

As tor me, atter writing page upon page, | should still feel | had not yet begun. So varied is the outlook, so infinite the number of tints, that the palette of the Divine Painter will alone be able, when the night of this life has passed, to supply me with the colours needed to portray the wonders my soul descries.

Since, however, my dearest sister, you have 1 John iv. 7. 2 Of ‘Feb ait 9. 4 Tob..any' 71

nes

A Little White Flower

expressed the wish to penetrate into the sanctuary of my heart, and to have in writing an account of the most consoling dream of my life, together with my “little denon as you aie it, I will comply with that wish in the following pages. 1 will address myself to Our Lord, ae by so doing I shall be better able to set down my thoughts. You may find my expressions somewhat exagger ated, but I assure you there is no exaggeration be Hikeceyer In my heart—there all is peace and calm.

O my Jesus, how tenderly and how gently

Thou dost lead my soulT..:

The storm had raged within me since Easter,

the glorious feast of Thy triumph, until, in the

month of May, there shone thr ough the darkness ot my night one clear ray of Thy grace.

While dwelling on the mysterious dreams which Thou dost sometimes send to Thy favoured ones, I thought that such consolations were not meant for me, for: ig soul it was always night, darkest night. “hen I fell asleep amid the tury of the storm.

The following morning, May to, at the first glimmer of dawn, | dheant I was walking i in a gallery alone bith our Mother when suddenly, without ee how they had entered, I perceived three Carmelites, wearing their mantles and long veils. I knew they came from Heaven

A Canticle of Love

and I thought how glad I should be if I could Only see the face of one of them. As if my wish had been heard, the tallest of the three Saints advanced towards me. I fell upon my knees and an inexpressible joy took possession of me as she raised her veil, or rather, threw it round me.

Without a moment’s hesitation | recognised our Venerable Mother Anne of Jesus, foundress of Carmel in France.! Her face was of an unearthly beauty; no rays came from it, and yet in spite of the thick veil which enveloped us, | could see it suttused by a soft light which seemed to emanate from her. She caressed me most tenderly and tinding myself the object of such affection I took courage to say: “ Dear Mother, f entreat you, tell me, will Our Lord leave me much longer in this world? Will He not come soon to fetch me?” Smiling weetly, she answered: “ Yes, soon... very

1The Venerable Mother Anne of Jesus—Anne of Lobera—was born in Spain in 1545. She entered the Carmelite Order in 1570 in the first convent of St. foseph of Avila, and shortly afterwards became the counsellor and coadjutor of St. Teresa, who called her, “her daughter and her crown.” St. Jobs of the Cross, who was her spiritual director

for fourteen years, described her as “a seraph incarnate,” and her prudence and sanctity were held in such esteem that the most learned men consulted her in their doubts, and accepted her answers as oracles. She was

always faithful to the spirit of St. Teresa, and had reccived from Heaven the mission to preserve the primitive spirit of perfection in the Reformed Carmels. Having tounded three convents of the Reform in Spain, she established it in France ond in Belgium. She died in the odour of sanctity in the Carmel of Brusscls on March 4, 1621. On May 3, 1878, His Holiness Pope Leo NIE signed the Decree introducing the Cause of her Beatification, [Casue..]

on

A Little White Flower

soon. <.. 1 promise you... tear Mion. asked again, “does He want more from me than these poor little acts and desires that l offer Him? ‘Is-He pleased with mer Our Venerable Mother’s face then shone with a fresh splendour and her expression became indescribably more gracious as she answered: “God asks nothing more of you; He is pleased, very pleased”’ ve taking my head between her hands she kissed me so lov vingly that no words can convey the sweetness of her embrace. My heart was full of joy, and remembering my Sisters | was about to beg some favour tor them, when, alas! I awoke.

I cannot express the happiness that filled my soul. Months have now passed since this wonderful dream, yet its memory has lost nothing of its freshness or its Here charm: <2) a8 still see the loving smiles of the holy Carmelite and feel her fond caress. “O Jesus! Thou didst command the wind and the storm, and there came a great calm.””'

On waking, I realised that Heaven does indeed exist—a Heaven peopled with those who cherish me as their child. This impression still remains, and is all the more sweet because up to that time I nad no ae to the Venerable Mother Anne of Jesus; I had never sought her help, nor thought of her yiiless: Do teara. ae

t CE Matt: vie 20,

A Canticle of Love

name, which was seldom. Now I know how constantly I was before her mind, and the remembrance of this increases my love not only for her but for all those in my Father’s Home.

O my Beloved! this was but the prelude of yet greater graces which Thou didst will to heap. upon me. Let me remind Thee of them to-day, and forgive my folly if I venture once more to tell Tice my longings and hopes that border on the infinite—forgive me, and that my soul may be healed, do Thou, I beseech Thee, fulfil all its desires!

To be Thy spouse, O my Jesus, to be a daughter of Car mel, and by my union with Thee to Le the mother ey, souls, should not all this content me? Yet other vocations make themselves felt, and | would wield the sword, I would bea Priest, an ‘Apostle, a Martyr, a Doctor of the Ciarch. I eanld fain accomplish the most heroic ee ae he spirit of the Crusader burns within me and I would gladly die on the battlefield in defence of the Church.

The vocation of the Priesthood! With what love, my Jesus, would I bear Thee in my hana when my words brought Thee down from Heaven! With what love, too, would I give Thee to the faithful! Aod yet, with all my longing to be a priest, I admire and envy the

ee

A Little White Flower

humility of St. Francis of Assisi! and feel myself drawn to imitate him by refusing that sublime dignity. How reconcile these opposite desires?

Like the prophets and doctors, I would bea light unto souls. I would travel the world over to preach Thy name, O my Beloved, and raise on heathen soil the glorious standard of the Cross. One mission alone would not satisfy my longings. | would spread the Gospel in all parts of the earth, even to the farthest isles. I would be a missionary, but not for a few years only. Were it possible, I should wish to have been one from the world’s creation and to remain one till the end of time.

But the greatest of all my desires is to win the martyr’s palm. Martyrdom was the dream of my youth, and the dream has only grown more vivid in Carmel’s narrow cell. Yet this too is folly, since to slake my thirst for suffering, not one, but every kind of torture would be needful.

Like Thee, O my Adorable Spouse, I would be scourged, I would be crucified! I would be flayed like St. Bartholomew, plunged into boiling oil like St. John, or, like St. Ignatius of Antioch, ground by the teeth of wild beasts into a bread worthy of God.”

1 This great Saint remained a Deacon until his death. [Ep.]

2 An allusion to the beautiful words of the Martyr, St. Ignatius of Antioch, uttered when he heard the roar of the lions in the Roman arena. “I am the wheat of Christ; let me be ground by the teeth of the wild beasts, that J may become pure bread.” [Ep.]

A Canticle of Love With St. Agnes and St. Cecilia I would offer

my neck to the sword of the executioner, and like Joan of Arc murmur the name of Jesus at the burning stake.

When I think of the fearful torments awaiting Christians at the time of Anti-Christ, my heart thrills within me and | wish those torments could be reserved for me. Open, O Jesus, the Book of Life, in which are written the deeds of all Thy Saints: «ich one of those deeds, I long to accomplish for Thee.

To folly such as this, what answer wilt Thou make?... Is there on earth a soul more feeble than mine? Yet precisely because of my feebleness Thou hast been pleased to grant my least, my most childish desires, and now Thou dost will to realise those others more vast than the Universe.

These aspirations becoming a real martyrdom, I one day sought relief in the Epistles of St. Paul and my eyes lighted on the 12th and 13th chapters of the First Epistle to the Corinthians. There I read that all cannot become apostles, prophets, and doctors: that the Church 1s comosed of different members: that the eye cannot also be the hand.

The answer was clear, but it neither satisfied my longing nor brought me the peace | sought.

osy

A Little White Flower

“Then descending into the depths of my nothingness, I was so lifted up that I reached my aim.””? W honk being discouraged I read on and found comfort in this counsel: “Be xealous for the better gifts. And I show unto you a vet more excellent way.” The Apostle then explains how all the better gifts are nothing without Love, and that Charity is the most excellent way of going in s safety to

God. At last I had found rest.

As I meditated on the mystical Bod: y of Holy Church I could not recognise myself among any of its members desc by St. Paul, or was it not rather that | wished to recognise myself in all? Charity gave me the key to my vocation. | understood that since the Church is a body composed of different members, she could not lack the most necessary and most nobly endowed of all the bodily organs. I under stood, therefore, that the Church has a /eari—and a ver on fies with love. I saw, too, that love alone imparts life to all the members, so that should love ever fail, apostles would no longer preach the Gospel and martyrs would refuse to shed their blood. Hinaily, I realised that love includes every vocation, that love is all things, that love is eternal, reaching down through the ages and stretching to the uttermost limits of earth.

Beside myself with joy, I cried out: “O Jesus, my Love, my vocation is found at last—wmy 1 St. fohn of the Cross. {tors a ee

A Canticle of Love

vocation is love!” | have found my place in the bosom of the Church, and this place, O my God, Thou hast Thyself given to me: in the heart of the Church, my Mother, / wil// be Love!. Thus shall I be all things and my dream will be fulfilled.

But why say: “beside myself with joy,” when it 1s rather peace that has become my portion, the calm, quiet peace of the sailor as he catches sight of the beacon which lights him to port. O luminous beacon of Love! I know how to reach even unto thy fires, | have found out the secret of making them my own!

Tam but a weak and helpless child, but my very weakness makes me dare to offer myself, © Jesus, as victim to Thy Love. In olden days only pure and spotless holocausts would be accepted by the Omnipotent God, nor could His Justice be appeased save by the most perfect sacrifices; but now that the law of fear has given way to the law of love, I have been chosen, though a weak and imperfect creature, as Love's victim. And is not the choice a fitting one? Most surely, for in order that Love may be wholly

satisfied, it must stoop even unto nothingness and transform that nothingness into fire.

“Love ts repaid by Love alone.”' Welldo L know it, my God! And therefore I have sought and have found a way to ease my heart by giving

1 Motto of Seur Therese, trom St. John of the Cross. [Ep. |

A Little White Flower

Thee love for love. “Use the riches that make men unjust, to find yourselves friends who may receive you into everlasting dwellings.” 1 This is the advice Thou gavest to Thy disciples after complaining that “the children of this world are wiser in their generation than the children of light.”*

I was a child of light, and I understood that my desires of being all things, and of embracing every vocation, were riches that might well make me unjust; so | employed them in the making of friends. Mindful of the prayer of Eliseus when he asked the Prophet Elias for his double spirit, I presented myself before the company of the Angels and Saints, and spoke to them thus: “T am the least of all creatures, 1 know my worthlessness, but | also know how noble and generous hearts love to do good. Therefore, O blessed inhabitants of the Heavenly City, I entreat you to adopt me as your child. All the glory you may help me to acquire will be yours, deign then to hear my prayer and obtain tor me a double portion of your love for God.”

I dare not try to understand all that my prayer means, O my God! I should fear to be crushed by the mere weight of its audacity. That I am Thy child is my only excuse, for children do not grasp the full meaning of their words. Yet, if their parents were to mount a throne and inherit vast wealth, they would not hesitate to grant

1 Cf, Duke ev, 9, 2 Like «yi, §,

A Canticle of Love

the desires of their little ones, who are dearer to them than life itself. To please them they would spend most lavishly, stooping even to weakness.

But the Church 1s a queen because she is Thy spouse, Divine King of Kings, and I am a child of Holy Church. I do dee ask for riches or glory, not even for the glory of Heaven—that belongs by right to my brothers the Angels and Saints. My own glory will be the reflection of the radiance that streams from the brow of my Mother, the Church. But I ask for ove. One thought i 1s mine henceforth, dear Jesus, it is to love Thee! Great deeds are fir bidden me. I can neither preach the Gospel nor shed my blood... but what does it matter? My brothers labour in my stead while I, a /“t/e child, stay close to the Throne and love Thee for all those who are in the strife.

But how shall I show my love, since love proves itself by deeds? 1, the little one, will strew flowers, perfuming the Divine Throne with their fragrance. I will sing Love’s canticle in silvery tones. Thus will my oe life be spent in Thy sight, O my Beloved! Tio strew flowers is the only means of proving my love, and these flowers will be each word and look, each little daily sacrifice. I wish to make profit out of the smallest actions and do them all for Love. For Love’s sake I wish to suffer and to rejoice: so shall I strew my Howers. Not one that

A Little White Flower

1 see but, singing all the while, I will scatter its petals bee Thee. Should my roses be gathered from amid thorns, I will sing notwithstanding, and the longer aad sharper the thorns, the sweeter will grow my song.

But of what avail to Thee are my flowers and my songs, dear Jesus?... Of what avail? I know well that this fragrant shower, these petals of little price, these songs of love from a poor little heart like mine, elk nevertheless be pleasing to Thee. They are but trifles, it is true, yet Thou wilt smile on them. Pie Church Triumphant, stooping towards her child, will gather up these scattered rose-leaves, and, placing them in Thy divine hands, that. es may acquire an infinite value, will Bes es them on the Church Suffering to extinguish the flames, and on the Church Militant to make her triumph.

My Jesus, | love Thee! 1 love my Mother the Church, and I bear in mind that “the least act of pure love is of more value to her than all other works together.”"? But does this pure love really exist in my heart? Are not my boundless desires mere dreams, mere folly? If so, | beseech Thee, enlighten me, for Thou noe I seek only ne truth. if my desires be too bold, deliver me from them and from this most grievous of al] martyrdoms. Yet I confess that

7 St; John of the Cross.

A Canticle of Love

should I fail to reach one day the heights to which my soul aspires, I shall have tasted more sweetness in my martyrdom, in my folly, than I shall taste in eternal bliss—unless by a miracle thou shouldst take from me all memory of the hopes I cherished upon earth. Jesus! Jesus! if the mere desire ot Thy Love awaken such delight what must it be to possess and enjoy it for ever?

How can a soul so imperfect as mine aspire to the plenitude of Love? What is the key to this mystery? O my only Friend!—why dost Thou not reserve these infinite longings for lofty souls, for the eagles that soar in the heights? Alas! I am only a little unfledged bird. Yet the eagle’s spirit is mine, and notwithstanding my littleness I dare to gaze upon the Divine Sun of Love, I burn to dart upwards unto its fires. Fain would I fly as the eagle does, but I can only flutter my wings—it is beyond my feeble strength to soar.

What then is to become of me? Must I die of sorrow because of my helplessness? Oh, no! I will not even grieve. With daring confidence, and reckless of self, I will remain there till death, my gaze fixed upon the Divine Sun. Nothing shall affright me, neither wind nor rain; and should impenetrable clouds conceal from my eyes the Orb of Love, should it seem to me that beyond this life there is darkness only, this would be the hour of perfect joy, the hour tn

A Little White Flower

which to urge my confidence to its uttermost bounds, for knowing that beyond the dark clouds my Sun is still shining, I should never dare to

change my place. O my God, thus far do I understand Thy

Love for me, but Thou knowest how often I lose sight of what is my only care, and straying from Thy side allow my wings to be draggled in the muddy pools of this world. Then “J crv /ike a voung swallow’! and my cry tells Thee all, and Thou dost remember, O Infinite Mercy, that “Thou didst not come to call the just, but sinners.”

Yet, shouldst Thou still remain deaf to the plaintive cries of Thy feeble creature, shouldst Thou still veil Thyself, | am content to remain benumbed with cold, my wings bedraggled, and once more I would rejoice in such well-merited suffering. O Divine Sun, I am happy to feel myself so smal] and frail in Thy presence, and my heart is at peace... for | know that all the eagles ot Thy celestial court have pity on me, that they guard and defend me, putting to flight the vultures—the demons that would fain devour me. I fear not these demons, for I am _ not destined to be their prey, but the prey of the Divine Eagle.

O Eternal Word! O my Saviour! Thou art the Divine Eagle whom I! love and who allurest me. Thou who, descending to this

r Isa. RExVills TA, 2 At baths tee

A Canticle of Love

land of exile, didst will to suffer and to die, in order to bear away each single soul and plunge it into the very heart of the Blessed Trinity— Love’s eternal Home! Thou who returning to Thy realm of light, dost still remain hidden here in our vale of tears under the semblance of the white Host to nourish me with Thy own supsiance, Voroive me, O Jesus, if. tell: Thee that Thy Love reacheth even unto madness, and at the sight of such folly what wilt Thou but that my own heart should leap up to Thee? How could my trust know any bounds?

I know well that for Thy sake the Saints have made themselves foolish—being ‘ ‘eagles”’ they have done great things. Ai little for such mighty deeds, my folly lies in the hope that Thy Love accepts me as a victim, and in m confidence that the Angels and Be will help me to fly unto Thee bay Thy own wings, O my Divine E agle! As Jong as Thou willest | shall remain with my gaze fixed upon Thee, for ] long to be fascinated by Thy divine eyes, | long to become Love’s prey. I am filled with the hope that one day Thou wilt swoop down upon me, and bearing me away to the source of all Love, wilt plunge me at last into its glowing abyss, that I may become for ever its happy victim.

O Jesus! would that I could tell all Attle s: u/s of Thy ineffable condescension! If by any

A Little White Flower

possibility Thou couldst find one weaker than mine, one which should abandon itself with perfect trust to Thy Infinite Mercy, | feel that Thou wouldst take delight in loading that soul with still greater favours. But whence these desires, O my Spouse, to make known the secrets of Thy Love? Is it not Thou alone who hast taught them to me and canst Thou not likewise reveal them to others? I know that Thou canst and I beseech Thee to do so...

Tl BESEECH THEE TO CAST THY “GLANCE Grom a VAST NUMBER OF LITTLE SOULS, I ENTREAT THEE



To Choose in This World A“ Legion: of Lirice

VICEIMS: WORTHY.OF THY LOVE,

END OF THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY.



Epilogue

" ANY pages of this story ’’—said its writer—-“will never be read upon earth.” There are sufferings which may not be disclosed here below,, Our Lord having jealously reserved to Himself the right to reveal their merit in the vision where all veils. shall be drawn aside. “The sufferings of Soeur Thérése were nearly all of this hidden nature, insomuch that to many her life may seem to have been a story of siniles and caresses—the story of a flower that has scen only spring-day suns, but has not lived through autumn rains or wintry bisa On the contrary, ie Servant of God suffered intensely, and towards the close of her life she suggested that the fact should be made known after her death, well aware that the seal of the cross would be for many the authentic sign of her mission.

It was not, however, this searching martyrdom of the heart which Haile her think that the offering of herself as a Victim of God’s Merciful Love had been accepted. She felt assured of the acceptance of the holocaust because of the “floods of love overflowing into her soul from the Heart of God.” It is true that in answer to the needs of certain of His spouses who were not sufficiently pliable in the Divine Hands, she once said: “to offer ourselves as Love’s victim is to lay ourselves. open to every kind of pain.”’ But she also said to another

A Little White Flower

soul which seemed to her the figure of regenerated

humanity thirsting after perfection yet trembling at

the sight of the cross: “Why fear to offer yourself as

a victim to God’s Merciful Love? If it were to His

Divine Justice you might have reason to fear, but the

Merciful Love will ee e pity on your weakness and will treat you with tenderest mercy.”

We have seen how great was her sacrifice in leaving her dearly-loved home. Some may think that the companionship of her two sisters in the convent made the sacrifice less painful. Instead of this, their presence afforded the young postulant many occasions for repressing her affection—-a form of self-denial most keen! ly felt. “The rules of solitude and silence were strictly observed and she saw her sisters only at recreation. Had she been less mortified she might often have sat beside them, but no one could remark in her any special eae for them, since “by preference she sought the company of hoes. rcligious who were least agreeable i. her...

Some time after she entered, her appointment as “aid” to Sister Agnes of fesus brauibhe fresh occasions of sacrifice. Soeur ‘Phérdse knew that all unnecessary conversation was forbidden and therefore she never allowed herself the shghtest word in the way of personal confidences. “QO my dear Mother,” she said later, “how much I suffered then!... I could not open my heart to you and I thought you no longer knew me.” After five years of this heroic silence Sister Agnes of Jesus was chosen as Prioress) On the evening of the election her child might well have rejoiced ‘Phat henceforth she could speak freely and as of old pour out her soul. God permitted, however, that of all the

Epilogue community Soeur “Therese saw least of her who was. now “doubly her Mother.” So strong was her sense of the supernatural, that on her deathbed she declared herself “happy to die in the arms of another Prioress,. in order to exercise more fully her spirit of faith in authority.”

She wished to live the lite of the Carmel with all the perfection required by St. “Leresa, and when her work did not necessarily absorb her attention the thought of God presented itself quite naturally. On one occasion, a novice entering her cell was struck by the heavenly expression of her countenance. “Though sewing most industriously she seemed lost in contemplation. “What are you thinking off” the young Sister asked. “I am meditating on the ‘Our Father,’”’ Thérése replied. “It is so sweet to call God ‘Our Father!’”... and tears glistened in her eyes. Another time she was heard to say: ‘f cannot understand what more I shall have in Heaven than I have now; I shall see God, it is true, but, as to being with Him, our union is already complete.”

On another occasion she related the tollowing incident: “A few days after the oblation of myself to God’s Merciful Love! I was in the choir, beginning the Way of the Cross, when suddenly I felt myself wounded by a dart of fire so ardent that | thought [should die. I cannot describe the transport, and no comparison would convey an idea of the intensity of the flame. It seemed as though an invisible force plunged me wholly into fre... But what fire! what sweetness!””

When the Mother Prioress asked her if this were the first rapture she had experienced, she answered quite

t The text is given in Prayers by Sr, Thérése: Orphans’ Press: td,

va |

A Little White Flower

‘simply: ‘I have had _ several transports of love, and one in particular during my novitiate when I remained for a whole week far removed from the world. It is impossible for me to explain it, but it seemed as though I went about my work with a body other than my own, and that a veil had been cast over all earthly things. But I was not then consumed by a real flame; I was able to bear it all, without hope of seeing the ties that bound me to tee give w > way under the weight of joy; whilst on the occasion of which I speak, one minute—one second—more and my soul must have left the body... Alas! I found myself again on earth and spiritual dryness once more took possession of my heart.” Jesus had withdrawn the fiery dart,! but the wound was unto death, and for the Victim of Love the “eternal weight of glory” was not to be long delayed.

Through dis close union with Almighty God she acquired a remarkabie mastery over self, while in the garden of her soul every virtue flourished. Let us not imagine, however, that all these flowers grew and blossomed without effort on her part.

“In this world there is no fruitfulness without suffering—vcither physical pain, anguish of soul, or trials

1 The great St. Teresa of Avila (Spain), reformer of the Carmelites, who completed her antobiography in 1562 at the command of her ‘confessor, gives there an account of the following vision. “I saw an angel very near me in corporal form, an unusual thing, for though angels ‘are often represented to me it is only by intellectual vision. He was rather small and very beautiful, and his face shone so brilliantly that he appeared to be one of the ser ‘aphim who look all on fire with divine ‘love. He had in his hand a Jong golden dart—-tipped, I thought, with fire—which he seemed to me to fice? several times through my heart, deaving me wholly inflamed with a great love of God.”

The Saint died in 1582, and while her body lies incorrupt at Alba de Tormes, her heart, bearing distinetly the mark of the fiery dart, is

preserved at Avila. Her Story of my own Life is considered the most amportant work of its kind after the Confessions of St. Augustine. [Ep.]

a7

Epilogue

known sometimes only to God. When good thoughts

and generous resolutions have been the result of our reading the lives of the Saints, we ought not to content ourselves, as in the case of profane books, with paying

4 certain tribute of admiration to the genius of their

authors—rather should we consider the price which, doubtless, they paid for the supernatural good produced in our souls.’’?

And, if to-day “the little Saint,” as she is so often styled, transforms countless hearts in an amazing way, if the good she does on earth is beyond reckoning, we may well believe she bought it all at the price with which Jesus bought back our souls—suffering and the cross. Not the least of these sufferings was the war she waged against herself, refusing every satisfaction to the demands of her naturally proud and impetuous nature, While still a child she had acquired the habit of never excusing herself or making a complaint, and in Carmel she strove to be the servant of her Sisters in religion, endeavouring in the same spirit of humility to obey all without distinction.

One evening, during her illness, the community had assembled in the garden to sing a hymn before an altar of the Sacred Heart. Soeur Thérése, who was already wasted by fever, joined them with difficulty, and arriving quite exhausted was obliged to sit down. When the hymn began, one of the Sisters made her a sign to stand. Without hesitation the humble child rose, and in spite of the fever and great oppression from which she was suffering, remained standing to the end.

The infirmarian had advised her to take a little walk

