A LITTLE WHITE FLOWER: THE STORY OF SŒUR THÉRÈSE OF LISIEUX

by Thérèse of Lisieux; Thomas N. Taylor (translator and editor)

Basis: Clean reading edition of A Little White Flower: The Story of Sœur Thérèse of Lisieux (1916), Thomas N. Taylor's translation of her Autobiography following the definitive Carmelite edition of 1914 (Internet Archive alittlewhiteflow00thaeuoft); spelling and wording original; running headers, page numbers and scanner noise removed

Rare & Obscure Books series


* * *

"A LITTLE WHITE FLOWER"

THE STORY OF SŒUR THÉRÈSE OF LISIEUX

A NEW TRANSLATION OF HER AUTOBIOGRAPHY INCORPORATING THE CHANGES AND ADDITIONS INSERTED FROM THE ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS INTO THE DEFINITIVE CARMELITE EDITION OF 1914

BY THOMAS N. TAYLOR, PRIEST OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF GLASGOW

New York: P. J. Kenedy & Sons, 1916 O God, who didst inflame with Thy Spirit of Love the soul of Thy Servant, Teresa, grant that we also may love

thee and make Thee much loved.

(ico days. Cardinal Bourne.)

Declaration

Conformably to the Decree of Pope Urban VIIT. the Editor declares that in the following pages the word “Saint” and ““Miracle” are employed in a purely human sense, and all intention of anticipating the judgment of the Church is utterly disclaimed.

Wibil Obstat Albanus King, (22707.

Censor Deputatus

Fmprimatur oo) EK L.C., Epus Salfordien,

17, Feb. tote.



“a Little White Flower”



The Story of



Sœur Therese of Listeux

caer | i bd tke Abd artes is af 4 Ck P 2 o ae \ \ \ \



A New Translation of Her Autobiography



Incorporating the Changes and Additions



Inserted from the Original Manuscripts Into



Toe Definitive =~ Carmelite Edition of -x914

BY THOMAS N. TAYLOR, PRIEST OF THE ARCHDIOCESE



Fe (slasgow: Witness Before 7 of



. . : the Beatificat

THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED TO THE SERVANT OF GOD,

SCEUR THERESE, IN THANKSGIVING - POR wars

ObTAINED, ANT TO Cepk Priirrk MERE,” MOTHER

AGNES OF “-JESUS,” IN’ GRATEFUL ‘MEMORY. «707



Innumerable Kindnesses Extending Over a



Period of Eir Teen. Years;

AN INDULGENCE of Two Hundred Days was graciously granted by His Eminence Cardinal Bourne, on the Nineteenth of March, Nineteen Hundred and Twelve, to Readers of the

Autobiography of Soeur Therese of Lisieux.

THE PROFITS of this volume---price eighty cents---will be devoted to the purpose of making the Little Flower of Jesus more widely known, and of thus recruiting her “Legion of Little

Victims of Divine Love.’

PreT ree, Or: His HOLANESS: PIU5. x

To the Prioress of the Carmel of Florence

(On receipt of the Italian translation of the Autobiography ]

HIS book, redolent of the virtues of Soeur

Thérèse of Lisieux, and into which it may be said that her whole soul has passed, has been to Us a source of most sweet joy. She has indeed blossomed as a lily, and has shed abroad the lily’s pleasing perfume. She has put forth a rich fruitage of Divine Grace, and praised to the full her Lord, and blessed Him in His

works.

To Our dear daughter in Christ, Louise of the Sacred Heart, Prioress of the Carmel of Florence, whose filial piety has afforded Us this consolation, and to all the Community of the Carmel, We most lovingly impart Our Blessing, urging them at one and the same time “vo be nol slow to imitate her whom it delights them to honour.”

Pius X,

FROM THE VATICAN.

Noveniber 7, 1910,



Letter of Cardinal Merry Del Val

(Secretary of the Congregation of the Holy Office) ROME, March 16, 1913. Drar FarHer Taytor,

I am very grateful to you for sending me a copy of “Sœur Thérése of Lisieux?— the Autobiography of the wonderful little Carmelite whose hidden lite now revealed to the world is bringing an abundance of light and grace to so many souls, and showing once again that the weak things of God are stronger than men; “quod infirmum est Dei, fortius Par rai is, ee

His Holiness desires me to say that He sends you a special blessing.... R.. Carp. Merry DEL VAL.



Letter of Cardinal Amette

(Archbishop of Paris, formerly Bishop of Bayeux and Lisieux) To the Prioress of the Carmel of Lisieux

BAYEUX, Jay 24, 1899. Dear Reverend Moruer,—The Holy Ghost has said: “Ut 1s good to hide the secret of a king; but honourable to reveal and confess the works of God.”? Doubtless you remembered this saying when you determined to give to the world The Story of a Soul.® Your beloved Sister “Peresa of the Child Jesus

ar, sik 2 Tobias xii. 7,

3 LP Histoire dune Ame: the title of the French edition of the Life Letters, and Poems of Seur Thérése. L’ Histotre d’une Ame was the title chosen for the complete French edition of her writings, of which edition alone over 150,000 copies have been published since 1899.

entrusted you with her inmost secrets, and those secrets, set in writing for her Mother alone, you deem it a duty not to confine to Carmel. Wise judges have agreed with you that to reveal the marvellous workings of grace in that heroic and innocent soul would be to give glory to Our Divine Lord.

Your hopes have not been deceived, as the rapid sale of the first edition testifies. [he perfumes of Paradise, which these pages of your Angel breathe, have delighted the souls permitted to enjoy them, and have, beyond all doubt, drawn more than one to follow after her Divine Spouse. I ask Our Lord to bless the new edition more abundantly still.

Leo ADOLPHUS,

Bishop of Bayeux and Lisieux.



Letter of Cardinal Mercier

(Archbishop of Malines and Primate of Belgium) To the Prioress of the Carmel of Florence MALINES, Laster, 1970. Dear ReverEND Moruer,—You have asked for a few words to serve as preface to your Italian translation of that touching book, The Story of a Soul, written by Sister Teresa of the Chil ld Jesus, Peace of Lisieux. It is a pleasure to have my name associated with that of the Archbishop of Florence-—my esteemed friend and to share with him the privilege of blessing your work. But what can I say of that most lovable child which has not been already said, with a delicacy of touch I dare not hope to rival, by Cardinal Gotti, Cardinal Amette and many another?

The soul whose tender beauty you unveil to your readers is like the hyacinth and other springtide blossoms whose fragrance makes us forget the frosts of winter; and by the shafts of light in which they are bathed we rise to the resplendent sun that, in a little time, will turn the harvest to gold. No one can read a Life such as that of Sister Teresa of the Child Jesus without the soul expanding, without a feeling of peace, and without experiencing more keenly the attractions of Divine Love.

Where can we better follow the divinely triumphant action of the Spirit of God? We see how this innocent child fears to wound God’s fatherly Heart, how she dedicates herself completely to His service, and becomes a victim for the Church and for souls. We note the unerring judgment that discerns the true from the false, the good from the bad; the strength of will leading a girl of fifteen to heroic virtue. The Counsellor from on High has indeed guided each step of this lofty soul, all steeped in grace, whose every thought was illumined by our holy Faith. Always and everywhere true wisdom kept her in union with God, and love for God was her one source of Inspiration.

Wisdom, understanding, counsel, fortitude, knowledge, piety, fear of the Lord—these gifts abound in the heart of Thérése, and through their human tabernacle, translucent as crystal, these marvellous graces shine

forth.

God bless your zealous work, and grant that this beautiful Life may be spread far and wide....

Destré CarpinaL Mercier,

Archbishop of Malines.

PRA 2.

S we become acquainted with the histories of

those in whom, in long succession, God has been pleased to show forth examples of holiness of life, it seems as if every phase of human existence had in the history of the Church received its consecration as a power to bring men nearer to their Maker. But there isno limit to the types of sanctity which the Creator is pleased to unfold before His creatures. “To many, on reading for the first time the story of Sister Teresa of the Child ‘Jesus and of the Holy Face, it came almost as a shock to find a very youthful member of an austere Order, strictly retired from the world, engaged in hidden prayer and mortification, appearing before us to reveal to the whole world the wonders of the close intimacy of friendship to which her Divine Spouse had been pleased tocallher. Certainly this way by which Sœur Thérése was led is not the normal life of Carmel, nor hers the manner whereby most Carmelites are called to accomplish the wondrous apostolate of intercession to which their lives are given. But no less certain is it that, in her particular case, her work for God and her apostolate were not to be confined between the walls of her religious home, or to be limited by her few years on earth.

In the first place, we know that it was by obedience that the record of God’s dealings with her soul were set down in writing. And, again, the long tale of graces granted in such strange profusion through her intercession, 1s proof sufficient that it was not without Divine permission and guidance that the history of her special and peculiar vocation has become the property of all

Catholics in every land. It is for God to keep, and for Him to make known the secrets of His Love for men. And in the case of Sœur Thérése it has been His Will to divulge His secrets in most generous consideration for our needs,

What are the hidden treasures which Our Divine Master thus reveals to us through His chosen servant?

It is the old story of simplicity in God’s service, of the perfect accomplishment of small recurring duties, of trustful confidence in Him who made, and has redeemed and sanctified us. Humility, self-effacement, obedience, hiddenness, untaltering charity, with all the self-control and constant effort that they imply, are written on every page of the history of this little Saint. And, as we turn its pages, the lesson is borne in upon our souls that there is no surer nor safer way of pleasing Our Father who is in Heaven than by remaining ever as little children in His sight. Doubtless for many of her clients whose hearts are kindled as they read this book, Sœur Thérèse will obtain, as she has done so often in the past, wonderfui gifts for health of soul and body. But may she win for all of us without exception a deep and fruitful conviction of the unchanging truth, that unless we become as little children in the deus ot our Heavenly Father’s Will, we cannot enter into our Eternal Home.

FRANCIS CARDINAL BOURNE.

Feast of the Presentation of Our Blessed Lady, 1912. Ye 9

PDI gO Kial. NOE,

HE writing of her Autobiography by Sœur

Thérése was an act of obedience. “The superiors who imposed on her the task, sought in all simplicity their own edification. But the fragrance of its pages was such that they were advised to give it to the world, and this they did in 1699, two years after the death of Soeur ‘Thérèse, in the odour of sanctity, September 30,1897. Nearly haif-a-million copies of the French edition have been disposed of and the book has been translated into many languages. An English version by Professor Dziewicki introduced Soeur Thérèse to the English-speaking public in 1901.

In August, 1911, the present writer published, under the title “ds Little Children,” an abridgment of the Autobiography which has now—March, 1916— reached its 140th thousand.! At the instance of the Carmel of Lisieux, and with the aid of devoted friends, he published at Christmas, 1912, “Seur Thérèse of Listeux,” the first complete edition of the Life of the Servant of God. It was a fresh translation of her Autobiography, Letters, and Spiritual Counsels, together with an account of some striking favours ascribed to her intercession. Much fresh material was embodied in the work, which was also richly illustrated. “The first large edition of 9,000 copies, abnormally large considering its price of six shillings net, was exhausted in nine months, and the volume, thrice reprinted, has in three years reached its 23rd thousand.

1 It was issued from the Orphans’ Press, Rochdale. ‘Three quarters of a million “Little Flower’ leaflets have been printed there, while

more than three times that number of English leaflets alone have been published from Lisieux.

It received a warm welcome from those outside the Catholic Church, and has led more than one soul back to the Fold. The following lines from a letter in Lhe Universe, signed by the Rev. A. N. Guest, will scarcely surprise the many clients of Sœur Thérése who have proved her marvellous power with God.!

Tue VICARAGE, STANTONBURY.

“T believe that East and West will one day be joined together again in a visible unity; and to bring about that reunion I count on the influence of the Autobiography of the Little Flower of Jesus, that young soul who will soon---let us hope—be canonised by the

Church of Rome.

“Tf we, both Anglicans and Romans, could unite in prayer through the intercession of Sœur Thérése, and if a novena to her were begun for our reunion, I have no doubt but that it would be as suddenly accomplished as was the conversion of the 3,000 Israelites on the day of Pentecost. I conclude, therefore: let us cease controversy, and betake ourselves to prayer.”

In deference to urgent requests the Autobiography is here published apart from the other contents of the large edition. “To complete the narrative, however, the story of the birth and death of Sœur Thérése is reproduced from its pages, together with a letter to her sister, Céline, containing a vigorous defence of the contemplative life.

‘Those who already possess the above mentioned complete edition may be surprised to find here an entirely

1 For an account of favours obtained by prayers to the Servant of

God, the reader is referred to “+4s Liztle Children,” “Saur Thérése of Listeux,’”’ or the Carmelite volumes of “ Roses.” (Lisieux and Rochdale.)

new translation from the French. The explanation lies in the fact that the Carmel of Lisieux has only now published for the first time the full text of what Sœur Thérése wrote, and this definitive edition of the Autobiography differs greatly from its predecessors. “Che many changes, though of minor importance, had to be incorporated ea ie English text of “ Saur Thérèse of Lisieux,” and the opportunity was taken of retranslating the whole, in order to render the style more flowing and the translation more faithful. In reverting thus to the original, the Carmelites have acted under advice, and the reversion comes appropriately on the occasion of the Introduction of Sœur Thérése’s Cause of Beatification at Rome.

We now know that the Autobiography is based upon three different manuscripts written by yi Servant of God at the command of her superiors. The first and longest Slt als chapters [LX of the present volume, was eddressed in 1895 to Mother Agnes of Jesus, at that time Prioress. Intended solely for one who had been to her a second mother, and for the other sisters who had lavished upon her a wealth of affection in her early years, it was couched in a familiar and intimate style. “Vhis manuscript bore the title of “ The Springtime of a Laitl [Vhite Flower” “Uhe second, forming chapters X-—XMII, is clearly more restrained intone. It was addressed to Mother Mary of Gonzaga, who had received her into the Order and who in 1896 had been re-elected Prioress. “The beautiful ehapter XIIT of the i oueeG was written in 1897 for Marie her eldest sister (in Carmel, Mary of the Sacred Heart.)

The manuscripts themselves were neither paged nor divided into chapters, and the contents, sometimes

rivalling the finest French prose, were rapidly composed and never revised. In the previous French and English editions it was thought well to publish them as the text of one manuscript, addressed to Mother Mary of Gonzaga. They are now reproduced exactly as they came from the pen of Sœur Thérése.

Though alone responsible for this new translation, I wish to express here my deep gratitude to those who have so generously lent their aid in the present and in the past, and I conclude with the following extract from a letter of the Bishop of Bayeux and Lisieux, in which, after speaking with approval of the new Carmelite edition, he thus continues:

“Men of letters may rejoice at being in a position to explain the special characteristics of the three manuscripts which supplement each other so well. But I am of the number of those who can merely find fresh matter for edification in the childlike confidence and perfect obedience of Sœur Thérése with regard to the superiors who, in her eyes, successively represented the Divine Authority. This new edition has therefore my entire approval and I repeat the wish I expressed in 190g: that the mystical perfume of her who was the good odour of “Fesus Christ may delight and sanctify a multitude of souls.”

6 ony bee

Feast of the Annunciation, 1916,

“THE STORY OF THE SPRING-



Time of a Little White



Flower.” Being the Life of

SOEUR ‘THERESE, WRITTEN BY



Herself: Preceded by an



Account of Her Parentage

AND BIRTH, AND FOLLOWED



By a Narrative of Her

SAINTLY DEATH.



Prologue

PARENTAGE AND BirtH

HE story of the young Carmelite nun whoin the

whole Catholic world now styles, as she so often in her simplicity styled herself, “The Little Flower of Jesus,”’ would, in part at least, be unintelligible without an allusion to the garden in which the flower bloomed. Pou Lord,” wrote Scour Therese; “would have it spring up in a soil fragrant with purity, where there had already appeared eight fair white lilies.” Among her pages of rare beauty, few are more beautiful than those which afford a glimpse into the home of her parents, Louis Martin and Zélie Guérin.

Louis Joseph Stanislaus Martin was born on August 22, 1823, at Bordeaux, while his father was captain in the garrison there. ‘God has predestined this child for Himself,”? said the saintly Bishop of Bordeaux on the occasion of his baptism, and events have proved the truth of the prophecy. From Bordeaux the family came later to Alengon in lower Normandy.

Louis Martin was twenty years old when he climbed the mountain of the Great St. Bernard and presented himself for admission as a postulant at the celebrated monastery. “Che Prior advised him to go back to Alengon, and on the completion of his course of Latin to return to the cloister. Louis turned his steps homeward, sad at heart, but before long he understood clearly that his life was to be otherwise dedicated to God.

s,

A Little White Flower

fae. years after the vain quest of Louis Martin a simular scene was enacted in Alencon itself. Accomed by her mother, Zclie Guérin presented herself at the Convent of hes sisters of Charity in the hope of gaining admission. For years it had been her desire to share the Sisters’ work, but this was not to be. In the interview that followed, the Superioress, guided by the Holy Ghost, as we may well believe, dee that Zelie’s vocation was not for the religious life, and that God wanted her in the world. She returned, therefore, to her parents, and to the companionship BF her elder sister and her younger brother. Shortly afterwards the gates of the Visitation Convent at Le Mans closed upon her beloved sister, and “éite’s thoughts turned to the Sacrament of Holy Matrimony. “On tY God!” she repeated constantly, “since I am unworthy to be Thy spouse like my dear sister, I will enter the married state to fulfil Thy holy will. I beseech Thee to make me the mother of many children, and to grant

that all of them may be consecrated to Thee.”

God heard her prayer, and His finger was visible in the circumstances which led to her becoming the wife of Louis Martin, in the Church of Notre Dame, Alengon, July 12,1858. Like ei and his spouse, they were joined in matrimony—“‘so/e/y for the love of children, in whom God’s Nanie might be blessed for ever and ever.” Nine flowers bloomed in this garden. Of these, four were transplanted to Paradise before their buds had guite unfolded, while five were gathered into God’s gardens upon earth—one entering the Visitation Convent in Caen, the others the Carmelite Convent in Lisieux.

1 Cf, Tobias viii, 9.

Prologue

Krom the cradie all were dedicated to Mary Immaculate, and ail received her name: Marie Louise, Marie Pauline, Marie Léonie, Marie Héléne (who died at the age of four and a half), Marie Joseph Louis, Marie Joseph Jean Baptiste, Marie Céline, Marie Mélanie “Phérése (who died when three months old) and lastly, Sarie Francoise Thérèse.

The boys were the fruit of prayers and tears. After s, their parents entreated St. Joseph

the birth of four girl to obtain for them the favour of a son who should

1 “ DORSAL PSA Ea bee ee M: 1 become a priest and a missionary. arie Joseph was given to then, but only five months had run their course when Heaven demanded what it had lent.

‘a8:

Phen folowed more urgent novenas, for the grandeur of the priesthood was so well understood by those Christian parents that their hearts coveted it eagerly. At all costs the family must have a Priest of the Lord-— an apostle, perhaps even a martyr, one who should dispense God’s Word, God’s Bread, God’s Pardon. But, the thoughts of the Lord are not our thoughts, nor are His ways ours. Another Joseph was born, and with him hope grew strong. Nine months, however, had scarcely passed when he joined his little brother. ‘They did not ask again, but if the veil of the future could have been lifted, their hearts would have been comforted. A daughter was to be vouchsafed them who would be invoked by the missionaries of the Gospel through the length and breadth of Africa, India and China, and who would be a herald of Divine Love, not to one land alone, but to all the ends of the earth. ‘They themselves were destined to shine as apostles. In the

5 aps he saat aac

A Little White Flower

dedication of the Portuguese edition of the Autobiography, we read these significant words of an eminent Jesuit:

“To the sacred memory of \Louis Jowph Stanislaus Martin and of Lélie Guérin, the blessed parents of Sister Teresa of the Child Jesus, an exaniple to all Christian parents.”

Every morning saw them at Mass; together they knelt at the Holy Table. They strictly observed the fasts and abstinences of the Church, kepc Sunday as a day of complete rest from work in spite of the remonstrance of friends, and found tn pious reading their most delightful recreation. “They prayed in common, after the touching example of Captain Martin, whose devout recital of the Our Father brought tears to the eyes of his hearers. “Che great Christian virtues flourished in their home. Wealth did not bring luxury in its train, and the simplicity of olden days characterised the household,

““How mistaken are the great majority of men!” Madame Martin used often to say. “If they are rich, they desire honours; and if these are obtained, they are still unhappy; for that heart can never be satisfied which seeks anything but God.” Her whole ambition as a mother was directed towards Heaven. “ Four of my children are already safely there,” she once wrote, “and the others also will go to that Kingdom, enriched with greater merit because of a more prolonged combat.”

Charity in all its forms was a natural outlet to the piety of these simple hearts. Husband and wife set aside each year a considerable portion of their income

Prologue

for the work of the Propagation of the Faith. They relieved poor persons in distress, ministering to them with their own hands. On one occasion Louis Martin was seen to raise a drunken man from the ground in a busy thoroughfare, take his bag of tools, support him on his arm, and lead him home. Another time, seeing in a railway station a poor and starving epileptic without the means to return to his distant home, he was so touched with pity that he took off his hat, and, placing in it an alms, proceeded to beg from the passengers on behalt of the sufferer. Money poured in, and it was with a heart brimming over with gratitude that the sick man blessed his benefactor.

He never allowed human respect to overrule his Christian instincts. In whatever company he might be, he always saluted the Blessed Sacrament when passing a church; nor did he ever meet a priest without paying him a mark of respect. A word from his lips sufficed to silence the blasphemer. In reward for his virtues, God showered even temporal blessings on His faithful servant. In 1871 he was able to give up his business as a jeweller and retire to 42 Rue St. Blaise.

It was in this house that the ninth child of Louis Martin and Zélie Guérin was born, January 2, 1873. Marie and Pauline were at home for the Christmas holidays from the Visitation Convent at Le Mans. There was, it 1s true, a slight disappointment that the future priest was still denied them, but it quickly passed, and the little one was regarded as a special gift from Heaven. ‘Two days later she was carried to the church of Notre Dame to receive the Sacrament of Baptism; her eldest sister, Marie, was her godmother, and she

A Little White Flower

received the name of Marie Francoise Thérèse.1 Soon, however, the tender bud drooped on its delicate stem. “You should pray to St. Francis de Sales,” wrote her aunt from the convent at Le Mans, “and promise, if the child recover, to call her by a second name, Frances.” This was a sword-thrust for the mother. Leaning over the cradle of her Thérése, she exclaimed: “Only when the last hope has gone, will I promise to call her Frances.”

‘The gentle St. Francis waived his claim in favour of the reformer of the Carmelite Order: the child recovered, and so retained her nate of Therese. Sorrow, one was mixed with the mother’s joy when she found it necessary to send her to a foster-mother in the country. There the little one Be ag and in ae en months had gained strength suficient to allow of her being brought back to the Rue St. Blaise. A tablet on he balcony of No. 42 now informs the pa ae by that here was born a certain Carmelite, by pone Sister Teresa of the Child Jesus and of the Holy Face. The pilgrims to the spot where the Little Flower first saw the light of day, are not so numerous as those to the grave where her remains await their glorious resurrection. ‘They may nevertheless be numbered by thousands.

After the death of his wife the father of Thérése lett Alengon for Lisieux, a Norman town lying amid the apple orchards of the ie of the Tougues. Lisieux is deeply interesting by reason of its old Sine caee of St. Jacques and St. Pierre, and its specimens of quaint houses, some of which date from the twelfth century.

1 The baptismal entry, with its numerous signatures, is shown to

visitors, and a tablet in the baptistery of the beautiful Gothic church ‘ells the pilgrim that here the “ Little Queen’ was made a child of God. [Ep.]

Prologue In 1877, the inhabitants little thought that their town would be rendered illustrious through its new citizen, Marie Thérése Martin. She entered its Carmel at the age of 15, and died there almost unknown, on September 30, 1897, in her twenty-fifth year.

Only 17 years later her Cause of Beatification was ee at Rome, while the entire Catholic world is inhaling the sweet odour of her holiness and marveling at the multitude, liters on innumerable, of spiritual ae temporal favours ascribed to her intercession, Each day a vast correspondence brings from all quarters of the globe to he Carmel of Lisicux news of cures, conversions, souls upufted to God, holy deaths, apparitions, mysterious perfumes, and signs of protection accorded by God’s Servant in countless most gracious to great and simple, to sinner and saint, to those outside the Fold as well as to those within, and in a special way to little children and God’s beloved poor— in a word, tidings of the foretold Shower of ‘Roses, and of the ample e fulfilment of her promise to “spend her Heaven in doing good on earth.”

c¢

It will not be amiss to say a word here about the brother and sister of A dom 1e Martin. Her sister, in religion, Sister Marie Dosithea,!ed at Le Mans a life so holy that she was cited by Dom Gueéranger, perhaps the most distinguished Benedictine of the nineteenth century, as the model of a perfect nun. By her own confession, from earliest childhood she had never been guilty of the > smallest deliberate fault. She died on February 24, 1877. It was in the convent made fragrant by her aunt’s extraordinary holiness that Pauline Martin, the “little Mother” of Thérèse and for five years her Prioress, received her education. And

A Little White Flower

if the Little Flower imbibed the liturgical spirit from her teachers, the daughters of St. Benedict in Lisieux, so that she could say before her death: “I do not think it is possible for anyone to have desired more than I did to assist properly at choir and to recite perfectly the Divine Office””—may we not trace to Le Mans the sweet spirit of St. Francis de Sales which pervades the pages of the Autobiography?

With the brother of Zélie Guérin the reader will make acquaintance in the narrative of Sœur Thérése. He was a chemist in Lisieux, and it was there that his daughter Jeanne Guérin married Dr. La Néele and his younger child Marie entered Carmel. Foreign missionaries had a warm-hearted friend in M. Guérin, who for his charities was made godfather to an African king. God called him to his abundant reward in 1909.

The pen of Soeur Thérése herself must now take up the narrative. It will do so in words that not only tell of love but set the heart on fire, and at the same time lay bare the workings of grace in a soul that “from the age of three never refused God anything.” In these inimitable pages, as in those of St. Teresa of Avila or St. John of the Cross, the spirit of poetry is the handmaid of holiness. And this translation sets forth again, in our world-wide English tongue, her worldwide mission, that of preaching the ancient message of God’s Merciful Love, and of pointing out the ever new way to Him of “confidence and self-surrender.”’

IO

fie aw TOBIOGRAPHY

“From the age of three I have never refused our good God anything... I have never given Him aught but love, and it is with love He will repay.”

(Seur Thérése.)

CrAt PER i



Earliest Memories

T is to you, dearest Mother,’ to you who are doubly a mother to me, that | am about to confide the story of my soul. When you asked me to write it | feared the task might unsettle me, but Our Lord has deigned to make me derstand that by simple obedience | shall please Him best. I begin therefore to sing what baie?

re |

be my eternal song: “The Mercies of the Lord.”

Before setting one my task I knelt before the statue of Our Lady which has given us so many proofs of Our heavenly Mother’s loving care. As I knelt I begged of that dear Mother to guide my hand, ane so ensure that only what was pleasing to he should find place here. Then, opening the Gospels, my eyes fell on these words: “ Yesus going up into a mountain called unto Him whom He would Himself.”®

They threw a clear light upon the mystery of my vocation and of my entire life, but above all upon the favours Our Lord ae granted to

1 Her sister Pauline—in religion, Mother Agnes of Jesus. She was then as now (1915) Prioress of the Carmel of Lisieux.

Here begins what Seur Thérése in her manuscript calls THe Story OF THE SPRINGTIME OF A Lirrte Wuite Fiower. This first portion of the Autobiography, written in 1895, closes with Chapter IX. [Enrror.]

28, Ixeevnly ts 3 Mark iii. 13.

as

A Little White Flower

my soul. He does not call those who are worthy, but those whom He will. As 5t. Pau says ee will have mercy On <chom He will have mercy." So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth METEN. =

l often asked myself why God has preferences, why all souls do not receive an equal measure of grace. I was filled with wonder when I saw extraordinary ihe showered on sinners such as St. Paul, St. Augustine, St. Mary * Magdalen, and many aes whom He forced, so to “speak, to receive His grace. In reading the lives of the Saints, | was surprised to see there were certain privileged souls whom Our Lord favoured from the cradle to the grave, allowing no obstacle in their path which | might keep them from mounting towards Him, nee spate sin from

soiling the spotless brightnes s of their baptismal

robe. And again it puzzled me why so many poor savages should die without ha wing even heard the name of God.

Our Lord has deigned to explain to me this mystery. He showed methe book of Nature, and I understood that every flower created by Flin is beautiful, that the brilliance of the rose and the whiteness of the lily do not lessen the perfume of the violet or the sweet simplicity of the Caisy. I understood that if all the lowly Howers wished

1 CE Bxod. axxo tgs & Ui. Rom 7e. 0G,

Farliest Memories

to be roses, Nature would lose her springtide beauty, and the fields would no longer be enamelled with lovely hues.

It is the same in the world of souls,Our Lord’s living garden. He has been pleased to create great Saints who may be compared to the lily and the rose; but He has also created lesser ones, who must be content to be daisies or simple violets flowering at His feet, and whose mission is to gladden His divine eyes when He deigns to look down on them: the more joyfully they do His will, the greater is their perfection.

I understood this also, that God’s love is made manifest as well in a simple soul which does not resist His grace as in one more highly endowed. in fact, the characteristic of love being self-abasement, were all souls to resemble the holy Doctors who have illumined the Church, it would seem as if God in coming to them did not stoop low enough. He has created, however, the little child who knows nothing and can but utter feeble cries, and the poor savage who has only the natural law to guide him, and it 1s to their hearts that He deigns to stoop. These are the field dowers whose simplicity charms Him; and by His condescension to them Our Saviour shows His infinite greatness. As the sun shines both on the cedar and on the smallest flower, so the Divine Sun illumines each soul, great or lowly, and all things work together for its good,

is

A Little White Flower

4 ust asin Nature the seasons are so disposed that on the appointed day the humblest daisy shall unfold its petals.

You will wonder, little Mother, to what all this is leading, for I ae ave said nothing yet that sounds like ae story of my life; but did you not tell me to write quite freely here came into my mind? Itwill not bea biography, properly ‘so called, that you will find in these pages, but my thoughts about the graces Our Lord has been pleased to bestow on His spouse.

I am now at a time of life when I can look back on the past, for my soul has been refined in the crucible of interior and exterior trials. Now, like a flower after the storm, I can raise my head and see that the words of the Psalm are realised in me: The Lord is my Shepherd and LT shall want nothing. He hath set me in a place of pasture. He hath brought ne up on the water of refreshment. He hath converted my soul. He hath led me on the paths of justice for His own Name’s sake. For though I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear no evils for Thou art with me.”

To me He has indeed been always “compassion ate and merciful, long-suffering and plenteous in mercy.” So it gives me great joy, dear Mother, to come to you; and sing His unspeakable mercies.

OL Pa ee ees a hs Gis a

Farliest Memories

It is for you alone’ that I write the story of the Little Flower gathered by Jesus. This thought will help me to speak freely, without troubling either about style or about the many digressions I shal) make; “fora mother's heart. always understands her child, even when it can only lisp, and therefore | am quite sure of being understood by the little Mother who made ready my heart and offered it to Our Lord.

If a little flower could speak, it seems to me that it would tell quite simply what God had done for it, without hiding any of its gifts. It would not say, under the pretext of humility, that it was not pretty and had not a sweet scent, that the sun had withered its petals or the storm bruised its stem—if it knew such were not the case.

The Flower now telling her tale rejoices in having to publish the wholly undeserved favours of Our Lord. She knows that in herself she had nothing worthy of attracting Him; His mercy it was that filled her with good things— His mercy alone. He allowed her to see the light in a holy soil fragrant with the odour of purity. He caused eight fair white lilies to spring up there before she appeared. In His love He willed to preserve her from the poisoned

breath of the world, for hardly had her petals

1 Italics her own; and so throughout the Autobiography, with the exception of quotations from Holy Scripture. [Eb.]

A Little White Flower

unfolded when this good Master transplanted her to the mountain of Carmel, Our Lady’s garden

of delight.!

Having summed up in a few words all that God has done for me, I will now relate in detail the story of my childhood. I know that what to others might seem wearisome will not be without charm for my Mother. Besides, the memories I am about to evoke are not mine alone. It was at your side my early years were spent, and together we shared the devoted care of God-fearing parents. May they now bless me tenderly, who am the least of their children, and help me to sing the divine mercies!

Up to the time of my entry into Carmel, the story of my soulis marked by three distinct periods.

1, Carmel means a garden. Formerly proverbial for its luxuriant beauty, the range of Carmel is still remarkable for its trees and flowers and sweet-smelling plants. Hermits dwelt in its caves at an early date, and during the second half of the 12th century St. Berthold, with ten companions, settled there from Europe near the grotto once occupied by Elias. According to tradition St. Berthold was favoured with an apparition of the prophet. The new-comers built a chapel in honour of the Mother of God, and the “Hermits of Our Lady of Mount Carmel” multiplied so rapidly that in 1208 the Patriarch of Jerusalem, St. Albert, drew up for them a rule of lite. Pope Honorius III, who approved of the Dominicans in 1216, and of the Franciscans in 1223, gave his approbation to the Carmelite rule in 1226. A cruel persecuticn by the Turks, in 1251, compelled the Hermits to return to Europe.

In 1245 Innocent IV raised the eremitical Congregation to the rank of a mendicant Order. That same year, the first general chapter was held at Aylesford in Kent, when an English Carmelite, St. Simon Stock, was elected general. The famous apparition of Our Lady to this Saint took place near Winchester, July 16, 1251. Giving him a brown scapular, she promised that those who died wearing it would not suffer from the eternal flames.

Earliest Memories The first, though short, is not without its rich

harvest of memories. It extends from the dawn of reason to the death of our dearly loved Mother: that is to say, till I was four years and eight months old. God, in His goodness, cid me the favour of awakening my intelligence when I was still very young, and He has so deeply engraved in my mind the impressions of childhood that past events seem to have happened but yesterday. His design, no doubt, was to make me know and appreciate the excellent mother He had given me, but alas! His divine hand soon took her from me to crown her in Heaven. Throughout my life it has pleased God to surround me with affection; my earliest recollections are of tender caresses and smiles. And

Another general, Blessed John Soreth, born at Caen, 1420, founded (or affiliated) the first convent of Carmelite nuns, and tried to restore among his friars the strict rule of St. Albert. This triumph was reserved for St. Teresa, like St. Simon a devoted client of Our Lady. She founded the first house of Discalced (i.e. barefooted) Carmelite nuns in 1562, at Avila in Spain. With the aid of St. John of the Cross she extended the reform to the houses of the friars, and her companion, Mother Anne of Jesus, brought the Sisters to Paris in 1604. The Carmel of Lisieux is a foundation from that of Poitiers and dates back to 1838. At present there are in existence about 20 convents of Calced nuns, and over 360 of the Discalced.

The Carmelite enclosure is very strict 5 in the parlour a veil covers the grille. In addition to other penances the nuns abstain perpetually trom flesh-meat, fast upon one meal a day from November 14 till Easter, wear coarse garments, retire to rest on straw pallets about 11-30 p.m. and rise during the greater part of the year at 4-45 a.m. Besides their hours of vocal prayer they spend two hours daily in mental prayer. Their tender devotion to Mary makes the Order her “ sarden of delight.” Amid all the austerity the gaiety of Carmelites is proverbial like the beauty of Carmel itself. “God alone suffices,”

wrote St. Teresa. [Ep.|

A Little White Flower

if He allowed so much love to be lavished upon me, He also endowed me with a warm and sensitive heart to return it. Of my affection for Papa and Mamma it would be difficult to convey an idea, and as | think of the thousand ways in which it was shown I cannot suppress a smile.

You have given me the letters which Mamma wrote to you while you were at Le Mans, studying at the Visitation Convent there. They are

he arming letters inspired by a mother’s love

and eee too often full of my praise. I shall find it easier to quote from Awe: though | remember distinctly the events to ae they sa In proof of what I have said about my

ray of showing affection for my parents, here is ek Mamma writes:

‘“‘ Baby is the dearest little rogue; she will kiss me and at the same time wish me to die. ‘Oh, how I wish you would die, dear Mamma!’ Astonished at being scolded for saying such a thing, she will answer: ‘It is because I want you to go to Heaven, and you say that to yet there we must die!’ In her outbursts of affection for her Father she wishes him also to die. The dear little thing will hardly ever leave me: she delights in following ime about, especially in the garden. If I am not there, she refuses to stay, and is so inconsolable that she has to be brought back to me again. She will not even go upstairs by herself without calling at every step, ‘Mamma, Mamma!’ and if I forget to answer, ‘Yes darling!” she waits where she is and will not move.”

Farliest Memories

bays nearly three years old when Mamma wrote:

“ Little Thérése asked me the other day if she would Porte: Meaven,. o¥es, 1 you are Bt 7.) tele hers ‘Oh, Mamma,’ she answered, ‘then if I am not good, shall I go to hell? Well, I know what I will do— I will Aly to you in Heaven, and you will hold me tight in your arms, and how ee God take me < away then?’ I saw by her look she was convinced that God could do nothing to her if she hid herself in my arms.

“Marie loves her little sister very much; indeed she is a child who delights us all. She is extraordinarily outspoken, and it is charming to see her run after me to confess her childish taults: ‘Mamma, I gave Céline a push; I slapped her once; but I will not do it again.’ The moment she has ie anything mischievous, everyone must know. Yesterday, without meaning to do so, she tore off 2 small piece of wall paper; you would have been sorry for her—she wanted to tell her Father immediately. When he came home four hours later and everyone else had forgotten about it, she ran at once to Marie, saying: ‘’ Vell Papa that I tore the paper, and she waited like a criminal for sentence. There is an idea in her little head, that if she accuses herself she will be the more readily forgiven.

Papa’s name fills me with many happy memories. As soon as he came home I would run to meet him, seat myself on his foot, and so he would carry me about through house and

; ‘ garden. Then he would take me in his arms, lift me high up in the air, set me on his shoulder

Rat

A Little White Flower

and load me with caresses. Mamma used to say, laughingly, that he always did whatever I weed and he would answer: “Well, why not? She is the ae Yet I cannot say that he spoilt me. I remember one day while I was merrily swinging he called out as he passed: “Come and give me a kiss, little Queen!”’ Contrary to my ‘usual custom, [ would not a and answered pertly: “You must come yourse If for it, Papa!”’ But he wisely took no notice of me.

“You naughty little gt irl” exclaimed Marie, “to answer Papa so rudely!” Her 7 reproof took ences | immediately gat off the swing and the whole house ee with my cries. isd hurried upstairs, this time not waiting to call “Mamma!” at every step, my one thought was to find Papa and make my peace with him, which, needless to say, was quic ily done.

I could not bear to ke I had grieved our beloved parents ai nd I acknowledged my faults instantly, as this little anecdote, related by Mam-

ma, will show:

One morning beiore going down-stairs [ wanted to kiss Théreése, but she seemed to be fast asleep and I

did not like to wake her. Marie, sceing my hesitation, said: ‘I am certain she is ue pee? I then et down towards her, and immediately she hid herself

under the bed-clothes, ie in the tone of a spoilt

child: ‘I don’t want anyone to look at me.’ I was not

pleased with her and [ told her so. A minute or two ae

Farliest Memories

later I heard her crying and shortly after, to my great surprise, I found her at my side. She had managed to get out of her cot unaided, and stumbling over her long nightdress, had come downstairs barefoot. Her little face was wet with tears: ‘Mamma’ she said, throwing herself on my knee, ‘forgive me for being so naughty!” Pardon was soon granted; I pressed the little angel to my heart, half smothering her with kisses.”

I remember also the great affection I had for my dear god-mother,' who had just left school. Without appearing to do so, I took in all that I saw and heard, and it seems to me that | judged of things then as { judge of them now. I listened attentively while she taught Celine, and I was very good and obedient so as to obtain the privilege of remaining in the room during lessons. Marie loaded me with little presents which, trifling though they were, afforded me endless pleasure.

I was proud of my two big sisters, and thought of you from morning till night, you seemed so far away. When I was just learning to talk, Mamma would ask me: “What are you thinking aboutr”’ and the invariable answer was: “ Pauline.”’ Sometimes I heard it said that you would be a nun, and without quite understanding what that meant I used to think: “I too will be a nun.” This is one of my earliest recollections, and |

‘o 1 Her eldest sister, Marie Louise, educated at the Visitation Convent of Le Mans. [Ep.] ary

A Little White Flower

have never changed my mind: so you see. when S eee |) ) I was only two years old, it was your example that drew me to the Divine Spouse of virgins.. t | What tender memories | could here confide to you, were I not afraid of being carried too far!

Dear Léonie also had a warm place in my heart and my great love for her was fully returned. In the evening, when she came from school, she used to take care of me while everyone else went for a walk, and it seems as though I can still hear the sweet songs she sang to lull me to sleep. [ remember perfectly the day of her First Communion, and | remember her companion, the poor child whom Mamma dressed, according to the touching custom of the well-to-do families in Alengon. This child did not leave Léonie throughout all that happy day, and at the grand dinner in the evening she sat in the place ar honour. I was too small to stay up for the feast, but, thanks to Papa’s goodness, I had my share in it, for when the dessert came round, he himself brought his little Queen a piece of the First Communion cake.

The only one now left to speak of is Céline, the companion of my childhood. My memories of her are so abundant that I do not know how to choose. We understood each other perfectly, though I was much the more forward and lively, and by far the less simple of the two. Here is a letter which will show you, dear Mother, how

Farliest Memories

much sweeter Céline was than naughty Théreése. I was then nearly three, and Céline six and a half.

“Céline is naturally inclined to be good; as to that little puss, “Chérese, one cannot tell how she will turn out, she is still so young and thoughtless. She is a very intelligent child, but has not nearly so sweet a disposition as her sister, and her stubbornness is almost

Pp ) unconquerable. When she has said ‘No’, nothing wil! make her change; you might leave her all day in the cellar without getting her to say ‘Yes’. She would

] ”. rather sleep there than do so,

I had another fault, that of strong self-love, which Mamma did not mention in her letters. Here are a couple of instances:—One day, wishing no doubt to see how far my pride would go, she said smiling: “Thérése, if you will kiss the ground [ will give you a halfpenny.” In those days the sum was a fortune, and in order to gain it I had not far to stoop, for | was so tiny that there was not much distance between my lips and the ground; but my pride was up in arms, and, holding myself erect, | replied: “No, thank you, Mamma, I would rather go without the halfpenny.”

Another time when we were going into the country to see some friends, Mamma told Marie to put on my prettiest frock, but not to let me have bare arms. I did not utter a word, and appeared as indifferent as children of that

ae)

A Little White Flower

age should be, but in my own mind I said: should have looked much prettier with bare arms.”

With such a disposition it is clear that had I been brought up by careless parents, I should have become very wicked, and perhaps have lost my soul. But jesus watched over His little spouse, and turned all her faults to advantage, since by being checked early in life, they became a means of leading her towards perfection. For instance, as I had great selflove and an innate love of good as well, it was enouch'.to téll me once > “You muse nor ie that!"’ and I never wanted to do it again. With nothing but good example before my eyes, I naturally wished to follow it, and I see with pleasure in my Mother’s fetters that as I grew older I began to be a greater comfort to her. ‘This is what she writes in 1876:

“Even ‘Chérése is anxious to practise mortification. Marie has given her little sisters a string of beads on purpose to count their acts of self-denial, and they have really spiritual, but very amusing, conversations together. ‘The other day Céline ee “How can God be in such a tiny Host?’ and Thérèse answered: ‘That is not strange because God is Almightyr’ § And what does Almighty mean?’ continued Céline. ‘It means’, said pence ‘that He can do whatever He likes.” But it is still more amusing to see Thérése continually putting her hand in her pocket and pulling a bead along the string for every little sacrifice.

Earliest Memories

“’The children are inseparable and need no other company. Nurse having made Thérèse a present of two bantams, every day after dinner she and Céline sit by the i playing with them.

“One morning ‘Vhércse climbed out of her cot and made her way into Céline’s; when it was time to dress her, nurse found the littie one clinging affectionately to her sister: ‘Oh, Louise!’ she exclaimed, ‘do leave me here! Don’t you see we are just like the little bantams, we cannot be separated!””

That was true. 1 could not bear to be away from Céline; I would rather leave my dessert unfinished than let her leave the table without me. The moment she rose I turned round 3 my high chair and had to get down at once, then we would run off to play together.

I was still too small for the long Sunday services so Mamma stayed at home to look after me. On these occasions I was very good and quiet, walking all the while on tip-toe; but as soon as ] heard the door open there was a tremendous outburst of joy. Rushing to my dear little Bister I would exclaim: “ ae Céline! quick, give me the blessed bread!”

One day she did not bring any. What was to Be tgae?> 1 could not do without it, for | looked upon this little feast as my Mass. A bright

1 The custom still prevails in many parts of France of blessing unleavened bread at the Offertory of the Mass and then distributing it to ‘the faithful. It is known as pain bénit. This blessing only takes place -at the Parochial Mass. [Eb.]

oa

A Little White Flower

idea struck meand I said: “ You have no blessed bread, well then make some!” Céline immedlately opened the cupboard, took out the bread, cut off a tiny bit, and, 2 after saying a Hail Mary over it with due solemnity, she triumphantly presented 1 ittome. Making the sign of the Cross [ ate it most religiously Be fhe it tasted exactly like the real blessed bread.

Under the impression, no doubt, that she was too big to play with dolls, Léonie one day brought us a basket filled with their frocks, and other trifies. On ‘these she laidher doll; * Piers dears,’ she said, “choose whatever you like.” Celine looked at it, and took a woollen ball. After 2 moment’s thought I put out my hand, saying: ‘1 choose evei rything, andi “capi af off oe doll and basket withor a more ado.

This childish incident sums up, so to speak, the whole of my life. Later on, when the way of perfection was opened out before me, I real-Hise sd that to become a Saint one must suffer much, one must always choose the most perfect path. I also understocad that a are many degrees of holiness, each soul being tree to respond to the calls of Our Lord, and to do much or little for His love, ina word, to select amongst the sacrifices He asks. Then also, as in the days of my childhood, [ cried out: “ My God, I choose everything—I will not be a Saint by halves, I am not afraid of suffering for Thee. One thing only

Earliest Memories

do I fear, and that is, to follow my own will. Accept then the offering I make of it, for I choose all that Thou willest!”’

But, dear Mother, I am forgetting myself, I must not tell you yet of my girlhood, I am still

speaking of the baby of ee or fae years old.

I remember a dream I had at that age which

impressed itself very deeply on my memory. I thought | was walking alone in the garden when, suddenly, I saw near the arbour two hideous ttle devils dancing with surprising agility on a barrel of lime in oP of the heavy irons attached to their feet. At first they cast fiery glances at me; then, as thougl 1 suddenly terrified, I saw them in the twinkling of an eye hae themselves down to the bottom of the barrel. They came out of that somehow or other, only to run and hide in the laundry which opened into the garden. Finding them such cowards, | wanted to know what they were going to do, and overcoming my fears I went to the window. The wretched creatures kept racing about on the tables, quite at a loss how to hide from my gaze. Now and again they would come nearer: od peer through the windows with an uneasy air, but finding me still at my post, they would scamper off looking the picture ‘of misery.

Of course this dream was nowise extraordinary; yet I believe Our Lord made use of it to show me that a soul in the state of grace has

ad

A Little White Flower

nothing to fear from the devil, who is a coward, and will fly even from the gaze of a little child.

Dear Mother, how happy | was at that age! Not only was I beginning to enjoy life but virtue itself wore a charm. It seems to me that my character was the same then as now, for even at that time | possessed a very large measure of self-control. 1 made it a practice never to complain when my things were taken, and if at any time I were unjustly accused, | preferred to keep silence rather than attempt an excuse. There was, however, no merit in all this for it came to me quite naturally.

How quickly those sunny years of early childhood passed away, and how sweet the memories they have left behind! I think with delight of the Sunday walks, when our beloved Mother always accompanied us. Indeed I can still feel the vivid and poetic impressions made on m childish heart by the vision of the cornfields studded with cornflowers, poppies, and marguerites. Even at that age I loved: far stretching views, sunlit spaces, ve stately trees: in a word all ane beauties of nature cast their spell upon me and raised my soul to Heaven.

Often during these walks we met poor people, and I was always the one chosen to give them an alms, which made me feel happy indeed. Sometimes Papa took me home, knowing the way was too long for his little Queen. This was a

Farliest Memories

cause of trouble, and to console me Celine would fill her pretty basket with daisies, and give them fo me on her return. Truly everything on earth smiled on me; I found flowers strewn at each step, and oo naturally happy disposition helped to make life bright. But a new era was about to dawn. I was to be the spouse of Our Lord at so tender an age that it was necessary I should suffer from chia hood.

As the early spring flowers begin to come under the snow and open at the first rays of th sun, so the Little Flower, whose story | am writing, had to pass through the winter of trial and ae her delicate cup filled with the dew of tears.

a}



A Catholic Household

LLU the details of Mamma’s illness are still

fresh in my mind. I remember especiall her iast weeks on earth, when Céline and I felt like poor little exiles. Every morning a friend came to fetch us, and we spent the day at her house. Once, when we had not had time to say our prayers before starting, my little sister whispered to me on the way: “Must we tell that we have not said Our prayers:’ Yes, certainly | am answered. So, on our arrival Céline timidly mace it known to our friend, who replied: “Well, children, you shall say them,” and taking us to a large room she left us there. Céline looked at me in amazement. I too was astonished and exclaimed: “This is not like Mamma; she always said our prayers with us.” During the day, in spite of all efforts to amuse us, the thought of our dear Mother was constantly in our minds. I remember once when Céline had an apricot given to her, she leant towards me and said: “We will not eat it, | will give it to Mamma.”’ Alas! our beloved Mother was now too ill to eat of any earthly fruit; she would never more be satisfied but

A Catholic Household

with the glory of Heaven. There she would drink of the mysterious wine which Jesus, at Pais last Si EPP promi ised to share with us in the Kingdom of His Father.

The touching ceremony of Extreme Unction made a deep impression a me. I can see the spot where I knelt, and hear poor Father’s sobs. The day after Mamma’s death? he took me in his arms, saying: “Come, child, kiss your dear thos for the last time!’’ and without a word I put my lips to her icy forehead. Ido not reme be er Ravi ng cried much, and; did not speak to anyone of Dal that filled my heart. | looked and listened in < silence, seeing many things they would have hidden ean me.

Once I found myselt alone in front of the cofin, which had been placed upright in the passage, and for a long time I stood there lost in contemplation. I had never seen one before, but I knew quite well what it meant. I was so small that I had to lift up my head to see its whole length, and it seemed a huge and melancholy thing.

Fifteen years later I was again standing yy a coffin, that of our holy RaGihes Genevieve,? and

1 Madame Martin dicd on the night of August 28, 1877, in her 46th year. She lies buried (since 1894) in the cemetery of Lisieux, by the side of M. Martin and the four children referred to on page 5. [Ep.]

2 This holy nun, Mother Genevieve of St. Teresa, was professed at the Carmel of Poitiers and in 1838 was sent to make a foundation

A Little White Flower

| was carried back to the days of my childhood. Memories crowded in upon me; it was the same Théreése who looked on, but she had grown and the coffin seemed small. There was no need to lift up her head, unless to gaze upon Heaven; and Heaven seemed full of joy, for trials had so matured her soul that nothing on earth could make her grieve.

Our Lord did not leave me wholly an orphan. On the day when our dear Mother’s remains received the. last: blessing: of the, Church: Tie gave me a second mother and allowed me to choose her freely. We were all five together looking sadly at one another, when our nurse turned pityingly to Céline and to me: “Poor little things!” she said, “you have no longer a mother!’ Céline then threw herself into Marie’s arms, crying: “ Well, you shall be my mother!” Accustomed to imitate Céline, I should undoubtedly have followed her example but that I feared you might be pained, and feel yourself forsaken if you too had nota little daughter. So I looked at you affectionately, and hiding my head on your breast exclaimed in my turn: “And Pauline will be my mother!”

at Lisieux, Her name is revered in both these: Convent, ohe practised the most heroic virtue, receiving many supernatural favours from God. On December 5, 1891, she crowned a life of good works by a holy death, being then in her 87th year. A sketch of her career, published by the Carmel at Lisieux, has been translated into English and may be procured through the Orphans’ Press. [Ep.]

A Catholic Household

With Mammia’s death, as I have already said, began the second period of my life, the most sorrowful of all, especially after you, my little Mother, had entered Carmel. It lasted for the space of ten years. At the age of fourteen I recovered much of my early gaiety, though at the same time I began to realise the serious side of life.

Immediately after Mamma’s death my naturally happy disposition deserted me. You know, dear Mother, how from being lively and demonstrative, ] became timid and shy, and so sensitive that 2 look was often sufficient to make me burst into tears. 1 could not bear to be noticed, or to meet strangers, and I was only at ease with my dear ones at home. There I was always cherished with the most loving care. Papa’s affectionate heart seemed endowed with a mother’s love, while you and Marie were no less tender and devoted. If Our Lord had not lavished His sunshine upon His Little Flower, she never could have become acclimatised to this earth. Still too weak to bear either rain or storm, she needed warmth, refreshing dew, and gentle breezes—gifts never denied her, even in the wintry season of trials.

I felt no grief at leaving Alencon': children love change and anything out of the common,

1 M. Martin’s object in coming to Lisieux was to bring his girls nearer their mother’s brother, M. Guérin, as well as to secure Mme-Guérin’s advice in the upbringing of the younger ones. [Caxmet.]

an

A Little White Flower

so I was pleased to come to Lisieux. I remember distinctly the journey and the arrival in the evening at our uncle’s house; | can still see our little cousins Jeanne and Marie waiting with aunt on the doorstep. How touching was the affection all these dear ones showed us!

Next day they took us to our new home, Les Butssonneis, and there everything proved a fresh source of delight. The trim lawn in front of the house, the kitchen garden at the back, the distant view from the large attic windows— all this appealed to my young imagination. — Its situation, too, was an added charm, for it stood in a quiet part of the town within easy reach of a beautiful park® laid out with flowers. This pleasant abode became the scene of many joys, and of family gatherings which I can never forget. Elsewhere, as I have said above, I felt an exile; | cried and. fretted for Mamma +2oue here my little heart expanded and I smiled on life once more.

1 M. Guérin lived quite close to the Church of St. Pierre, above what was then the Pharmacie Guerin. [Ep.]

2 The house and grounds have been recently restored and may be visited on any afternoon in the week; a number of souvenirs of Thérése’s childhood are now gathered there. ‘The room where Our Lady appeared to her (see page 67) has been fitted up as an oratory, blessed in May, 1913, by Mgr. Lemonnier. In the garden may be seen one of her minjature altars. [Ep.]

3 Jardin de |’ Etoile, Ik is not open to the general public. The pilgrim in search of Les Buissonnets goes to the Church of St. Jacques, passes behind St. Pierre, and a little further along the Boulevard Herbet-Fournet, a narrow road to the right, called the Chemin des Buissonnets, leads to the house occupied for eleven years by the Servant of God. [Ep.]

A Catholic Household

When I woke, you were there to caress me, and at your side I said my prayers. My reading Jesson followed later, and I remember that “ Heaven’ was the hese word I could read alone. Lessons over, I ran upstairs, where Papa was generally to be found, and how pleased I was when I had good ma fics to show!

Each ieee lL went with him for a walk, and made a visit to the Blessed Sacrament in one or other of the churches. It was in this way that I first saw the chapel of our Carmel: “Took, little Queen!” said Papa. “Behind that grating Binge are holy nuns who are always praying to Almighty God.” Little did I think that nine years later I should be amongst them, that in this blessed Carmel I should receive so many graces.

On returning home I learned my lessons, and then spent the rest of the day playing in the ees near Papa. I never cared for dolls, but one of my favourite amusements was making coloured mixtures with seeds and the bark of trees. If the colour turned out pretty 1 would pour some of the liquid into a dainty little fap and coax’ Papa to’ taste. He would at once stop his work, and with a smile pretend to drink.

] was also very fond of flowers, and in a recess which by some good fortune happened to be in the garden wall, I used to make little

So)

A Little White Flower

altars and decorate them. When all was ready, | would run and call Papa. To give me pleasure he would appear lost in admiration over the wonderful altar that to me seemed a masterpiece.! If I were to tell you of the thousand and one such incidents my memory treasures, I should never stop. How, indeed, could words convey all the love and devotion which that best of fathers lavished upon his little Queen!

Those were supremely happy days when my dear “King,” as I called him, went fishing and took me with him. Sometimes I tried my hand with a small rod of my own, but more often | preferred to sit on the grass at some little distance. My reflections would then become really deep, and without knowing what meditation meant, my soul was absorbed in prayer. Far-off sounds wafted towards me on the murmuring breeze, and faint notes of music from the neighbouring town, tinged my thoughts with gentle melancholy. Earth seerned a land of exile and | dreamed of Heaven.

The afternoon passed quickly. It was soon time to turn home, and before packing up | would eat the provisions | had brought in m little basket. Somehow the very slices of bread and jam you had prepared, looked different; in the morning they were so fresh and tempting, and

i The tiny monstrance, chalice, missal, cruets, candlesticks, statues, etc, are still carefully treasured at Les Butysonnets. [Ev.]

A Catholic Household

now they appeared stale and uninviting. Evena trifle such as this made earth seem sadder, and I understood more fully still that only in Heaven will there be unclouded joy.

I remember one day when we were out, how angry clouds darkened the lovely blue sky, and a storm, accompanied by vivid lightning, burst overhead. I looked round on every side so as to lose nothing of the splendid scene. A thunderbolt fell in a field close by, and far from being the least bit frightened, 1 was overjoyed— God seemed so near. Papa, however, less pleased than his Queen, soon put an end to my rapture, for several meadows separated us from the road, and already the grass and the great tall daisies, taller than I, were sparkling with liquid jewels. Though hampered with his_ fishing tackle, he carried me in his arms, while I looked down with admiration on the beautiful diamonds below.

| have not, | think, mentioned that in our daily walks at Lisieux, as at Alencgon, I often gave alms to the beggars we met by the way. Once we came upon a poor old man, who with great difficulty was dragging himself along on crutches. | went up to him with my penny, but he looked at me long and sadly, then smiling sorrowfully he refused my alms. I cannot express what I felt; | had wished to bring help and comfort and instead I had perhaps only caused

a9

A Little White Flower

pain. He must have guessed my thoughts, for when we were some distance off | saw him turn round and smile at me.

Just at that moment Papa bought me a cake, and I longed to run after the old man, thinking that though he did not want money he would be certain to like a cake. Fear held me back, however, and I felt so sorry that it was with difficulty I could repress my tears. Finally I remembered having heard that Our Lord grants all the favours we ask on our First Communion Day. The thought instantly dispe led my grief, and though I was then only Six, Tee coe to pray for my poor old man when ‘cae day should come. Five years later I faithfully kept my resolution, and I have always believed that my childish prayer for this suffering member of Christ has had its blessing and reward.

As | grew older my love of God grew more and more, and I frequently Pe Him my heart, using the words Mamma had taught me. eed very hard to please Him in all my actions, and was most careful never to offend Him. Yet one day I committed a fault which it would be well to mention here; it affords me a good opportunity of humbling myself and I think my contrition for it has been perfect.

It was the month of May, 1878. You considered me too ee to attend the May devotions every evening, so I stayed at home

A Catholic Household

with Victoire, the maid. We said our prayers together before my little altar, which I had arranged in my own way. Candlesticks, vases, flowers— everything was small. Two wax vestas were quite sufficient to light it up, but on rare occasions and as a surprise, Victoire would treat me to some bits of real candle.

One evening, as we were going to begin our prayers, I asked her to recite the Memorare while I lighted up. She tried to begin, then glancing at me she burst out laughing. At the sight of my precious vestas burning away, I again begged her to say the “\Zemorare quickly. Again there was silence, broken only by laughter, and with that all my good temper deserted me. 1 sprang to my feet and stamping furiously, cried out: “ Victoire, you naughty thing!”’ The poor girl ceased laughing at once and stared at me in blank amazement. Then from under her apron, but all too late, she produced the surprise she had in store—two candle-ends. My tears of anger were soon changed into tears of repentance, and full of shame at having shown such temper I firmly resolved it should never occur again.

Shortly after this I made my first confession. What a consoling memory! You had told me, dear Mother, that it was not to a man but to God Himself that | was going to tell my sins, and this truth so impressed me, that I asked you

A Little White Flower

seriously if I should tell Father Ducellier! | Joved him “with my whole heart,” since it was God I was going to speak to in his person.

Well instructed as to what 1 should do, | entered the confessional and knelt down. When the priest opened the slide he saw no one, for | was so small that my head came beneath the elbow-rest. He then bade me stand up. Turning towards him in order to see him better, I made my confession and received absolution in a spirit of the most lively faith, for you had assured me that at that solemn moment the tears of the Holy Child would purify my soul. I remember he exhorted me to be devout to Our Lady, and how I determined to redouble my love for her who already filled so large a place in my heart.

Finally I passed him my Rosary to bless, and came out of the confessional feeling more lighthearted and happy than ever before. It was evening, and as soon as I reached a street-lamp I paused, took the newly blessed Rosary from my pocket, and examined it carefully, turning it over and over. “What are you looking at, Thérése dear?”’ you asked. “I am looking to see what a blessed Rosary is like,’ I answered, and the artless reply afforded you much merriment. The influence of the grace I had received

1 Now Arch-priest of St. Pierre of Lisieux. This was formerly the ‘Cathedral, and here ‘Thérése made her first confession. [Ep.]

A Catholic Household

remained for a long time with me, and I went afterwards to confession for all the great feasts. These confessions, | may add, filled my young heart with transports of joy.

The Feasts! What precious memories those simple words recall. I loved them; and you knew so well how to explain the mysteries hidden in each one. They were indeed a foretaste of Heaven. Above all, I loved the processions of the Blessed Sacrament. What a joy it was to strew flowers in God’s path! But before letting them fall under His feet, | threw them high up in the air, and never was I more happy than when | saw my rose-petals touch the sacred Monstrance.

True, the great feasts came but seldom. Each week, however, brought one very dear to my heart—Sunday.!_ What a glorious day! It was Almighty God’s feast and the day of rest. First of all, the whole family went to High Mass, and I remember that before the sermon we had to leave our places, which were a good way from the pulpit, and find seats in the nave. This was not always easy, though everyone was ready to offer a chair to little Thérése and her Father. My good uncle was always delighted to see us

1 In the French, dimanche, from (dies) dominica, meaning “The Lord’s Day,” i.c., the day commemorative of His triumphant Resurrection. Pius X. restored it to its former important position in the ecclesiastical calendar, from which it had long been displaced by the feasts of the aiats, | Ev.|

A Little White Flower

draw near; he called me his “sunbeam,” and used to say that the picture of the venerable old man leading his little daughter by the hand was one that moved him deeply.

For my part 1 was too engrossed in listening to the preacher to trouble about the attention I attracted. A sermon on the Passion of Our Blessed Lord was the first I thoroughly understood, and I was profoundly touched. 1 was then ave and a half. and» trom ‘that ‘tee understood and appreciated all the esc” If St. Teresa were mentioned, Papa would bend down and whisper: “ Listen attentively, little ere he 1s speaking of your holy patr Shenae

I really did listen attentively, though I must own that I often looked at oo more than at the preacher, [ read so many things in his noble face. Ee leaime: his eyes were Ale with tears which he strove in vain to keep back; and, as he listened to the eternal truths, he seemed no longer of this world, it was as though his soul had soared to a higher sphere. Alas! his journey was far from its close: long years of suffering lay between him and the ee when his eyes would open upon: the’ “beauties on Heaven, and when Our Divine Lord’s hand would wipe away the bitter tears of His faithful servant.

But to return to our Sundays. These happy days, which passed all too quick ly, had also

A Catholic Household

their touch of melancholy. My joy lasted till Compline, but after that a feeling of sadness took of me. I thought of the morrow when the daily round of work and Jessons would begin again, and feeling like an exile on this earth, | longed for the repose of Heaven, the never ending Sabbath of our true Home. Every Sunday, aunt invited us in turns to spend the evening with her, and 1 was always glad when my turn came. It was a pleasure to listen to my uncle’s conversation, which when serious interested me greatly, and he little knew that I paid such attention. But my pleasure was not unmixed with fear when, taking me on his knee, he would sing “Blue Beard” in a deep loud voice.

At about eight o'clock Papa would come to bring me home, and I remember how on the way | looked up at the stars with untold delight. Orion’s belt, like a cluster of diamonds hung i in the deep a overhead, had a wonha) ascination for me because 1 saw in it a Meee to the letter: *) “Look, Papal? I would cry, “my name is written in Heaven!” Then, no longer wishing to see this dull earth, | would ask him to lead me on, while with head thrown back I gazed unweariedly at the starry skies.

There is much | could tell you about our winter evenings at home. After a game of

A Little White Flower

draughts you or Marie used to read aloud from. ig aww

the Liturgical Year," and then a few pages from some other instructive and interesting book. During this time | always sat on Papa’s knee. When the re sading was over, he eu rock me gently, my head pillowed on his breast, and would sing in his beautiful voice some soothing

melody as if to lull me to sleep.

rats length we went upstairs for night prayers. Once again my place was beside our beloved Father, and I |} had but to look at him to learn how the Saints pray. Then you put me to bed, dear little Mother, and I invariably asked you: “Have I been good to-day? Is God pleased with me? W Tl the Angels watch over me?” “Yes, wae the unfailing reply—were it not, | Bhomld have spent the night i in tears. - You ame Marie then kissed me, and little Theres was left alone in the dark.

I consider it an important matter that from childhood I was taught to overcome my fears. Occasionally you sent me in the evening to fetch something trom a room at the other side of the house, wisely taking no refusal; but for this ] should have become nervous, whereas now it is dificult to frighten me. I wonder how you

1 By the illustrious Dom Guéranger, Abbot of Solesmes. This book, ike the /yitation of Christ, had a considerable influence upon her spiritual life. ‘There exists an English edition in fifteen volumes, now published at Stanbrook Abbey. [Ep.]

A Catholic Household

were able to bring me up with so much tenderness and yet not spoil me. You neither passed over the least fault, nor scolded me without cause, and I knew well that a decision once taken would never be gone back upon.

To you I confided my most intimate thoughts, to you | brought all my childish doubts. One day I expressed surprise that God does not give an equal amount of glory to all the inhabitants of Heaven—I was fre that they would not all be quite happy. You sent me to fetch Papa's big tumbler, and putting it beside my tiny thimble, flied both with water and asked me which cl the fuller, <1 replied that:one was as full as the other; it was impossible to pour more water into either of them, for they could not holdit. In this way you ade it clear to me that in Heaven the least of the Blessed does not envy the happiness of the greatest; and by bringing the highest mysteries cee oh the level of my understanding, you gave my soul

the food it ie

Each year I gladly welcomed the prize day. Though I was the only candidate, justice was none ae. less strictly observed, ad 1 never obtained a reward unless it were well merited. My heart beat fast as I listened to my notes and received the prizes, in presence of the whole family, from the hands of my “King.” To me it was a picture of Judgment Day!

A Little White Flower

Seeing Papa so cheerful, no suspicion of the great trials awaiting him ever crossed my mind, but one day God showed me in an extraordinary vision, a striking picture of the trouble 1» store.

Papa was away from home and was not expected back till late. It would be about two or three o’clock in the afternoon; the sun shone brightly and all Nature seemed at play. [ was alone ata window which looked out on the large kitchen garden, my mind full of pleasant thoughts, when I saw in front of the wash-house opposite, a man dressed exactly like Papa, and of the same height and demeanour, though more bent and aged. I say aged, to convey an idea of his general appearance, because, the head being coverea with a thick veil, I did not see his face. Slowly and with measured steps he advanced, and passed by my own little garden. Overcome by a feeling of supernatural dread I called out loudly and in frightened tones: “Papa, Papa!’’ The mysterious person seemed not to hear, and continuing on his way without even turning round, went towards a clump of fir-trees which divided in two the garden walk. I expected to see him reappear beyond the tall firs, but the prophetic vision had vanished.

It was all over in a moment, but it was a moment which impressed itself so deeply upon me that even now, after so many years, the memory of it stands out as distinct as the vision itself.

A Catholic Household

You and Marie were in an adjoining room, and at my cry of “Papa!” you were both seized with fear. Concealing her emotion, Marte ran to me, saying: “Why do you call Papa lke that when he is at Alencon?” I described what I had just seen, and to reassure me | was told that the maid must have covered her head with her apron on purpose to frighten me,

When questioned, however, Victoire declared she had not left the kitchen, and besides, the truth was deeply engraved on my mind: I had seen a man and that man was exactly like Papa. Together we went to look behind the fir-trees, and finding nothing, you told me to think no more about it. But to banish the thought was impossible. Often and often this mysterious vision rose up before me. Often and often I tried to lift the veil which hid its true meaning, and deep down in my heart lay the conviction that some day it would be fully revealed.

And now you know everything, dear Mother; you know that it was really our darling Father whom God showed me bent with age and bear-

ing on his venerable face and silvery hair the

symbol of his terrible trial As the Adorable

1 It scems advisable, on account of the vague allusions which occur here and elsewhere, to state what happened to M. Martin. In 1888 he had several attacks of paralysis, which after affecting his limbs, left them each in turn, but continued to affect his mind until the end of his life. For a space of three years it was found necessary to entrust him to the care of strangers. [Carmer.]

sie

A Little White Flower

Face of Jesus was veiled during His Passion, so it was fitting that the face of His humble servant should be veiled during the days of his humiliation, in order that it might shine with greater ilaiice in Heaven. Hew { admire the ways of God in showing us beforehand this precious cross! Even so does a father’s love prompt him both to dwell himself with delight on the treasure he has stored up for his children, and to allow those children to catch a stray olimpse of the glorious future he is preparing.

But oe thought comes to my mind: ‘Why did God give this light toa child, who, if she had pnderstoads it, would have died of ‘orief 2” o Why p Here is one ce the incomprehensible mysteries we shall only understand in Heaven, where they will be the subject of our aN admiration. My God, how good Thou art! How weil dost Thou suit the trial to our strength!

At that time [ had not. courage to think of the possibility of losing Papa, without feeling terrified. One day ene he was at the top one ladder, and I stood close by, he called out: “ Move away, little Queen! if I fall I shall hurt you.” But my soul rebelled against the idea, and going still nearer to the ladder I determined that should he fall, | would perish with him and so be spared the pain of seeing him die.

How I loved and admired him! When he expounded to me his ideas on the most serious

A Catholic Household

matters as if | were a grown-up girl, | would say quite artlessly: “It is certain, Papa, that if you spoke like that to the great men who govern the country, they would make you its king, and France would be happier than she has ever been. But you yourself would be unhappy, for such is the lot of kings, and besides, you would no longer be my king alone, so 1 am glad they do not know you!”

I was between six and seven when I saw the sea for the first time. J could not turn away my eyes: its majesty, the roaring of the waves, the whole vast spectacle impressed me deeply and spoke to my soul of God’s power and greatness. While we were on the beach, a gentleman and his wife, after looking at me for a long time, asked Papa if I were his child, and remarked that I was avery pretty little girl. Papa at once made them a sign not to flatter me, but [ was pleased to have overheard, for I did not think I was pretty. You had always been most caretul to avoid saying anything before me that might in the least way spoil my childlike simplicity. And because of my perfect confidence in you, | attached little importance to these expressions of admiration, and so gave them no further thought.

That same evening, at the hour when the sun seems to sink into the broad expanse of waters, leaving behind it a trail of light, I sat with you onan unfrequented rock and let my gaze linger

a!

A Little White Flower

on this path of splendour. You described it as an image of grace illumining the way of faithful (carts. Were Upon earth. den |) pictured my own soul as a tiny barque, with graceful white sails, floating in the midst of the golden stream, and I determined never to steer it out of the sight of Jesus, so that it might make its way swiftly and tranquilly towards the Heavenly Shore.

Gera Pee Tit



Pauline Enters Carmel

JT WAS eight and a half when Léonie left school

and I took her place at the Abbey.? The girls of my class were all older than I; one of them was fourteen, and though not at all clever, she knew how to impose on her companions. Seeing me, in spite of my years, nearly always first in class, and a favourite with all the nuns, she became jealous, and paid me out ina thousand ways. Naturally timid and sensitive, I was unable to defend myself, and took refuge in tears. Neither my little Mother, nor Celine knew of these troubles, and as I was not advanced enough in virtue to rise above them, I suffered a great deal.

Fortunately | went home every evening, and then my spirits revived. 1 would climb on to Papa’s knee, telling him what marks I had, and his caresses drove away all my troubles. It was with the greatest delight that I announced the result of my first composition, for I had obtained fall marks. In reward I received a silver coin which I dropped into my money-box for the poor, and nearly every Thursday I was able to

1 The Benedictine Convent at Lisieux,

a3

A Little White Flower

put in another. Such kindnesses were in my case a real necessity: the Little Flower needed to strike its tender roots deeper and deeper into the dearly loved garden of home, for nowhere else could it find the nourishment it required.

Thursday was a holiday at the Abbey, but it was not like the holiday I had with you at Les Buissonnets, when 1 spent most of my time upstairs with Papa. Not knowing how to play like the other children, I felt myself a dull companion, and though I tried my best to do as th ey did, it was always without success.

After Céline, whom I found almost indispensable, I sought the company of my little cousin Marie, because she left me free to choose the games I liked best. Already we were united in closest affection, as if God were showing us beforehand how one day in Carmel we should both embrace the same religious life.!

At my uncle’s house we often played at being two austere hermits, with only a poor hut, a

little patch of corn, and a garden in which to

t Marie Guérin entered the Carmel of Lisieux, August 15, 1895, taking the name of Sister Mary of the Eucharist. She was remarkable for her spirit of poverty and her patience through long suffering. “I do not know if I have borne my sufferings well,” she said in her last illness, “but it seems as though Thérése were communicating to me her spirit of self-surrender, and I think her confidence is mine. Oh! if only like her I could die of love! {t would not be surprising, since I belong to the legion of little victims she asked of God. Mother, if during my agony you see that my sufferings are preventing me from making acts of love, I beseech you to remind me of my desire. I wish to die saying, ‘Jesus, I love Thee!’ This desire was realised. Our

ion

Pauline Enters Carmel

grow a few vegetables. We arranged that while one was attending to active duties the other was engaged in prayer, and thus the hours went by in an unbroken contemplation of divine things. All was gone through in silence with religious gravity and decorum. The make-believe continued even in the street. There the two hermits would say the Rosary, using their fingers to count on, so as not to display their devotion before those who might scoff. One day, however, the hermit Therése forgot herself and made a great sign of the Cross before eating a cake given her for lunch, with the result that some worldly folk smiled.

The desire of always doing the same thing sometimes carried us too far. One evening on our way home from school at the Abbey, we bethought ourselves of imitating the modesty ot the hermits. “Lead me,” I said to Marie, “1

b se if r be | ce b de * am going to shut my eyes. So ata came the answer. circular letter addressed to the other Carmels thus describes her last moments:

“There was in her cell an atmosphere not of this world. One of the Sisters brought her the statue of Our Lady which had smiled on Thérése, and immediately the expression on the face of our child, already so sweet, became quite transfigured. ‘ How I love her!’—she exclaimed, stretching forth her hands—‘ How beautiful she is!”

“As the end drew near, Sister Mary of the Eucharist became more and more ardent in her aspirations of love: ‘I do not fear to die!... Oh, what peace!... We must not dread suffering for He gives strength... How I long to die of the love of God!... My Jesus, I love Thee!’.. and with these words her soul took its flight to the Divine Bridegroom. She died on April 14, 1905, being then in her 35th year.” | Cararer.]

A Little White Flower

Keeping to the pavement, we had nothing to fear from the passing vehicles and for a brief space all went well. Bat presently we fell over and Kee some boxes that stood at a shop door. Out rushed the angry shopkeeper to pick up his goods, while the would-be hermits, scrambling to sige feet, made off at full speed. Their eyes were now wide open, and their ears could not shut themselves to the reproaches of Jeanne, the maid, who seemed quite as much vexed as the shopman.

[ have not yet told es of my altered relation-

ship with Celine, and how at Lisieux the positions had been reversed. She was now the little romp, full of mischief, while I had oe quite a quiet child, and ae too inclined to tears. I stood ba eek a champion, an office which dear Céline was ever ready to discharge with the utmost intrepidity. At that early age our hearts were simple and unspoiled. They unfolded like spring flowers swa wed by the same soft breezes and gladly welcoming the morning dew. It was our delight to wiles one another little presents; in fact all our joys were shared in common, as I felt vividly on the happy day of Calne.

First Communion

I was then only seven, and had not as yet begun school at the Abbey. During her last eles of ois ation, you talked with es every evening of the great step she was about to take.

Pauline Enters Carmel

In my own eagerness to prepare, I listened to al! you said, and my heart was very sore when I was told to go away because I was still too young. Four years, | thought, was not too long a time to spend in making ready to receive Our Lord. One evening I heard someone say to my happy little sister that from the time of her First Communion she ought to begin an entirely new life. J determined to begin with her, without waiting for my First Communion.

During the preliminary retreat she remained as a boarder at the Abbey. The time seemed to me very long, but at last the great day dawnec. What an impression it has left! It was lke « foretaste of Our Lord’s first entry into my own heart. Many were the graces I received, and | look on it as one of the most beautiful days or my life.

I have gone back a little in order to recal! those tender memories, but now I must tell you of the parting that almost broke my heart when Our Lord took you, my little Mother whom 1 so dearly loved. I told you once I should like to go away with you to a far-off desert, and you replied that you wished it too, and would wait till I should be old enough to set out. If took this impossible promise in earnest, and great was my grief when | overheard you speaking to Marie about your approaching entrance into Pence 1 did not: know what this: meant,

oe

A Lattle White Flower

but I quite understood you were leaving us to enter a convent, and that you would not wait for Phérése.

