1 When Acre fell in 1291, Palestine passed completely into the hands of the Saracens, but, on May 10, the house where God became man and where the Holy Family spent so many years, was transported by angels to ‘Tersato, in Hlyria. ‘Three years later, it was carried across the Adriatic to the province of Ancona, in Italy, where after further journeys it was set down finally in the middle of the road at Loreto, in 1295. Such is the tradition, and it has been accredited by many Popes and Saints and strengthened by miracles. A strong defence of it will be found in The Holy House of Loretto, by Bishop Macdonald, of Victoria, B.C. (New York, 1913.) The basilica is the work of the famous Bramante.

x Pilgrimage to Rome

indeed beneath the very root which had sheltered the Holy Family, that I was gazing on the same walls upon which Our Lord’s divine eyes must have rested, and was treading the ground once moistened by the sweat of St. Joseph’s toil. I saw the little chamber of the Annunciation, where the Blessed Virgin so often bore Jesus in her arms, after having borne Him there in her virginal womb. I even put my rosary into the bowl used by the Holy Child. How sweet are al] these memories!

But our greatest joy was that of receiving Our Lord in His own house, and so becoming His living temples on the actual spot which He had honoured with His Divine Presence while on earth. According to Roman custom, the Blessed Sacrament is reserved at one altar in each church, and there only is It given to the faithful. At Loreto this altar is in the Basilica —a church built round the Holy House, and enclosing it as a casket of white marble might enclose a diamond of great price. But this did not satisfy us, for it was in the diamond and not in the casket that we wished to receive the Bread of Angels. With his wonted meekness, Papa followed the other pilgrims while his daughters, less easily pleased, went toward the Saat Casa, or Holy House.

We found that a priest was about to enjoy the privilege of celebrating Mass there, and on

A Little White Flower

our telling him of our great wish he immediately eed for two hosts, which he placed on the paten. You can imagine, dear Mother, the ineffable joy of that Communion, joy which no words can express. What then oi it be when we shall communicate eternally in the dwelling of the King of Heaven, when our happiness shall never draw to an one or be dimmed by the grief of a farewell? There will be no need to covet, as we did, fragments from the walls hallowed by the Divine Presence, tor His house will be ours throughout all eternity. he will not give us His earthly home, He only shows it to us to make us love poverty and the hidden lite. That which He reserves for us is the palace of His glory, where we shall no longer see Him veiled under the form of a little child or the appearance of bread and wine, but as He is, in the brightness of His infinite beauty.

Now | must speak of Rome, where I thought to find comfort and where I found the cross. It was night when we arrived and I was awakened from my sleep by the porters calling “ Roma!” With enthusiasm the pilgrims caught up the cry, repeating “ Roma, Roma!”’ Then I knew it was no dream. I was really in Rome.

Our first day, and perhaps the most enjoyable, was spent outside the walls, where everything retains the stamp of antiquity, whilst in the heart of Rome, with its hotels and shops, it would be

A Pilgrimage to Rome

easy to suppose oneself in Paris. That drive through the Romian Campagna has left a most pleasing 1 impression on my ee

How can I describe the feelings which thrilled me as I gazed on the Coliseum? At last, my eyes beheld the arena where so many martyrs had shed their blood tor Christ. ee tirst impulse was to stoop and kiss the ground hallowed by their glorious combats—-but what a disa appointment! Thesoil havi ng been raised, the real arena now lies buried at 2 depth of bout twenty-six feet. As the result of excavations, the centre part was nothing but one great mass of rubbish to which all entrance was rendered impossible by an insurmountable barrier, but in any case no one dared penetrate into the midst of those dangerous ruins. Was it possible, however, to be in Rome and not go down to the real Coliseum’ That was out of the question. | paid scant attention to the guide’s explanations, one thought only filled my mind—I must reach the arena.

We are tolc in the Gospel that St. Mary Magdalen remained close to the Sepulchre and stooping constantly to look in was at last rewarded by seeing two Angels. L.ike her, I also kept stooping wad I saw, not two Angels, but Mat of which | was in eth. A cry of joy escaped me and calling to Céline I told her to follow. We sprang eee wd together, scrambling

A ladle Wee Flowc:

over the ruins, which crumbled under our feet.. In vain did Papa, astounded at our boldness; call loudly to us. We did not hear.

As the warriors of old felt their courage grow in the face of peril, so did our joy increase in proportion to 18 fatigue and danger we had to. face before reaching “the goal of our desires. With more fores ight than i. Céline had listened to the guide, and she remembered a ame mentioned a particular stone marked with a cross as showing the spot where the martyrs had foug! it the good fight. She sents work to find it, and having succeeded, we knelt together on that sacred eround, our oene united in one and the same prayer. My heart beat violently when I suis my. lips tothe. dust Gage reddened with the blood of the early Christians. And as I. begged for the grace to be aise martyr for Jesus, I felt a deep conviction that my prayer was eee

All this took but a short time, and after collecting a few stones we approached the walls to begin once more our perilous climb. So great was our happiness that Papa had not the heart to scold us; I could see that he was even proud of the daring we had displayed.

From the Coliseum we went to the Catacombs where Céline and I laid ourselves down in what had” once beén St.. Cecilia's tomib, and we aigo carried away some of the earth sanctified by her

A Pilgrimage to Rome

holy remains. Before my journey to Rome I had not felt any special devotion to this Saint; but on visiting the house where she was martyred, and on hearing her proclaimed “Queen of harmony ” because of the sweet song she sang in her heart to her Divine Spouse, | felt more than devotion to her, I felt real love as for a friend.

She became my chosen patroness as well as the keeper of my most intimate thoughts, for what appealed to me above all else was her perfect abandonment to God and her unbounded confidence in Him—virtues that enabled her to purify souls which till then had never desired any but earthly joys. St. Cecilia is like the Spouse in the Canticles and in her I find the Scriptural “choir in an armed camp.” Her life was one of melodious song in the midst of terrible trials,. but this is not to be wondered at, since we read that “the Book of the Holy Gospels lay ever on her heart,”? while in her heart reposed the Spouse of Virgins.

- Our visit to the Church of St. Agnes was also a sweet experience, and there I found a friend of my childhood. At first I was unsuccessful in my endeavour to procure you some little relic, dear Mother, but when men refused me God Himself came to my aid, tor there fell at my feet a fragment of red marble from an ancient mosaic dati ng back to the time of the gentle Martyr. Was it not

Ret Cantyyu i: 2 Office of St. Cecilia.

ryi

A Little White Flower

touching that St. Agnes herself should give me a keepsake from her house?

We spent six days visiting the chief wonders of Rome, and on the seventh we saw the greatest of all-Leo XIII. 1 donged for am a dreaded that day, since on it depended my vocation. No answer had come from the Bishop of Bayeux, and now my one and only hope lay in the Holy Father's permission. But to obtain that permission 1 should have to ask it, and | trembled at the mere thought of daring to address the Pope in the presence of many Bishops, Archbishops, and Cardinals.

It was on Sunday morning, November 20, that we went to the Vatican, and at eight o'clock we assisted at the Pope’s Mass in his own private chapel. His saintly bearing at the altar gave abundant evidence that the Vicar of Christ was in very truth the “Holy Father.”

In the Gospel for that day there occurred these consoling words: “Fear not, liule flock, for it hath pleased vour Father to give you a Kingdom.” * My heart became filled with confidence. All my fears departed, and in their place was awakened a firm hope that the Kingdom of Carmel would soon be mine. 1 did not think just then of the other words of Our Lord. “J dispose to you, as My Father hath disposed to Me, a Kingdom.”? That 1s to say, | hold in reserve for you crosses and

b LAME eh, 32, & Luke exu. 32% je ers

A Pilgrimage to Rome

trials, and through them you will become worthy to possess My Kingdom. “Ought not Christ to have suffered these things and so to enter into Pas crys i you dese to. sit on ttis righ hand, you must drink the chalice which He has drunk Himself?”

The Holy Father’s Mass was followed by a Mass of thanksgiving, and then the audience began. Leo XIII, wearing a cassock and cape of white, was seated on a dais, while round him were grouped various dignitaries of the Church. According to custom, ok visitor, kneeling in turn a.) 8Sing, i the foot® and then the and. of the Sovereign Pontiff, finally received his eas At this moment, two of the Noble Guard placed their hands on the puilgrim’s shoulder as a sign to rise and pass on to the adjoining hall, thus leaving the way clear for the next.

No one uttered 2 word, but I was firmly determined to speak, when suddenly the Vicar-General of Bayeux, Father Révérony, who was standing to the night of His Holiness, announced in a loud voice that he abso: utely forbade ie to address the Holy kather. On hearing this my heart beat wildly as if it would break, and 1 looked for counsel to Céline who whispered:

OO. 1 Luke xxii. 29. 245. Matt. xx, 22.

3 The pilgrims kissed a cross embroidered on the shoe. Pius X, it may be remarked, abandoned this ancient custom, [Eb.]

A Little White Flower

The next moment [ was on my knees before the Pope. After I had kissed his foot he extended his hand, and then, raising my eyes which were blinded wth tears a said imploringly:: “Holy Father, I have a i favour to ask of you. *” At once he bent down towards me until his head almost touched my own, while his piercing black eyes seemed to fad my very soul. “Holy Father,” 1 repeated, “in honour of your jubilee, allow me to enter Carmel at fie dee of aifteen:'

cd and displeased, the Vicar-General said quickly: “ Holy F mathe this is a child who desires to become a Carmelite, and the superiors of the Carmel are looking into the matter.” “Well, my child,” said His Fok liness, “do whatever the superiors may decide.” Clasping my hands and resting them on his knee, | made one last effort: “ Holy Father, if only you were to say ‘ Yes,’ everyone else would be willing.”

He looked fixedly at me, and said clearly, each syllable strongly emphasised: “ Well, child! well, you will enter if it be God’s Will!’ Once again | was going to plead, when two of the Noble Guard bide me rise; seeing, however, that the request was of no avail, and that my hands remained resting on the knees of His Holiness, they took me by the arms and, with the as of Father Révérony, lifted me to my feet, Just as 1 was pee thus forced to move,

ae

A Pilgrimage to Rome the dear Holy Father placed his hand sane

on my lips, then raising it blessed me, while his eyes followed me as | turned away.

Papa was deeply distressed to see me coming from the audience in tears; he had passed ee betore me and so knew nothing of what had Rappened. To him, per sonally, the Vicar General had shown unusual kindness, Bete him to the Sovereign Pontiff as the father of two Carmelites, and he nee as a special sign of benevolence, had placed } us hand on Papa's s head, appearing to mark him with a mysterious aul in the name of Christ Himself. Now that this father v four Carmelites 1 a in Heaven, it 1s no longer t the hand of Christ’s Vicar whic rests on his aa prophesying his martyrdom: it 1s the hand of the Spouse of Virgins, the King of Heaven; and never again will the divine hand be removed from the head it has crowned with such glory.

My sorrow was indeed crushing. Nevertheless my soul remained in peace, Seek ora | had done all that lay in my power to respond to my Divine Master’s appeal. But the peace dwelt only in the depths, on the surface all was troubled, and Jesus seemed absent rather than silent, so hidden was He from view.

That day again the sun did not dare shine,

and the beautiful Italian sky, now veiled with

A Little White Flower

heavy clouds, mingled its tears unceasingly with fais, PUL was cover baa Vy journey had failed in its pur ae and for me had no further charms. And yet the Holy Father's last words should have consoled me—were they not truly prophetic? Despite all obstacles, God’s Will has been done. He has not allowed creatures to do their will, but His.

For some time past | had offered myself to the Child Jesus, to be His little plaything; 1 told Him not to treat me like one of those precious toys which children only look at and dare not touch, but rather as a little ball of no value that scale be thrown on the ground, tossed about, pierced, left in a corner, or pressed to His heart, just as it might please Him. Ina word, all I desired was to amuse the Holy Child, to let Him play with me just as He felt inclined.

My prayer had been heard. In Rome, Jesus pierced His little plaything, anxious, no ‘doubt to see what it contained. Then, eecser with what He found, He let the ball drop and went tovsieen, VW fay was He doing t throug hout His sweet slumber, and what became of the toy ie had cast aside? Jesus dreamed that He was still at play; that He took up the ball, or threw it down, or else rolled it far away; but that finally He pressed it to His heart and never again allowed it to slip from His hand. You can imagine, dear Mother, the desolation of the

A Pilgrimage to Rome

little ball as it lay neglected on the ground! Yet it continued to hope against hope.

Shortly after the fran 20th of November, Papa went to call on Brother Simeon, founder and director of St. Joseph’s College. There he met Father Revérony, whom he gently reproached for not having helped me through my dificult undertaking. Papa told the whole story to Brother Simeon, and the kind old man showed considerable interest in the matter, even going so far as to make notes about it. In conclusion, he remarked with emotion: “Such a thing would not happen in Italy.”

On the day following that ever memorable morning of the audience, we started for Naples and Pompeii; Vesuvius did us the honour of emitting from its crater 2 thick volume of smoke accompanied by numerous loud reports. The traces of devastation over Pompeii ii are terrifying, and furnish a most striking proof of God’s power: “Fe looxeth upon the earth and maketh it tremble; He toucheth the mountains and they smoke. } reneude have liked to wander alone amon 2 its ruins, Ee on the instability of all things human, but such solitude was not to be thoue cht of.

During our stay at Naples we a for a magnificent drive to the monastery _ San Martino, which stands on the crest of a high hill overlooking the whole city. On our way

+ Pa, 20.42.

nee

A Little White Flower

back to the hotel the horses took the bit between their teeth, and it is solely to our Guardian Angels that 1 attribute our safe arrival at tie splendid hotel. The epithet is not too strong, During the pilgrimage we stayed at the eg Se hotels, and I, certainly, had never been sur rounded ‘by such princely luxury.

How true is the saying: Wealth does not make fappiness! should have been a thousand times more contented under a thatched roof with the hope of entering Carmel, than I was amid marble staircases, gilded ceilings, and silken hangings, with my heart full of woe. | thoroughly feahees that joy is not found in the things’ that surround us, but lives only in the soul, and that it may be possessed just as easily in an obscure prison as in the palace of a King. As a proof, 1 am now happier in Carmel, ne trials within and without, than I was in the world where | had everything I needed, even to the sweet joys of an ideal home.

Although tmy heart was heavy, outwardly was the same as usual, for ] was under the impression that no one had any knowledge of my petition to the Pope; but I was mistaken. On one occasion, when most of the pilgrims had gone to the aes) room and Céline and I were alone, Mer. Legoux came to the door of our carriage. After carefully scrutinising me, he said with a smile: “Well, how is our little

A Pilgrimage to Rome

Carmelite?” I understood by this that my secret was known to the pilgrims, which fact was indeed further emphasised by the looks of sympathy I recetved—but happily no one spoke to me on the subject.

While at Assisi, visiting the place sanctified by St. Francis and St. Clare, I had a little adventure, thanks to having lost the buckle of my belt in the monastery. Some time elapsed before I was able to find itand put it onagain, with the result that, when I reached the door, all the carriages had gone with the exception of one, and that one belonged to the Vicar-General of Bayeux! Should I try to catch one of those already out of sight and risk losing the train, or should I beg for a seat in Father Révérony’s carriage? I decided on the latter and wiser plan.

My embarrassment was extreme, but I did my best to hide it and at the same time to explain my dilemma. He was now ina ditiiculty also, for every seat was already occupied, but the problem was quickly solved by one of the occupants giving me his place, and taking a seat beside the driver. I felt like a squirrel caught in a snare, and sat 1ll-at-ease in the midst of these important people, face to face, as it happened, with the most formidable of them all. Father Révérony was extremely kind, however, and every now and then interrupted his conversation to talk with me about Carmel,

A Little White Flower

and to tell me that he would leave nothing undone towards helping me to enter when | was fitteen. This promise was as balm to my wounds, even though it did not put an end to all suffering. Having lost trust in creatures, it was on God alone I oule lean.

Yet my distress did not hinder me from taking a deep interest in the holy places we visited. In the choir of the Carmelite church:2 Florence we saw the oi of St. Mary Magdalen of Pazzi, and all the pilgrims were anxious that their rosaries should touch the: Samt’s tommy, My hand was the only one small enough to pass through the Pee so | was deputed for this important and rather lengthy task which I accomplished with pride and delight.

This was not the first time I had been so favoured. At Santa Croce, in Rore, when we venerated the relics of the True Cross, together with two of the Thorns and one of the Sacred Nails, I longed to examine them more closely For this purpose 1 remained behind, and when the monk in charge was going to replace them on the iter, 1 asked rs I might touch the precious treasures. He was quite willing, though doubtful whether | should succeed. | managed, however, to slip my little finger through one of the openings of the reliquary and was able to touch the Sacred Nail once bathed by the Blood of Our Saviour. It is easy to see that

A Pilgrimage to Rome 1’ behaved towards Our Lord like a child

who looks on its Father’s treasures as its own, and thinks it may do with them as it pleases.

After passing through Pisa and Genoa, we returned to France by one of the loveliest routes. Along part of the line we skirted the sea, and one day, as the result of a storm, the water rose so high that it seemed as if the waves might easily reach us. Farther on, we travelled through stretches of plain covered with orange trees, olives, and feathery palms. Then, as night fell, the numerous seaports became ablaze with lights, while the stars crept out and shone tremulously in the dark blue sky. Yet it was without regret that I watched this fairy picture fade from my eyes, for my heart was set elsewhere.

Meanwhile Papa was proposing to take me to Jerusalem, but although my natural inclination drew me to visit the places sanctified by Our Lord’s footsteps, I was weary of earthly pilgrimages. 1 longed only for the beauties of Heaven, and it was to win them for souls that I pined to become a prisoner as quickly as possible. Alas! before the gates of my hallowed prison should open, I knew that I must continue to struggle and suffer; yet my trust in God did not grow less, and I still hoped to enter at Christmas.

Scarcely had we reached home when I went to «he convent. What an interview that was! You will remember, dear Mother, how I left myself

A Little White Flower

entirely in your hands, for my own resources were completely exhausted. You told me to write to the Bishop and remind him of his promise, <1) did So at once, and no sooner was the letter posted than I felt I should obtain the necessary permission without any further waiting; but each day brought a fresh disappointment. When the beautiful feast of Christmas dawned Jesus was still sleeping. He had left His little ball on the ground without even glancing at it.

The trial was a sore one, but He whose Heart is ever watching taught me that He works miracles for those whose faith is as a grain of mustard seed, in hope of thereby strength ening it; whilst for Fi intimate friends, for His Mother even, He did not work wonders until He had put their faith to the test... Did He not permit that Lazarus should die, even though Mary and Martha had sent Gord that he was sick? And at the marriage feast of Cana, when Our Lady asked her ivi. Son to aid the master of the house, did He not answer that His hour had not yet come? But after the trial what a reward! Water was changed into wine, and Lazarus rose trom the dead. In like manner did my Beloved act with His little Thérèse—having tried her long and often, He granted all her desires.

For my New Year’s gift in 1888, Jesus again gave me His cross. Mother Ma: ry of Gonzaga

a Pilgrimage to Rome

wrote to tell me that on the feast of the Holy Innocents, December 28, she had received the Bishop’s answer authorising my immediate entry into Carmel, but that she herself had decided not to open its doors to me until after Lent. At the thought of such a long delay I could not restrain my tears: the dove had been released from her earthly ties only to find that the Ark itself refused to shelter her.

The three months of waiting were fruitful in sufferings, and still more so in other graces. At tirst indeed the thought came to me to throw off restraint and lead a life less strict than usual. But Our Lord made me understand how valuable those months were, and I resolved to give myself up more than ever to 2 serious and mortified life. When I say mortified, 1 do not allude to the penances practised by the Saints. Far from resembling those heroic souls who from. their childhood use fast and scourge and chain to discipline the flesh, 1 made my mortifications consist simply in checking my self-will, keeping back an impatient answer, rendering a small service in a quiet way, and a hundred other similar things. By means of these trifles I prepared myself to become the spouse of Christ, and I can never tell you, dear Mother, how much the enforced delay helped me to grow in selfabandonment, humility, and other virtues.

CMA i hay it



Carmel at Last

ONDAY, April 9, 1888—Feast of the Annunciation, transferred from Passiontide—was the day chosen for me to enter Carmel. On the eve we all gathered round the table where I was to take my place for the last time, and as if to increase the pain of parting—tor farewells are in themselves heartrending —J heard the tenderest expressions of affection, just when I should have most liked to have been forgotten.

The following morning, after a last look at the dear home of my childhood, I set out for the convent where together we all heard Mass. At the Communion, when Our Divine Lord entered our hearts, | heard sobs on every side. I did not shed a tear, butas I led the way to the cloister door the beating of my _ heart became so violent that I wondered if | were going to die. Oh, the agony of that moment! One

must have gone through it to understand it.

I embraced all my loved ones, then I knelt for Papa’s blessing, and he too knelt as he blessed me through his tears. To see this old man giving his child to God while she was still

Carmel at Last

in the springtime of life was a sight to gladden the Angels. *

At length the door closed upon me, and I found a loving welcome in the arms of those dear sisters who, each in her turn, had been to me a mother, and likewise from the family of my adoption, whose tender devotedness 1s not dreamed of by the outside world. My desire was now accomplished, and my soul was filled with so deep a peace that it baffles all attempt at description. This peace has been my portion during the eight and a half years of my life within these walls, never forsaking me even amid the hardest trials.

Everything in the convent delighted me, especially our little cell, and I could fancy myself in my longed-for desert. I repeat, however, that my happiness was calm and peaceful; not Pen a gentle breeze came. to ruffle the tranquil waters over which my little barque sailed, not a cloud came to darken the blue sky. I was indeed amply rewarded for all I had gone through, and it was with untold joy that I kept repeating: “Now I am here for ever.”

Nor was my joy merely a passing illusion destined to fade away. From illusions God in His

t In the spirit of poverty, nuns avoid using the word my as denoting

private possession. Later on “our lamp,” “our handkerchief,” will occur. [Ep.]

A Little White Flower

mercy has. ever preserved me. ~ f found: aac religious life just what I had expected: sacrifice was never a matter of surprise. Yet you know well, dear Mother, that from the very outset my path was strewn with thorns rather than with roses.

To begin with, I experienced great spiritual aridity, ghd in adden Our Lord permitted that Mother Mary of Gonzaga—sometimes unconsciously—s hould treat me with ereat severity. She never met me without finding fault, atic remember on one occasion when I had left a cobweb in the cloister she said to me before the whole community: “It is ae to see that our cloisters are swept by a child of fifteen. It is disgraceful! Go, and sweep away that cobweb, and be more ever in future.’ On the ce occasions when I spent an hour with her for spiritual direction, she seemed to scold me nearly all the time, and what troubled me more than anything was that I did not understand how | was to correct my faults—my slow ways, for instance, and my want of thoroughness. It occurred to me one day that she would prefer me to spend my free time in work, rather than in prayer as was my custom. | therefore plied my needle most industriously without even raising my eyes. No one, however, knew of this, as | wished to be faithful to Our Lord and work for Him alone.

Carmel at: Last

While I was a postulant, our Novice-Mistress used to send me every afternoon at half-past four to weed the garden. This cost me a great deal, the more so because | was almost sure to meet Mother Mary of Gonzaga. On one of these occasions she remarked: “ Really, this child does absolutely nothing! What are we to think of a postuJant who must be sent out for a walk every day?” And this was her invariable method of dealing with me.

Yet, dear Mother, J thank God for having provided me with so sound and valuable a training: it was a priceless grace. What should I have become if, as the outside world believed, I had been made the pet of the community? Instead of seeing Our Lord tn the person of my superiors I might only have considered the creature, and my heart, so carefully guarded in the world, would have been ensnared by human affection in the cloister. Happily 1 was preserved from Stich a disaster.

T can truly say that not only in what I have described, but in trials that affected me more keenly, suffering opened wide her arms to me from the first and I took her fondly to my heart. In the solemn examination before taking the vows I thus declared my reasons for entering Carmel— / have come to save souls and especially to pray for priesis.” “Che end cannot be reached without adopting the means, and since Our

A Little White Flower

Lord had made me understand that it was through the cross He would give me souls, the more crosses | encountered the stronger became my attraction to suffering. Unknown to anyone, this was the path I trod for fully five years: it was precisely the flower 1 wished to offer to Jesus—a hidden flower which keeps its perfume only for Heaven.

Two months after I entered Carmel, Father Pichon? was astonished at the workings of grace in my soul; he considered my fervour quite childlike and my path a most peaceful one. The spiritual direction given me by this holy priest in the confessional would have brought me great comfort, had it not been for the extreme difficulty 1 felt in opening my heart. Nevertheless I made a general confession to him and when I had finished, he said: “Before God, the Blessed Virgin, the Angels and all the Saints, I declare that you have never committed a mortal sin. You must thank God for this favour which He has bestowed upon you without any merit whatever on your part.”

It was not difficult to believe that it was without merit on my part, and, fully conscious of my weakness and impertection, my heart overflowed with gratitude, and gratitude alone. The tear that | might have stained my _ baptismal robe had greatly disturbed me, and this assurance

1 Of the Society of Jesus.

Carmel! at Last

coming from the lips of a director such as our mother St. Teresa desired—one, that is, “‘ combining knowledge with virtue””—seemed to me to come from God Himself. “May Our Lord always be your Superior and your Novice Master!” added Father Pichon: and indeed He ever was, and my Director too. By this I do not mean to imply that I was reserved towards my superiors; on the contrary, I always tried to be as an open book to them.

Our Mistress was truly a Saint, a perfect type of the first Carmelites; she had to teach me how to work and so I was constantly with her. Yet, kind as she was beyond all I can say, and much as I loved and appreciated her, my soul did not expand under her guidance. Words failed me when I spoke to her of what passed in my soul, and thus my time of spiritual direction boone a torture and a real martyrdom.

Apparently understanding my difficulty, on of our former Mothers once said to me during recreation: “I should think, child, you have not much to tell your a Why do you think that, dear Mother?” I asked. ““ Because your soul is extremely simple. And when you are perfect you will become still more so, for the nearer one approaches God the simpler one becomes.”” She was right; but although the great difficulty | experienced in opening my heart arose from simplicity, it was nevertheless

A Little White Flower

x genuine trial. Now, however, without detriment to simplicity I can express my thoughts

with the createst ease.

I have eee said’ thae Our Bord. Biiisen has always acted as my spiritual cuide, for hardly had Father Pichon undertaken the care of my soul when his superiors sent him to Canada, and | could not hear from him more than once in the year. It was then that the Little Flower which had been transplanted to the mountain of Carmel, turned quickly to the Director of directors aha gradually untolded itself under the

shadow of His cross, having for refreshing dew is tears and His blood, and for its radiant sun His adorable Face.

Until then 1 had not appreciated the beauties of the Holy Face, and it was you, my little Mother, who unveiled them to me. Just as vou had been the first to leave our home for Carmel, so too were you the first to penetrate the mysteries of love hidden in the Face of our Divine Spouse. Having discovered them you showed them to hee I understood.. More than ever did it come home to me what true glory consists. He whose “Kingdom 7s not of this world”? taught me that the only kingdom worth coveting is the grace of being

Sv aawn and ceed as naught,”’? and the jo that comes of self- -contempt. | eae that, ike

1 John xvii. 36. 2 tonite dy es Ifo

Carmel at Last

the Face of Jesus, mine “ should be, as it were, hidden and despised,’ so that no one on earth should esteem me: I thirsted to suffer and to be torgottet Most merciful has been the way by which ae Divine Master has led me, never leaving unsatished any wish He may have inspired: that is why 1 ae a whos found His bitter chalice full of sweetnes

At the end ot May, Maric, our eldest sister, was professed, and Thérèse, the Benjamin, was given the privilege of crowning her with roses on that day of her mystical espousals—a joy which was quickly followed by a cross. ‘Ever since Papa's first attack of paralysis, we realised that he was very easily tired, and in the course of our journey to Rome I noticed that he often seemed exhausted and in pain. But what str “ me above all was his progress in holiness. He had so completely succeeded in mastering his natural impetuosity of character that earthly things failed to disturb him.

During our pilgrimage, for example, when we were in the train for days and nights at a stretch, some of the travellers grew weary, and to wile away the hours they played cards, becoming at times very noisy. One day they asked us to join in the game, but we refused on the pretext that we knew little about it. Unlike them, we found the time none too long to enjoy

U Isasiir..s

3. £S1

A Lattle White Flower

the magnificent views that everywhere met the eye her annoyance soon became manifest, and our dear Papa defended us quietly, suggesting that as pilgrims more of our time might well be given to prayer.

Unmindful of the respect due to age, one of the players thoughtlessly exclaimed: “Thank God, there are not many Pharisees!’’ Papa did not answer and seemed even to be pleased. Not long after this, he found an opportunity of shaking hands with the speaker, and the kindly action was accompanied by such pleasant words as to convey the impression that the rude remark had either not been heard or had been forgotten. But his habit of forgiveness, as you well “know, did not date from this day only. Mamma and all who knew him bore witness that no uncharitable word ever passed his lips.

His faith and generosity were likewise proof against trial. This is how he announced m leaving home to one of his friends: “Therese, my little Queen, entered Carmel yesterday. God alone could ask such a sacrifice, but He helps me so powerfully that my heart is overflowing with joy even in the midst of tears.”

To this faithful servant was due a reward worthy of his virtue, and to that reward he himself laid claim. ie. you remember the day on which he said to us in the parlour: “Children, I have just returned from Alengon, and there,

ive

Carmel at Last

in the church of Notre Dame, I received such graces, such unteld consolation, that I made this prayer: ‘My God, it is too much—I am too happy. It 1s impossible to reach Heaven in this way; I must suffer something for Thee!—and I offered myself asa...” The word victim died on his lips—he dared not pronounce it before us, but we understood.

You know but tco well, dear Mother, all the sad tale, and it is needless for me to dwell on those heart-rending memories.

My clothing day was now drawing near, and Papa having recovered, contrary to all expectations, from a second attack of paralysis, the Bishop fixed the ceremony for January 10. The time of waiting had been long, but the beautiful feast came at last. Nothing was missing, not even snow.

Have I ever told you how fond Iam of snow? Even when I was quite small its whiteness entranced me. Why this strange fancy, I wonder? Perhaps, because being a little winter flower, my eyes first saw the earth clad in its beautiful mantle. It was therefore natural that on the occasion of my clothing ceremony, I should wish to see it arrayed like myself in spotless white. The weather, however, was so mild on the preceding day that it might have been spring

t See Bote on Dp, £47.

ee

A Little White Flower

and Ino longer dared hope for a fall of snow. The morning of the tenth bringing no change, I gave up my childish desire as impossible, “on Peale aon: and so went out of the convent for the ceremony.

Papa met me at the enclosure door, his eyes full of tears, and pressing me to his heart he exclaimed: “Ah! here is my little Qucea ae Then giving me his arm, we ‘made our solemn entry into the public ch rapel. This was indeed his day of triumph, his last feast here below; the sacrifice was now complete—his children belonged to God.' Céline had already told him that later on she also meant to exchange the world tor Carmel, whereuspou he cried in a a Gr yoy: Come. let us visit the Blessed Sacrament together and hank God for all the graces He has bestowed upon our family, especially tor the great honour He has done me in choosing His spouses from my household. Were I possessed of anything better | would hasten to offer it to Him.’ That something better was himself, “and God received him as a victim of holocaust; He ivied him as sue in the furnace, and found him worthy of fi1m self?

After the ceremony in the public chapel, | re-entered the convent and the Bishop intoned

t Léonie had entered a Convent of the Poor Clares, but the Order ee too austere tor her delicate health, she had been obliged to return

home. She afterwards became a Visitation Nun at Caen, taking the name of Sister Francis Teresa. [Carma | 2 Cf. Wisdom iil. 5, 6.

Coamnel a Last

the Te Deum. One of the clergy remarked to him that this hymn of thanksgiving was usually sung at profession only, but, once begun, it was continued to the end. And indeed it was fitting that the feast should be thus complete since in it were united all other joyful daysr

The moment | again set foot in the enclosure my eyes fell on the pretty statue of the Holy Child smiling at me amid flowers and lights; ' then, turning towards the quadrangle J saw 1 was all coyered with snow! ‘Nhat a delicate attention on the part of Jesus! To gratify the least wish of His little spouse He actually made her a gift of the snow. Where is the creature with power enough tom: ake even one flake fail, to ple ase his beloved? Owing to the warm temperature everyone was filled wits amazement, but, hearing of my desire, many have since Dee ied hie event as “ fhe little miracle”? of my clothing day, while at the same time expressing surprise at the strange fancy I displayed. So much the better-—such ‘things help to show forth still more the wonderful condescension of the Spouse of Virgins, of Him who loves hhes white as the snow.

After the ceremony the Bishop entered the enclosure and gave me many proofs of his

fatherly enc. Before all the priests who

1 Until her death Soeur ‘Chérése had charge of this statue, ot the Holy Child Jesus. [Carmen]

ee

A Little White Flower

were present, he spoke of my visit to Bayeux and my journey to Rome; nor did he forget the incident of how 1! had put up my _ hair. Laying his hand on my head he blessed me affectionately, and as he did so my mind dwelt with exceeding sweetness on the caresses Our Lord would soon lavish upon me before all His Saints, so that this gracious blessing came as a foretaste of Heaven,

I have said that January 10 was Papa’s day of triumph. I likened it to the feast of Christ’s entrance into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday, for his day of glory was followed by a dolorous passion just as in the case of Our Divine Master: and even as the agony of Jesus pierced the heart of His holy Mother, so were our hearts deeply wounded by the humiliations and sufferings of him whom we loved best on earth.

I remember how in the month of June, 1888, when we were afraid Papa might be stricken with cerebral paralysis, | surprised our Novice Mistress by saying, “Tam sufering a great deal, Mother, yet I feel 1 can suffer still more.” | did not then suspect the cross that awaited us. Neither could I know that on February 12, one month after my clothing day, our beloved Father would drink so deeply of such a bitter chalice.!

1 On this day, M. Martin was removed from Lisieux to a private asylum, where he remained for three years. At the end of that time,

the paralysis having become general, Céline was able to bring him back to Lisieux, where he lived for three years more. He died at his

eas

Carmel at Last

I no longer protested that I could suffer more, and as there are no words to express our grief, I shall not attempt to describe it here....

In Heaven we shall delight to dwell on those dark days, and even here the three years of our dear father’s martyrdom seem to me the sweetest and most fruitful of our lives. I would not exchange them for the most sublime ecstasics, and in gratitude for such a priceless treasure my heart cries out: “ Blessed be Thou for the days wherein Thou hast afflicted us.”*

Dear Mother, how sweet and precious was this bitter chalice, since from each stricken heart there came only sighs of grateful love. We no longer walked—we ran, we flew along the road of perfection.

Though still living in its midst, Leonie and Céline were no longer of the world; the letters. they wrote to us about this time are full of the most edifying resignation, and when Celine came to see me, how sweet was our intercourse! Par from separating us, the grating of the Carme! united us more closely: the same ideas, the same desires, the same love for Our Lord and for souls made our very life. No word concerning the things of this earth entered into our conversation; but just as in former days when seated

brother-in-law’s house, Chateau de la Musse, in the department or Eure, July 29, 1894. At the last moment he recovered full possession of his faculties and fixed upon Céline, then alone by his side, a look of the most tender gratitude, [Caxaer. | io Ss A ah ie eee on

tay

A Little White Flower

at the attic window our eyes were raised eagerly to Heaven, so now our hearts yearned for the joy that is ‘beyond all time and space, and for the sake of our eternal happiness we chose to suffer and be despised here below.

Though my suffering seemed to have reached its height, its attraction for me never lessened, and soon my soul shared in the trials the heart had to bear. My spiritual aridity increased and 1 found no comfort in Heaven or on earth; yet amid these waters of tribulation so eagerly thirsted for, I was the h 1appiest of mortals.

Thus passed the time of my betrothal—a time far too long for me. At the close of my year of novitiate, Mother Mary of Gonzaga told me | must not think of profession as the Superior of the Carmel had expressly forbidden it, and I must wait for eight months more. Though at first I found grea i: difficulty in being resigned to such a sacrifice, divine light soon penetrated my soul.

At this time | was using Surin’s Foundations of ihe Spiritual Life for my meditations, and it was brought home to me one day during prayer that my £6 eager desire to take my vows was mingled with auch self-love. Since 1 belonged to Ou l.ord and was His little plaything to amuse and console Him, it was for me to do His Will and not for Him todo mine. 1 understood also that on her wedding day a bride would be scarcely

Carmel at Last

pleasing to the bridegroom if she were not arrayed j in magnificent attire. Now, I had not as vet laboured with that end in view. Turning, therefore, to Our Lord, I said to Him; “I do not ask Thee to hasten the day of my profession, 1 will wait as long as it may please Thee, but } cannot bear that my union with Thee should be delayed through any fault of mine. IT will set to work and prepare a wedding dress adorne! with ail kinds of precious stones, and when Thou findest it sufficiently rich Tam certain that

nothing will keep Thee from accepting me as Thy spouse.” Then with renewed zest | took up the task of making myself ready.

Since the day of my clothing I had received abundant lights on religious perfection and particularly on the vow of poverty. Whilst I was

2 postulant | liked to have nice things for my own use, and to find what was needful ready to hand. Jesus bore with me patiently. He does not disclose everything at once to souls, but as a rule gives His light little by little. At the beginning of my spiritual life—between the age of thirteen and fourteen—I often wondered what greater knowledge of perfection could come foeme later on;. for a thought it impossible to acquire a better understanding of it than I had then. It was not long, however, before I learnt that in this matter the more one advances, the farther one seems from the goal, and now I am

ho

A Little White Flower

not only resigned to seeing myself always imperfect, but the thought of it even affords me joy.

To return to the lessons Our Lord deigned to teach me. One evening, after Compline, I searched in vain for our lamp on the shelves where they are kept. I concluded rightly thata Sister had taken it beheving it to be her own, and during the time of the “Great Silence’! ] could not ask to have it back. Must I then remain in darkness tor a whole hour, just when T had counted on doing a great deal of work? Without the interior light of grace I should undoubtedly have pitied myself, but in the midst of the darkness I found my soul divinely illumined. It was brought home to me that poverty consists in being deprived not only of what 1s convenient but also of what is necessary, so that I felt happy instead of aggrieved.

About this time I began to have a preference for whatever was ugly and inconvenient, so much so, that I rejoiced when a pretty little water jug was taken from our cell and replaced by a big one, badly chipped all over. I also made great efforts not to excuse myself, but I found this very difficult, especially with our Novice Mistress from whom I was unwilling to hide anything.

My first victory of the kind, though not a great one, cost me a good deal. It happened

1 In all religious houses the time from the close of night prayers until aiier the morning meditation is a period of strictest silence. [Ep.]

mane at Last

that a small jar which had been left by a window was found broken. ” nelieving that 1 was’ the culprit our Novice Mistress reproached me for leaving it about, adding that [ was most untidy and must be more careful for the future. fe seemed. displeased, A without saying a word 1 self-defence | kissed the ground and thee to be more nee { was so little advanced in perfection that even trifles hke these cost me dear, as I have said, and | found it necessary to console myself wen tee thought that all would come to light on the day of Judgment.

f endeavoured, above all; to ie little hidden acts of virtue, such as folding the mantles which the Sisters had forgotten and being on the alert to rencer them help. I had alsoa great attraction towards penance, although [ was not allowed to satisfy the desire. Indeed the only mortification I was permitted was the overcoming of my self-love, which did me far more good than any bodily penance could have done. Meanwhile Our Lady helped me with my wedding dress and no sooner was it completed than all obstacles vanished and my _ profession was fixed for September 8, 1890.

All that I have set down in such few words might have filled miny pages, but those pages will never be read uvon earth.

CHARI Bae ¥ it



Profession of Sœur Thérèse

HALL I tell you, dear Mother, of the retreat before my profession? lar from feeling consoled, I went through it ina state of utter spiritual desolation—seemingly abandoned by God. Jesus slept in my barque, as was His wont. But how rarely will souls allow Him to sleep inpeace! Wearied with making continual advances, our good Master readily avails Himself of the repose I offer Him, and in all probability will sleep on till my great and everlasting retreat; this, however, rather rejoices than grieves me. Such a frame of mind is sufficient to show that fam in truth no Saint, for T ought not to rejoice in my dryness of soul, but attribute it rather to my want of fervour and fidelity. I suppose | ought to be distressed that I so often fall asleep during meditation, and thanksgiving after Holy Communion, but L reflect that little children, asleep or awake, are equally dear to their parents; that to perform operations doctors put their patients to sleep; and finally, that “The Lord knoweth our frame. He remembereth thai we are but dust.”

bs. Che 44:

Profession of Sœur ‘Thérèse

Yet apparently barren as was my retreat—and. those which followed have seemed no less so—I received unconsciously many interior lights on the best means of pleasing God and practising virtue. I have often observed that Our Lord will never give me a store of provisions, but nourishes me at each moment with food that 1s always new. | find it within my soul without knowing how it has come. I believe, quite simply, that it is Jesus Himself, hidden in my poor heart, who is mysteriously at work inspiring me from hour to hour with whatever He wishes me to do.

Just before my profession I received the Holy Father’s blessing through the kindness of Brother Simeon, and I am certain that this precious blessing helped me through the most furious storm of my whole spiritua! life.

On the eve of the great day, usually so full of sweetness for a novice, my vocation suddenly appeared to me as unreal as a dream. The: devil—for it was he—assured me that I was wholly unsuited for the Carmelite life, and that by entering on a way to which I was not called I was deceiving my superiors. The darkness became so intense that one fact alone stood out clear—I had no vocation and must return to the world.

| cannot describe all | went through. What was to be done in face of such a difficulty?

A Little White Flower

feast was heavily bei/edin sorrow. Papa was too il] to come and bless his “ little Queen a ae the last moment Mer. Hugonin, who myenls have presided at the ceremony, was prevented from doing so; for other ‘ae too, was a day of gloom. And yet through it all, my soul was pr ofoundly at peace. It nicased On ‘Lord, however, that on this occasion I should not be able to restrain my tears...and they were not understood. True, I had borne far harder trials without shedding a tear, but then [ had been helped by special graces, whereas on that day

: and | soon showed my

Jesus lett me to mys self weakness.

Fight days after I had taken the veil our cousin Jeanne was married to Dr. La Néele and at her next visit I heard of all the little attentions she lavished on her husband. I was ereatly impressed and i determined it should never be said that a woman in the world did more for her husband than I for my Beloved. Filled with tresh ardour, | strove with increased earnestness to please my Heavenly Spouse, the King of Kings, who had deigne sd to honour me by ri divine alliance.

Miah L saw the letter announcing our cousin’s marriage, | ee I would amuse my self by composing aN invitation which I read to the novices in order to bring home to them what had struck me so forcibl y- that earthly unions, however

Profession of Sœur Thérése

elorious, were as nothing compared to the titles of a Spouse of Christ.

Gop Atmicuty, Creator of Heaven and Earth, Sovereign Ruler of the Universe, and the Mosr Grortous Vircin Mary, Queen of the Heavenly Court, announce to you the Spiritual Espousa!s of Their August Son, Jesus, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, with little THrrkse Martin, now Princess and Lady of His Kingdoms of the Holy Childhood and the Passion, assigned to her in dowry by her Divine Spouse, from which Kingdoms she tiolds her titles of nobility—OF

tae be bee

wii Cuitp [esus AND OF THE Hory Face. It was not possible to invite you to the Wedding Feast which took place on the Mountain of Carmel, September 8, 1890-—the Heavenly Court was alone admitted——-but you are requested to be present at the At Home which will take place to-morrow, the Day of Eternity, when Jesus, the Son of God, will come in the clouds of Heaven, in the splendour of His Majesty, to judge the living and the dead. “Phe hour being uncertain, you are asked to nold yourselves in readiness and to watch.!

I prepared myself by a fervent novena for the retreat in the year following my profession, as | anticipated that it would be a time of severe

; This letter, the style of which may sound strange to Engiish ears, is modelled closely on the somewhat quaint letters whereby French parents of the better class announce the marriage of their children.

Such letters of “faire-bar?” are issued in the name of relatives to the third or fourth degree. [Ev.]

A Little White Flower

can understand, dear Mother, how great was the light and Salon that lowed

The next ee I asked Mother Genevieve whether she had received any revelation as to my state, but she assured me she had not, «vhich only increased my admiration, showing ase did, how intimately Jesus lived in her soul, directing her every word and action. Such is the holiness | desire, a holiness that is truly holv and tree trom all ee Ons.

On the day this dear Mother’s exile ended, | received a very special grace. It was the nrst time I had assisted at a death-bed, and though the sight impressed me deeply, I must confess that during the two hours watching, a kind of torpor crept over me. I was grieving at my insen sibility when, at the moment her soul passed to As0d; an extr aordinary change wa is Wroughtin my a hole being. In an instant I was filled with

an indescribab ian joy and fervour, as if the soul of our blessed foundress had os me a sharer in the happiness she already possessed—for 1 am certain she went straight to Heaven. One day I had said to her: “You will not go to Purgatory, dear Mother.” “] hope nee > oie answered gently. Assuredly God ule not ie a trust so full of humihty, and in the any favours we have received through her one Oe hes the proof that her hope was

fulfilled.

Profession of Sœur Thérése

Fach of the Sisters hastened to claim something belonging to our beloved Mother, and you know the precious relic I treasure. During her agony I had noticed a tear glistening on her eyelash like a diamond, and that tear, the last of all those she had shed on earth, never fell; I saw it still shining as her body lay exposed in the choir. So when evening came | made bold to approach unseen, with a little piece of linen, and now I am the happy possessor of the last tear of @ Saint.

1 attach no importance to my dreams and indeed they seldom have any special meaning, though I often wonder how it 1s that since I think of God all through the day, my mind does not dwell on Him more in my sleep. Asa rule 1 dream of woods and flowers, of brooks and the sea. [nearly always meet pretty children, or else chase birds or butterflies such as I have never before seen. But it my dreams are sometimes poetical, they are never mystical. One night, however, after Mother Genevieve’s death, I had a more consoling one: [ saw her giving to each of us something which had belonged to herself. When my turn came her hands were empty and 1 feared I was not to receive anything, but she looked at me lovingly and repeated three times: 7.0.you | leave my heart’,

Towards the close of 1891, about a month after that death so precious in the sight of God,

Eat

A Little White Flower

an epidemic of influenza broke out in the convent. had only 2 slight attack and was able to be about with two other Sisters. It is impossible to imagine the heart-rending state of our Carmel during those days of mourning. The worst sufferers were nursed by those who could hardly stand on their feet; death was all around us, and no sooner had one Sister breathed her last than we had to leave her and turn our attention to another. seed nineteenth birthday was saddened by the death of our Sub-Prioress. Together with the infirmarian I assisted at her last agony. Two more deaths followed in ea succession. During this ttme | did all the sacristy work unaided, and | sometimes wonder how I was equal to i One morning when it was time to rise I hada presentiment that Sister Magdalen was dead. The corridor, which should have been already lit, was in oe es darkness; no one as yet had left her cell. 1 determined to go in to Sister Magdalen’s, oa found her lying fully dressed pi herbed. 1 was not in the least afraid, and hastening to the sacristy quickly brought a blessed candle and placed a wreath of roses on her head. Amid all this desolation I felt the Hand of God, and 1] knew that His Heart was watching over us. It was without a strugele that our dear Sisters left this life to enter on a happier one;

Profession of Sœur Thérése

they lay as if asleep, with an expression of heavenly peace on their faces.

Throughout those trying weeks I had the unspeakable joy of receiving Holy Communion every day. It was indeed a sweet grace. Jesus treated me asa spoilt child, for a longer time even than His more faithful spouses. After the influenza epidemic He came to me daily for several months, 2 privilege not shared by the Community. Lhad not sought this favour, but it brought me untold happiness to be united day after day to Him whom my soul loved.

I rejoiced’ also in being able to touch the sacred vesse!s and to prepare the altar linen on which Our Lord was to be laid. I felt that 1 must increase in fervour, and often recalled those words addressed to a saintly deacon: “Be ye holy, ye who carry the Vessels of the Lord:

And now, dear Mother, what can I tell you about my thanksgivings after Communion, not only then but always? ‘There is no time when I have less consolation—yet this 1s not to be wondered at, since it is not for my own satisfaction that | desire to receive Our Lord but solely to give Him pleasure?

Picturing my soul as a piece of waste ground, I beg of Our Lady to take away my imperfections, which are as heaps of rubbish, and to raise upon it a spacious pavilion worthy of

1 Words used in the ordination ceremony. [Ep.]

A Little White Flower

Heaven and beautify it with her own adornments. I next invite thither all the Angels and Saints to sing canticles of love, and it seems to me that Jesus is well pleased to find Himself welcomed with such magnificence, while I, too, share His joy. But Hie does a keep off a tractions and drowsiness, and I often resolve to continue my thanksgiving throughout the day in amends for h laviIng ae it so bad ly in choir.

You see, dear Mother, that my way is not the way of fear; | can always find means to be happy ‘and to profit by my failings, and Our Lord Himself encourages me to do so. Once, contrary to my usual custom, | felt troubled on approacning the Holy Table. For several days the number of Hosts having been insufficient, I only recerved a small part of one, and on ne particular morning the foolish thought came that if the same hing happened again I would understand that Our Lord did not care to come

into my heart. | approached the rails... fora moment the priest hesitated, then his me swo entire Hosts! Whata loving response!

! have indeed much for which to be thankful to God, dear Mother, and I want to tell you something in all simplicity. He Ah as shown the same mercy to me as to King Solomon. All my desires have been satisfied: not o desires ot uaa but even those of which [ understood the vanity, in theory if not in practice.

ae

/ i

Profession of Sœur ‘Thérése Having always looked upon you as my ideal | wanted to be like you in everything. You used to paint charming miniatures, to write beautiful poems, and all this; wee | in me a desire to learn painting,’ to express my thoughts in verse, and to do some good to ae nea me. I would not ask for these natural gifts, so my wish remained hidden in my heart. But Jesus, hidden also there, once more designed to show me the vanity of ail that passes. sae the astonishment of the community | succeeded in painting several pictures, | in writing some yes and in doing ae to certain souls. And just as Solomon,

“surning to all the works which his peasy cwrough, and to the labours wherein he had laboured in vain, saw in all things vanity and vexation of mind,”? so experience taught me that the sole happiness. of this earth eR in being hidden and remaining in total ignorance of created things. I understood that without love, even the most brilliant deeds count for nothing. Far from doing me any harm, these gifts whieh Our Lord showered upon me, "drew my soul more closely to Him and

1 Therése had kept this wish concealed from the days of her childhood, and Jater in life she made the following confidences “I was ten the day Papa toid Céline that she was to begin painting lessons and I felt quite envious. Then turning to me be said: ‘Well, little Queen, would vou like to learn painting too?’ I was going to say: ‘Yes indeed T should,’ when Marie remarked that I had not the same taste for it as Céline. She carried her point and I said nothing, thinking it was a splendid opportunity to make a big sacrifice to Our Lord; but I was 80 anxious to learn that even now I wonder how I was able to keep silence.” [Carmet. | % Peels i 1k,

ee

A Little White Flower made me see that He alone is unchangeable, that Healone can fill the vast abyss of my desires.

While speaking of my desires, I must tell you about others of a different kind, which ie Divine Master has deigned t o grant——childish desires, like the wish for snow on my clothing day. You know, dearest Mother, how fond { am of flowers, and that when I made myself a prisoner at ae age of fifte ai 3 { gave up for ever the delight of r ambling through mendows bright with ae treasures of spring.) Yet ol ewes possessed so many flowers as I have since entering Carmel. In the world young men present choice flowers to thet + betrothed and in like manner Jesus did not forget me. 1 received for His altar an abundance of ail the flowers I loved best: cornflowers, poppies, marguerites— one little friend alone was missing, the purple vetch. I longed to see it acain, aiid, Game recently, it came to gladden me, and to show me that in the least things as in the | (rod gives a hundred- fold, even in this world, to those who have left all things for love of Him.

One desire, the dearest of all, and for many reasons the most difficult of Set nment, still remained unsatistied—my wish to see Cae enter the Carmel of Lisieux. I had made a sacrifice of this, however, and 1 committed the care of my loved sister to God alone. I was willing she should go to far distant lands if

Profession of Sœur ‘Uhérése need be, but I wanted to see her, like myself, the spouse of Our Lord. Aware that in the world she was exposed to dangers I had never

nown, I suffered intensely: my affection for her was that of a mother rather than of a sister and 1 was filled with solicitude for the welfare of her soul.

One evening when she was to go toa dance

with my aunt and cousins, I felt, without knowing why, more anxious than usual, and 1 implored Our Lord to hinder her from dancing. My prayer was heard and not only was His future spouse prevented from dancing, graceful dancer though she was, but her partner likewise, who found himself obliged to walk up and down most solemnly with her, to the astonishment of everyone, Finally, the poor young man slipped away feeling very much ashamed and did not dare appear again that evening. This unique occurrence increased my confidence in Our Lord, proving clearly to me that He had already set His seal on Céline’s brow.

On July 29 of last year, God called to Himself our saintly and much tried Father. During the two years previous to his death he had lived in our uncle’s house, where he was surrounded with the tenderest care, but owing to his helpless condition we saw him only once during the whole course of his illness. It was a sad interview! You remember it, dear Mother, and

aed

A Little White Flower

how at the moment of parting he raised his eyes, then, pointing upwards, said in a voice choked with tears: “/z Heaven”!

Now that he had reached that beautiful Htome the last ties which bound his consoling angel to the world were severed. When Angels have accomplished their mission here below they take instant flight to God. Is not that why they have wings? «And Céline likewise tried to Ay to aed but the difficulties which met her on all sides seemed insurmountable. When matters were going from bad to worse, I said to Our Lord, one morning after Holy Communion: “Thou knowest, dear Jesus, how earnestly I have desired that the trials my dear Father endured

should serve as his purgatory. I long to learn ‘. my wish has been granted, but I do not ask Thee to speak to me, “all I want isa sign. “Thou art aware that one of our community is strongly opposed to Ceéline’s entrance into Carmel—it she withdraw her opposition I shall regard it as an answer from Thee, and in this way I shall Know if my Father went straight to Heaven.’

God, who holds in His hand the hearts of His creatures and inclines them as He wills, deigned in His infinite mercy and_ ineffable condescension to change that Sister’s mind. After my thanksgiving she was the first person I met, and with tears in her eyes she spoke to me of Céline’s entrance, expressing a keen desire

Profession of Sœur Thérése

to see her amongst us. Shortly afterwards, His Lordship the Bisl 1op of Bayeux removed the last obstacles, thus allowing you, dear Mother, without the least hesitation, to open the door of our ark! to the poor exiled dove.

Now I have no further desire unless it be to love Jesus even unto folly! Love alone draws me. I wish for neither suffering nor death yet both are precious to me, and I have long called upon Sey, as the messengers of 1PY. Already I have suffered much, already it has seemed to me aon my barque was nearing the Eternal Shore. From my earliest years I believed the Little Hower would be gathered in her springtime, but now the spirit of self-Bee carmcat is my sole guide—lI have no other compass. I am no longer able to ask eagerly for anything s save the perfect accomplishment of God’s designs on my oe I can indeed repeat these words of our leather, St. John of the Cross:

“7 drank deep in the cellar of my Friend, And, coming forth again, Knew naught of ali this plain, And lost the flock I erst was wont to tend. My soul and ail its wealth I gave to be His Own; No more I tend my flock, all other work 1s done, And all my exercise ts love alone.”?

1 Céline entered the Carmel on September 14, 1894, and took the name of Sister Genevieve of St. ‘Peresa, [Carmet. ] 2 Spiritual Canticle: Stanzas 18 and 20,

ee,

A Little White Flower OP Greer ‘Love hath so wrought in me Since [ have Known its sway, That all within me, whether ood or il It makes subservient to the end it secks, And soon transforms iny sou! into itself.

mee a

How sweet is the way of Love! True, one may fall and be unfaithful to grace, but Love, knows how to draw proftt fron everything ae quickly consumes whatever ma iy be ‘displeasing to Our Lord, leaving in the heart only a deep and humble peace.

[ have received much spiritual light me the works of St. John of the Go and @b tie age of seventeen and eighteen they were my only food. Afterwards, all spiritual authors left me cold; as they do still. ie hla beautiful and touching a book ma y De, my heart does not respond a [ read withou t es sdletsteea | Or iE

I understand I cannot meditate.

In my helplessness, the Holy Scriptures and the /mitation are of the greatest assista nce} I find in them a hidden manna, pure and genuine. It is from the Gospels, however, that I derive most help in the time of prayer; | Gnd in their pages all that my poor soul nee ds, and Lam always discovering Hees new lights and hidden mysterious meanings. | know a nd I have experienced that “The Kingdom of Gad 1S Culkin, us, thee a

1 Hymn to the Deaty. x Luke avi. oa,

Profession of Sœur ‘Uhérese

Master has no need of book or teacher to instruct asoul. The Teacher of teachers instructs without sound of words, and though I have never heard Him speak, yet I know He is within me, always cuiding and inspiring me; and just when I need them, lights, hitherto unseen, break in upon me. Asarule, it is not during prayer that this happens but in the midst of my daily duties.

Dear Mother, after so many graces may | not | sing with the Psalmist that “rhe Lord is good, that His Mercy endureth for ever”?* It seems to me that if every soul were to receive such favours God would be loved to excess and feared by none: I believe that every least wilful fault would be avoided out of love, without thought of fear.

Yet all souls cannot be alike. They must differ, so that each divine perfection may receive special honour. To me He has manifested His Inpirnire Mercy and in this resplendent murror I contemplate His other attributes. There, each appears radiant with Love; His Justice perhaps more than the rest. What a sweet joy to think that Our Lord is just—that He takes into account our weakness and knows so well the frailty of our nature. What then need | fear? Will not the God of infinite justice, who deigns to pardon lovingly the sins of the Prodigal Son, be also just to me “iho aim always with Hi.

tm cat F % Luke Xi. 2h.

A Little White Flower

in the year 1694, 1 meceived tie, Grice 3 understand better than ever how much Jesus desires to be loved. While thinking one day of those who offer themselves as victims to the Justice of God, and who turn aside the punishment due to sinners, taking it upon themselves,' | felt such an offering to be both noble and generous. I was very far, nevertheless, from feeling myself drawn to Gave it and on the depths of my--heart | coed; “O my Dive Master, shall Thy Justice alone find atoning victims: Has not Thy Merciful Love need otf them also? On every side it is ignored and rejected... those hearts on which Thou wouldst lavish it turn to creatures and seek their happiness in the miserable satisfaction of a moment, rather than cast themselves into Thy arms—into the ecstatic fires of Thy infinite Love.

O my God, must that Love which is disdained le hidden in Thy Heart? It seems to me that if Thou shouldst find souls offering themselves zs a holocaust to Thy Love, Thou wouldst consume them rapidly ‘and Sole be pleased to set tree those flames of infinite tenderness now imprisoned in Thy Heart. If Thy Justice which avenges itself upon earth must needs be satisfied, hou much more must Thy Merciful Love desire to inflame souls since “Thy Mercy

1 ‘Phis is the chief aim of the great Arch-Confraternity of the Sacred Heart established in the Sacred Heart Basilica, Montmartre, Paris. [Ep.]

Protession ot Sœur Thérése

reacheth even to the Heavens”? O Jesus, permit that 1 may be that happy victim—consume Thy holocaust with the fire of Divine Love!

Dear Mother, you who allowed me to offer myself thus to God—you know the flames of love, or rather the oceans of grace, which filled

my soul when | made that e4et of Odblatioiz

June 9, 1895.7 Since that day love surrounds and penetrates me; at every moment God’s Merciful Love renews and purifies me, cleansing my soul from all trace of sin. [ do not i Purga itory, tor though I know | do not deserve even to enter with the Holy Souls into that place of expiation, | also know that the fire of Love is more sanctifying than the fire of Purgatory, that Jesus could not will useless suffering for us, and that He would not inspire

me heh the desires I feel were He not willing to tulfil them.

This is all I can tell you, my beloved Mother, of the story of and little Thérèse. You know what she is, and what Jesus has done for her, fur i: than hie herself does, so you will for give her for having greatly abridged the oma or her religious ne

How will it end, this “History of a Little Meute Power 7...

+ Ci. Ps. 2xeve6: 2 It was on Juneg, igt4, the nineteenth anniversary of her holocaust, that the Congregation of Rites decided upon the Introduction of he~ Cause of Beatification. The Reman Process began in March, 1915. [Ep.!

A Lattle White Flower

Will she be gathered in all her freshness, or will Stee De ansplanted tO Gther shotess 223 | cannot say; but this | know, that the Mercy of God will everywhere follow her, and that she will for ever bless the Mother at gave her to God. She will rejoice through eternity at being one of the fowers in that ee Mother’s crown, and will sing together with her the ever-new canticle of tha inksgiving and of love.!

1 Here ends the first manuscript, and the story of Seur Thérése as written for her sister, Mother Agnes of Jesus, [Ep.]

Cp Ue



The Night of the Soul

LD) Reverend Mother,’ you have ex-

cae the wish that I should finish singing the Mercies of the Lord,’ and though | will not protest, I cannot help feeling somewhat amused as once again L take up my pen. What I am about to relate you know as well as I do, cies tober. 1 do not even ask of what use this ma nuscript could be, and should you burn it before my cyes without having read it, I should not be in the least distressed.

It is the genera! opinion of the community that you have spoilt me ever since I entered Carmel. {tis written, however, that “an seeth those things that appear, but the Lord beheldens she heart.”® 1 thank ie, Mother, for not having spared me; Jesus | cine w that His Flower was too weak to bke root without the life-giving waters of humiliation, and it is to you she owes that inestimable blessing.

1 Chapters IX and X were addressed to the Reverend Mother Mary of Gonzaga and were written later. [CarMet. ]

2 “The Mercies of the Lord I shall sing for ever.’ Ps, Ixxxviil. v. 1. This was the motto of St. ‘Teresa of Avila. Cf. also pp. 13 and 191. 3 1. Kingexvi. 7.

A Lattle White Flower

For some months the Divine Master has completely changed His method of cultivation. Finding, no doubt, that His Little Flower has been sufficiently watered, He allows her to grow up under the warm rays of a brilliant sun. He only smiles upon her now, and it is you, dear Reverend Mother, who mirror His smile to me. The bright sunlight, far from withering her petals fosters their growth ina marvellous way. Deep in her heart she treasures those precious drops of dew—the humiliations of other days—and they remind her always how frail she is. Were all creatures to draw near and pour out their flattery, no hollow satisfaction would mingle with her joyful realisation that in God’s eyes she is a poor worthless thing, and nothing more.

When I say that | am indifferent to praise, I do not mean the love and confidence you show me, which really touch my heart, but I feel that [ have nothing now to fear from praise, and can listen to it unmoved, attributing to God all that is good in me. If it please Him to make me appear better than I am, that does not concern Mme. bisican act as BAG. will,

My God, by how many different ways dost Thou lead souls! We read of Saints who have left nothing behind them at their death, not the least thing by which they may be remembered, not a single written line; whilst others, like our Holy Mother St. Teresa, have enriched the

The Night of the Soul Church with their sublime teachings, not hesitating to reveal “the secrets of the Rae) nae cae

may better known and better lov oh Which of these two ways is more pleasing to God: It seems to me they 2 are equally agreeable to Him.

All those bel oved by God have followed the inspiration of the Holy (shost who commanded the ee to oi “© Tell the just man that all eg eV es All is Mi in eek one seeks only the Master’s W a so l, poor little flower, obey Jesus when I try to please you, who are His representative upon earth.

You know, Mother, that 1 have always desired to become a Saint, but in comparing myself with the Saints | have ever felt that 1 am as far removed from them, as 2 grain of sand trampled underfoot by the passer-by 1S sae the mountain whose ue is lost in the clouds.

Instead of feeling discouraged by such reflections, | concluded that God “would not inspire a wish which could not be realised, and that in spite of my littleness | might aim at being a Saint. “It is impossible,” I said, “for me to become great, so | must bear with myself and my many imperfections, but I will seek out a means of reaching Heaven by 2 little way—very short, very straight and entire! ly new. We live in an age of 1 inventions: there are now lifts which save us the trouble of climbing stairs. [I will

t FOpvas xii. 7. 2h Teatas: fii. 10.

A Little White Flower

vou have done you have doubtless remembered that Our Lord is often pleased to give wisdom to little ones.

On this earth, indeed, it is rare to find souls that do not measure God’s Omnipotence by: reIr Own narrow thoughts. The world is ever

ready to admit of exceptions: to God alone that liperty is denied. I know it has long been the custom to measure experience by age—in his youth the holy King David sang to the Lord: “7 am young and despised,”: but in the same nsalm, however, he does not fear to say: ie have had understanding above old men, because | have soughi Thy commandments; Thy word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my paths L have sworn and I am determined to keep the judgments of Thy justice.’” You did not consider it imprudent to assure me one day that the Divine Master

was enhghtening me and giving me the experience of years A am now too little to be guilty ot vanity, ao too littl to try to prove my humility by high-sounding words. I prefer, therefore, to own in all simplicity that “He that is eel hath done great things to me,”® and the

-eatest of all is that He has shown me m ttleness and how of myself I am incapable of anything good.

cy as I;

My soul has known trials of many kinds and 1 have suffered much here below. In my child-

ed ats sits pas ee a 2 Psi cxviil 100, 705, On, + Inke. aa. Igo

The Night of the Soul

hood | did so with sadness, while now I find sweetness in all things—even the most bitter.

T admit you must know me intimately, deat ie not to smile as you read these words, for has ever a soul appear ed less tried than mine But if the martyrdom I have endured for the past twelve months were to become visible, i: would cause no little surprise. Since it is your desire that [ should describe it I will attempt to do so, but words are inadequate and I chal always fall short of the reality.

Last year during Lent I felt stronger than ever, and in spite of the fast, which I observed in all its rigour, 1 was perfectly well until ea, Week. But in the ear ly hours of Good F'rids —blissful remembrance!—Jesus gave me es hope that | should soon join Him in His beautiful Heaven.

Not having obtained permission to wateh at the Altar of Repose throughout Thursday fent, | returned to. our cell at midnight. Scarcely had I laid my head on the pillow when I felt a hot stream rise to my lips, and thinking 1 was going to die, my heart almost broke with joy. i had already put out our lamp, so | mortified my curiosity till morning and went peacefully to sleep.

At five o’clock, the time for rising, | remembered immediately that I had some aa news to learn, and going to the window I found, 2s!

IgI

A Little White Flower

bitterness where these poor sinners take their food and will not rise from it till Thou givest the sign. But may she nots say in her own name and in the name of her guilty brethren: “O Gog, be merciful to us sinners’?' Send us away justified. May all those on whom faith does not shine, at tact a the light! My God, ifthat table which they profane must be puri! od by one who loves nek Iam willing to remain there alone to eat the bread of tears until the d: i when it shall please Thee to bring me to Thy Kingdom of lieht. I ask no other favour beyond that of never offending Th

[ have already role you, Mother, that from my childhood, I had had the conviction that I should one day be released from this land of toe. [ believed it not only from what I had heard, but also because the deepest and most secret longings of my heart assured me that there was in store for me another and most beautiful country, an abiding dwelling place. I was like Christopher Columbus ee genius anticipated He PG aet of the New World. But of a sudden the fog that surrounds me finds its way into os very soul, and so blinds me that I can no longer see there — lovely seen of my t promised Home has all faded awa

When my heart, weary of the ee darkness, tries to find some rest and strength in

i. Of, Luke xviii

The Night of the Soul

the thought of an everlasting life to come, my anguish only increases. It seems to me that the darkness itself, borrowing the voice of the unbeliever, cries mockingly: “You dream of a land of light and fragrance, you believe that the Creator ne these wonders will be for ever yours, you think to escape one day from the mists in which you now languish. Hope on!... Hope on!... look forward to death! It will give you, not what you hope for, but a night darker still, the night of utter nothingness!””

This description of what I suffer, dear Mother, is as far removed from reality as the painter’s rough outline from the model he copies, but to write more might be to blaspheme... even now I may have said too much. May ar forgive me! He knows how I try to live by faith even though it affords me no consolation. I have made more acts of faith during the past year than in all the rest of my life. Whenever my enemy provokes me to combat, I try to behave like a gallant soldier. Aware that a duel is an act of cowardice, I turn my back on the foe without once looking him in the face; then hastening to my Saviour I tell Him that 1 am ready to shed my blood as a witness to my belief in Heaven. I tell Him that if He will deign to open it for eternity to poor unbelievers, 1 am content to sacrifice during my life all joyous thoughts of the Home that awaits me.

L95

A Little White Flower

And so in spite of this trial which robs me of all sense of enjoyment, I can still say: “Thou hast given me, O Lord, a delight in Thy doings. oa iS there a greater joy than to suffer for Thy love, QO my God? The more intense and more hidden the suffering the more dost Thou value it. And even if by an impossibility Thou shouldst not be aware of my affliction, I should be still happy to bear it, in the hope hay by my tears 1 might prevent or atone for one sin against faith.

You may think that I am exaggerating the night of my soul. If one judged | by the poems I have composed this year it might seem that I have been tnundated with consolation, thatcst am a child for whom the veil of Faith is almost refit asunder.. ¢ But it 1s mot a. veil ee a wall which reaches to the very Heavens, shutting out the starry sky.

When [ sing in my verses of the happiness ot Heaven and of the eternal possession of God, | teel no joy, | Sing only of what I wish to believe. Sometimes, | confess, a feeble ray of sunshine penetrates my dark. night and brings me a moment's, relief, but» after it) has cone, the remembrance of it, instead of consoling me, makes the blackness seem denser still.

And yet I have never experienced more fully the sweetness and mercy of Our Lord. He did

an

The Night of the Soul

not send this heavy cross when it would, | believe, have discouraged me, but chose a time when I was able to bear it. Now it does no more than deprive me of all natural satisfaction in my longing for Heaven.

It seems to me, Mother, that nothing stands in the way of my going tien. I have no longer any great desires, beyond that of loving till I die of ioe. Tam free, and | fear nothing, not even what I once dreaded more than anything else, a long illness which would make me a burden to the community. Should it please God I am quite content to have my sufferings of body and soul prolonged for years. I do not shrink from a long life; I do not refuse the combat. The Lord is the rock upon which I stand—“Who teacheth mv hands to fight, and my fingers to war. He is my Protector and T have hoped i in Lim.”’* | have never asked God to let me die young, but I have always thought that this tavour will be granted me.

Very often He is satisfied with our wish to labour for His glory, and you know, Mother, how immense are my desires. You know, also, that through my own dearly loved sisters, Jesus has offered me more than one bitter chalice. The holy King David was right when he sang: “Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity.” But perfect union can only exist upon earth in the midst of sacrifice.

Sire. Chi. 2 ty 2, 2:18, cuxnie, 1s

eae

A Little White Flower

It was not to live with my sisters that I came to this dear Carmel: indeed, I foresaw clearly that the restraining of natural affection would offer scope for great suffering.

How can it be said that it is more perfect to separate ourselves from those who are bound to us by ties of blood? Are brothers to be blamed who fight side by side on the same field of battle, or who together win the martyr’s palm? It 1s true, no doubt, that they encourage one another, but it is also true that the martyrdom of each inflicts a martyrdom on all. And so is it in the religious life, which theologians call a martyrdom. A heart given to God loses nothing of its natural affection; on the contrary, that affection grows stronger by becoming purer and more spiritual. It is with this love, Mother, that I love you and my sisters. I am glad to fight beside you for the glory of the King of Heaven, but I am quite ready to go to another battlefield, should the Divine Commander so will. There would be no need even of an order —a look, a sign would suffice.

Ever since I entered Carmel I have thought that if Our Lord did not take me quickly to Heaven the lot of Noah’s dove would be mine, and that one day, opening the window of the ark, He would bid me fly away to heathen lands bearing the olive branch. And this frm hope has helped me to soar above all earthly things.

The Night of the Soul

Knowing that even in Carmel there must be: partings, I have tried by anticipation to make my abode in Heaven. | have accepted exile in the midst of an unknown people, not for myself alone, but, what was far more bitter, for my sisters also. Two were asked for by our own foundation, the Carmel of Saigon, and there was serious question of their being sent. My heart ached at the thought of the trials awaiting them but I would not say a word to hold them back. All that is over now. Superiors brought forward insurmountable obstacles, so that my lips only touched the cup long enough to taste its bitterness.

Let me tell you, Mother, why, if Our Lady cures me, I want to respond to the call from our convent at Hanoi. A very special vocation, it seems, is needed to live in the Carmels abroad, and many who think themselves called are mistaken; but you have told me that I have this particular vocation and that my health alone stands in the way. If, however, I am some day obliged to leave the cradle of my religious life, it will not be without a pang. My heart is naturally sensitive and it is precisely because of its capacity for pain that | wish to offer to Our Lord every kind of suffering it can bear. Here I am loved by you and by all the Sisters, and because this love is so sweet to me, I dream of a convent where 1 should be unknown, where — should taste the

A Little White Flower

bitterness of exile. I know only too well of how little use | am, and it would not be for the sake of the service | might render to the Carmel of Hanoi that I would leave everything dear to me, my sole reason would be to do God’s Will and to sacrifice myself for Him at His good pleasure. I should not be disappointed, for when we expect nothing but suffering, the smallest joy comes as a surprise; and when we seek it as a precious treasure, suffering becomes the greatest of all joys.

But 1 shall not recover from this sickness. My soul, nevertheless, abides in peace, for [ have long since ceased to belong to myself. I have surrendered my whole being to my Spouse and He is free to do with me whatsoever He pleases. He awakened in me an attraction for a life of complete exile and asked me if | would consent to drink of that chalice. Without hesitation I tried to grasp it, but He, withdrawing His hand, showed me that my consent was all He desired,

O my God! trom how much disquiet do we free ourselves by the vow of obedience! Happy is the simple religious: her one guide being the will of her superiors, she is ever sure of following the right path, and has no fear of being misled, even when it may appear her superiors are mistaken. But should she cease to consult the unerring compass, then at once her soul goes

The Night of the Soul

astray in barren wastes, where the waters of grace quickly fail.

You, Mother, are the compass which Jesus has provided to direct me safely to the eternal shore. | find it a joy to fix my eyes upon you, and then do the will of my Lord. By permitting me to suffer these temptations against faith, He has greatly increased within me the spirit of faith ae spirit which makes me see Him living in your soul, and communicating through you His holy commands. I know well that you make the burden of obedience sweet and light, but deep in my heart I feel that my attitude would remain unchanged, and that my filial affection would not grow less, were you to treat me with severity, because I should still see the will of God manifesting itself in yet another way for the greater good ae my soul.

ChAPT HR x



The New Commandment

MONG the numberless graces I have received this year, not the least is a deeper insight into the precept of charity. I had never before fathomed the words of Our Lord: “ The second commandment is like to the first: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself-’' | had laboured above all to love God and it was in loving Him that I discovered the hidden meaning of these other words: “Not every one that saith to me: Lord, Lord! shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that doth the will of My Father”? This will Our Lord revealed to me through the words of His new Commandment addressed to His Apostles at the Last Supper, when He told them ““ /nve one another as He had loved them.”* 1 set myself to find out how He had loved His Apostles, and saw that it was not for their natural qualities, seeing they were but ignorant men, whose minds dwelt chiefly on earthly things. Yet He calls them His friends, His brethren; He desires to see them near Him in the Kingdom of His. Father; and to open this Kingdom to them He

t Matt. xxii. 39. 2 Cf. Matt, Wise t. 3 Cf. John xiii. 34..

The New Commandment

wills to die on the Cross, saying: “Greater love than this no man hath, that a man lay down his life for his friends.”

As I meditated on these divine words, I understood how imperfect was the love I bore my Sisters in religion, and that 1 did not love them as Our Lord does. Now I| know that true charity consists in bearing all my neighbour's defects, in not being surprised at mistakes, but edified at the smallest virtues.

Above all else | have learnt that charity must not remain shut up in the heart, for “No ian lighteth a candle and putteth it in a hidden place, nor under a bushel; but upon a candlestick, that they who come in may see the licht.’” This candle, 1t seems to me, Mother, represents that charity which enlightens and gladdens, not only those who are dearest to us, but likewise a// those who are of the household.

In the Old Law, when God told His people to love their neighbour as themselves, He had not yet come down upon earth; and knowing full well man’s strong love of self, He could not ask anything greater. But when Our Lord gave His Apostles a new Commandment— His own Commandment” —He not only required of us to love our neighbour as ourselves, but would have us love even as He does, and as He will do until the end of time.

1 John xv, 23. 2 Luke xi. 33. 3 John xv. 12.

2018

A Little White Flower

O my Jesus! Thou dost never ask what is impossible; Thou knowest better than I how frail and imperfect I am; Thou knowest that I shall never love my Sisters as Thou hast loved them, unless Thou lovest them Thyself within me, my dearest Master. It is because Thou Abe desire to grant me this grace, that Thou hast given a new Commandment, an dearly do I cherish it, since it proves to me that it is “Thy Will co ove in me all those Thou dost bid me love.

When I show charity towards others | know that it 1s sere who 1s acting within me, and the more closely I am united to Him, the more dearly I love my Sisters. Should | iss to increase this love, and should the devil bring before me the dohccis of a Sister, | hasten to look for her virtues and good motives. I call to mind that though I may have seen her fall once, she may have oained many victories over ecco which in her h umility she conceals, and also that what appears to be a fault may very well, owing to the good intention that prompted it, ie an act of virtue. I have all the Jess difficulty in persuading myself that this is so, because of my own experience.

One day, during recreation, the portress came to ask for a Sister to help her in some particular task which she mentioned. Now I had the eager desire of a child to do this very thing, and as it happened, the choice fell upon me. I began immediately to fold up our needlework, s slowly

The New Commandment

