How can I describe the anguish my heart endured! Ina flash I beheld ite as it really is, full of suffering and constant partings, and I shed most bitter tears. At that time the | joy of sacrifice was still unknown to me. I was so weak, that | look back on it as an immense erace not to have died under a trial which to all appearance was far in excess of my strength.

I shall never forget how tenderly you tried to console me, my little Mother. You explained to your child the nature of the religious life, and one evening, while pondering all alone on the picture you had drawn for me, I felt that Carmel was the desert where er wished me also to hide. I felt it so strongly that there was no room for doubt. It was not the dream of an impressionable child, but the certainty of a divine call, and this sensation, which 1am unable to describe, brought with it a wonderful peace. Next day I confided my desires to you, and, seeing in them the working of God’s Will, you promised to take me soon to ieee the Mother Prioress that | might tell her my secret.

A Sunday was chosen for this solemn visit, but great was my embarrassment when I heard we were to have the company of our cousin Marie, who was still young enough to be allowed to see

Pauline Enters Carmel

the Carmelites.!. I had then to devise a means of speaking to Mother Prioress alone, and this is what I planned. I told Marie that since we were to have the privilege of seeing Reverend Mother we should be on our best behaviour, and out of politeness should tell her all our iigle secrets, adding that this would entail our going out of the room in turns. Though Marie did not quite like it, as she had no secrets to confide, she nevertheless accepted the suggestion. In this way I contrived to be alone with Mother Mary of Gonzaga, who listened to my great disclosure, and expressed her bel lief in my vocation. But she told me postulants” were not received at the age of nine; | must wait until I was sixteen. In spite, acter: e, of my eager desire to enter with you, dearest Mother, and make my First Communion on your clothing? day, I had to be resigned to the delay.

1 Carmelites cannot be seen by the ordinary visitor. A dark cloth covers the parlour grating through which conversation takes place, and it is only removed for near relatives, intending postulants, and young children. [Eb.]

2 It may be well to explain here, for those unacquainted with the

language of the religious life, that a postu/ait is one who asks to be admitted to a Religious Order; the postulantship usually lasts from three months to a year and ends with the c/ofhing, or ceremony of exchanging the secular for the religious garb. The no¥itiate, a period of prayer rather than of active work, is then begun, continuing for one year or two years. At its close, the av}ice is admitted to profession, that is, to take the vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, and not unfrequently a fourth vow such as that of serving the sick, labouring for the poor, working on the foreign missions or the like. In the case of nuns the white veil is on that ae exchanged for the black, though, as the reader will note, among the Carmelites the taking of the black veil is a separate

so

A Little White Flower

At last, the’ sécond ‘of October canie round, 2 day of tears but also of benediction, when Our Lord gathered the first of His flowers from our garden, the chosen one who later on was to become the Mother of her sisters.

Whilst our beloved Father, together with my uncle and Marie, climbed the mountain of Carmel to offer his first sacrifice, aunt took me to Mass with Leonie and Celine. We were crying bitterly, and as we entered the church the people gazed at us in surprise, but that did not stay the floods of tears, and I even wondered how the sun could go on shining. Perhaps, dear Mother, you may find that I exaggerate my grief, and 1 admit that this parting ought not to have upset me so much. But my soul was still far from matured. I had yet to weather many a storm before reaching the haven of peace, and before tasting the delicious fruit of perfect love and absolute self-surrender to God’s Will.

ceremony which is performed later. On the occasion of her clothing and profession, a Carmelite wears « crown of roses for the day, in token of her Divine Bridal, and Seur Thérése alludes several times to the custom. Among the ae Clares, the roges are replaced on the profession day by a crown of thorns. In Carmel, the vows—by which a religlous becomes the “ Spouse of Crise” ---ure taken straightway for life, but in modern Religious Congregations they are at first made temporarily, then renewed at intervals, and only after several years are they made perpetual.

Contrary to received ideas, the difficulty Hes in entering rather than in leaving a convent or monastery, the tests of the vocation to a life of selt-sacrifice and of close union with God being necessarily very searching. [Ep.]

1 “ Pauline”? has been several times Prioress of the Carmel of Lisieux, and in 1909 again succeeded to that OMice on the death of the young and saintly Mother Mary of St. Angelus of the Child Jesus. [Ep.]

Pauline Enters Carmel

In the afternoon of the same day, October the second, 1882, I saw you behind the parlour grating of Cuenel. My dear Pauline was now St Agnes of Jesus. How much I suffered in that parlour! It seems to me that because this is the story of my soul, I ought to tell you everything. I must therefore acknowledge that the first pain of our parting was as nothing when compared with what followed. 1, who had been accustomed to perfect freedom of intercourse with my little Mother, heart to heart, could now scarcely snatch two or Pee minutes wie Sister Agnes of Jesus at the end of the family visits." spent these minutes in tears; then, still in tears, | would come away. I did not realise that it was impossible to give to each one of us a half-hour, and that naturally Papa and Marie must have the largest share. I could not understand this, and my heart cried out: “Pauline is lost to me!”’

My mind developed too rapidly under the strain, and | soon fell dangerously il]. It was an illness in which Satan assuredly had a hand. Enraged no doubt at this first entry into Carmel, - wished in his jealousy to avenge himself on me for the grave mischiet my family was to do him in the future. He little knew, however, |

that the co of Heaven was keeping a fithfal

1 The hours during which visits may be made to the parlour are:

limited by the Rule. [Carwet.]

A Little White Flower

and affectionate watch from above over her Little Flower, and was making ready to still the tempest just as the frail and delicate stem was

on the point of breaking.

At the close of the year 1882, I began to suffer from constant headache, but it was bearable and did not prevent me from continuing my studies, until Easter, 1883, when Papa went to Paris with Marie and Leonie, having confided Céline and myself to the care of our uncle and aunt. One evening, while I was alone with my uncle, he spoke so touchingly of Mamma and of bygone days that 1 was deeply moved and my tears began to flow. My sensitiveness went to his heart, and, surprised that anyone of my age should speak and feel as I did, he determined to do all in his power to divert my mind during

the holidays. But God had ruled otherwise. That very

evening my headache became extremely acute, and 1 was seized with a strange shivering which Jasted all night. My aunt, like a real mother, never left me for a moment, and indeed all through my illness she nursed me with the most tender affection.

How shall I describe our poor Father’s grief, when he returned from Paris to find me in this hopeless state. Soon he was convinced that | was going to die; but Our Lord might have said to him: “This sickness is not unto death, but

Pauline ne Carmel

for the glory of God.”' For God was glorified in

our acon ae the wonderful resignation of our dear Father and sisters, and especially of Marie. How she suffered on my account, and how erateful 1 am! It was her heart that ouided her in forestalling my every need, and truly the wisdom of a motherly heart 2 far

beyond that of the most skilful doctor. Mieansiale, dear little Mother, your clothing

day was drawing near. It was taken for granted that | eauid not be well enough to Pend the ceremony, SO, fearing to tees ric, no one ever Pe ronee the matter in my eee Deep down in my heart, however, | felt that God would on that day vouchsafe me the consolation of being with you again once more. | knew this feast would pass without 2 cloud, and that Our Lord would not try His spouse by ae her of the presence. of the child whose illness had caused her such

sorrow.

And so it fell out. 1 was able to embrace you, to sit on your knee, to hide myself under your veil, to receive your loving caresses. I feasted my eyes on my dear little Mother, so lovely in her snow-white bridal dress. fs was a bea day ina time of dark tri: aie a the hour—passed all too ee od I was soon

in the carriage which was to take me away.

t John xi. 4.

. Little White Flower

On reaching Les Buissonners | was put to bed, though 1] o it no trace of fatigue On the morrow, however, | had a serious relapse and I became so ill that, humanly speaking, there was no hope of recovery. I do not ae how to

describe this extraordinary illness. I said things

which I did not think, and I did things as though I were forced to an them in spite of myself, Most of the time I appeared delirious, and yer d am quite certain | was never for one moment deprived of my reason. Sometimes for hours together I remained in a strange kind of swoon, unable to make the slightest movement, an yet hearing everything that was said around me, even when spoken in a whisper. I remember it all so well.

What fears, too, the devil inspired! Everything frightened me. The bed seemed to be surrounded by awful precipices, and nails in the wall would assume the ghastly appearance of huge, coal-black fingers, filling me with terror and at times making me cry out with fright. Once, whilst Papa stood looking at me in silence, the hat in his hand was suddenly transformed into some horrible shape, and I showed such fear that he turned away sobbing.

But if God allowed the devil to approach in this open way, He also sent His angels of earth to console and to strengthen me. Marie rarely left my side, and, notwithstanding all the

Pauline Enters Carmel

trouble I gave, she never once betrayed the least sign of weariness. | could not rest while she was away; and during meals, when Victoire took Pare of me, 1 cried continu: ally and never ceased calling “Marie, Maric!” It was only if she were going to Mass or to visit you that I would allow her to leave me. On these accasions I

did not complain. Leonie, too, and my little Céline, could not

do enough for me. On Sundays, they would remain for hours shut up with a poor child who seemed almost to have lost her reason. My own dear sisters, how much I made you suffer! Uncle and aunt were also 7 of affection, and every day, when my aunt came to see me, she would bring me some little oe During this illness, my ‘Tove for these dear ones increased more than I can possibly say, and | understood better than ever what our good Father so often said: “ Always remember, children, that your uncle and aunt are devoted to you in quite an

1 Seur Thérése repaid her trora Heaven. During Madame Gueérin’s Jast illness, she made her presence felt on several occasions. One morning the invalid was found very peaceful and happv: —I have suffered a great deal,” she said, “but Thérése watched tenderly by me all night. I felt her near my bed, and she encouraged me frequently by her caresses.” Madame Guerin Sai lived a most holy life, and her last words were: “Jesus, I love Thee, I offer Thee my life for Thy priests, as did my little Thérése.”” She died on February 13, 1900, aged 52.

M. Guerin, who had for many years used his pen in defence of the Church and his fortune in support of good works, also died a holy death, as a Carmelite Tertiary, on September 28, 1g0g. He was in his

6gth year. Lee RMEL. |

A Little White Flower

exceptional way.”” In his old age, he himself experienced that devotedness, and now in his turn he will protect and bless eh yose who showed him such care.

In the hours when the pain was less acute, it was my delight to weave garlands of daisies sad forget-me-nots for Our Lady’s statue. We were then in the lovely month of — and the earth was adorned with the flowers of Spring. Only the Little Flower drooped, and se emed to have faded for ever. But close beside her was a radiant Sun, the miraculous statue of the Queen of Heaven, and towards that glorious Sun the Flower would often turn

Papa came into my room one morning, evidently in the deepest distress. Going up to Marie, he gave her some gold pieces, and bade her write to Paris for a novena of Masses to be said at the shrine of Our Lady of Victories! to obtain the cure of his poor little Queen. His faith and love touched me to the quick, and | longed to get up and tell him I was cured. Alas! my wishes could not work a miracle, and an extraordinary miracle was necessary if I were to be restored to health. But it was wrought, and my recovery made _complete, by the intercession of Our Lady of Victories.

1 It was in this small Church—once deserted and to-day perhaps the most frequented in Paris—that the saintly Abbé Desgenettes was

inspired by Our Lady, in 1836, to establish the Confraternity of the Immaculate Heart of Mory for the conversion of sinners. [Eb.]

Pauline Enters Carmel

One Sunday during the novena Marie went into the garden, leaving me with Léonie who was reading by the window. After a while | began to call in a low voice: “ Marie, Marie!” Accustomed to hear me fret in this way, Léonie took no notice, so I called out louder and Marie came back to me. I distinctly saw her enter, but for the first time I failed to recognise her. I looked piteously round the room and towards the garden, crying again and again: “Marie! Marie!”” Words cannot convey the agony of that moment and Marie’s suffering was perhaps greater than mine. At last, after many fruitless efforts to m:ke me recognise her, she whispered to Léonie and went away, pale and trembling.

A few minutes later, Léonie carried me to the window overlooking the garden, where I could see Marie walking slowly up and down. She held out her arms to me with a smile, and called fenderly: “ Therese, my little Therese!” but still I did not know her. This last effort failing, she returned to my room and knelt in tears at the foot of the bed. Then, looking towards the statue, she implored Our Lady’s assistance with all the fervour of a mother who begs the life of her child and will not be refused. Leéonie and Céline joined in her prayer, and that cry of faith forced the gates of Heaven.

Utterly exhausted, and finding no help on earth, I too sought my heavenly Mother's aid,

A Little White Flower

and entreated her with ali my heart to have pity on me.

Suddenly the statue became animated and radiantly beautiful—with a divine beauty that no words of mine can ever convey. The look upon Our Lady’s face was unspeakably kind and sweet and compassionate, but what penetrated to the very depths of my soul was her gracious smile. Instantly all my pain vanished, my eyes filled, and big tears fell silently, tears of purest heavenly joy.

“Our Blessed Lady has come to me, she has smiled on me! How happy I feel! but I shall tell no one, for if I do, my happiness will leave me.’ Then, | foes down and recognised Marie, who was watching me lovingly and scenia overcome with emotion, as though ‘she cuessed the great favour I had just rece

It was indeed to her and her earnest prayer | owed that wonderful grace—a smile from the Blessed Virgin. When Marie saw me gaze fixedly on the statue, she said to herself: “Thérése is cured!”?! It was true. The Little Flower had come back to life. A bright rav from her glorious Sun had brought warmth and light, and had

1 At that moment, her face became as though transfigured. Her whole attitude, as well as her supernatural expression, filled those present with wonder and admiration, leaving no doubt on their minds as to what had taken place-—-Our Blessed Lady had really appeared to Thérése during those moments of ecstasy. This statue—referred to on page t— had already twice appeared as if endowed with lite in order to enlighten and console the mother of Thérése. [Carmer.]

Pauline Enters Carmel

delivered her for ever from the cruel enemy: “The dark winter was now passed, the rain was over and gone,’ t and Our Lady’s Flower gathered such strength that five years later she unfolded her petals on the fertile mountain of Carmel.

Marie, as I have said, was fully convinced that the Blessed Virgin, while restoring my bodily health, had granted me some hidden grace;. and when we were alone together, | was unable to resist her tender and pressing enquiries. Astonished to find my secret already known without my having said a iword, | told her everything, and, as I had foreseen, my happiness was changed, alas! into sorrow. ‘ For four years the remembrance of the great favour caused me real pain, and it was only in the sanctuary of Our Lady of Victories, at my Mother’s feet, that once again peace was restored to me in all its fulness, as I will tell you later.

The change came about in this way. After Marie had heard my simple and sincere account of the grace I had received, she begged leave to tell the nuns at Carmel, and I did not like to refuse. My first visit there, after my illness, was one of joy at seeing you, my little Mother, clothed in the habit of Our Lady of Carmel. It was a time of bliss for us both, so intensely had we suffered, but although there was much to say, my heart was too full and I could hardly speak.

PY Ci Gant et. as.

A Little White Flower

Mother Mary of Gonzaga was present, and she gave me many proofs of affection. I saw several other members of the community as well, and all of them, as you will remember, dee Mother, questioned me on my riee cure. Sonic: asked if Our Lady had the Infant Jesus in her arms; others wished to know if Angels were with her. These and further questions troubled and grieved me, and I could only make one answer: “Our Lady looked very beautiful; | saw her come towards me and smile.”

Noticing that the nuns thought something quite different had happened, I imagined the I had, perhaps, been guilty of an untru ath: Had I only kept my secret, my happiness, too, would have been secure. But Our Lady ieee this trouble to befall me for the good of my soul; without it, vanity might have crept into my heart, whereas now I was humbled, and looked on myself with profound contempt. My God,. Thou alone knowest all that I suffered.

—~J QO



First Communion

Pill; deseribine this visit to’ Carmel,

my thoughts are carried back to the first Ore ater you entered. In the-course of the morning I had been wondering what name would Ge given to me later on; I knew there was already a Sister Teresa of Jesus, but [ could not bear to lose my beautiful name of Thérése. Suddenly I thought of the Holy Child to whom I bore such devotion, and I felt how happy I should be if I could be called Teresa of the Child Jesus. I was careful, however, not to tell you of my wish, so what was my surprise and joy at hearing Reverend Mother say: “When you come to us, little one, you will be known as ‘Teresa of the Child Jesus.””” This happy coincidence of thought appeared to me as a special mark of tavour from the Divine Child.

So far I have said nothing oi my predilection for pictures and books, and yet, dearest Mother, 1 owe some of the best and strongest impressions which have encouraged me in the practice of ull that is good, to the beautiful pictures you used to show me. While I looked at them, the hours passed unheeded. ‘The Little Flower of the Divine Prisoner,” for instance, suggested so

we |

A Little White Flower

many thoughts that the sight of it would cast me into a kind of ecstasy. I mae offer myself to Our Lord to be His little flower, and I longed to. dwell in the shadow of the Tbe a _ hike the flower in the picture, consoling Him, being affectionately cared for by Him, and finally to be gathered by His hand.

As I was useless at games, | should have preferred to spend all my time reading. fF ortunately I had visible guardian angels to cuide me in the matter. They chose ie me books suitable to my age, that were interesting, \ct provided food for both mind and heart. The time set apart for this, my favourite recr eation, was carefully limited, for which reason it became an occasion of much self-sacrifice, as no sooner had the time elapsed than I made a point of instantly putting the book down, even in the middle of the most absorbing passage.

With regard toithe impressions produced on me by these books, | must frankly own that, in reading certain tales of chivalry, I did not always understand the realities of life; and in my admir-

ation for the patriotic deeds of the heroines of

France, especially of the Venerable Joan of Arc, I longed to do what they had done. Then | od what I have always considered one of the greatest graces of my life; for at that age I was not ie with lights (es Heaven as I am now.

ee:

First Communion

Our Lord made me understand that the only true glory is the glory which lasts for ever; and that to attain it there is no necessity to do brillant deeds; rather should we hide our good works from the eyes of others, and even from ourselves, so that “he left hand knows not what the right hand does.”' Then, as I reflected that | was born for great things, and sought the means to attain them, it was made known to me interiorly that my personal glory would never reveal itself before the eyes of men, but would consist in becoming a Saint.

This aspiration may very well appear rash seeing how imperfect | was, and am, even now, after so many years of religious life; yet I still feel the same daring confidence that one day | shall become a great Saint. 1 am not trusting in my own merits, for I have none; but I trust in Him who is Virtue and Holiness itself. It is He alone who, pleased with my poor efforts, will raise me to Himself, and by clothing me with His merits make me a Saint. At that time | did not realise that to become one it 1s necessary to suffer a great deal; but God soon disclosed this secret to me through the trials | have already related.

To return to my narrative. Three months after my cure, Papa took me away for a change.

Cf, Matt, vil 4,

1m

A Little White Flower

It was a thoroughly enjoyable time and I began to see something of the world. All around me was joy and oladness; I was petted, made much of, admired—in fact, foe a whole fortnight, my path was strewn wah flowers. True indeed are these words contained in the Book of Wisdom: “The bewitching of vanity overturneth the innocent mind.” At ten years of age, the heart 1s easily fascinated, and I admit that in my case this kind of life had its charms.

The world knows well how to combine its pleasures with the service of God. How little it thinks of death! And yet death has come to many I knew then—young, rich, and happy. I recall to mind their luxurious hone and ask myself where they themselves are now, and what profit they derive from the mansions and estates where I saw them enjoying the good things of life. Then I reflect that “4// is vanity” besides loving God and serving Him alone.”’* Perhaps Our Lord, before paying His first visit to my soul, wished me to know something of the world, that I might choose with greater deliberation the way in which I should falicne Him.

I shall always remember my First Communion Day as one of unclouded happiness. It seems to me that I could not have been better prepared. You remember, dear Mother, the delightful

t Wisdom iv. 12. a Beclosc eS. 3 demts EC ia a,

ee e oo: ee WOGE - y nil fh, / yunucatetinl

First Communion

little book! you gave me three months before: the great event? 1 found in the much prized manuscript an attractive method which prepared me gradually and thoroughly. It taught me also that, even though I had been long thinking of my Pict Canon f must stir up in my heart fresh transports of love and fill it anew with flowers. Every day, therefore, I made a number of little sacrifices and acts of love which were to be transformed into so many flowers: violets or roses, cornflowers, daisies or forgetme-nots—in a word, all nature’s blossoms were

to form within me a cradle for the Holy Child. Marie had taken your place as my guide, and

every evening I spent a long time with her, eager to hear all she had to say. She was so eloquent that her noble and generous spirit seemed to pass into mine. As the warriors of old trained their children in the profession of arms, so she trained me for the battle of life, and roused my ardour by pointing to the victor’s glorious palm. She spoke, too, of the imperishable riches which are within our daily reach, and of the folly of trampling treasures under foot, when one need but stoop to gather them.

Often, indeed, 1 felt sorry that I alone was listening to her wonderful teaching, for in my

1 This manuscript of Mother Agnes of Jesus has since been published under the title “T'wo Months of Pienai ation for First Communion.”’ The method adopted, which Seur Thérése goes on to explain, is still of value, though the age for First Communion has been considerably lowered. [Ep. |

op

A Little White Flower

simplicity I imagined her torrent of eloquence would convert even the most obstinate sinners, with the result that, forsaking the perishable riches of this world, they eould seek none but the riches of hey

At this time I should have liked to practise mental prayer, but Marie thought it better I should keep to vocal prayer only, as she considered my piety sufficient for my years. While I was at school at the Abbey, one of the mistresses asked me what J did on holidays when I stayed at home. | answered timidly: “I often hide in a corner of my room, where I can shut myself in with the bed-curtains, and then I think.” “But what do you think about?” she said, laughing. ‘I think about God, about the shortness of life, about eternity—in a word, / think.” This was not forgotten, and later on my mistress liked to remind me of the time when / thought, and used to ask me if I still continued 5 a06's0. It is clear to me now that | was then really engaged i in mental prayer under the gentle guidance of my Divine Master.

The three months’ preparation for my First Communion passed quickly; the time came for my retreat, and during it I stayed at the Abbey. What ‘days of grace! I do not think such joys can be experienced outside a religious house; and the number of children being comparatively small, each one can receive individual

First Communion

care. It is in a spirit of the deepest gratitude that I speak here of the true motherly affection our mistresses showed us; though | do not know why, it was nevertheless plain that they watched over me even more carefully than over my companions.

Every night, the first mistress, her little lamp in hand, softly drew aside my bed curtains and kissed me tenderly. She showed me_ such affection that, touched by her kindness, I said to her one night: “ Mother, I love you so much that 1 am going to tell you a great secret.” I then took trom under my pillow the precious book you had given me and handed it to her. She opened it with care, and, looking through it attentively, told me how privileged I was. Several times during the retreat, the truth came home to me that very few motherless children are as affectionately dealt with as I was then.

I followed most closely Father Domin’s instructions, taking copious notes. As for my own thoughts, I did not put any of them in writing, for I knew I should remember them quite well. And so it proved.

With what delight I followed the Divine Office, just as the nuns did! I was noticeable among my companions by a large crucifix, which, like the missionaries, I carried in my belt The crucifix had been given me by Leonie, and it was thought that in wearing it as I did, I was

(y)

A Little White Flower

simply imitating my ee sister. And certainly my heart was often in Carmel with my dear little Mother. I knew you were also in retreat, not to prepare for jesus to give fi self to you, but to make ready to give yourself entirely to Him, and that on my First Communion Day. sue time of quiet waiting was therefore doubly dear to me.

At last there dawned the most beautiful day of all the days of my life. How perfec uy | remember even the smallest details of those

sacred hours! The joy ful awakening, the reverent and tender embraces of my mistresses and older companions, the room filled with snowwhite frocks, where each child was dressed in turn, and, above all, our entrance into the chapel and the melody of the morning hymn:

“() Altar of God, where the Angels are hovering.” But I would not and I could not tell you all. Some things lose their fragrance when exposed a the air, and one’s innermost thoughts cannot be ea into earthly words Withow instantly ee heir deep and heavenly meaning. How sweet was the first embrace of Jesus! It was eee ay bu bee Oh pce loved, and. 1 said: “1 Jove Thee, and.1 give mye es for ever.” Jesus asked nothing of me, and claimed no sacrifice; for a long time He an little Therese had known and NEE one.

First Communion

another. That day our meeting was more than simple recognition, it was perfect union. We were no longer two. Thérèse had disappeared like a drop of water Jost in the immensity of the ocean; Jesus alone remained—He was the Master, ie King. Had not Thérèse asked Him to ae. aWay fe liberty which frightened herf She felt herself so weak and frail, that she wished to be tor ever united to the ene Strength.

And then my joy became so intense, so deep, that it could not be restrained; tears of happiness welled up and overflowed. My companions were astonished, and asked each other afterwards; aaah hy did a cry | ° Had she anything on her

conscience '... No, it is because she has not her

Mother a ot the Carmelite sister of whom she 1s so fond.” And no one understood that all the joy of Heaven had come down into one heart, and that that heart—exiled, weak, and mortal—could not contain it pions tears.

How could our darling Mother’s absence grieve me? Since Heaven itself dwelt in my soul, in receiving the visit of Jesus I received one from her as well. Nor were my tears due to your being away, for we were even more closely united than before. No, I repeat it-——joy alone,

a joy too deep for words. overflowed within me.

In the afternoon, I read the Act of Consecration to Our Lady in the name of all the First Communicants. Probably the choice fell upon me

A Little White Flower

because my own earthly Mother had been taken from me while I was still so young. I put my whole heart into the reading of the prayer, and

besought Our Blessed Lady always to watch over me. It seemed to me that she looked down lovingly, and once more smiled on her Little Flower.

I recalled the visible smile which had cured me, and my heart was full of all [ now owed her, for it was no other than she who, on that very May morning, had placed in the garden of my soul her Son Jesus—“ the Flower of the field and the Lily of the valleys.””"

When evening came the little Queen walked hand in hand with Papa to Carmel, where I saw you, my beloved Pauline, now become the spouse of Christ and, like me, wearing a

white veil and a crown of roses. My happiness was without alloy, for | hoped soon to join you and at your side to wait for Heaven.

I was not indifferent to the feast prepared at home, and I was charmed with the watch presented to me by Papa. But my joy was a tranguil joy. No exterior thing could interfere with the inward peace of my soul. At last, night fell, bringing to a close that beautiful day. For even the brightest days are followed by darkness; one alone can have no setting—the day of the

ie Cant, it. 05

8o

First Communion

eternal Communion in our only true Home. The morrow seemed veiled in melancholy. The pretty clothes, the presents I had received, did not satisfy me. Henceforth Our Lord alone could. fill my heart, and I only longed for the blissful moment when I should receive Him again.

I made my second Communion on Ascension Day, and I had the pleasure of kneeling at the rails between Papa and Marie. My tears flowed with inexpressible sweetness, while I recalled and repeated again and again the words of St. Paul:-— “T ive now not I, but Christ liveth in me.”* After the second visit of Our Lord, my one desire was for Holy Communion, and this was allowed to me on all the great feasts. Alas! how far apart they seemed |

On the eve of those happy days, Marie helped me to prepare, just as she had done for my First Communion. Once, I remember, she spoke of suffering and said that in all probability, instead of making me walk by that road, God, in His goodness, would carry me always like a little child. The following day, after Communion, these words came back to me, bringing with them an ardent desire for suffering, as well as a conviction that I should have many a cross to bear. Then a wave of consolation swept over my soul —of such consolation as in all my life I have never known. Suffering became my treasure. [|

+ Galo ie ae:

8I

A Little White Flower

found in it charms that held me spell-bound, though as yet I did not appreciate it to the figs

I had one other great wish: to love God only and to find my joy in Him alone. During my thanksgiving fre Holy Communion, I often repeated ae passage from the Jwmitation of Christ: “O my God, who art pala sweetness, turn for me into bitterness all the consolations of earth.”’! These words rose to my lips naturally. I said them like a child who, without quite understanding, repeats what a friend may suggest. Later on, dear Mother, I will tell you haw Oar Lord ee been ple Used to fulfil my desire; how He, and He alone, has always been my joy. Were I to speak of it now, I should have to pass on to my girlhood, and there is stil] much to tell you of my earlier days.

Soon after my First Communion, I went into retreat again to prepare for Confirmation. It was oe the greatest care that I made ready for the coming a the Holy Ghost, and I could not understand how anyone could 6 otherwise before receiving this Sacrament of Love.

For some reason the ceremony was delayed, so | had the consolation of |} having my retreat prolonged. How zany Po felt V0 Dike eae Apostles, I looked with joy for the promised Comforter, gladdened by the thought that | should soon be a perfect Christian, and have

: Fite Ti), che wav 3.

First Communion

the holy Cross, the symbol of that wondrous Sacrament, traced upon my forehead for all eternity.

I did not feel the mighty wind of the first Pentecost, but rather the “ genile breeze which the pr ophet Elias heard on Mount Horeb. On that

day | received the gift of fortitude in suffering— a gift 1 needed sorely, for the martyrdom of. my Spal was soon to begin.

When these sweet and nae feasts were over, | had to resume ng lite asa day pupil a the Abbey. I made good | See with ny lessons, and remembered fe easily the sense of what I ae but | found the greatest difficulty in learning by heart, and indeed it was only at catechism my efforts were ever crowned with success. The chaplain called me his little “ Doctor of Theology,” no doubt because of my name Thérèse.

During recreation | frequently gave myself up to serious thoughts, while from a distance |} watched my companions at play: in fact this was my favourite occupstion. Another one, which gave me real pleasu: ‘e, was to pick up ihe little dead birds that had eyes trom the trees, and bury them in a special plot apart. At times, too, I told stories to my companions, and even ae big girls came to listen, but my career as an

1 St. ‘Teresa is called the Doctor of Mystical Theology, because of her writings on the rclations of the soul with God. [Eb.]

A Little White Flower

orator was soon, and wisely, brought to an end by the interference of our mistress who wished us to exercise our bodies and not our brains.

Just about this time, I chose as friends two little girls of my ownage. But how shallow are the hearts of creatures! It happened that for some reason one of them had to remain at home for several months. While she was away I thought of her very often, and on her return showed great pleasure at seeing her again. All 1 met with, however, was « glance of indifference —my friendship was not appreciated. 1 felt this very keenly and I no longer sought an affection which had proved so inconstant. Nevertheless [ still love my little school friend and I pray for her; God has given me a faithful heart and when once I love, I love for ever.

Observing that some of the girls were very devoted to one or other of the mistresses, I tried to imitate them, but never succeeded in winning special favour. Happy failure, from how many evils have you not saved me! {am most thankful to Our Lord that He has allowed me to find only bitterness in earthly friendships. With a heart such as mine I should so easily have been taken captive and had my wings clipped. How then should | have been able to “fy away and be at rest”’?' How can a heart given up to human affection be closely united to God?

t Ps. liv. >.

First Communion

It appears to me impossible. I have seen so many souls who, having been allured like poor moths by this treacherous light, fly into the flame and burn their wings, then return injured to Our Lord, the Divine Fire which burns and does not consume.

I know well that Jesus saw I was too weak to be exposed to temptation, for without doubt had my eyes been dazzled by the deceitful light of creatures, | should have been utterly lost. There, where strong souls find joy and are faithful in practising detachment, I only found bitterness. No merit, then, is due to me for not having let myself be bound by these false ties, since I was preserved from them by God’s sweet mercy alone. Too well do I realise that without Him | might have fallen as low as St. Mary Magdalen, and the great words of the Divine Master to Simon the Pharisee re-echo with much sweetness in my soul. I know that “to whom less 1s forgiven, he loveth less,” but 1 know, too, that Our Lord has forgiven me even more than He forgave St. Mary Magdalen. 1 wish it were possible to say all that I feel, but here is an example which will convey to you some idea of what I mean.

Let us suppose that the son of a very clever doctor, stumbling over a stone on the road, falls and breaks his leg. His father hastens to his aid, and binds up the fractured limb with all the

t Luke vii. 47.

A Little White Flower

skall at his command. When cured, the son shows the utmost gratitude—and with good reason.

Suppose on the other hand that the father, knowing that a large stone lies on his son’s path, anticipates the danger, and, unseen by anyone, hastens to remove it. Unconscious of the accident from which such tender forethought has saved him, the son will not show any mark of vratitude for it, or feel the same love for his rather as he would have done had he been cured of some grievous wound. But if he came to earn the whole truth, would he not love his ‘ather all the more?

Well now, I am this child, the object of the foreseeing love of a Father “4#ho did net send His Son to call the just, but sinners.’! ie wishes me to love Him because He has forgiven me, not much, but everything. Without waiting for me to love Him much, as St. Mar Magdalen did, He has made me understand how He has loved me with an ineffable love and forethought, in order that my own love may reach eben unto folly. I have often heard it said, both in retreats and elsewhere, that an innocent soul has never loved more than a repentant one. Ah, if | could but give the lie to those words!

But I have wandered so far from my subject that I scarcely know where to begin again... It was during the retreat before my second

é

| i

1 Luke v. 32.

First Communion

Communion that I fell a prey to scruples, and i remained in this unhappy state for nearly two years. It is not possible for me to describe all the sufferings it entailed; one must have passed through such a martyrdom to be able to understand it. Iivery thought, every action, even the simplest, was a source of trouble and anguish; no peace came to me till I told everything to Marie, and that cost me a great deal, for | imagined myself obliged to lay open absolutely all my thoug hts, even the most extravagant. This done, | experienced a a momentary peace, but it passed fie al ‘flash and once again the martyrdom began. Dear Marie, with how many occasions for patience did I ne furnish you?

That year we spent a fortnight of our holidays at the sea-side. My aunt, ever ready to give proot of her motherly love; treated us to al! manner of amusements—donkey rides, shrimping, and so on. She indulged us also in the matter of clothes: once, I remember, she eave me some pale blue bhae and, in spite ps my twelve and a half years, I was seu a child that I quite enjoyed tying it on my hair. But even this childish pleasure filled me with scruples, and I could not rest till I had been to confession.

Dun ing Our stay at Trouville, | hada salutary lesson. onhon Martie frequently had © sick headaches and on these occasions my aunt used to

fondle her and call her the most endearing names.

A Little White Flower

The aed response, however, was continual tears and the ceaseless complaint: ‘‘ My head aches!” Though I had a headache nearly every day, | made no complaint. But one evening | was seized with a desire to imitate Marie, and throwing myself into an arm-chair in a corner of the room, I began to cry. Cousin Jeanne, to whom I] was very devoted, was soon at my side, and my aunt too was all anxiety to know what was the matter. Like Marie, I only answered: “ My head aches!”” Apparently, complaining was a part which did not suit me, for | failed to convince anyone that a headache was the real cause of my tears. Therefore, instead of pitying me as she usually did, aunt spoke to me very seriously. Jeanne went so far as to reproach me, kindly, it is true, but evidently grieved at my lack of simplicity, and want of confidence in my aunt, for she was convinced that my tears were caused by some scruple which I was unwilling to make known. Getting nothing for my pains, I made up my mind never again to imitate other people, and I now understood the fable of the ass and the little dog. I was the ass who, seeing all the petting bestowed on the dog, put his clumsy hoof on the table to try and secure his share. If, unlike the poor animal, | red a sound beating, I received at any rate what I deserved — a severe lesson which cured me once and for all of the desire to attract attention.

First Communion

I must now return to the subject of my scruples. They made me so ill that I had to be taken from school when I was thirteen. To complete my education, Papa took me several times a week to have lessons from a very competent teacher, which lessons served the purpose not only of instructing me, but also of bringing me into contact with the outside world.

Visitors were often shown into the quaintly furnished room where I sat surrounded with my books, and though conversation was carried on, as far as possible, by my governess’s mother, I did not succeed in learning much while the visit lasted. Though seemingly absorbed in my work, little escaped my attention, even of what it would have been far better I should not hear. One visitor remarked on my beautiful hair; another enquired, as she left the room, who was the pretty little girl Such remarks, allthe more flattering because I was not meant to hear them, left a certain feeling of pleasure which clearly proved that I was full of self-love.

How great is my compassion for souls that perish! Itis so easy to go astray along the world’s seductive paths. Without doubt the sweetness which it offers to one somewhat advanced in virtue is always mingled with bitterness, nor can the immense void of such a soul’s desires be filled by the flattery of a moment; but in my case, had not my heart been lifted up to God

A Little White Flower

trom its first awakening, had the world smiled on me from the padle there is no knowing what I might have bese e. os gratefully then, dearest Mother, do | sing “the Mercies pre Gord as He not, Bi: to the words of Holy Wisdom, “saken me a way fr om the world lest wickedness should alter my understanding, ar deceit beguile mv soul?’

Meanwhile, | resolved to consecrate myself ina special way to Our Blessed Lady, and theretore | soughtadmission into the Soda lity of the Children of Mary.’ For this it was necessary to go twice a week to the convent, and I was so shy that a

must admit it cost me an cae I certainly had a great love for my mistresse,and [ shall always

retain a strong feeling of a rade towards them, but, as I have already said, I had no. special friend among them ed whom, like other old pupils, | might have spent several hours. So I worked on in silence till the end of the sewing es and then, as no one took any notice of é went to ae tribune in the chapel and eae there until Papa came to take me home.

Here, in this quiet visit, | found my one consolation. But was not Jesus my only friend? To Him alone could I open my heart. All conversation with creatures, even on holy subjects, wearied me. True, | sometimes felt sad because of the

1 Cf. Wisdom iv. 11. 2 She became a Sodalist of Our Lady, May 31, 1886..[Ev.] go

First Communion

indifference shown me, but I would console myself by repeating this line from a beautiful poem Papa used often to recite for us:

“Time is thy barque and not thy home.”

Young as I was, these words restored my courage, and even now, though I have outgrown many of the pious impressions of childhood, the symbol of a ship always delights me, and helps me to bear with my exile. Does not the Wise Man tell us: “Life is like a ship that passeth through the waves; when it is gone, the trace thereof cannot be found”? }

When my thoughts turn this way they soon lose themselves in the infinite. I seem already to touch the heavenly shore, and to feel Our Lord’s loving embrace. In my fancy, I can see Our Blessed Lady coming towards me, Papa and Mamma by her side, and in their company those four little angels, our baby brothers and sisters. Then at last I taste, as in a dream, the true and unending joys of Home.

But before reaching our Heavenly Father's Home, I had many separations to endure upon earth. The same year in which I was made a Child of Mary, Our Lady took from me my dearest Marie,” the only support of my soul. Since the time of your entering Carmel

1 Wisdom v. to. 2 Marie entered the Carmel of Lisieux on October 15, 1886, taking the name of Sister Mary of the Sacred Heart. [Carmet.]

QI

A Little White Flower

she had been my spiritual guide, and I loved her so deeply that 1 could not bear to be deprived

ot her gentle companionship.

I no sooner heard of her determination than | resolved to take no further interest in anything here below and I shed abundant tears. But tears at that time were nothing unusual; they flowed for the most trivial cause. I was most anxious, for instance, to advance in virtue, yet | went about it ina strange way. I had never been uccustomed to wait on myself, or do any house work, and Céline always ar ranged our room. Now. however, with the intention of pleasing Our 1 ord, I ee sometimes make my bed, or, if Céline happened to be out, | would bring in her plants and cuttings. ite it was for Our l.ord’s sake that I did Fhese little things I ought not to have looked for any return. ‘But, ee, 1 did look for thanks, and if, unfortunately, Céline did not seem surprised and grateful for my small services, I was disappointed, as my tears soon showed.

Again, if I unintentionally offended anyone, far fos ‘making the best of it, I fretted until | became quite ill, thus increasing my fault instead of repairing it. hen when | began to be reconciled to the blunder, I would cry for having cried. In fact, I made one out of everything. But all fis has come to an end. The favours God has showered upon me have wrought a complete

First Communion

change and I am no longer the same. Thanks to grace from above, transitory things cannot depress me, and as my thoughts revert to what I used to be, my heart overflows with gratitude. Marie having entered Carmel, | could not tell her of my scruples, so [ turned towards Heaven and confided them to the four little angels who had gone before me. I thought that these innocent souls, who had never known either sorrow or tear, ought to have pity on their poor little suffering sister. I talked to them with childish simplicity, and told them that as I was the youngest of the family, | had always been the most petted and loved by my parents and sisters, and that if they too had remained on earth, they ota no doubt have given me the oe proots of affection. | told the em also that the fact of their being in Heaven was no reason why they should forget me. On the contrary, since they could draw from the treasury of Heaven, they ought to obtain for me the grace of peace, and so prove that in Paradise they loved me still.

L had not long to wait tor fie answer: a sweet peace soon inundated my soul and I knew that J was loved, not only on earth but also in Heaven. From that day my devotion towards those blessed ones increased; I loved to talk to them, to tell them of all the sorrows of this exile, and of my great longing to join them soon in our Eternal Home.



Vocation of Therese

WAS far from meriting the graces showered

upon me by Our Lord. I had a constant and ardent desire to advance in virtue, but how numerous were the imperfections tee were mingled with my acts! My extreme sensitiveness made me almost unbearable, and all arguments against it were simply useless, I could not correct myself of this miserable failing.

How then could I dare hope to be soon admitted into Carmel, s since nothing short of a miracle was needed if my childish ways were to be altered? But God wrought the desired miracle on December 25,1886. On that blessed Christ mas night, the swect Intant Jesus, scarce yet an hour old, flooded with His olor ious sunshine the acne into which my soul was plunged. In becoming weak and little for love of me, 246 made me strong and brave, He placed His own weapons in my hands, and I went from victory to victory, beginning, so to speak, “to run as a Si. Ae fountain of my tears was dried up, and from that time they flowed neither easily nor often.

1 Ct, Psalm xvili. 5.

ve

Vocation of Thérése

temmust teil you ‘here, dear Mlother, the circumstances under which I received the priceless grace of my complete conversion. On reaching home, after midnight Mass, I knew | should find my shoes in the chimney-corner, filled with presents, just 2s when I was a little child, 2 fact which proves that I was still treated asa baby. Papa loved to watch my enjoyment and hear my cries of delight as I drew each fresh surprise from the magic shoes, and his pleasure added considerably to mine.

But the hour had come when Our Lord desired to free me from the failings of my childhood, and take from me even its innocent pleasures. He permitted that Papa, instead of indulging me in his usual way, should feel annoyed, and as I went upstairs I overheard him say: “All this is far too babyish for a big girl like Therese, and I hope this is the last time it will happen.” ‘These words cut me to the very heart, and Céline, knowing how sensitive I was, whispered: “ Don’t go down just yet, you would only cry if you looked at your presents before Papa.” But Thérèse was no longer the same— Jesus had transformed her. Choking back my tears, | ran down to the dining room, and making every effort to still the throbbing of my heart, | picked up my shoes and gaily drew out the presents one by one, looking all the time as happy as a queen. Papa joined in the laughter and

ye

A Little White Flower

there no longer appeared on his face the least sign of vexation. Céline thought she must be as eaming, but hap pily it was a sweet r eality, and Thérése had once tor all regained the strength

of mind which had left her when she was four

and a halr.

On this radiant night beean the third period of my life, the aes a ae of air. ne most filled with heavenly favours Sa cence with my good-will, Our | ord accomp lished in an instant the one I had not been able to do during years. Like the Apostles, | might have said: “ Master sd have laboured all night and have taken nothing!’* More merciful to me than to His beloved disciples, Jesus Himself took the net, and casting it, drew it out full of fishes: He made me a a fisher of men. Love, and a spirit of self-forgetfulness took complete possession of my heart, and thencetorward I was perfectly happy.

One Sunday, on closing my book at the end of Mass, a picture of ie crucifixion slipped partly out, showing one of the Divine Hands, pierced sive bleeding. An indescribable thrill, such as I had never before experienced, passed through me; my heart was torn with grief at the sight of the Precious Blood fal ling to he ground, with no one caring’ to treasure it\aS it Tel ae once I resolved to remain continuously in spirit

at the foot of the Cross, that I might receive

i Luke we a

Vocation of Thérése

the divine dew of salvation and pour it forth upon souls.

From that day, the cry of my dying Saviour: “7 thirst!” resounded incessantly in my heart, kindling within it new fires of zeal. To give my Beloved to drink was my constant desire; I was consumed with an insatiable thirst for souls, and I longed at any cost to snatch them from the everlasting flames of hell.

In order to enkindle my ardour still further, Our Divine Master showed me how pleasing to Him was my zeal. About this time, I heard people speak of a notorious criminal, Pranzini, who had been condemned to death for severa! horrible murders. He was impenitent and in consequence it was feared he would be eternally lost. I longed to avert that greatest of misfortunes, a calamity beyond all repair, and | employed all the spiritual means I could think of to obtain the ransom. of this poor sinner. Knowing that of myself I could do nothing, | offered up the infinite merits of Our Saviour together with the treasures of Holy Church.

In the depths of my heart I felt convinced my request would be granted, but, that I might gain courage to persevere in the quest for souls, | sud in all simplicity: “My God, I am sure Thou wilt pardon this unhappy Pranzini, and | should still think so even if he does not confess

his sins or give any sign of sorrow—such is the

A Little White Flower

confidence I have in Thy unbounded mercy. But, because this is my first sinner, I beg for just one sign of repentance to reassure me.”

My prayer was granted to the letter. Though Papa never allowed us to read newspapers, I did not consider it an act of disobedience when on the day following the execution I hastily opened

the paper, La Croix, and looked for the part concerning Pranzini. What wasit l saw oy Tears betrayed my emotion and I was obliged to run fromthe room. Without confession or abso-Jution Pranzini had mounted the scaffold, and the executioners were dragging him towards the fatal block, when all at once, apparently in answer to a sudden inspiration, he turned round, seized a cr as ee the priest we towards him, and

ae obtained de desired sign, and it came with special sweetness, for was it not the sight of the Precious Blood, flowing from the Wounds of Jesus, which had fired me with that great thirst for souls? I had longed to give them to drink of the Blood of the Immaculate Lamb, that it might wash away their stains, and lo! the lips of “my first-born” had been pressed to those Divine Wounds. How touching was the answer from Heaven! After this answer to prayer my desire for the salvation of souls increased day by day. I seemed to hear Our Lord whispering to me as He did

Vocation of Thérése

to the Samaritan woman: “Give me to drink.””? It was truly an exchange of love: I poured out the Precious Blood of Jesus upon souls, and to Jesus—in order to quench His thirst—I offered these same souls refreshed with the dew of Calvary. But the more I gave Him to drink, the greater became the thirst of my own poor soul,. and this was indeed my most precious reward. In a short while, God in His goodness had litted me out of the narrow sphere in which I lived. The great step was taken, but along road lay before me. Freed, however, from scruples and over-se nsitiveness, my mind expanded, and as | was always a lover of the noble and beautiful, 1 developed about this time a passionate desire for learning. Not satisfied with the lessons of my mistress, | took up certain subjects by myself and in a few months learned more than I had done in my whole school-life. But was not “coanity and vexation of spirit’?? IT was now at the most dangerous time of my life, and with my impetuous nature, | should have run grave risk were it not that God wrought on my behalf what Ezechiel describes in his “prophecy:

“ Behold thy time was the time of lovers: and I spread My garment over thee. «Ind I swore to thee, and I entered into @ covenant with ee saith the Lord Gid and thou becamest Mine. -And | washed thee with water and I anainted thee with oil. 1 clothed thee with fine garments,

1 John ty, 7. % Bech. i... 7A.

A Little White Flower

and put a chain about thy neck. Thou didst eat fine four and honey and oil, and wast made exceedingly beautiful, and wast advanced to be a queen.”}

All this Our Lord has done for me. I might take each word of that striking passage, apply it to myself, and show how completely it has been realised in me, but in the graces I have already recorded vou hove l sud ent proof, so I shall only speak now ot the abundant food provided for me by my Divine Master. For a long time I had sustained my spiritual life on the “jive flour” contained in the [imitation of Christ. It was the only book from which I derived any good, because as yet I had not discovered the Geasar es hidden in the Holy Gospels. | always carried it about with me, much to the amusement of those at home, and my aunt would often open it and make me repeat the first chapter she chanced to light upon.

When I was fourteen, my thirst for knowledge grew so keen that God thought fit to add to the fine flour abundant honey and oil, and this honey and oil I found in the conferences of Father Arminjon on The End of this World «aud the Alysieries of the World to Come. While reading them, my soul was steeped in a joy that was ee of ee J experienced a foretaste of what Our Father has prepared for those who love Him, and understanding how far eternal rewards

t Exechiel xvicds 9, 33.

Vocation of Thérése

exceed the petty sacrifices of this life, 1 yearned to love God passionately, and, while it still lay in my power, to prove that love in countless ways.

Since Christmas especially, Celine had become the most intimate sharer of my thoughts. Our Lord, wishing us to advance in virtue together, drew us to one another by ties stronger than blood. He made us sisters in spirit as well as in the flesh, and in us were realised the words of our holy Father, St. John of the Cross:

‘Preading in ‘Thy footsteps

Young maidens hghtly run upon the way. From the spark’s contact,

And the spiced wine,

They give forth aspirations of a balm divine.

Truly it was with light hearts that we followed in the footsteps of Jesus. The burning sparks which He cast into our souls, the strong wine which He gave us to drink, made us blind to all earthly things, and from our lips broke forth aspirations all fragrant with love.

What tender memories are awakened as I think of the intercourse of those days! Every evening, from our spacious attic window, we gazed at the azure vault studded with golden stars, and i seems to me that inthose moments many precious graces were bestowed upon His children. “God,” says the author of the /mitation, “communicates Himself sometimes amid great light, at other

IO]

A Little White Flower

times sweetly veiled under signs and figures.” In this latter way He deigned to manitest Himself to our hearts; but how light and transparent was the veil!) Doubt was no longer possible: Faith and Hope had already given place to Love — Love whichi made us find Him whom we sought, even upon earth. And when He found us Mont a gave us His kiss and now no one may despise us.”

These divine impressions could not but bear fruit, and the practice of virtue gradually became sweet and natural to me. In the beginning my looks betrayed the effort, but little by little selfsacrifice grew easy, even (ae the very first call. OS eae oe Be has ca ae a, aa Bee: hath shall be given, and he shall abound.’*® Each grace faithtully received brought in its train many others. He gave iiss tome in Holy Communion ies frequently than I dared hope, for I had made it a rule to receive Him as often as my confessor would allow, but never to solicit any further leave. Now, however, I should act very differently: I am quite certain that a soul ought to make known to her spiritual guide the longing she has to receive her God. ioe is not to remain in a golden ciborium that He comes down from Heaven each day, but to seek another Heaven—the Heaven of our souls wherein He takes such delight.

2 Ch Imit. 1h Ohi xin. 4: > 2 Of Cant wil, 1. 4 ee ee

[O2

Vocation of Thérése Tas satisfy my desires, Our Lord inspired my

confessor to permit me to recerve Holy Communion several times weekly, and this permission coming, as it did, straight from Him, filled me with joy. In those days I did not dare to speak of my intimate feelings; the road I trod was so direct, so clear, that I did not feel the need of any other guide but Jesus. I compared directors to mirrors that faithtully reflect Our Saviour to the souls under their care, and I thought that in my case He used no inter mediary, but acted directly.

When a gardener gives special attention to a fruit which he wishes to ripen early, it is never with a view to leaving it on the tree, but rather to placing it on a well-spread table. In the same way did Our Lord lavish His favours on His Little lower, for He willed that His mercies should shine forth in her—He who while on

earth cried out in a transport of joy: “JZ bless Thee, O Father, because Thou hast hidden these things from a WISE and prudent, and hast revealed them to little ones.”’ And because J was small and frail, He deigned to stoop down to me and instruct me gently in the secrets of His love.

As St. John of the Cross sings in his Canticle of the Soul:

On that happy night In secret | went forth, beheld by none, And seeing naught; i As Mee a 2

A Little White Flower

Having no light nor guide

Excepting that which burned within my heart, Which lit my way

More safely than the glare of noon-day sun

To where, expectant,

He waited for me Who doth know me well,

Where none appeared but He.

This place was Carmel, but before I could “ sit down under His shadow whom I desired,” + J had to pass through many a trial. And ie the divine call was becoming so insistent that had it been necessary tor me to go through tire to follow Our Lord, | should have cast my self into the flames.

You, and you alone, encouraged me i my vocation; in your loving heart mine found a faithful echo, and the you | should never have reached the blessed haven which, already for five years, had sheltered my little Mother. For five years we had been kept apart; you had seemed as though lost to me, but now, in the hour of trial, it was your eee that tae me the path | aia follow, and assuredly I was in sore need of this Me! My visits to the convent were becoming more and more distressing, for I could not speak of my desire to enter without encountering opposition. Marie, considering me too young did all that was

i Cant. diy 3.

1O4

Vocation of Thérése

possible to thwart my plans; in fact, from the very beginning, there were obstacles at every turn. Besides, I feared to tell Céline, and that tortured me. It was so hard to have a secret she did not share. However, she soon found out my intention, and far from striving to hold me back accepted the sacrifice with wonderful courage. She, too, wished to be a nun, and was entitled to go first, but imitating the martyrs of old who used to embrace joyfully those chosen to go before them into the arena, she willingly allowed me to leave her, and took my troubles as much to heart as though it had been a question of her own vocation.

Krom Céline then | had nothing to fear, but 1 did not know how to speak to Papa. How could I ask him to part with his little Queen, when he had already made the sacrifice of his two eldest daughters? Moreover, that year he had been stricken with a serious attack of paralysis, and though he had recovered quickly we were full of anxiety for the future.

What struggles I went through betore I could decide! But I had to act promptly, for I was now fourteen and a half. In six months’ time the blessed feast of Christmas would be here, and I had resolved to enter Carmel at the same hour at which, a year before, I had received the grace to overcome my childish failings, the hour of my complete conversion.

10S

A Little White Flower

I chose the feast of Pentecost on which to make my great disclosure. All day I prayed for light from the Holy Ghost. 1 called upon the Apostles to plead for me, and begged them to inspire me with the words [I ought to usc. Were they not the very Saints to help a timid child whom God destined to become an apostic of apostles by prayer and sacrifice?

In the afternoon, on our return from Vespers, 1 found the opportunity 1 so much deren Papa had gone into the garden, and was sittiig there, ity hands clasped, admiring the wondevs of nature. The birds were warbling their evening prayer, and the crimson rays of the setting sun still lingered on the tall trees, kissing their upr: branches to gold.

His face wore a heavenly expression—I could feel that his soul was full of peace. Without saying a word, I sat down by his. side, my eyes already wet ‘ithe tears. He looked at me with indescribable tenderness, and, pressing me to his heart, said: “ What is it, little Queer: Welt me... oS ERBh as ae ie his own emotion, he rose and walked slowly up and down, still holding me close to him.

ar fo

Through my tears I spoke of Carmel and of my oreat wish to enter soon. He too, A but ce not say one word to turn me faa my vocation; he simply pointed out to me that |

Vocation of Thérése

was still very young to decide on so grave a matter. I insisted, pleading urgently my cause, and because of his upright, generous nature, our noble Father soon yielded. For a long time we continued our walk in the garden; my heart was relieved and Papa no longer shed tears. He spoke to me just as a Saint might have spoken and showed me some little white flowers, like miniature lilies, which were growing on a low stone wall. Picking one, he gave it to me, and remarked with what loving care God had brought it to bloom and preserved it until that day.

I thought I was listening to my own life story, so close was the resemblance between the little flower and little Thérése. I received it asa relic, and [ noticed that in trying to pluck the slender blossom, Papa had pulled it up by the roots: it seemed Adstined to live on, but in other and more fertile soil. He had just done the same thing for me, by permitting me to leave the sweet valley a my childhood’s years for the mountain of Carmel. I fastened my little white flower to a picture of Our Lady of Victories, SO that the Blessed Virgin smiles upon it and the Infant Jesus seems to hold it in His hand. It is there still, 5ut the stalk is now broken close to the root. No doubt God wishes me to understand by this that He will soon sever all the earthly ties ot His Little Flower, and will not leave her to fade here below.

A Lattle White Flower

Having secured Papa's consent, I thought | could fly to Carmel without further hindrance. To my Ae when I confided the secret to my uncle, he declared that to enter sucha severe order at Ene age of fifteen seemed contrary to all human prudence, and, moreover, that it would be doing 2 wrong to religion to let a mere child See such a life. He added that he would oppose it in every possible way, and that nothing short of a miracle would induce him to change his mind. [| clearly saw that all arguments were useless and I Jett him, my heart ‘Overwhe | with grief. My only consolation lay in prayer. I entreated Our Lord to work the miracle of which my uncle had spoken, for thus only could I respond to His divine call. Some time elapsed, and to al] appearances my uncle had forgotten our interview, though later I learned it had been constantly in his thoughts.

Before sending a ray of hope to shine on my soul, God a Didoea me to pass through a three days’ martyrdom of another and ety sage kind. Never before had I so well understood the bitter sorrow of Our Lady and St. Joseph as they walked through the streets of Jerusalem in search of the Divine Child. It was as if I were lost in some fearful desert; or rather my soul seemed like a frail skiff, without a pilot, left to the mercy of the stor my waters. I knew that Jesus was there, asleep in my barque, but how

Vocation of Thérése

could I see Him through a night of such darkness? Had the storm really broken, a flash of lightning might have pierced the clouds that hung over me, enabling me to catch a momentary glimpse of the Beloved of my heart, but even that sorry light was denied me. All around was night, dark night, utter desolation, death! Like my Divine Master in Gethsemane, IJ felt that ] was alone, and that I] could find no comfort, neither on earth nor in Heaven.

Nature scemed to share my deep sadness, tor during those three days there was not one ray of sunshine and the rain fell in torrents. Again and again I have noticed that, all through my life, Nature has reflected my feelings. When I wept, the heavens wept with me; when I rejoiced, no cloud darkened the azure sky. On the fourth day, a Saturday, 1 went to see m uncle, and what was my surprise to find his attitude towards me completely changed! First of all he brought me into his private study—a privilege quite unasked; then, after gently reproaching me for being somewhat reserved towards him, he told me the miracle he had exacted was no longer necessary. He had prayed to God to guide his heart aright, and the prayer had been heard. Indeed I scarcely knew my uncle, so sympathetic had he become. After embracing me like a father, he said with deep feeling: “Go in peace, dear child, you are a

10g

A Little White Flower

privileged little flower which Our Lord wishes to gather for Himself; I will no longer put any obstacle in your way.”

How joyfully I retraced my steps homeward under a beautiful sky whence every cloud had

vanished! In my soul, too, dark night was gone; | no longer heard he roar of the waves— tas had awakened to eladden my heart. Instead of an adverse dike a light breeze swelled my sails and [ thought myse! if safe in port, ae alas! more than one such storm was yet to arise, making me fear lest I should be driven, without hope of return, from the shore I so longed to reach.

Scarcely had I obtained my uncle's approvai when you yourself told me the Superior of the Carmel! would not allow me to enter till [ was twenty-one. No one had dreamt of this opposition, the hardest of all to overcome, yet au losing courage I went with Papa to lay my request before eae He received me very coldly. Nothing would induce him to change his mind, and we left him with a very emphatic “No.” “OF cour se,” hevadded, “1 aim: Gass the Bishop’s delegate; should he allow you to enter, I shall have nothing to say.”

When we came out of the presbytery it was once more raining in torrents, and my soul, too, was overcast with heavy clouds. Papa was at a

t Father Delatréette. I1O

Vocation of Thérése

Joss to know how to console me. He promised that, if 1 wished it, | should go with him to Bayeux,! and | oladly accepted. Many things, however, happened before we were able to undertake the journey. Meanwhile, to all out-

ward appearances, my life autineed as before. I went on studying—more important stil <4 went on growing in the love of God, and now and then I experienced what were indeed raptures of spiritual joy.

One evening, not knowing in what words to tell Jesus how much | loved Him, and how much | wished that He might be everywhere honoured and served, the oe thought forced itself upon my mind that from the “depths of hell there would never go up to Him one single act of love. From my inmost heart | then cried out that | would gladly be cast into that place of torment and blasphemy to make Him eternally loved even there. This could not be for His glory, since He only desires our happiness, but love must needs speak foolishly. And though I spoke thus, I coveted Heaven most eagerly: nevertheless Hown for me meant nothing but /ove, and in my ardour I felt I could not be separated from the Divine Being who held me captive.

It was about this time that Our Lord gave

1 ‘To interview Mgr. Hugonin, the Bishop of Bayeux and Lisieux who lived at Bayeux. [Eb.]

ja a}

A Little White Flower

me the consolation of gaining a more intimate knowledge of the souls of children. It happened in the following way. During the illness of a poor woman, | interested myself in her two little girls, the elder of whom was scarcely six. It was a real pleasure to see with what simplicity they believed all I told them. Baptism must indeed plant deeply in our hearts the theological virtues, since the hope of heavenly JOYS Is “strong enough to make us practise selfdenial even e om our earliest childhood. When I wanted the two little girls to be kind to one another, instead of promising toys and sweets, I talked to them about the eternal reward the Holy Child Jesus would give to good children. The elder one, who was coming to the use of reason, would look quite pleased and ask me charming questions about the little Jesus and His beautiful Heaven. She promised me faithfully always to yield to her younger sister, adding that all through her lite she would never forget what I had taught her. I used to compare those innocent souls to soft wax, ready to receive any impression—evil, alas! as well as. good, and I understood the words of Our Lord: “Tt were better to be thrown into the sea than to scandalise one of these little ones.””'

How many souls might attain great sanctity if only they were directed aright from the first!

c Gt. Wilatt. aaa a. Bis

Vocation of Thérése

I know that God has no need of anyone to help Him in His work of sanctification, but just as He allows a clever gardener to cultivate rare and delicate plants, providing him with the necessary skill to accomplish it, while reserving to Himself the task of making them grow, so also does He wish to be helped in the divine cultivation of souls. What would happen if an ignorant gardener did not properly graft his trees? What if, without understanding the nature of each, hé endeavoured, for instance, to eTOW roses on peach trees?

This reminds me that among my birds I used to have a canary which sang beautifully, and also a tiny linnet of which I was specially fond, having adopted it straight from the nest. The little prisoner, deprived of the teaching it should have received from its parents, and hearing from morning till night the joyous trills of the ee tried one day to imitate them. No eas task indeed for a linnet! It was delightful to follow the efforts of the poor little thing, for its sweet voice found great difficulty in accommodating itself to the vibrant notes of 1 master; but to my great surprise the Pin song ae in ne exactly like the song of the canary.

Dear Mother, you know who taught me to sing from the days of my earliest childhood. You know the voices which drew me on. And

eo

A Little White Flower

in spite of my weakness, I trust it may be granted to me to sing through eternity the Canticle of Love of which the harmonious notes have here below so often fallen on my ear.

But where am If These thoughts have carried me far trom my subject. I must resume the history of my vocation.

Together with Papa I set out for Bayeux on October 31, 1887. My heart was full of hope, mingled with excitement at the thought of calling at His Lordship’s house. For the first time in my life | was going to pay a visit without any of my sisters, and this to a Bishop. 1, who had never yet had to speak except to answer questions addressed to me, would have to explain and enlarge on my reasons tor wishing to enter Carmel, and so give proof of the venuineness of my vocation.” It sk me 2 creat effort to overcome my shyness sufficiently tor this, ba it is true that Love knows no such word as

“impossible,” but believes “it may and can do all things.” I had to purchase my happiness by heavy trials, and nothing but the love of Jesus could have made me face these hardships, as well as the many others which followed. Today, it is true, [ look upon them as insignificant, and were not the happiness already mine, to win it I would willingly pay the price a thousand times over.

1 Cf. Imit. IT, v. 4. je &§

Vocation of Thérése

When we reached the Bishop’s house, the flood-gates of TFleaven seemed to have opened afresh. The Vicar-General, Father Reévcrony, who had arranged the te OP aun visit, received us very kindly, though he looked a little surprised. Noticing tears in my eyes, he said: “Ah! those diamonds! they must not

Ley

be shown to His Lordship!

We passed through reception rooms so large that I felt like some tiny ant, and I wondered all the while what | should ie tosay. The Bishop was walking in 2 corridor with two priests. 1 saw the Vicar-General er xchange some words with him and together they came into the room where we were waiting. A bright fire was burning on the hearth, in front of which were three enormous armchairs.

As His Lorcship entered, Papa and I knelt tor his blessing, after which he signed for us to sit down. Father Réverony directed me to the armcheir in the middle; I excused myself politely but he insisted, telling me to show if | knew how to obey, so I took it without further remark. I was mortified, however, to see him take an ordinary chair while I was buried in an enormous seat that would have held quite comfortably four children like myself—more comfortably, in fact, for I was far from being at ease. I had hoped ‘that Papa would speak, but instead of this, he bade me explain the object

A Little White Flower

of our visit. I did so as eloquently as 1 knew how, conscious all the time that one word from the Superior would have carried more weight than all I could say, while his opposition told strongly against me.

The Bishop asked me if it were long since I had wished to enter Carmel. “A very long time, my Lord,’ I replied. “Come!” said the Vicar-General, laughing, “it certainly cannot be fiftecn years... “ That is trae,’ | answered, ““ae there are not very many years to subtract, for I have wished to give myself to God from the time I was three.

The Bishop, no doubt to please Papa, tried to make me understand that | ought to remain at home some time longer. To his surprise and edification Papa took my part, adding, in the most courteous way, that we were going to Rome with the diocesan pilgrimage, and that if I failed to obtain the desired permission before then, I should not hesitate to speak to the Holy Father.

It was decided, however, that before giving an answer it would be necessary to interview the Superior of the Carmel. This, of course, was particularly unpleasant news, for | knew only too well his declared and determined opposition, and in spite of the Vicar-General’s advice not to allow any “diamonds” to be seen, I not only showed my tears but let them fall. The Bishop seemed

Vocation of Thérése

touched, and treated me with the most paternal kindness, greater kindness, I was afterwards told, than he had ever displayed to any child. “All is not lost, little one,” he said, “but I am very glad you are going to Rome with your good Father; it will strengthen your vocation, and, A of weeping, you ought to rejoice. Next week I shall be at Lisigae ond I will talk to the Superior about you. You shall certainly have my answer while you are in Italy.”

His Lordship next took us to the garden, and he was much interested when ieee told him that, to make myself look older, I had put up my hair for the first time tag very morning. Nor was the incident forgotten, for even now, when the Bishop speaks to anyone about ree “little daughter,” he always repeats the story of her hair. I own that 1 would rather it had been left untold. As the Vicar-General accompanied us to the door, he remarked that such a thing had never yet been seen—a father as anxious to give his child to God as the child was to offer herself.

We had then to return to Lisieux without any favourable answer. It seemed to me as though my future were for ever shattered, for the nearer I drew to the goal, the greater my difficulties became. Yet all the time, deep down in my heart reigned a wondrous peace, because I knew I was seeking only God’s Will.

ni

Creal fee Vi



Pilgrimage to Rome

HREE days after the journey to Bayeux, |

set out on another and a much longer

one, our pilgrimage to the Eternal City. It

taught me the hollowness of all things that

pass away. I saw, however, splendid monu-

ments; 1 studied the countless wonders of art

and religion; and better than all, I stood on the

very soil trodden by the Apostles and bedewed

with the blood of Martyrs, and my soul grew strong by contact with those holy things.

1 am delighted to have visited Rome, but | can quite understand people believing that Papa undertook this pilerimage with a view to altering my ideas on the religious life. It might well have injured a vocation Ten firmly ae ART TT

To begin with, Céline and I found ourselves in the company of people of rank; indeed there were few others amongst the pilgrims. lar from being dazzled, nevertheless, by any such splendour, we oles on all dike exalted titles but as a “vapour of smoke.” * 1 understood the words of the Jmitation: “Be not solicitous for the shadow of a great name,’’? and | realised

1 Joel ii, 19. 2 Imit. IIT, xxiv, 2.

A Pilgrimage to Rome

ener true greatness ee TO ot We ha bat in the soul. The Prophet Isaias tells us: “The Lord shall call His servants by another name,” and we read in St. John: “ To him that overcometh 1 will give a white counter, and on the counter a new name written which no man knoweth but he that receiveth it.’? In the next world, therefore, we shall know our titles of nobility, and “sew shal every man have praise from God,”? and he who upon earth chose for love of his Saviour to be the poorest and least known, will be the first, the noblest, and the richest in Heaven.

The second piece of knowledge | acquired concerned God’s Priests. Up to this time I could not understand the chief aim of the Carmelite Reform. The thought of praying tor sinners afforded me the utmost delight, but | was surprised at the idea of praying for priests, whose souls I deemed purer than crystal. In Italy, I understood my vocation, and the long journey was well worth undertaking to gain such useful knowledge.

During that month I met many holy priests. Yet l saw that despite the sublime dignity of the Priesthood which raises them above the Angels, they stil! remain men and subject te human frailty. Now if those whom Our Lord in the Gospel calls “che salt of the earth’ —if holy priests have need of our prayers, what must be

den, inv. Tse 2 Apoc. il. 17. 5, Cote. §.

T19

A Little White Flower

the needs of the lukewarm? Has not Our Lord said also: “Uf the salt lose its savour wherewith shall it be salted?’ }

Dear Mother, how beautiful 1s our vocation! We Carmelites are called upon to preserve “te salt of the earth”, to offer our prayers and sacrifices tor the apostles of the Lord, to be their apostles, while they by word and example are preaching the Gospel to our brethren. Have we not a noble mission to fulfil? But I must say no more on this subject, or my pen would run on for ever. It is time to return to the journey. Let me describe it tor you more in detail.

On the morning of November 4, while Lisieux lay shrouded in the darkness of night we passed through her silent streets. I felt that 1 was going out into the unknown, that great things were awaiting me in the Eternal City. When we reached Paris, Papa took us to see all its wonders, but for me the sole attraction was the church of Our Lady of Victories. | can never tell you what I felt at her shrine; the graces she granted me there were like those of my First Communion Day, and I was filled with happiness and peace. In this holy spot the Blessed Virgin, my Mother, told me plainly it was really she who had smiled on me and cured me. With intense fervour, | entreated her to guard me always, to realise my heart’s desire by

x Matt, vs 23, L229

A Pilgrimage to Rome

sheltering me under her spotless mantle, and to remove from me every occasion of sin.

I was well aware that throughout the Bish age I should come across things that might disturb me, and having no knowledge of evil, | feared to discover it. As yet Ih ad not experienced that “to the pure all things are pure’ '—that a simple and upright soul does not see evil in anything, since evil exists only in impure hearts and not in inanimate objects. From my childhood, devotion to St. Joseph had been interwoven with my love for Our ee Lady, so I prayed to him also that he might watch over me. Each day I said the prayer beginning: “St. Joseph, Father and Protector of Virgins. v Under such patronage, | felt quite sheltered from harm.

On November 7, after our solemn consecration to the, Sacred: Heart in the Basilica. of Montmartre,’ we quitted Paris. Each compartment of the train was named after a Saint, the selection being made in honour of some priest who was among the occupants—his own patron or that of his parish being chosen. But

PR doe.

2 Montmartre.-—the * Mount of Martyrs ’?—is the hill on which St. Denis, Apostle and Bishop or Paris, was martyred with his two companions, in the third century. It was a famous place of pilgrimage tn medizeval times, and it was here that St. Ignatius and the first Jesuits took their vows. U: a a the Presidency of Marshal MacMahon, the erection of the well-known Basilica was voted in 1873 by the French

‘Chamber of Deputies, 2s a national Act of Reparation to the Sacred Heart, [Eo.|

Lee |

A Little White Flower

in the presence of all the pilgrims, our compartment was named after St. Martin! Deeply touched by the compliment, Papa at once went to thank the director of the pilgrimage, Mer. Legoux, Vicar-General of Coutances. From this incident, he was afterwards often called Monsieur St. Martin.

Father Révérony observed me narrowly; | could see that he was doing so, even from a distance. At table, if 1 were not sitting opposite to him, he would bend forward so as fo see and. hear me better, and I think he was satisfied with his observations, since towards the end of the journey he deeaied more favourably disposed. I say towards the end, forin Rome, as I will tell you shortly, he was far from being my advocate.

Before reaching the goal of our ‘pilgrimage, we had to pass through Switzerland, with its lofty mountains, their snowy peaks lost’; in the clouds, its rushing torrents, its deep valleys profuse in luxuriant growths of giant ferns and purple heather.

Dear Mother, what good all those marvellous beauties of nature aid to my soul, lifting it up to God who has lavished such masterpieces on our earth, though it is merely a land of exile destined to endure but a day! Now we were high up the mountain side, while at our feet a yawning abyss seemed ready to: enoult tien. ys little later we were passing through some charming village with its cottages and graceful

T22

A Pilgrimage to Rome

belfry, over which fleecy clouds floated lazily. Farther on, the calm, clear waters of a great Jake would blend their azure tints with the glories of the setting sun.

I cannot tell you how much I was impressed with all this pageant so full of poetry and grandeur. It was a foretaste of the wonders of Heaven. Then there rose before me a picture of the religious life as it really is, with its constraints and its small daily sacrifices made in secret, and | understood how easy it would be to become wrapt up in self, and to forget the sublime end of one’s vocation. “ Later on,” | thought, “ when the time of trial comes—when | am enclosed in Carmel and shall be able to see but a little space of sky, | will recall this day and it will encourage me. 1 will make light of my own small troubles by thinking of the greatness and majesty of God; I will give my “heart. to Him alone and avoid the misfortune of 2 ittaching myself to fleeting trifles, now that I have had a glimpse of what is reserved for those who love Him.”’

Having contemplated the works of God, | turned to admire those of His creatures. The first Italian city we visited was Milan. Its white marble Cathedral, adorned with statues numerous enough to form a_ small town, furnished us with matter for much careful study. Leaving the more timid members of the party,

pax

A Lattle White Flower

whose nerve failed them after a snort Gimp, Celine and 1 followed the bolder pilgrims, and on reaching the top could enjoy a farreaching view ora the city lving beneath us. On descending # rom those giddy hy nehts, we began a series of carriage doe which Aneret through the whole pilerimage, curing me for ever of all desire for such a lazy style of locomotion.

The “Campo Santo”! filled us with rapture.. The whole vast enclosure is covered with marble statues so exg uisitely sarved as to make one fancy that the chisel of genius has actually imparted life. The apparent nesligence with which these wonders of art are everywhere scattered is but an additional charm. Their expression, too, so perfectly portrays a calm and Christian sorrow, that one is almost tempted to console them. Here it isa child throwing flowers on its father’s grave, and as the delicate petals seem to fall through its fingers, the solid nature of the marble is. for gotten. Iilsewhere, a widow's light veil, a the ribbons that bind some young maiden’s tresses, appear to float at the

bidding of the breeze.

We-were' at a’ loss’ for words: to express our admiration, when an elderly gentleman, French like ourselves, who followed us every-

where, recretting no doubt his inability to share » reg y

t Cemetery.

A Pilgrimage to Rome

our sentiments, said ill-humouredly: “What enthusiasts these French people are!” The poor man would, I think, have done better to: have stayed at home. Far from enjoying the journey, he was for ever grumblirg; nothing pleased him, neither cities, ‘hotels, people, nor anything else. Papa, whose disposition was the exact opposite, and who was quite happy no: matter what the circumstances were, tried to cheer his disagreeable neighbour, offering him his place in the carriage or elsewhere, and with his wonted kindness encouraging isi to look on the bright side of things. But all to no purpose —nothing would make him contented. How many different types of people we saw and how interesting is the study of the world when one 1s. about to leave it!

In Venice, the scene was completely changed. Instead of the bustle of a large town, there was. 2 stillness only broken by the soft lapping of the waters mingled with the cries of the gondolier as he gracefully plied his oar. Assuredly ft 192 city of great charm, but likewise of sadness. Ewen the Palace of the Doges with all its splendours is affected by this spirit of melancholy. We passed through halls, the vaulted roots of which have long ceased to re-echo the Governor's voice: giving sentence of life or death. Unhappy prisoners no longer pine in the dark dungeons. that are like living tombs.

Le

A Little White Flower

While visiting their dreadful cells I transported myself to the days of the Martyrs. Most gladly would I have dwelt in those sombre abodes had there been question of contessing my faith. But pr esently the guide’s voice roused me from my reverie and I crossed the “Bridge of, Sighs,’’,-so' called’) because or ane sighs tee ‘by the poor prisoners as they nassed trom their dungeons to death.

Atter leaving Venice, we visited Padua and there venerated’) the pele of “St: “Anthonys tongue; then Bologna, where rests St. Catherine's body, the face still bearing the impress of the kiss bestowed upon her by the Infant Saviour.

Joy filled my heart as we went towards Loreto.’ Our Lady has chosen a truly ideal place for her Holy House. There everything is poor, simple, and primitive: the women still wear the gracetul dress of the country and have not, as in other towns, adopted the modern Paris fashions. Everything enchanted me. But otf

the Holy House itself what can I say? Emotion overwhelmed me when I realised that I was

