Note 176.— Following details are of interest: While in Topeka, 1875-"76, the Karlin family had bought 1 brown gelding, $80; another, $60; 1 brown mare, $65; 2 geldings, $115; 2 oxen with yoke and chains.?70; 3 cows, $85; harness, $24; 1 wagon, $73; 2 plows, $36;.5000 pounds flour (a $2 50 per 100 (A Karlin, pp. 8. 9). Jacob Schmidt had $2095 on his arrival. The first year he invested $1312 90 in horses and cattle ( Schmidt, p. 8). B. Brungardt in 1876 bought a half section of an old soldier for $1000 ( B. Brungardt). Such cases are exceptions. J. Lang, on his arrival in Topeka 1875 had $300. He purchased 3 horses and 1 cow, which were stolen; he then with Jos Strernel bought 2 horses, 1 wagon, 1 plow (J. Lang). I. Vonfeld on his arrival in Victoria had $3 (I Vonfeld) The three families Urban had together 1 pair oxen. 1 plow; the boys by working in Salina earned money to buy a second pair of oxen; later they bought one horse, and the next spring another. Of those who arrived in 1378. but two families were well-to-do. No homesteads could be had then near Herzog, and railroad land cost $5 to $8 (Lmnenberger, II, pp.

Kansas State Historical Society.

Planted acreage.

Year.

Winter wheat.

Spring wheat.

Oats.

Corn.

Crop, bushels.

Winter wheat.

(rii 4d

Price, cents.

Spring wheat.

Oats.

Corn.

a. Crop total failure (Schmidt, p. 9). Men worked in Colorado. Seed wheat furnished by U. P. R. R. (<!' $0.65 (A. Karlin. p. 13).

b. Chinch bug (A. Karlin, p. 14).

c. No record of 1882-'83.

d. Much rain, worms, chinch bug, Hessian fly, etc. (A. Karlin, p. 18).

e. Chinch bug (Karlin, 21). /. Drought (Karlin, 22).

g. Drought (Karlin. 24).

h. Very good year (Schmidt, 11).

i. Total failure in wheat (Schmidt, 11). June 26, 1893, first good rain since August, 1892 (Victoria Chronicle, 41).

j. Total failure (Schmidt, 11). End of June, 1894, hail (Victoria Chronicle, 43); hail June 23, 1894 (Karlin, 30).

k. Drought (Victoria Chronicle, 43).

I. 6 bu. per acre (Schmidt, 11); end of April wind tore out grain (Victoria Chronicle, 45).

OTi. 7 bu. per acre (Schmidt, 11); end of May hail north of Victoria, June 6 south of Victoria (Victoria Chronicle, 49); grasshoppers devoured cabbage, cucumbers, watermelons, tomatoes (Karlin, 34).

n. 40 acres resown, because eaten by grasshoppers (Karlin, 37).

that their possessions were wrested for the most part from the stubborn glebe. The table on this page shows the personal property of the settlers in 1899 and 1909. This too was kindly compiled by B. M. Dreiling from the assessment rolls. Unhappily the records of 1889 were burned.

Acreage and Valuation of lands owned by the Ellis county Russian settlers, taken from the

tax rolls for 1899 and 1909.*

No. of acres.

Valuation.

No. of acres.

Valuation.

Big Creek

Buckeye

Catharine

Ellis

Freedom

Hamilton

Herzog

Lookout

Pleasant Hill

Saline

Smoky Hill

Victoria

Walker

Wheatland

Totals)

* This list does not include land rented or partly paid. It does not show the land-holdings of the Liebenthal. most lands of the Pfeifer and mucli of the possessions of the Schoenchen settlers which are in Rush county.

Personal Property assessed against the Russian settlers of Ellis county.

Township.

Big Creek

Buckeye

Catharine —

Ellis

Freedom

Hamilton

Herzog

Lookout

Pleasant Hill.

Saline

Smoky Hill...

Victoria

Walker.

Wheatland...

Totals.

The first who came to Victoria found as the only buildings the present depot and one other house. Near Munjor was one dwelling (of J. Schlyer); the sites of the other villages were as yet unsettled. The English colonists who had founded Victoria in 1873 gave employment to a number of the German-Russians, also an Englishman, some distance from Munjor. Most found employment on the railroad, and the money thus earned was invested in land and stock. A source of income, 1876-'78, was the sale of buffalo

526 Kansas State Historical Society.

bones, strewn far and wide over the prairie, which brought from five to seven dollars per ton. The earliest dwellings were board tents. As the season advanced sod houses or dugouts were built. Houses of stone (which required labor rather than money) and of lumber (which required money) succeeded as freedom from other occupation and wealth allowed. Many buildings of recent years are large and commodious. Some of the small houses in the villages have their explanation in this, that they are not designed to be a home (which is on the farm), but a temporary shelter on Sundays and hohdays when attending divine service. The want of timber and the need of economy led to the use of "mist-holz" (compost of manure and straw) as fuel, which is still used. The spinning wheel was and is yet in use in some homes. Knitting too, is still a favorite occupation of some

few.

Great was the poverty and suffering among the colonists in the yearg 1893-'97. Harvest there was practically none (compare table, page 524); the settlers were forced to pay exorbitant interest for loans; land depreciated so as to be almost valueless; even school children, for want of proper nourishment, became so listless that they remained on their benches rather than play during recess. ^'^ In spite of all, the stout-hearted men remained, till with the year 1897 a bountiful harvest rewarded their endurance.

A bright page this in the history of Kansas which relates the quiet and unassuming conquest of a one-time desert ^'^ with staid adherence to old customs, thus presenting the strange spectacle of "Gemuetlichkeit" in the land of the "strenuous life."

The above happenings are the outcome of a peculiar chain of circumstances that has few parallels in history. The horrors of the seven-year war (1756-1763) that had involved most of Europe had led men to regard a home where immunity from military service was guaranteed as a veritable ' Eldorado. ' It was again the military spectre that a century later brought the descendants of these lovers of peace to the land of stars and stripes. To the early hardships that for many decades made literary pursuits impossible and to the poor estate of learning, which was suppressed by those by whom it should have been fostered, ^^^ is due that but few of the settlers in Ellis county can state the home of their ancestors in Germany, i^o Printed records, as those of Landau, Sulz, Karlsruhe, Speier, Rastadt and Muenchen, which were founded 1809-1811 in southern Russia, giving the names of the first settlers and their homes in Germany, ^^i seem not to exist. Many whose

Note 177.— Various communications. The majority of settlers remained true to agricultural pursuits. Some are engaged in mercantile business, others practice a trade (stone mason, carpenter) alone or in addition to farming. The exploitation of gold on the banks of the SmokyHill river (1900-'02— see Waldemar Lindgreen. Tests for Gold and Silver in shales from Western Kansas, Washington, 1902), and a similar attempt near Catharine (section 28, township 13 south, range 17 west), were failures.

Note 178.— Pike's Journal of 1805 (Prentiss, History of Kansas, p. 24). Kansas Historical Collections, vol. IX. pp. 101-114.

Note 179.— See Bauer, book I, ch. 2-5; book II, ch. 5-6.

Note 180. — The Brungardt family have preserved the tradition that their maternal ancestors came from Ornbau, Bavaria ( B. Brungardt); Jacob Schmidt ( p. 3 ) states that his grandfather, Peter Schmidt, was born in Lindheim in Isenburg-Buedingen ( now Hessen-Darmstadt ). Such details are rare.

Note 181. — Rev. Conrad Keller, in Deutscher Volkskalender, Odessa, 1909, pp. 104-129. Such records could probably be made from the parish registers in the colonies and the lists which the Russian government had of all immigrants who were required to repay to the government moit of the sum of five million rubles expended for colonization. (See Bauer, pp. 12, 105-6). Mr. Jos. Linnenberger states that manuscripts of A. Schneider are still preserved by a relative in Marienthal, Russia; also that Rev. Th. Beratz, pastor in Herzog, Russia, has written a work on the colonies which he contemplates publishing.

names are here chronicled are no longer in the land of the living, and the time is not far distant when all the pioneers of our German-Russian settlements will have passed from the stage.

The question as to whether our settlers know nothing of their ancestors is a difficult one. A few can state from what village in Germany their ancestors came, but it must be admitted that most cannot. These records could undoubtedly be found in the parish registers in Russia and Germany. Some settlements near Odessa which date from the first two decades of the nineteenth century have printed details of all persons who founded the settlements. A like service could probably be performed for the settlers on the Volga, Without doubt an extensive literature, both Russian and German, exists, of which we have no knowledge. While, then, it is true that most of our settlers know little of their ancestors, such records may, and probably do, exist. The sum which the Russian government expended to colonize the region near the Volga was repaid by the colonists, which goes to indicate that the government had a complete list of persons and expenditures.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

MANUSCRIPT.

Linnenberger, Jos., sr. Book (letter-paper size) of over 600 pages. Relates the early history of several colonies on the Karamann; a chapter is devoted to the emigration to America. This book is referred to in this article as I. A smaller book treats in particular of the emigration to Kansas and is cited as II.

Walter, August, relates on 34 pages (copy size) the emigration from Germany to Russia, and from Russia to the United States, with a full list of the settlers in Catharine; but one side of the page is numbered; a and b in this article refer to the front and reverse of the pages.

Karlin, Athanasius. Diary (though begun only February 8, 1889) gives details of his trip to Kansas, of crops from 1876 till 1897 (34 pages, memorandum size).

Schmidt, Jacob. Family book (11 pages, ledger size) begun 1843, relates important family matters till 1904. Some notes of general interest are cited above.

The monastery chronicles of Victoria and Munjor contain some items of interest which are frequently referred to. All these manuscripts are German.

PRINTED.

Schaab, Christopher (school teacher in Pfeifer. Russia), gives in the St. Joseph's Blatt (published in Mt. Angel, Ore.), vol. XXI (1909) n 35 (Aug. 27), n. 41 (Oct. 8). n. 43 (Oct. 22), n. 45 (Nov. 5), n. 48 (Nov. 26), many details of the emigration to Russia and subsequent development, from a manuscript he secured in Semenowka.

A. Z. ( = A. Zottmann: Communication of Dr. Jochner. of Munich, February 10, 1910) in Historisch-politische Blaetter (published in Munich, Bavaria), vol. CXV (1895), pp. 417-430, gives similar details from a manuscript of Anton Schneider of Mariental. written in 1863, and preserved in the seminary at Saratow.

528 Kansas State Historical Society.

Zottmann, Al. Franz X. von Zottmann, Munich, 1904, 8vo, XII, 220 pages. Biography of the second bishop of Tiraspol, in which diocese the Russian colonies lie. The details, pp. 100-105, are taken from the manuscript of A. Schneider.

Katholische Missionen (published by B. Herder, Freiburg, Baden and St. Louis, Mo.), vol. XXXIV (1906), pp. '97-101, 127-130, relates the emigration to Russia, early hardships and especially ecclesiastical conditions and development.

Bauer, Gottlieb, Geschichte der deutschen Ansiedler an der Wolga seit ihrer Einwanderung nach Russland bis zur Einfuehrung der allgemeinen Wehrpflicht (1766-1874) nach geschichtlichen Quellen und muendlichen Ueberlieferungen, Saratow, 1908, IV, 182 pp. depicts emigration to Russia, hardships, political conditions and corruption.

Eastman, Philip, published a sketch of the Ellis county settlements in the Kansas City Star, August 5, 1906. This was reproduced in various papers, e. g., in part in "Herold des Glaubens, " St. Louis, October 17, 1906 (German translation).

Epp, V. Rev. Hyacinth, O. M. Cap. Deutsche Russlaender in Kansas, in " Seraphischer Kinderf reund " (published at Pittsburgh, Pa., by Capuchin Fathers), vol. VI, n. 12 (Dec. 1904), vol. VII, n. 1-7 (Jan. -July, 1905), treats of emigration to Kansas, and especially of ecclesiastical development. A similar series (from the pen of Rev. Severin Scharl, 0. M. Cap.) was published in the "Seraphic Child" (Pittsburgh, Pa., Capuchin Fathers), vol. VI, n. 8-9 (Aug., Sept., 1907), vol. VII, n. 1-4 (Jan. -Apr.,

Ellis County Star, vols. I-V (1876-'80), were kindly lent by J. H. Downing, editor and publisher.

The data in Prentis, Noble L., A History of Kansas (Winfield, Kan., 1899), pp. 147, 148; revised ed. (Topeka, 1904), pp. 147, 148, are exact. In Cutler's History of the State of Kansas (Chicago, 1883), p. 1290, there is some confusion of the villages (Munjor is named Catharine, Catharine is named Schoenchen, Schoenchen is named Munjor).

Fuer Musse-Stunden, vol. II, Cologne, Bachem, 1894 (?), p. 57-60, reproduces an article of the "Koelnische Volkszeitung," which relates conditions in the Russian colonies on the Wolga in the '90's.

Keller, Konrad, Die Deutschen Kolonien in Sued-Russland, Odessa, 1905, XII, 306 pp., designedly excludes the Wolga colonies (p. IV).

Stach, J., Die Deutschen Kolonien in Sued-Russland, Prischib, 1905 (Parti), 216 pp., seems not to treat of the colonies from which the Ellis county settlers came.



Old Fort Hays — James H. Beach (Collections, vol. XI, pp. 571–580)

OLD FORT HAYS.

By James H. Beach, ' Western State Normal School, Hays.

IN the settlement of western Kansas every event was in some way connected with the coming of the railroad. The old Kansas Pacific line, now the Kansas branch of the Union Pacific, was begun at Wyandotte in 1863, and by the close of the Civil War was pushing its slow way across Kansas. Indian affairs during the war had been neglected and population had crowded into the debatable country. It became necessary to protect the construction camps and lines of communication across the plains. For these reasons a line of forts was established, of which Hays was one.

The post was named Fort Fletcher, in honor of former Governor Fletcher, of Missouri. It was situated on Big creek, fifteen miles below the site later chosen. It was established on October 11, 1865, and on November 11, 1866, the name was changed to Hays. Gen. Alexander Hays, for whom the post was named, was an officer of the Civil War who went out with the Sixtythird Pennsylvania infantry and was killed at the battle of the Wilderness. The garrison of the post was composed principally of former Confederate soldiers who had been captured and who had changed their allegiance. This was true of other posts in the West and Northwest.

On June 5, 1867, a disastrous flood occurred, which destroyed the post and caused the death of several soldiers. Mrs. Elizabeth B. Custer gives a stirring account of the flood in her book, "Tenting On the Plains." Evidently a prairie thunderstorm was a new phenomenon to her. She asserts that the water rose thirty-five feet in one night, and that soldiers were rescued from the water while clinging to the tops of tall trees.

General Hancock was in command of the troops on the frontier at that time and at once gave orders for the selection of a new site. Major Gibbs, of the Seventh cavalry, according to these orders went up the creek and chose the new location. It was on high ground to the south of Big creek, and half a mile south of the present town of Hays. No more commanding site could have been chosen in the entire region. Lieutenant Jackson, of the Seventh, was the engineer in charge who laid out the. post. Lieut. Charles H. Brewster, of the same regiment, first hoisted the flag over the new fort on July 4. The fort had been officially established on June 21, and during the month of July a survey of the reservation was made by Lieut. M. R. Brown, chief engineer. Department of the Missouri. The reservation included approximately 7600 acres, the greater part of which lay to the

Note 1.— James Harvey Beach was born on a farm in Doug-las county near Lecompton, on January 26, 1872. His father, James M. Beach, came to the state in 1860. and his mother, Nancy J. Spurlock, came in 1856. The son was educated in the State Normal School and in the State University. He has been principal of various schools, and is now teacher of Kansas and American history in the Western State Normal School at Hays. He married a schoolmate. Miss Mary E. Beach, of Hays.

572 Kansas State Historical Society.

south of Big creek. The creek in those days was well timbered and furnished an abundance of good water for the post. In the days when the sod was unbroken and impervious to water the volume of the streams was much greater than at present.

Things were just beginning. In the early spring the town of Rome was started, a mile west of the present Hays. It flourished greatly for a time, but its prosperity was brief. Hays was surveyed in June. It was nearer to the fort and was favored by the railroad officers. Rome was soon absorbed and nothing now remains to mark its site. Materials for construction had to be brought overland at great expense. Those for the fort came from Fort Leavenworth. In October the railroad reached Hays, and then town and fort had communication with the outside world.

A "Circular Descriptive of Army Posts," issued in 1870, gives a good description of Hays. It was in latitude 38 degrees and 59 minutes north, and longitude 99 degrees west. The elevation is given as 2107 feet. A similar publication issued by the War Department in 1875 gives the elevation as 1893 feet. In other respects the descriptions are almost identical. The buildings of the post at that time consisted of four barracks, four married soldiers' quarters, nine officers' quarters, three quartermaster's storehouses, one quartermaster's office, one commissary office and storehouse, one guardhouse, one hospital, one dead house, one bakery, four quartermaster's stables, one cavalry stable, one quartermaster's workshop. It appears that no substantial increase was ever made in the equipment of the post. From official reports it seems that not more than six companies were ever stationed regularly there. Of course large numbers of soldiers were in camp on the reservation at the times when Indian expeditions were fitted out. When the expeditions were absent the garrison dropped to a single company at times.

The belief in the American desert has died hard. General Sheridan, in his report for 1866, says, in speaking of the country of the plains, that the eastern part is fertile but that of the west is subject to drought and not inviting to settlers. "These plains," he says, "can never be cultivated, never be filled with inhabitants capable of self-government and self-defense, but at best can become one vast pasture ground." He evidently thought that the forts would always be needed to keep order. It is interesting to note that Pike in his report on eastern Kansas sixty years earlier gave an almost identical opinion.

Just as the fort was being estabhshed an epidemic of cholera ^ visited the West. The disease had traveled westward from the Atlantic seaboard. It was brought to the frontier posts by the negro soldiers of the Thirtyeighth infantry, who had come out from St. Louis. It spread terror along the settlements on Big creek, and many exaggerated reports have become current as to its fatality. The following, from the official records of the surgeon general's office, gives the facts: "The first case at Fort Hays was a citizen who had just arrived from Salina. On the same day, July 11, a colored soldier of the garrison was taken sick and died next day. During July, August and September 33 cases and 23 deaths are reported among the colored troops, whose mean strength during the three months was 215 men. September 1 a white soldier was attacked, but recovered; the rest of the white troops, averaging during the three months 34 men, escaped." This report

Note 2.-Cholera at Fort Barker, July, 1867. ( See Kan. Hist. Coll.. vol. 6, p. 85.)

makes no mention of the fatality among the settlers and there is no way at this time of finding out the facts.

It is not the purpose of this paper to rewrite the history of the Indian campaigns on the western border. Their story has been ably told for the Historical Society by participants in the campaigns. It is proper, though^ to note the connection of Hays with these events.

In the spring of 1867, General Hancock took the field with an expedition against the Indians. To Hancock had been assigned the duty of protecting the railroad builders. The expedition stopped at the old fort, where Custer was in command. Henry M. Stanley was along as a correspondent for eastern newspapers. Under date of May 9 he describes the fort and the country. 3 The command moved up the creek and camped near the site which Hancock later chose for the new fort.

Later in the summer it became necessary for the state to cooperate with the War Department in subduing the hostile Indians. The Eighteenth cavalry battalion* of four companies was organized to take the field against them. The career of this regiment began at Harker on July 15 and extended over a wide area of the western counties. Two companies (B and C) of the battalion took the field from Hays on August 12 and fought a severe battle on Prairie Dog creek on August 21.5 jn all probability these operations prevented a general uprising of the Indians such as occurred the next summer.

In the summer of 1868 the uprising came. From Texas to Nebraska and from central Kansas to the mountains there were murders and outrages of the most atrocious kind. The forces of the War Department were inadequate to meet the emergency, and, at the request of General Sheridan, Governor Crawford called a full regiment of cavalry to assist the regular army. The Nineteenth cavalry was organized at once, and took the field with Custer's command to subdue the savages. ^ General Sheridan himself came west and spent the summer and autumn of 1868 with Hays as his headquarters.^ Two troops (D and G) of the Nineteenth were sent by rail ta

Note 3. —Henry M. Stanley, " My Early Travels and Adventures in America and Asia," London, 1895, vol. 1. p. 83.

Note 4.— Kan. Hist. Coll.. vol. 6, p. 35.

Note 5.— This battle is recorded in Kan. Hist. Coll., vol. 9, p. 443, by Geo. B. Jenness, under the title "The Battle of Beaver Creek."

Note 6.— "Nineteenth Kansas Cavalry and the Conquest of the Plains Indians," by James A.. Hadley. in Kan. Hist. Coll., vol. 10. p. 428.

Note?.— "Concurrent Resolution No. 12.

"Resolved, By the House of Representatives, the Senate concurring. That the thanks of the people of Kansas are hereby tendered to Generals Sheridan and Custer, to Colonel Forsyth, and to the officers and soldiers of their commands, for the efficient manner in which they are prosecuting the war against the Indians on the plains.

"Resolved, That we have no sympathy with the peace commissioners and eastern philanthropists, who seek to cast odium upon the names of the gallant commanders above mentioned by reporting that the Indians attacked in the late fight were friendly to the United States.

"Resolved, That the clerk of this house is hereby instructed to transmit a copy of these resolutions to our senators and representatives in Congress, and to Generals Sheridan and Custer, and Colonel Forsyth.

"Adopted by the House January 19, 1869. Heney C. Olney, Chief Clerk."

Concurred in by the Senate January 22, 1869. ( Records of the Secretary of State, Topeka. )

"Headquarters Military Division of the Missouri. "Hon. W. H. Smallwood, "Chicago, III., November 9, 1871.

"Secretary of State, Kansas: "Dear Sir— Please accept my sincere thanks for your kindness in furnishing Hie a copy of the joint resolution of thanks passed by the Legislature of Kansas in the winter of 1868-'69. "Very truly yours. P. H. Sheridan, Lt. General."

(Archives department, Kansas State Historical Society.)

574 Kansas State Histoncal Society.

Hays in November, from which place they went south and later joined the rest of the regiment in the campaign on the Washita. This was the last desperate attempt of the Indian to resist the settlement of the plains by the white man. That it was a serious matter is proved by the statement of Governor Harvey in his message of January, 1869, that from 80 to 100 settlers of Kansas had been killed within the previous year. Popular estimates placed the number much higher.

At the close of the winter campaign of 1868-'69the Nineteenth and Custer's Seventh returned to Hays, where the Nineteenth was mustered out. On the ISth of April the regiment received its final discharge and its heroic record was closed. Custer's regiment went into camp on the reservation just below the fort and spent the summer there. A large detachment of Indian prisoners had been brought up from the Indian Territory, and they were kept in a prison stockade, guarded by the Seventh, until autumn. The experiences of the summer furnished the material for a large part of Mrs. Custer's book, "Following the Guidon."

In the correspondence of this summer there is frequent mention of an independent detachment of Kansas militia recruited at Hays. It was under the command of John S. Park, and is called the Sharp's Creek Detachment. The records of the adjutant general's office show that the company was ordered into active service on August 24, and that it was relieved from service by Governor Crawford on December 1.^ No record of its service is preserved. It appears that Governor Crawford made a visit to Hays to look after this and, perhaps, other matters. An order from General Smith at Harker on September 10 directs the assignment of an escort to the governor of Kansas to visit Hays. Those were indeed strenuous days when the governor of Kansas had to have an escort to visit a town in the state.

In these Indian days Col. Geo. A. Forsyth was a frequent caller at the fort as he passed back and forth on his expeditions. In September, 1868, he recruited his famous band of scouts whose fight at the Arickaree placed Forsyth in the ranks of the great Indian fighters. The command stopped at Hays on the way to the West. General Sheridan was in Hays, and reported the result of the fight to Governor Crawford on September 24. To a civilian the remarkable thing about the telegram is the soldierly brevity and directness with which he tells the story. There was no time then for wasting words in hero worship. He gives the briefest details, adding only, ■"The fight was a very close and severe one."

In the spring of 1870 another raid was threatened and Custer was back *t Hays. His forces were scouting for hostile Indians to the west and northwest. On May 31 he sent a despatch to Colonel Tilford to notify the detachments on the Republican, the Solomon and the Saline to be on the alert, and says he has sent Reno with four troops to scout the country between Wallace and the Platte. The reports of the time are full of stories of outrages, of expected attacks, and of excitement in the scattered settlements along the river valleys. The settlement of western Kansas was not altogether a holiday picnic.

The West was to have one more Indian raid. It came in the autumn of

lSfi8^n°J/f!ir^"%^° ^- B. Hutchinson. August"28. 1868. of J. S. Park. September 4 and 6, cc^n«nv.^A^? I ^°^«T?'- Crawford. October 13, 1868. relate to raising and service of this company, and may be found m the Archives department of the Historical Society.

1878, when the Northern Cheyenne ^ Indians from the territory left their reservations and started north. Many depredations were committed, and after the record of 1868-'69 it is small cause for wonder that settlers were alarmed. The following telegram from Hays to Governor Anthony on October 2 illustrates the state of feeling: "Reliable information has just been received that eighteen white men were killed by Indians this morning near Buffalo. Plese send immediately 100 guns, " etc. Then follows a great number of petitions for arms, requests for aid, and wild rumors of killings. A letter from D. Gochenaur, county superintendent of public instruction for Ellis county, to the adjutant general of Kansas, on February 14, 1879, gives a list of seventeen persons killed by the Cheyennes in his vicinity, and is a seemingly reliable account. He evidently refers to the same massacre mentioned in the telegram given above. The garrison at the fort was very small at that time, because the greater number of the troops were away on the plains. There was abundant ground for alarm, but as a matter of fact the Indians kept well out in the open country, and there is no evidence that any of them came within the limits of Ellis county.

After the campaign of 1869 military officers began to consider the danger from Indians as much less to be feared. General Pope was in command of the Department of the Missouri in 1870 and recommended that Harker, Dodge and Lyon should be consolidated at Hays. He thought the Indians could no longer be dangerous except in small bands of marauders. He argued at length that the small posts were unnecessarily expensive, and that the equipment of all of them was temporary in its character. He thought the Indians could move only in the summer, when the grass furnished forage for their ponies, and that scouting parties of soldiers sent out from central posts would be sufficient to overawe them. In 1871 he repeated his recommendation for consolidation, but did not mention Hays as desirable for the central post. In 1872 he urged the abandonment of Hays and Wallace. Harker was abandoned that year. This ended any rational hope that Hays would ever become a post of importance. From that time Pope urged the abandonment of all the small posts, including Hays. In 1882 General Sherman recommended the abandonment of the post. It has been claimed that General Sheridan recommended the consolidation of Kansas posts into Leavenworth and Hays, but a careful reading of all his official reports shows that he expressed no such opinion. It is of course natural that every post should be considered locally the most important one in the possession of the nation, but there is no evidence that army officers of high rank considered Hays as different from other temporary outposts to guard the frontier until conditions had become settled.

Fort Hays was abandoned in November, 1889, and the reservation was turned over to the Interior Department. When it became apparent that the post was lost to the state, an agitation was started at once to secure the reservation for a soldiers' home. The legislature of 1889, by resolution, asked Congress for a cession of the lands at Dodge and Hays for this purpose. The same legislature appropriated money for the establishment of homes at both places, but provided that none of the money should become

Note 9.— U. S. Comm'r of Indian Affairs, Ann. Rept., 1878, p. XXII; Kan. Hist. Coll., vol. 9, p. 577; "Report of commission appointed in pursuance of the provisions of Senate joint resolution No. 1, relating to losses sustained by citizens of Kansas by the invasion of Indians during the year 1878."

576 Kansas State Historical Society.

available until the state had secured title to the lands. Citizens of Dodge bought the remainder of the reservation there and gave it to the state, and the Soldiers' Home became a Dodge institution.

In 1895 the Kansas legislature again asked Congress for the land. This time it was proposed to make it an experiment station, a public park and a site for a branch normal school. Congress failed to act, and numberless schemes were proposed for the disposition of the reservation. Finally, by act of March 28, 1900, the land was given to the state so long as it should be used for a branch of the State Normal School, an experiment station of the State Agricultural College, and a public park. By joint resolution of February 7, 1901, the legislature accepted the land on behalf of the state, and by act of February 26 of the same year the two institutions were created. The history of old Fort Hays was at an end. The scientist and the student came to take the place of the Indian, the soldier and the cowboy. They had all become only a memory, and only the dilapidated buildings of the fort remained to call attention to their story.

In the summer of 1899 the report was spread that the reservation was open to homestead entry. A small army of squatters appeared and a long, complicated contest ensued. This was finally decided against the squatters after the act of Congress had granted the land to the state. The account of the contest forms no part of the subject matter of this paper, but it is interesting to note in passing that the Interior Department decided that the reservation was in fact open to homestead entry for a short time during the summer of 1899. If the claimants had proceeded legally in their course the state could never have secured title to the land.

The land grant in Ellis county to the Union Pacific Railway was made in 1866. The road, however, did not secure title to the land until after the line had been built and the plats of the surveys had been filed according to law. i" The executive order setting apart the land of the Fort Hays reservation for military use was made on August 28, 1868, and the railroad plats were not filed until a later date. The railroad company therefore never had any title to the lands of the reservation.

When the state came into possession of the fort property the buildings had been unoccupied for twelve years and were of little value. They were constructed of flimsy material, and after more than thirty years the climate

Note 10.— The grant for the Union Pacific railroad was made by acts of Congress of July 1, 1862, and July 2. 1864, of every odd-numbered section of public land within twenty miles on either side of the road not otherwise disposed of. This grant in Kansas was to the Leavenworth, Pawnee & Western railroad from Kansas City to Fort Riley, and thence in a northwesterly direction to whera the Union Pacific road of Nebraska should cross the one-hundredth meridian. The Kansas road, having failed to comply with these acts, secured a change in the route beyond Fort Kiley under act of July 3, 1866. The map of the new route, up the valley of the Smoky Hill and to Denver was filed in the United States land office prior to July 14, 1866. As these acts reserved from the lands granted railroads such as had already been appropriated by the government for other purposes, the post would naturally have the first right of selection.

John A. Anderson, in May, 1880, in a speech before Congress, shows how the road and the purchasers of land from it evaded taxation under the provisions of section 21, act of 1864. which provided that the company should not receive a patent for the land until it had first paid into the „ K.u J ^f ^ treasury the fees for surveying, etc. The company sold the lands on time, and wnen the deferred payments were all in. presented the required fees to the treasury and received ine patent. In the meantime no taxes could be collected by the state or county, the land being 81111 in the name of the government. (See speech of John A. Anderson, May 5. 1880: "Pacific a.ullr'.tL • ".u ""justly exempted from state taxation.") The late William A. Harris made this UnH^V^Tlu J r ^ °-^ representatives January 31, 1895, in a discussion relative to these same

for,r«fo„f fwu. '"Stance, would sell land on ten years' payment, and would never apply r,lir»?ilJ^ f " the last payment was made and the party demanded his deed; or at least no apthp t«vI!o;,°'" ^ J^u ^ff, ■"^'^^ except at convenient intervals, and tfie purchasers then became nav bIMK^^ t The settlers on the alternate sections have been required for years and years to acre for fLvt^i^^ i" ^1 development of that new country, " and they paid $2.50 instead of $1.25 an acre lor their land. (See. also. Report of Samuel J. Crawford as State Agent, 1886, pages 8 to 11.)

of western Kansas had left nothing of permanent good. The only buildings of the post now remaining in their original positions are the commander's house, occupied until recently by the principal of the Normal School, a small octagonal stockade building known locally as the "arsenal," and the stone guardhouse. All the others have been razed or moved away. The hospital building has been moved to the new site of the school, and is doing duty as a dining hall. Where once the army surgeon cared for sick and wounded soldiers is now heard the clatter of dishes and the gay talk of students, i^

Many noted soldiers served at Hays for at least a short time. General Sheridan dates his report of 1868 from "The Field near Fort Hays." Corbin. Cutler, Hancock, Miles, Forsyth, Lawton, Wheaton, Hazen, Sturgis, and others more or less famous, were all at the fort in some capacity or another in the old Indian fighting days. The following list of commanders is taken from the reports of the adjutant general and other authentic sources. It is not complete, because some of the commanders served only a short time and their names do not appear in the reports:

1867, Col. Geo. A. Custer, Seventh cavalry.

1867, Capt. Henry C. Corbin, Thirtyeighth infantry.

1868, Maj. John E. Yard, Tenth cavalry.

1869, Lieut. Col. A. D. Nelson, Fifth infantry. 1869, Col. Nelson A. Miles, Fifth infantry. 1869-'70, Lieut. Col. George Gibson, Fifth infantry. 1871, Capt. Samuel Ovenshine, Fifth infantry.

1871, Col. Wm. B. Hazen, Sixth infantry.

1872, Col. Samuel D. Sturgis, Seventh cavalry. 1872-'73, Col. DeL. Floyd-Jones, Third infantry. 1874, Col. James Oakes, Sixth cavalry.

1874, Maj. Charles E. Compton, Sixth cavalry.

1875, Lieut. Col. E. A. Carr, Fifth cavalry.

1876, Lieut. Richard Vance, Nineteenth infantry.

1877, Capt. D. M. Vance, Sixteenth infantry.

1878, Lieut. Col. R. I. Dodge, Twenty-third infantry.

1880, Col. R. S. Mackenzie, Fourth cavalry.

1881, Lieut. Col. Z. R. Bliss, Nineteenth infantry.

1882, Lieut: Col. N. A. M. Dudley, Ninth cavalry. 1883-'84, Lieut. Col. C. R. Layton, Twentieth infantry. 1885, Lieut. Col. J. J. Coppinger, Eighteenth infantry. 1887-'88, Col. J. E. Yard, Eighteenth infantry.

1889, Maj. G. K. Brady, Eighteenth infantry.

Note 11. — By legislative act of February 26. 1901, the Western State Normal School was created as a part of the normal school system of Kansas. No action was taken toward starting the school that year because of the controversy over the title to the land. This was settled so that the school could beg-in work in the summer of 1902. On June 23 the formal opening occurred, with William S. Picken and Anna Keller as teachers. Thirty-four students were present.

Work was begun in the old fort hospital building, which served its purpose until the autumn of 1904, when the school moved into a building provided by the legislature of 1903. The present buildings have cost $75,000. and $30,000 more is to be spent the coming summer for an electric light, heating aftd water plant.

The first course of study provided for two years' work. This was lengthened to three years in 1905, and to four years in 1908.

In 1907 a Model District School was established especially for the training of teachers who are to work in the rural districts. A building is now being erected for its use on the reservation.

The first legislature gave $12,000 for the support of the school for the biennium 1901-'03. The appropriation for 1910-'ll is $98,000. The institution has in addition the rentals from the reservation.

The total number of students in attendance for the year 1902-'03 was 121. For the year 1908-'09 it was 402.

There are at present fourteen teachers.

578 Kansas State Histoncal Society.

No history of a western army post would be complete without some account of the conditions of society in the towns that grew up around them. These towns were all alike, in that they consisted of a collection of people coming from the ends of the earth. They were attracted by the lure of gain, the desire for plunder, the hope of health, the wish to bury their past, or merely that gregarious instinct that leads men to flock into crowds where some excitement is to be had. In such a community ordinary restraint is laid aside and shame asserts no power over the play of primitive passion. The old elemental desires of men for contest, for blood and lust assert themselves. Orgies that have hidden under the veneer of civilization for ages come forth in such towns into the blazing light of day. All this exists along with the highest regard for the rights of others. It is simply individualism run riot. The lives and property of respectable citizens are no safer to-day under modern conditions than they were then. Every one did what seemed right in his own eyes without let or hindrance, but was forced to respect the same right in others. The man of conventional life went on his way unmolested. The adventurer, the gambler, the "gun fighter" and the prostitute lived in their own world, and their orgies of gambling, drunkenness, lust and murder excited neither note nor comment.

Mrs. Custer, in her book, "Following the Guidon," describes the Hays of those days. Her account is the mere statement of what the old-timers tell in detail. She says, beginning on page 153: "The town of Hays City was a typical western place.... There was hardly a building in it worthy of the name except the station house. A considerable part of the place was built of rude frames covered with canvas; the shanties were made up of slabs, bits of driftwood and logs, and sometimes the roof was covered with tin that had once been fruit or vegetable cans, now flattened out.... The carousing and lawlessness of Hays City were incessant. Pistol shots were heard so often that it seemed a perpetual Fourth of July.... The aim of a border ruffian is so accurate that a shot was pretty certain to mean a death, or at least a serious wound, for some one.... Our men knew so much of the worthlessness of these outlaw lives that it was difficult to arouse pity in them for either a man's or a woman's death in the border towns.... There was enough desperate history in that little town in one summer to make a whole library of dime novels.... Our soldiers were unfortunately in many an affray with the citizens."

Much has been written of "Boot Hill" in Hays. Stories vary as to the number of persons meeting violent deaths who were buried on that hill. It was the cemetery in which all the dead of the town were buried until about 1879. The West in those days was filled with the young and the vigorous. There were no aged and but few women and children. For these reasons the number of natural deaths during the first ten years was exceedingly small. At a conservative estimate probably seventy-five in all were buried on the hill, and the greater number of these died with their "boots on." Mrs. Custer says: "It was in Hays City that the graveyard was begun with the interments of men who had died violent deaths. There were thirtysix of their graves before we left. The citizens seemed to think no death was worthy of mention unless it was of some one who had died with his boots on." She left in October, 1869.

During this same summer Wild Bill lived in Hays, and in the intervals of

his work as a scout acted as marshal of the town.^^ It has been reported that he was sheriff of the county, but this comes probably from the fact that he was the defeated candidate in 1869. The old settlers give him the reputation of being quiet and inoffensive in his manners, but cool and utterly fearless. He helped to populate Boot Hill, but perhaps in most cases his acts were justifiable. Stories do not agree as to his reasons for leaving the town. Mrs. Custer is not very explicit, but her account probably comes as near to being authentic as any other. She says: "Some of our men, having received, as they considered, a deadly insult to their company, planned to assassinate the renowned scout." Then follows an account of a saloon fight in which the leader of the soldiers was killed. She continues: "The troopers were driven out of town, but not without loud threats of vengeance. There was no question among the citizens but that every threat would be carried out, and it was decided that if Wild Bill hoped for his life he must flee. It was impossible for General Custer to interfere in such a contest." Local tradition adds some details to this account, but all agree that Bill had pressing business elsewhere. Buffalo Bill was a citizen of Rome'^ in the summer of 1867. His name appears on a petition forwarded to Governor Crawford asking for the appointment of a certain J. G. Duncan as justice of the peace. When Rome fell he came over to Hays. He does not figure ex" tensively in the accounts of the time. His principal business was killing buffalo for the camps of the railroad contractors and for the commissary of the fort.

During the history of the fort there were three noted clashes between negro soldiers and the citizens. The first of these occurred in January, 1869. A squad of riotous soldiers killed a white man named John Hays. The next day three soldiers were arrested at the fort and lodged in jail. On the following night they were taken from jail and hanged to a railroad trestle just west of the station. Colonel Nelson was in command at the time and Governor Harvey wrote to him to make inquiry as to the truth of the report that the town had been placed under martial law. The reply is worth quoting, because of the light it throws on conditions in a border town. Colonel Nelson says: "Fort Hays has been the depot of supplies for General Sheridan's forces in the field, and consequently it sometimes happens that three or four hundred wagon masters, teamsters, etc., are congregated here at one time. While here numbers of these men have been in the habit of visiting Hays City after nightfall, and what with the use of whisky and their revolvers the town was rendered very uncomfortable for the better class of citizens. It was upon the representation of such citizens that I sent out a patrol a few nights since to stop the dangerous rowdyism going on. Nearly fifty arrests were made, and of that number there may have been five or six citizens.... I presume also you have been informed that three colored soldiers were very recently taken out of the jail at Hays City at midnight and hung by the inhabitants of that town...,"

Another noted affair occurred in the fall of 1869. At that time one of

Note 12.-James B. Hickok, in W. E. Webb's Buffalo Land, p. 145.

Note 13.— Rome was founded by a Mr. Rose, a grading contractor on the Union Pacific near Fort Hays, and William F. Cody, it is supposed, in the spring of 1867. It was situated on the grade south of Big creek, and a little west of Hays City, its successful rival, which was located in June of the same year by Dr. W. E. Webb, W. J. Wells and Judge Knight, of St. Louis.— Cutler's History of Kansas, p. 1291; Last of the Great Scouts, by Mrs. Helen Cody Wetmore, p. 146.

580 Kansas State Historical Society.

the most notorious resorts was kept by the desperado Jim Curry and a woman named Ida May. Some colored troopers came to the place and were denied admission. They were soon in a quarrel with Curry and a general fight ensued. A number of soldiers were killed— six, according to local memory. It does not appear that any citizens were killed. This seems strange, because the negroes were armed and were in force. Perhaps no one cared to keep the names or histories of the citizens killed. The fight occurred late in the afternoon. Soon after nightfall a mob collected that drove out of town every negro citizen of the place. None were allowed to retum'except a harmless old man named White and his wife. He came out of hiding and remained in town many years, until he was killed by falling off the station platform and being run over by the cars. Since that time no negro family has ever ventured to make Hays a place of residence. An occasional straggler has worked a few days in town, but the history of the place has appealed too strongly to his imagination for him to remain.

Something should be said further of the Jim Curry mentioned above. He was a ruffian of the type occasionally developed on the frontier. He had none of the redeeming qualities of chivalry and generosity that sometimes accompany a violent life. He was simply a cutthroat, one of "the devil's own." As life became more decent he was compelled to seek other fields.

In marked contrast to Curry was Tommy Drum, who kept the most noted saloon that ever ministered to the thirst of the town. He began business very early in the history of the town, and ended with the coming of the prohibitory law. He was everybody's friend, and no one who came to him for help went away unrelieved. While his saloon was the scene of many disorderly brawls, he was a gentleman in every respect. In another business and amid other surroundings he would have been an ornament to any community. When the prohibitory law went into effect at midnight of Decemberi.31, 1880, he gave away all of his remaining stock of liquors, and never once attempted to violate the law. A few years later he left Hays, and his going caused universal regret. It has been reported that he died on a small fruit farm in Indiana or Illinois.

By the latter '70's life on the border became more settled. With the coming of the farmer and the disappearance of the Indian, conditions were changed. Citizens ceased being proud of the reputation of their town, and made'an effort to induce settlers to come. The long lines of saloons and dance halls that had so long been the principal feature of Main street were closed, or were at least compelled to become outwardly respectable. Hays had become a new town. The old order had passed away.

There was to be one more act of bloodshed before the history of the fort was closed. On January 13, 1882, a number of drunken negro soldiers resisted arrest, and in the affair one of them was shot so that he died soon after. On the following night a company of the soldiers came over from the fort fully armed to kill the constable. They were in the mood to shoot up the town, when Capt. Lloyd Wheaton appeared on the scene. His prompt action averted bloodshed, and the negroes were marched back to the fort as prisoners.

Some years after the abandonment of the fort the War Department took steps to have the bodies of the soldiers buried in the post cemetery removed. A protest went up at once from Hays because of the fear that another outbreak of cholera would result. The State Board of Health interposed, and

Histoncal Sketch of Kansas City, Mo. 581

the threatened action was prevented for a time. This occurred more than once. Finally the War Department convinced the state board that no danger was threatened, and, after many delays, in December, 1905, the work was done. On the 20th of that month the shipment was made, and the remains rein terred. in the Fort Leavenworth cemetery. This was positively the last act in the government ownership of the post. The number of bodies removed is reported by the doctor in charge to have been 157. This by no means represents the total number buried in the cemetery, for nearly all the civilians and many of the soldiers had been removed by friends. Possibly 200 would be a fair estimate of the number buried in the cemetery. This number includes many who had been removed from Harker and other places.

A pathetic interest attaches to the lone grave on the hill. One of the first victims of the cholera was a Mrs. Polly, the wife of the hospital steward. When she knew that she must die it was her request that she should not be buried in the cemetery but out on the hill southwest of the fort, where she might overlook its activities. Her request was granted, and she still sleeps on the lone hill keeping ward over the reservation. When the other bodies were removed the doctor in charge asked permission to take hers too. The department refused to grant it because none but those buried in mihtary cemeteries were included in the order. It was better so. Who knows whether her spirit, in company with those of other brave men and women, still broods over the scenes of those stirring days?

In a few years the memories of the old post will have passed away and it will live only in tradition. It represented an epoch in the history of the West that is as much a part of the dead past as the era of Spanish colonization. Events have moved rapidly, and our children will learn the history of those days in the same way that they learn the history of the Crusades— from books.



Appendix: Ellis County in the Society's Newspaper Directory (Transactions, vols. I–II, 1875–1881)

ELLIS COUNTY.

Hays City Sentinel, F. C. Montgomery, editor, Plays City. Ellis County Star, J. H. Downing, editor, Hays City.

The Ellis Weekly Headlight, Chas. E. Griffith, editor and proprietor, Ellis.

