§ 12. And we shall, perhaps,first observe how much of illumination is thus cast upon a large and perplexing class of telepathic dreams, those, namely, in which B is made aware of A's state, not as if by an entry of A's phantom into his bedchamber, but as if by an excursion of his own into the room where A is actually dying.

Dreams, as Mr. Gurney has amply explained, form only a very subsidiary part of the evidential case which we put forward. Taken alone,

1 In the present state of the subject, I hold that a writer avowing such beHef is bound to show cause for his apparent credulity; and this I shall hope to do on the earliest practicable occasion.

they could hardly prove telepathy; rather they are themselves shown to be telepathic by the analogies of the more cogent evidence drawn from waking hours. But though evidentially a minor branch of our subject, they are, nevertheless, among th.e most instructive of psychical phenomena. They show us phantasms in the making; they initiate us into sub-conscious processes of which waking hallucinations are, as it were, the final output or manufactured result.

But when we come to scrutinize the details of veridical dreams we. find that amongst many where fantastic elements are commingled with the true, as though a central conception were embodying itself in the imagery which it found readiest to hand, there are some dreams where the scene seems to be described without such admixture, and much as it might have appeared to a real spectator.

Dr. A. K. Young's dream (case 142) is closely analogous to a case of so-called " travelling clairvoyance." Locality, personages, and actions seem to have been completely realised, and the violent blows delivered by Dr. Young as he lay asleep in bed are the precise parallel of the shivering, sweating, &c., frequently recorded of clairvoyants who are witnessing distant scenes of heat or cold. Noteworthy in the same sense is Mrs. Green's dream (case 138), where it seems as though the link of kinship, though without personal acquaintance, had directed the sleeper's clairvoyant vision to the scene of sudden death. In these cases it seems to me that to talk of the drowning women as the agents who afiected Mrs. Green, the wounded tenant as the agent who afiected Dr. A. K. Young, tends to obscure the real nature of the occurrence; the deeper view being that the so-called percipient was in fact the agent or active personage, too; and that the concurrent crisis of danger or death did but determine the direction, or the remembrance, of activities which the sleeper's unconscious self was exercising in the abeyance of waking function.

And if we follow up this hint, we shall note that in most cases where even a waking percipient is conscious of a distant scene, the sensation is accompanied by something like a momentary abstractedness, or even actual somnolence.' In Canon Warburton's case (No. 108) the sudden perception of a distant crisis, apparently occurring at that moment, wakes the sleeper from his doze And if the various expressions used by the percipients of these clairvoyantly witnessed scenes, whether we have classed them as awake or asleep at the time, be compared together, we shall find that they agree in describing the experience as something unlike either dreampresence or waking presence in the suddenly-revealed locality, as giving a

1 See, for instance, eases 24, 63, 109.

sense of a translation of the centre of consciousness, of a psychical excursion into a definite region of space.

Such expressions need imply nothing more than the manner in which this sudden extension of the psychical purview represents itself in the forms of ordinary thought. But they may aid in putting us on the track of a question which is, in my view, of profound importance. Is there evidence of any percipience on the part of others which corresponds to the clairvoyant's own sense of presence and action in the scene which is common to his mind and theirs? Readers of Chap. XVII. will have perceived that there is such evidence; and although the cases there given are not numerous, there are reasons (as I hope presently to show) why but a very small fraction of such experiences is ever likely to come to our knowledge.

Meantime, we must observe that in these reciprocal cases the condition and sensations of the percipient, who thus becomes an agent also — the clairvoyant who is himself discerned as a phantom in the scene where he conceives himself to be — are precisely similar to the condition and sensations of the clairvoyant whose vision affects no second person. Our agent, too, is in a fit of abstraction, or dreaming, or plunged in stupor as death draws nigh, when he produces on others the impression correlative to the impression which is being produced on himself.

§ 13. Correspondently with clairvoyant perception there may he phantasmogenetic efficacy: — this, as it seems to me, is a sound induction from our recorded cases, and an induction which, if thoroughly grasped, will modify profoundly our comprehension and classification of the evidence before us. For, speaking broadly, our "phantasms of the living" will consequently tend to arrange themselves into two main classes, classes which are themselves linked in more ways than one; namely, the class in which the phantasm may be considered as the emergence or externalisation, in and by the percipient's mind, of an impression transmitted from a distant agent, and the class in which the phantasm may be considered as corresponding to the conception in the mind of a clairvoyant percipient, — who is thus also an agent, — of his own presence and action in a scene which he shares with the persons who are corporeally present therein.

§ 14. And thus we have reached a point at which what seemed the unique difficulty involved in collective hallucinations is not indeed explained, but is seen as merely a special case which we can subsume under a higher generalisation. What I mean is this; that if the appearance, say, of Mr. Newnham to Mrs. Newnham (case 35) or of Mrs. Smith to her friend (case 306) is held proximately to depend on their own perception of their VOL. II. u

own presence in the scene where their phantasm is observed, it becomes then a subsidiary question whether only one, or some, or the whole group of the persons of whose consciousness that scene forms a part, perceive such phantasm or no. And this subsidiary question, again, resolves itself into a special case of the larger question which meets us throughout the whole inquiry, — the question as to the causes of varying idiosyncratic receptiveness of phantasmal impressions. There will be no need to assume, as Mr. Gumey is inclined to do, a direct infection of hallucination from one primary percipient to neighbouring minds. Still less shall we need to explain such cases as Nos. 242 and 355 by the strange hypothesis that an idea, partly or altogether latent and undeveloped in the mind of the primary percipient, did nevertheless propagate itself from thence and emerge into full externalisation for a person to whom the distant agent was wholly unknown. For we shall be able to conceive it as possible that all the persons in the room may be equally favourably situated for the discernment of that phantasmal correlate which represents or accompanies, in some way unknown to us, the clairvoyant percipience of the distant and dying man.

§ 15. At the cost of some cumbrousness of language, I have been careful to express my hypothesis in exclusively psychical — as opposed to physical — terms. I desire that the reader should clearly distinguish it from any view which implies a material or objective presence, of however tenuous a kind. I shall not, indeed, commit myself to the assertion that any such presence is impossible; or that there may not be some intermediate view between what seems to me the gross conception of a molecular metaorganism, already alluded to, and the purely psychical agency which is all that I postulate here. The line between the "material" and the " immaterial," as these words are commonly used, means little more than the line between the phenomena which our senses or our instruments can detect or register, and the phenomena which they can not. And the whole problem of the relation of the psychical to the physical — of thought and will to space and matter — is forced upon our attention with startling vividness from the very beginning of this inquiry. At every step we find that familiar speculative difficulties assume a new reality; and that dilemmas which the metaphysician can evade, and the physicist ignore, present to the psychical researcher an imperative choice of one or the other horn.

In the present discussion, however, such difficulties can still be postponed. I shall confine myself to pointing out that since some even of the phantasms which are perceived by more than one person escape the perception of one or more of the bystanders, they cannot be objective in

any ordinary sense. And while they are regarded as entirely psychical incidents, the differentia of the view here advanced is still, I think, sufficiently plain. I treat the respective hallucinations of each member of the affected group as each and all directly generated by a conception in a distant mind — a conception which presents itself to that mind as though its centre of activity were translated to the scene where the group are sitting, and which presents itself to each member of that group as though their hallucinations did not come to them incoherently or independently, but were diffused from a " radiant point," or phantasmogenetic focus, corresponding with that region of space where the distant agent conceives himself to be exercising his supernormal perception.

§46. This view is at any rate definite enough to suggest certain experiments which might test its probability in comparison with the view which assumes one primary percipient and a transference of hallucination, as though by a second telepathic process, from that primary percipient to his neighbours in space.

The most important experiment would be one which there is perhaps small chance of making; for it depends on the coolness and preparedness of several persons collectively witnessing a veridical hallucination. It might, for instance, have been carried out by Mrs. Elgee and Miss D. in the case (No. 348) which Mr. Gumey cites as one where "the flashing of the hallucination from one of the percipients to the other seems specially well illustrated, since the figure which appeared was one which the second percipient had never seen in the flesh." In that case we have no independent account from Miss D., and the details are insufficient to show the relation between the hallucinations of the two persons. But let us assume, for the sake of argument, that a similar incident occurs to persons prepared to analyse it; that A's phantom appears to B, who knows him, and also to 0, who is in the room with B, but never saw A.

I will arrange an account of the imaginary scene in two ways; flrst, so as to illustrate Mr. Gurney's " flashing of the hallucination from one of the percipients to the other "; and, secondly, so as to illustrate my own view of the diffusion of the hallucination to both minds similarly, in a manner conditioned by the agent's conception of himself as present in a scene in which the two percipients are sitting.

(1) B sees the figure first, and thus develops the hallucinatory figure of

A, clothing it with the dress in which he has most frequently seen A. C

discerns the figure after B has done so, and either more vaguely or in the same

garb in which B discerns it, or with peculiarities which may be traced to

O's own mind; at any rate, not inti^oducing true points of resemblance to A, which have not been observed by B. Moreover, if B's hallucination represents A as facing him, C's hallucination takes a similar attitude, although C may be so placed with reference to the figure that, had it been A in proprid persond, G would have seen, not A's full face, but his profile or back. There is no distinct agreement between B and 0 as to the point of space which the phantom seemed to occupy, or as to its successive movements, or the time and mode of its disappearance. Such details as these, if occurring in the manner here suggested, would favour the supposition that C's hallucination was not the result of any direct transfer from A, but rather of a transfer from B of the hallucination to which B's mind had given shape.

(2) 'Now let us suppose that these little incidents occur in just the opposite manner. C perceives the phantom before B does, and perceives it with characteristic details of garb and appearance, some of which B fails to note. Moreover, when B and C are so placed that 0 would see the phantom's back, and B the phantom's face, were the phantom a real person in the place where B sees it, then they do see difierent aspects of the phantom accordingly. And they agree as to every detail of its garb, so far as observed, and as to its apparent position in space, its movements, and the mode of its disappearance. If the details of the hallucination were found to follow this type, there would seem to be strong reason for supposing that the impression on C 's mind was not (so to say) reflected from B's, but that both alike corresponded to a more or less detailed, definite, and persistent conception on A's own part of his presence and action in the scene where his friend and the stranger were sitting. In that case the manner or distinctness with which the phantom was discerned by B and C respectively would depend on their relative power of supernormal percipience, — their psychical permeability, — though it will still be presumable that B's previous rapport with A, which has probably determined the direction which A's clairvoyant perception has taken, may also predispose or enable B to discern the phantom on some occasions when C cannot do so. On the other hand, if C's power of supernormal percipience greatly exceed B's, 0 may discern the phantom, though of a stranger, when B fails to discern it, though of a friend, as in cases 242 and 355, above mentioned.

§ 17. The occasions on which such observations as these are possible are likely to be almost as rare as ecliiDses. But, in the meantime, we may, at any rate, practise (so to say) with smoked glass. We have now the means of actually producing hallucinations at will in certain subjects by hypnotic suggestion, and a careful arrargement of conditions may throw

light on the modes of communicability of hallucination from one mind to another.

I will take first the simplest case, and will suppose that I am communicating a hallucination to several hypnotised subjects by direct suggestion. I say to the first: " There is a playbill on the wall; write down the name of the play advertised, but do not show it to anyone." He sees the imaginary playbill at my suggestion, and his own mind supplies the title of the play — say Hamlet. I simultaneously, or just afterwards, make the same suggestion to other subjects. Now if all of them see Hamlet advertised, the special form in which the first subject shaped his hallucination has probably influenced the rest. Even if they see Othello, Macbeth, &c., there has perhaps been a communication of the idea of Shakespeare. But if they see Our Boys, The Private Secretary, &c., then the specific form which the first subject's hallucination assumed has not exercised a shaping power over the impulses to hallucination which I have communicated to the other subjects.

Again, take a case of deferred hallucination, as when Professor Beaunis of Nancy told Mdlle. A., in the hypnotic trance, that she would see him call on her on January 1st at 10 a.m. Let a similar anticipatory idea be again impressed on Mdlle. A, and let it be provided that other persons, known to be susceptible, shall be in Mdlle. A's company when the hallucination falls due. It can then be seen whether they " catch it from her," so to say, by telepathic infection. Or if they fail to do so, the transference might be facilitated as follows. Mdlle. A might be led to expect Professor Beaunis' visit in a special dress, carefully impressed on her. The others might simply be told that the Professor would call at the hour determined. It might then be seen whether the hallucination which had been suggested to them in a comparatively vague form were rendered definite by infection from Mdlle. A's clearer perception of the phantasmal visitant, so that all alike saw him in the dress announced to Mdlle. A.

The subjects on whom such experiments as these can be attempted with success are at present few in number, and almost exclusively French. But the methodical zeal with which a group of French physicians are now pursuing this form of research renders it likely that fresh light will soon be shed on the genesis and development of hallucinatory percepts. Such theorising, therefore, as I am here attempting need not be premature, if it serves to suggest experiment, and to guide observation.

§ 18. But those who have followed me thus far will find that a further reflection is here naturally suggested. If in cases of collective hallucination we have seen reason to conjecture that there has been, not a mere series of

telepathic transferences of impression, but a presentation as a quasipercept to several minds of a distant agent's conception of himself as present among them by a kind of psychical translation, then we can hardly suppose that this explanation is applicable to collective cases alone. The accident that some indifferent person shared with the primary friend the perception of the phantasm may enlighten us as to the mode in which that phantasm was generated, but cannot have itself determined that mode. Can we decide, then, for which of the apparitions seen by one person only our newly-suggested method of origination may most plausibly be invoked?

Much, I think, might be learnt from reviewing the whole series of our phantasms, while keeping in view the analogy of the alleged cases of experimental clairvoyance in the same way as the analogy of experimental telepathy has been kept in view in the preceding chapters. But such a task must be postponed till the evidence for clairvoyance itself shall have been subjected to a searching analysis. All that I can attempt here is to draw attention to two problems, already repeatedly touched on by Mr. Gurney, but capable of being discussed with profit from several points of view. I speak of the apparent garb and symbolism of phantasms, and of their attraction to special localities.

§ 19. The question of the clothes of ghosts — or the ghosts of clothes — is one which presents the relation between the material and the immaterial under a specially grotesque aspect. Theories which attribute any kind of materiality to the "White Lady " or " Grey Lady " herself, are apt to get inextricably entangled in her shadowy muslin. And apart from any definite theorising, the frock-coat or the flowered dressing-gown of the " spiritual visitant," has seemed to many minds to destroy his dignity and interest — to be painfully incongruous with pure existences and a noumenal world. On the other hand, I need hardly, at this point, explain that on the hypothesis advanced in this book, this very mundaneness of the apparition is precisely what was to be expected. For veridical hallucinations — like morbid hallucinations, though in a different sense — are the outcome of human minds; the form in which my friend's phantasm presents itself to me has been stamped thereon either by my friend's mind or my own. And it therefore would be strange if I phantasmally saw the dying man unclothed, — as I have never seen him in life; if he, in his last moments, pictured himself as he has never hitherto pictured himself in colloquy with his friends.

But granting the almost unavoidable supposition that the phantom will appear clothed — and clothed in some such way as either agent's or percipient's mind can suggest — questions remain which are among the most

important and the most difficult with which we have to deal. The clothes of apparitions are like the cartouches of Egyptian kings — they are hieroglyphs, in part seemingly arbitrary, in part obviously symbolical, which we must compare and decipher before we can arrange our processional figures by date and dynasty. For the most part these phantoms remain but for a moment, and are gone without speech or action before their astonished spectator has recovered from the shock of their approach. Sometimes their faces present some change or particularity, as of hair or beard, of pallor or injury, which in some degree identifies the moment of time, past or present, which that phantasmal visage tends to reproduce. But often such traces fail us. The witness gazes, not on some scarred and mangled form — Priamiden laniatum corpore toto — but on the unchanged aspect of a familiar friend. For most observers such recognition is enough, as it is enough for the devout worshipper to recognise in a picture the Madonna's face. Too soon the vision disappears — iterum crudelia retro Fata vacant — and what is left is the shock of loss, the memory of consolation. It is from no want of sympathy with those primary emotions that we must urge on the readers of this book the imperative need, should occasion be ofiered to them, of a minuter and calmer observation. Every detail of the phantasmal appearance has some meaning • and the points which the spectator accepts as subordinate and unimpressive may contain clues sought elsewhere in vain. Thus — to come at once to my present purpose— it is usual for a witness to say "he appeared to me in the dress he habitually wore, and in which I knew him." In one sense these two clauses mean the same thing. But which of them is the really efiective one? If A's phantom wears a black coat, is that because A wore a black coat, or because B was accustomed to see him in one? If A had taken to wearing a brown coat since B saw him in the flesh, would A's phantom wear to B's eyes a black coat or a brown? Or would the dress which A actually wore at the moment of death dominate, as it were, and supplant phantasmally the costumes of his ordinary days?

Those who have followed the cases cited in this book, and Mr. Gurney's comments thereon, will know that the answer to these questions is neither uniform nor clear. It is seldom that we can trust the percipient's memory of the details of his vision, and even when these details have been carefully noted their lesson is not easy to decipher.

We have, of course, as a starting point, the known fact that a man may have a purely subjective hallucination, and may clothe it in almost any fashion, — introducing items of dress which have never been consciously familiar to his mind. We may naturally begin, then^ by assuming that, unless evidence to the contrary be forthcoming, it is from the percipient's mind that the dress or other imagery of the phantom is

drawn. Let us see whether there are any cases where this seems clearly indicated by the particulars of the dress itself.

Suppose that the dying A appears to B, habited in hat and coat, though in point of fact he is in bed at the time. Must we not here say that B's mind has furnished the setting of the figure, and that nothing beyond the mere impression of a personality comes from A himself?

No; this deduction would be insecure. For it assumes that if the agent projects a developed phantom of himself, — a conception of himself, that is to say, which B's mind externalises as a phantom, — he will necessarily project it as though clad in the garments which he is wearing at the time. But we have no grounds for assuming this. Just as B may imagine A as wearing a familiar greatcoat, so may A imagine himself as wearing that coat, whatever be his actual dress at the time.

Suppose that we dream of calling on a friend. In most cases we dream of ourselves as in ordinary walking attire. It is only rarely that we dream of entering a drawing-room in tiefem neglige, as the Germans put it, — an obscure sense of one's actual condition entering, with disastrous incoherence, into the feebly co-ordinated story of one's dream.

Now, if we are comparing these veridical hallucinations to objectified dreams, we must at least allow for the chance of the dream being the agent's own; we must not assume that it is always— so to say — dreamt for him by the person to whom he appears. Whatever the agent's actual dress at the time, all the cases where he appears merely in his usual costume must be set aside as neutral. We cannot press them to prove the origin of the figure in either the one or the other mind.

Is there, then, any feature to which we can point as undoubtedly due to the workings of the percipient's mind? anything in the associations of the dress? or in the special symbolism of the apparition? It is plain that associations attaching to A's dress must be common to A as well as to B. Suppose that B saw the dying A habited in a coat which A wore at B's wedding, or at some other epochal moment in B's life. It must still be remembered that that same moment was epochal to A also, in so far as his relation to B was concerned, and that its conscious or unconscious memory may influence A's conception of himself as bidding B a last farewell. Similarly, a man who recalls his acts of homage to Royalty vaguely feels himself in Court dress; a man who imagines himself talking to a hunting acquaintance has a slight sense — what is called a " phantom " sense — of being on horseback.

And this ambiguity, I think, attaches to the few cases in which, as Mr. Grurney urges, the " ghosts of old clothes," in which the phantom appears, indicate the percipient's memory as the source of that investiture.

In Colonel and Mrs. BoUand's case (201), a scrutiny of the dates and facts given will show that we have no reason to regard Ramsay's clothes as old, — as otherwise than still the suit in which he would be likely to imagine himself as calling on a former mistress. In case 200, a brother delirious in Australia, and fancying himself at home, appears to his sister on the lawn, " dressed as he usually was when he came home from London, not as he was when he left home, nor as he could be in Australia, nor as I had ever seen him when walking in the garden." Surely all that this dress implied was the idea of a traveller's home-coming, which was at any rate the dominant one in the brother's ravings. Had it been his wonted garden costume, tlien to my mind the dress, though still ambiguous, would have looked more probably referable to the sister's shaping imagination.

In a third and fourth case, (No. 202, and p. 546, second note,) there is an admixture of unexplained grotesqueness, (the lady in a carriage, the boy " enclosed, as it were, in a dark cellar "), which seems to remove these eases into the category next to be considered, namely, where the phantasmal figure is accompanied by symbolism,, whose origin we have to ascribe to one or the other mind. Such symbolism, as Mr. Gurney has pointed out, is usually referable to some "mental habit or tradition," which is probably common to both the minds concerned. One can, of course, imagine a case where the symbolism should be such as the percipient's mind alone would be likely to think of; as if, for instance, the " thousands of angels as tight as they could be packed," which (in case 207) are seen surrounding a departed Christian friend, had formed the symbolic escort of a pronounced Agnostic.

§ 20. But in default of such narratives as this, the cases where the influence of the percipient's idiosyncrasy seems most marked are those where the same percipient has a recurrent symbolical dream, coincident on each occasion with a death or other marked occurrence. We have a few such cases, but in the most remarkable of them (No. 131) the form of the dream is not exactly idiosyncratic, but rather takes on a form with which students of folk-lore are already familiar. The traditions of folk-lore, it may be remarked, form a kind of endemic symbolism, in which both morbid and veridical hallucinations tend to clothe themselves. In some cases we have found a community of Celtic fishermen, or the like, so deeply impregnated with traditions of this kind that we cannot accept their accounts of corpsecandles, &c., though supported by apparent coincidences of fact, as of real evidential value. We are obliged, that is to say, to treat such a community as subject to casual hallucinations, which detract from the importance of such coincidences with objective fact as do from time to time occur. It is

only in some of the remoter regions of Wales and Scotland that we have found superstitions of this sort active and definite. But the tendency to the recurrence of some special symbolism — symbolism of which the percipient may never remember to have heard — among the dreams of educated persons, reminds us sometimes of the sporadic endemicity of certain traditions of folk-lore, of which this very tendency may be itself the proximate cause.

In our present collection, however, we have included very little of such symbolism, and to what there is we can assign no certain origin in agent's or percipient's mind.

§ 21. On the whole, then, it seems that we have few indications in the dress or other surroundings of fully-developed veridical phantoms which point conclusively to an origin in the percipient's mind. Are there instances, on the other hand, which yield the reverse indication 1 that is, where the dress or imagery seems manifestly traceable to the mind of the agent himself?

Such indication may conceivably be given in two main ways. The agent's dress or aspect at the moment may be phantasmally reproduced; or there may be symbolism, not vague or traditional in character, but plainly adapted to communicate some information known to the agent alone.

Of the first of these classes the reader will have observed a good many examples. There are, first of all, the phantoms in night-dress. In one or two cases {e.g., No. 563,) these are apparitions of persons whom the percipient knows to be dying, and the white dress might, therefore, be suggested by the percipient's mind. But in other cases (see especially No. 214) there is no expectation of the agent's death, and the dress astonishes the percipient by its incongruity.

Still more remarkable are the cases where the dying man appears in a dress which he is actually wearing at the moment, although it is not such as is usually associated with death-beds. The case of Dr. Bowstead (No. 212), commented on by Mr. Gurney, may serve as a type of this class. In such a case as that (to anyone who believes that more than mere chance is involved), it must surely seem more probable that the dress of the phantom was the creation of the dying man's mind rather than of the mind of the boy to whom that phantom appeared. And it is observable that while such evidence as points to the percipient's part in shaping these figures is indirect and inferential, the evidence which points to their full-blown projection from the agent's mind is often as direct and unmistakeable as any evidence on such a point can be expected to be.

§ 22. Next as regards the symbolism which accompanies the figure. The commonest case of symbolism — if such it is to be called — consists in the wet clothes of the apparition of a drowned man. There is possibly something in death by asphyxiation which (as it seems to revive past memories with unusual vividness) predisposes also to telepathic action. At any rate, we have a good many of such cases, and there seems almost always to be some specific indication of the manner of death, " Dripping with water," "his hair wet," "pale, sad, and wet," "looking halfdrowned," such are the phrases which recur. The distinctive mark here is very simple — it may be said to be nothing more than a translation into visibility of the idea " He is drowning." We might, therefore, suppose that it had perhaps originated in the percipient's mind. But this view is rendered less plausible by the cases where the apparition presents more detailed marks of accident, change, or disease, as the wound on the chest in case 210, the trembling and pallor in case 527, the grey hair in case 194, and the complex and partly symbolical aspect of the phantom in case 25. It is worth remarking that " IST. J. S. " (case 28), who looked carefully at the details of his apparition, is of opinion that the walking-stick which his friend held (but which " N. J. S." never remembered to have seen him using) was symbolical, and meant to imply departure and a farewell. The case (No. 514) of the lady seen with a lock of hair cut off and a " peculiar light upon her," presents a somewhat similar mixture of true reproduction and symbolism; and the extraordinary narrative of Sengireef (No. 449), which throughout resembles an extravagant dream, shows that the phantom presented some details (of beard, &c.) which were true and unknown to the percipient. My view in that instance is that the dream in reality was not Madame Aksakoff's, but Sengireef 's; that its insane strangeness was the reflection of the confused clairvoyance of a delirious monomaniac. With this last case I should compare No. 349: the diff"erence being that here, instead of the sombre wildness of the fanatic, we have the devout aspiration of the Catholic boy. I should explain, that is to say, the figure of St. Stanislaus as the reflected embodiment of a dying dream.

I have said enough, perhaps, to enable the reader to form his own judgment on this point from the cases recorded in these volumes. On the one hand, if he accepts our general argument as to the connection of purely subjective and veridical hallucinations, he will recognise that there is a certain a priori likelihood that the details of the hallucination will be found to emanate from the loercipient's mind. And he may be disposed to follow Mr. Gurney in classing dubious cases by this presumption; in ranking as exceptional the narratives where the details seem plainly derived from the mind of the agent. If, on the other hand, he views the cases which I have mentioned (and many others which resemble them) in

the light in which I have tried to place them, he may recognise that when the apparition does present any distinct details, these are almost always such as the agent's mind might most naturally have supplied; and that this fact suggests a doubt as to whether there may not be something more than a simple telepathic impulse involved; — whether the obscurer agency of clairvoyance must not here be invoked; — an analogy suggesting that certain modes of supernormal percipience and selfrealisation in a distant scene may produce upon the persons placed in that scene an impression as of the actual presence of the clairvoyant among them, in a manner corresponding to his own momentary conception of himself,

§ 23. Connected, in a certain way, with the symbolism of which we have been speaking, is another point of interest in these phantasmal appearances. I mean the difficulty which is sometimes felt in recognising them.

To begin with, it is no doubt possible to suppose that the percipient's mind builds up the hallucination, so to say, from some unconscious stratum, so that the conscious self does not at the first moment understand the figure presented. This would be a form of gradual development of the quasi-percept which could be paralleled both from ordinary dreams and from automatic writing. I cannot, indeed, find that purely subjective hallucinations ever develop themselves in this way. Yet I should myself see no real difficulty in applying this explanation even to cases where the recognition wholly fails at the time, and is only effected afterwards by conscious reflection. Such a case would resemble the anagrams which an automatic writer will sometimes commit to paper, i without understanding at the time what are the words which his unconscious self has thus concealed in a meaningless group of letters.

But, nevertheless, some of the recorded particulars seem to point to the simpler explanation — namely, that the phantom's details were developed independently of the percipient's mind, and that the figure merely failed in making itself known to him. Sometimes, for example, the percipient looks attentively at the figure, but mistakes it for some one who resembles the person whom the figure is afterwards found to represent.^ Sometimes the phantom which the percipient fails to recognise represents a person whom he might equally have failed to recognise in the flesh. ^ Sometimes a call is re2oeated, as if in insistant appeal.* And there are a few cases, — we could not expect many, — where a percipient has seen a figure wholly unknown to him, but which he has afterwards been able to identify by circumstantial evidence. Such are cases 544 and 215. Under

1 See Proceedings, S.P.R., Vol. ii., p. 226, &c. 2 gge cases 170 and 171.

3 See cases 189 and 241. ^ gee especially case 508.

this category, too, comes the singular apparition detailed in case 30, whatever explanation we may prefer to give to it.

Cases like these incline me to think that we are still in danger of an old error in a modified form, — the error of attributing too much importance to the person who sees the phantom, because his account of the matter is the only one which we can get. We are, indeed, no longer aflTected by the crude emotional form of this mistake, — as when the percipient considers the apparition to be a breach of natural laws permitted expressly in favour of himself. But our own conception of the apparition as the result of a telepathic transference of impression from the one to the other mind is apt, I think, to obscure the possibility of generative causes quite apart from any pre-existing rapport between the two persons.

§ 24. Thus, to proceed to the next point which I had selected for notice, it seems to me that the attraction which determines the phantasmal presence is sometimes local rather than personal. This apparent influence of a certain locality may be observed in several different stages. In some cases the phantasmal visitor appears to an acquaintance with whom he has some slight link, and who is also in a spot to which the dying man is attached. Here the telepathic impulse may have been facilitated by the familiar locality. But in a few cases, as already mentioned, the dying man appears to persons with whom he is in no way acquainted. And I believe that in every clear instance of this kind there has been a local attraction, a reason which draws the dying person to that house or field, irrespective of the living persons who may be there at the moment.

Case 666 is a good example of what I mean.i But at the same time it warns me to press my argument no further. For just as in certain dreams, already mentioned, we discerned the point of contact between thoughttransference and clairvoyance, so in this appearance, (as it may seem to have been,) of a dying person to the casual inhabitants of her former home we have the point of contact between the topic of this work and the evidence which bears on the haunting of particular spots. To the clairvoyance, when thus confronted with it, I felt able to express a distinct adhesion. But as to the haunting I have no equally clear opinion.

Now it is probable that what appears to us as local attraction may sometimes be a mere phase of psychical rapport. To explain my meaning,

1 See also case 29, where the phantom would appear to have been more probablyinterested in a tomb round which the dying person's eccentric thoughts had so often revolved, than in the ex-gardener who chanced to pass through the familiar churchyard; and case 211, where the dying man seems to have been wishing to see Mr. L., in whose drawin-groom the phantom appeared, not Miss L., who chanced to be present there. Case 192 is similar.

let us assume that all minds whatsoever are telepathically connected,m such a manner that the existence of any given conception in any mind throws that mind into connection with every other mind in which that conception exists at the moment. Let us further suppose that at the hour of death this faint potential rapport is quickened in the same way as the more permanent and individual forms of rapport with which we have mainly had to deal. Then when a man dies et dulcis moriens reminiscitur Argos, this remembrance of his early home may bring him into telepathic relation with the stranger now living there, and that stranger may discern the dying man's phantom merely because the two minds are simultaneously occupied with an identical conception.

This view, which is practically held by Mr. Gurney, seems to me to express what is probably some part of the truth. I conceive that, if telepathy be a fact, something of diffused telepathic percolation is probably always taking place. This at least is what the analogy of the limitless and continuous action of physical forces would suggest. If I lift my little finger I affect, like Zeno's sage, the whole universe by my act. I apply a vis a tergo to atoms which, for aught I know, may send my push rolling on to the Pleiades. Or again, the heat, part of which I can by an effort concentrate on an apple in my hand, is in fact radiating continuously from all my organism, and fastest in the direction of readiest conduction. And similarly it is not unreasonable to suppose that the same telergy which is directed in a moment of crisis towards a man's dearest friend, may be radiating from him always towards all other minds, and chiefly towards the minds which have most in common with his own.

Yet it seems to me that this is not enough wholly to explain our cases of local attraction. Before we can assume that any perceptible telepathic impact can follow the lines of so transitory and contingent a rapport as that implied, for instance, by Mr. Bard's presence in Hinxton Churchyard, in case 29, we ought, I think, to have some case where a phantom has appeared to B without previous acquaintance, on the ground of some community of ideas and interest between the two, unconnected with any special locality. Now, so far as I know, there is not, among our cases recognised as telepathic, a single incident of this kind.

§ 25. Here, then, we are again met by this perplexing problem of the relation of psychical operations to space; and although, as already said, I shall avoid any attempt at its discussion in this work, the reader will probably recognise that some such hypothesis as that of an independent clairvoyant perception of the dying man's, reflected in a correspondinglylocalised hallucination for other minds, is strongly suggested by such narratives as these.

There is, however, an obvious difficulty in this view which must be discussed before we go further. I have spoken repeatedly of acts of clairvoyant percipience on the dying man's part, corresponding to the location and movement of the apparition which the distant friend discerns. But where is the evidence of this clairvoyant percipience 1 Ought we not to have the dying man's testimony that he saw his friend as well as the friend's testimony that he saw the dying man 1 Ought not the mass of our cases, in this view, to be reciprocal? and is not that type, in fact, of very rare occurrence in our collection?

The difficulty seems formidable; but there is, I think, a sufficient and an instructive reply. To put it in a sentence, the recollection of an act of clairvoyance is itself an occurrence as rare as is the perception of an apparition; it involves the same difficult translation of a quasi-percept from the supernormal to the normal consciousness. The very act of claii'voyance presupposes a psychical condition as far removed as may be from the stream of every-day sensation. The clairvoyance alleged to have been induced by direct experiment, as by mesmeric passes and the like seems hardly ever to have been remembered by the subject on wakino-. So also the clairvoyance, on a smaller scale and more resembling hypersesthesia, which has shown itself in certain cases of spontaneous somnambulism, seems rarely to persist into the normal memory. And speaking generally, all supernormal operation (so far as we can at present tell) tends to form a secondary memory of its own, alternating with, or apart from, the memory of common life.

In order, then, that a " reciprocal " case may occur — a case in which A remembers to have had a clairvoyant perception of B and B's environment, while B also has perceived A's phantasm at approximately the same time — two chances have to concur, two difficulties to be surmounted, — the difficulty on A's part of recollecting his clairvoyant percipience, and the difficulty on B's part of externalising into memorable distinctness the corresponding impression conveyed to him. And we may expect that it will be hard to get a complete or stable account of so hazardous a transmission as this, — a kind of signalling between boats one of which expects no signal, and which come in sight of each other only when they both chance to be riding for a moment on the crest of a wave.

§ 26. Nay, more; in most cases the signalling boat can only produce a momentary flash, and sinks to the bottom directly after. In other words, the agent dies; and if indeed he has enjoyed a clairvoyant percipience of B (who saw his phantom), he at any rate cannot return and tell us. The great bulk of what might have been evidence to the reciprocality of supernormal percipience is thus destroyed at a blow.

Not even here, however, need we abandon all hope of getting at some fragments of evidence. The last words, the last gestures of dying men, which have been noted so eagerly by many a religious, and many a selfseeking bystander, may have for us an interest unconnected either with their form of creed or with their testamentary dispositions. Nothing, perhaps, has been so little looked for at death-beds as the special indications which we desire, — indications not of a first perception of another world, but of a last of this. Yet there are scattered tokens of some such supernormal percipience on the part of dying men, which carry us from mere vague expressions to distinct statements as to the distant person who has been clairvoyantly seen. Thus in case 309 the dying woman's statement is merely to be noted in connection with others of more weight. Case 296 must either be dismissed as a mere coincidence, of a very extraordinary kind, or accepted as an almost typical instance of what might, on my hypothesis, be expected to occur. Case 303 points in the same direction. Case 683, though well attested, is one whose bizarrerie may disincline the reader to attach to it the weight which I think that it ought to carry. On looking closer the reader will see that there are other features in that account besides mere grotesqueness; features which are very unlikely to depend upon any failure, or any embellishment, of memory. And if, as I am disposed to believe, what is there implied did actually occur, few words of men momentarily recalled from death have had a stranger significance.

Then we come to cases where there is a distinct statement of the dying person's. In this connection, case 354 seems to me important. It is remote, no doubt; but Miss W. has herself told me, with an earnestness that I cannot doubt, that it was, in a sense, the turning incident of her life, having excited a very marked influence on her character. Then there is case 612, and the parallel example given in the note on that case. Now I do not say that it is impossible that any one of these cases may have been merely subjective on the one part, though veridical on the other 3 so that Miss Ws. dying aunt, for instance, only fancied that she saw her niece, while the niece did actually behold a phantom of her aunt at a corresponding time. But I doubt whether many minds will rest at this point precisely. Those who believe in the reality of the one experience will probably believe in the reality of the other; remembering that a dying person's object is not to collect evidence, and that it must be a mere chance whether he mentions any incident which can vouch to others for the genuineness of his clairvoyant perception.

I will conclude this section with a narrative whose accuracy there is no reason to doubt, though, on the other hand, it contains no complete proof of anything beyond a mere subjective hallucination. It finds therefore, no

place in our array of evidence; but it will have an intei'est to those who have followed the present argument, as illustrating an occurrence which, in my view, must probably often take place, though it can seldom leave any record behind it. For here we have an account of that side only of the reciprocal incident which is usually lost to human knowledge altogether; — I mean of the supernormal percipience of a man in the very article of death; while there is no record of any corresponding sound or vision as experienced by those to whom he seemed to pay his visit of farewell.

Dr. Ormsby writes as follows from Murphysborough, Illinois.

"April 22nd, 1884.

"I received my degree from Rush Medical College, Chicago, 111., at the close of the session 1857-8, and having said so much will proceed to give you as clear and complete a statement of the occurrence to which you allude as I can. Early in February, 1862, the 18th Regiment Illinois Volunteer Infantry, of which I was Assistant-Surgeon, was ordered from Cairo to join in the attack on Fort Henry. The surgeon went with the regiment, and left me with the sick in the Regimental Hospital — about 30 — among whom was Albert Adams, sergeant-major of the regiment. He was an intelligent and estimable young man, who had recently been in attendance, and I think graduated at a Literary College. I had removed young Adams from the hospital proper to a room in a private house — one that had been quite large — but a smaller room had been partitioned off at one end with a board partition, which was, I think, canvassed and papered; and in the smaller room so partitioned off was my wife, who is now, besides myself, the only person who heard the speaking whose whereabouts I know. Seeing the young man would die, I had telegraphed, and his father came at 4 or 5 p.m. During all the afternoon he could only speak in whispers, and at 11 p.m. he to all appearance died. I was standing beside his father by the bed, and when we thought him dead the old man put forth his hand and closed the mouth of the corpse (?), and I, thinking he might faint in the keenness of his grief, said 'Don't do that! perhaps he will breathe again,' and immediately led him to a chair in the back part of the room, and returned, intending to bind up the fallen jaw and close the eyes myself. As I reached the bedside the supposed dead man looked suddenly up in my face and said, ' Doctor, what day of the month is it 1 ' I told him the day of the month, and he answered, ' That is the day I died.' His father had sprung to the bedside, and turning his eyes on him, he said, ' Father, our boys have taken Fort Henry, and Charlie ' (his brother) * isn't hurt. I've seen mother and the children, and they are well.' He then gave quite



Vol. Ii. X

comprehensive directions regarding his funeral, speaking of the corpse as '' my body,' and occupying, I should think, as much as five minutes. He then turned towards me, and again said, ' Doctor, what day of the month is it? ' and when I answered him as before, he again repeated, ' That's the day I died,' and instantly was dead. His tones were quite full and distinct, and so loud as to be readily heard in the adjoining room, and were so heard by Mrs. Ormsby. Now, this is very remarkable, but perhaps little more so than the fact (which is true) that I have forgotten the day of the month on which it occurred.

(Signed) " O. B. Ormsby, M.D."

In reply to some questions referring to a briefer account first given. Dr. Ormsby writes on December 28th, 1883: — •

" The fort was taken and the brother uninjured, as I learned when a few days afterward I went forward to the regiment. I never learned whether or not that which was said of the family was correct. The name of the soldier was Albert Adams, a young man of unexceptionable moral character and good education. He was then sergeant-major of his regiment. I understand that his father has been dead several years. I do not now recollect what other parties were present in the room besides myself and the young man's father, though there were several, but as we were almost strangers to each other, and soon separated, I could not expect to be able to trace them. The young man occupied a room, not in the hospital proper, which was crowded, but in a private dwelling where he could have the entire room. The next room, communicating with this by a door, I occupied as a sleeping room, and my wife, who was then on a visit, was in that room, with the door closed. I have just asked her whether she heard the words of the dying soldier, and she answers that she did, informing me that the partition between the rooms was of boards, papered, and that young Adams, instead of saying ' Our forces,' &c., said ' Our boys.' I learned nothing of any wraith or appearance to anyone.

(Signed) " O. B. Ormsby, M.D."

§ 27. But apart from these cases where the evidence is barred by death, there are many others, as I have already implied, where the agentpercipient — the man whose clairvoyant perception has given rise to a corresponding hallucination in other minds — seems to be unable to recount his side of the experience simply because in his normal state he has forgotten it. In our rare narratives of a voluntary self -projection, this seems to have been the case on each occasion. The friend of the Rev. W. S. Moses, who appeared to him, (case 13,) had no recollection of the fact, but an unaccustomed headache may have been a trace of some forgotten psychical efibrt. In Mr. S. H. B.'s cases (Nos. 14, 15, and 16,) the

projection of the phantom was unremembered, and could only be effected during slumber, or if it was attempted during waking hours, the concentration of mind which was needed seemed to induce slumber. ^

§ 28. Passing from these voluntary cases to the spontaneous cases, I would ask the reader's attention, for instance, to case 100. From an evidential point of view, I agree with Mr. Gurney that, while regarding the case as a well-marked dream of telepathic origin, we cannot press the details — the memory of the hotel-passages and of Lieutenant O.'s bedchamber. What entitles the narrative to a place in this book is the striking time-coincidence — not the details, which might have been " read back " into the half-recollected vision. But, on the other hand, if the incident were telepathic at all, there must have been some modus operandi; Mr. AUbree's dream must have had some sort of content; Lieutenant O.'s psychical appeal must have taken effect in some particular way. And if any hypothesis at all is to be formed on the matter, are not the recorded facts best met by the hypothesis that Lieutenant O.'s crisis evoked a clairvoyant percipience in Mr. Allbree just as the mesmeriser is said to evoke it in the sleep-waking subject 1 and that Mr. Allbree seemed to himself to pass through the surroundings and into the presence of his friend 1 and that on waking the memory of all this was gone from him, though it was afterwards revived by the bodily sight of the scene which he had already supernormally discerned?

Let us see, however, what kind of probability is given to this view by the records of cases where something of the invaded scene has remained in the recollection of the invader. I am forced, for clearness' sake, to use this new metaphorical term, since the words agent and percipient are no longer sufficiently distinctive, the agent in these cases being, in my view, the primary percipient also. The metaphor of invasion may be justified by the fact that in these reciprocal cases A and B always agree as to the scene where the apparition occurred. It is never (with one or two dubious exceptions) the case that A thinks that he discerned B in B's house, while B thinks that he, on his part, was transported to A's house and saw A there. On the contrary, if A fixes the scene as in B's house, there does B fix it too, a fact which is just what the present hypothesis would lead us to expect. This apparent localisation in one or the other entourage is all that my metaphor of invasion is here intended to suggest.

Let us briefly consider the amount of subsequent memory shown in a few instances by a waking, a sleejnng, and an entranced invader.

§ 29. First, as regards the cases of invasion by a waking agent. These,

1 See case 215 (Vol. i., p. 567), where Mrs. W.'s "trance-state " was semi-voluntary.

in my view, are likely to be scanty and incomplete. I conceive that it is seldom that the sense of transference to a distant locality can be strongenough in waking life to give rise to the correspondent impression in other minds. And in this group it seems to me natural to find the confused or inchoate reciprocity — if such indeed it were — of case 304. But we have also case 307, where Mr. L. seems to have fallen into a deep reverie resembling Mr. S. H. B.'s (Nos. 14, 15, and 16), though in Mr. S. H. B.'s case the reverie passed on into sleep. Case 617, again, perhaps supplies a kind of faint or transitional instance, which may indicate the way in which the occupation of two persons with the idea of each other may pass into something like a reciprocal hallucination.

Here too, if anywhere, must be placed the anomalous case No. 642 — • recalling, on the one hand, the most recent experiments of the communication of hallucinations to hypnotised subjects; on the other hand, the old accounts of so-called " obsession."

§ 30. More numerous are the cases where a sleeping person's clairvoyant vision of a distant scene has evoked a corresponding impression of his own presence in the minds of persons situated in that scene, and has also persisted into his own waking memory. Two striking cases have been quoted, Nos. 35 and 306. In these cases not only is the dream (so to say) acted out, but the clairvoyant retains a memory of actual circumstances, of the true positions and actions of the persons clairvoyantly discerned. In some other cases, — -Nos. 94 and 301, — the incidents, as recollected on both sides, are dreamlike, but the locality of the visionary incident is agreed on by both persons concerned. We seem, therefore, to have here another transitional case, a transition between mere simultaneous dreams and the kind of clairvoyant invasion with which I am now concerned. Again, case 271, which touches the very nadir of triviality, seems to me on that account all the more instructive. I cannot think that a mere dream on Mr. Pike's part that he was calling for hot water, — a condition as far removed from " death or crisis " as can well be conceived, — would so strongly have afliected the servant in his distant home. I conceive that the efficacy of the dream depended on his conception of himself as actually standing at his bedroom door; so that this, too, was a case of clairvoyant invasion, though the scene invaded was so commonplace that it left with the dreamer no memory of anything otherwise unknown. And this example, in its turn, may throw light on some less-developed clairvoyant dreams, — as for instance case 412, — where the dreamer's invasion was not manifested by any phantasmal sight or sound, though the trivial scene was recollected on awakening

§ 31. Still more propitious, in my view, to this mode of psychical interaction is a state of trance, or even of delirium, on the part of the percipient-agent, though here the profoundly abnormal state must usually preclude all recollection. Specially instructive in this connection is case 308, where the boy whose call was heard in the place where he feverishly conceived himself to be, — or at least in the field of his clairvoyant perception, — was afterwards entirely oblivious of that momentary rajjport with his distant sister and friend. It is observable that the evidential value of this case depends on the accident that a watcher was present with the boy, and noted the almost automatic exclamation which his sudden vision evoked. Had there been no one thus present with him, the call of " Connie! Margaret! " would have ranked as a well-marked collective hallucination of a purely subjective kind. To this class also belong Mr. Cromwell Varley's singular narratives (Nos. 84 and 305), which again, bring us round to the cases where the clairvoyant invasion is apparently facilitated by the hour of dissolution itself.

Lastly, while these pages are passing through the press, we have received a striking case where memory of what was perceived in the hypnotic trance persisted into normal consciousness; — namely, Mr. Cleave's narrative (case 685, in the Additional Chapter) of his attempts first to see, and then to be seen by a distant friend. The sequence of incidents is curiously concordant with the theory which has been expressed above. First, the steady gaze of the friend who operated threw Mr. Cleave into unconsciousness. Then a new consciousness showed him the face of the distant lady, " which gradually became plainer and plainer until I seemed to be in another room altogether, and could detail minutely all the surroundings."

This process was several times repeated: and he at last succeeded, (as he, at least, conceives the occurrence,) "in making himself seen by " the lady in question. Twice she saw him; and on the second occasion, at least, he perceived that she saw him, and noted where she was, and in what company.! Now there will probably be some readers who, even after all the evidence which these volumes contain, will set aside Mr. Cleave's narrative as merely incredible. But among those who are by this time prepared to accept it as an honest and careful record of fact and impression, few, I think, will argue that Mr. Cleave's own impressions were purely subjective, though the lady's were veridical; — that she genuinely saw his phantasm in the place from which he imagined himself to be looking at her, while yet this imagination of his was merely fanciful, and his supposed perception of her amid her actual surroundings of the moment, a

1 The boy who was with her seems to have seen nothing; but this fact is quite consistent with my view. (See p. 290.)

mere chance coincidence. Rather they will hold that he saw her before she saw him; that it was because his centre of observation was in some sense transferred to the Wandsworth dining-room that she saw his phantasm standing in that dining-room; — that, in short, as I have already expressed it, " correspondently with clairvoyant perception there was phantasmogenetic efficacy."

§ 32. I do not propose to enter here into a detailed criticism of the mass of narratives which this book contains. Many of them, I think, need, for the purpose of any instructive analysis, an experience of these phenomena far wider than we as yet possess. But I have said, perhaps, enough to enable the reader to detect for himself, in many other cases, indications of some such clairvoyant invasion as I have endeavoured to describe. The cases which I have selected for notice have some of them been of strange and aberrant types; but I wished to show that the scheme of psychical interaction here suggested does at any rate offer an appropriate niche to nearly every wellattested phenomenon which our collection includes. It may at least be useful to have, as it were, a Linncean system under which all our cases can be conveniently docketed, even though we may as yet be far enough from discerning their " natural order " or truest affinity.

For clearness' sake, 1 will briefly trace the steps by which, as I conceive the matter, our veridical phantasms gradually approach that reciprocal character which forms their complete or ultimate form.

First come the numerous cases which are too faintly defined for specification — cases where the impression transferred retains a frankly psychical character, where neither is a distant scene supernormally discerned, nor does anyone amid his ordinary surroundings discern a phantasmal visitant. There is here no illusion of space-relations, — merely an emotional or ideational affection of the percipient's consciousness. In most of these cases all that we can say is that some telepathic action has taken place. And the terms agent and percipient serve to express all that we know of the process; namely, that on one side there is either death, or some crisis, or at least some concentration of thought; while on the other side something is felt or perceived which corresponds in some way with the agent's unusual agitation.

But now let us go on to cases which have reached a further stage of development. After passing through certain intermediate stages, — visions in the mind's eye, ifec, — we arrive at cases where a spatial element is apparently introduced; that is to say, the phenomenon, whatever it is, bears reference to a special scene; and when this scene is well-defined, and the two or more persons concerned retain a memory of the incident, it

is found that they all agree as to what the scene was. It is rarely, however, that a reciprocity of impression can be satisfactorily attested; one or the other side of that phenomenon is usually aborted or absent. And according as the one or the other side emerges into normal consciousness we regard the incident as belonging to one of two main classes; it may be a perception of the scene by a distant person, or it may be the perception of a distant person as forming a part of that scene.

And as the terms agent and percipient now become inadequate, I am forced to use an avowed metaphor, and to speak of the person who discerns the distant scene as the clairvoyant invader, whose figure is sometimes discerned in the invaded scene. Now the clairvoyant invader must be regarded as primarily a percipient; for his first function, so to say, is to discern the distant scene. But this discernment of his may fail to subsist into his waking or normal memory, or instant death may intercept his recital thereof, so that there may be no evidence to show that he was clairvoyant at all. And, on the other hand, since his clairvoyant perception is sometimes accompanied with a corresponding phantasmogenetic efficacy, — since his supernormal invasion of the scene may generate in the denizens of that scene a hallucinatory perception of a supernormal invader,— we have cases in which this invader, (though on my theory primarily a percipient,) appears in our evidence purely as an agent: so that A dies and A's phantom appears to B, and A is set down simply as an agent, and B is set down as the only percipient concerned. But in such cases I hold that A is quite as truly a percipient as B is; but that the shifting of the threshold of consciousness which accompanied his perception, — whether that shift were from waking to sleep -waking or from life to death, — prevents him, even if his consciousness is shifted back again, from recalling or recording that perception as a link in his chain of normal memories.

§ 33. Now let us turn our attention for a moment to the other person concerned in the phenomenon; to the denizen, that is to say, of the invaded scene. He is (it is plain) frequently a percipient; unless he perceived the phantasmal invader we should often be ignorant that any invasion had taken place. But is he ever to be considered as an agent too? Yes, I hold that in certain cases he is an agent in somewhat the same sense as a mesmerist is an agent when he induces clairvoyance in a subject. In that case I hold that a certain influence (I know not what) from the mesmerist evokes or disengages in the subject a pre-existent but non-manifest capacity of supernormal percipience, which first places that subject in rapport with the ideas or sensations of the mesmerist himself (as in experiments of our own, and other cases, to be found especially in Supplement, Chap. I.), but

which ultimately, in some few well-attested cases, does actually extend tlie subject's percipience beyond the range either of his own or of his mesmeriser's normal powers of sense. And somewhat similarly, 1 hold that if a man is dying or deeply agitated, and his friend, gifted with much latent capacity of supernormal percipience, is asleep at a distance, then some influence from the dying man may evoke or direct that percipience in the friend, so that he becomes cognisant first, perhaps, of the deathbed scene as realised by the dying man himself, but ultimately of that scene as it might be realised by an independent entrant, including casual denizens unnoticed by the dying man, but who may perhaps, on their part, discern the friend's phantasmal invasion, and thus be percipients without beingagents (as in case 30); while perhaps the dying man, who is in reality the determining cause of that phantasmal invasion, may attain to no perception of it whatever.

§ 34. " But," someone will say, " are you not here introducing a crossdivision 1 You have spoken hitherto of A as enabled by his own death to make a clairvoyant invasion of the scene where B sits in a normal condition. You now speak of A as enabled by B's death to make a similar invasion of the scene where B lies dying. You are thus classing the dying man alternately as the invader and as the invaded; and yet surely he who is undergoing this profoundest of all crises ought always to be ranged on the same side in whatsoever psychical interaction you are assuming; there cannot be other psychical conditions more marked and determinant than his." I have led up to a statement of this difiiculty because I believe that the answer, if we ever attain to more than a glimpse of it, will involve that true principle of classification which we are still seeking. And as a hint towards such reply I will repeat what has been already suggested, namely, that the right way of regarding these startling incidents is not as isolated psychical operations, but rather as emergent manifestations of psychical operations which are continuous, though latent; and which belong, not so much to the self of which we are habitually conscious, as to a hidden chain of mentation, which, for aught we know, may comprise a continuity of supernormal percipience or activity. When therefore, B is dying and A has a clairvoyant dream, as of presence at the deathbed, the relation between B and A with which we have to deal is not the mere external relation between agony on the one side and repose on the other. It is a relation between that specific supernormal activity which accompanies death and that specific supernormal activity which accompanies slumber. And though the death is still the prime factor in the resultant interactions, we cannot say a priori what the scene of interaction in any given case will be; — whether

there will be an invasion by the dying man of the sleeper's chamber, or by the sleeper of the dying man's.

I will illustrate my meaning by a modification of an analogy which I have elsewhere employed. I compare our conscious existence to a barge floating down the Arve, where it flows side by side, but as yet unmingled with the Rhone; the water round our keel is habitually turbid and opaque, but occasionally an inequality of river-bed, a clash of currents, swings us for a moment into the more pellucid Rhone. The Rhone — our unconscious self — flows on as continuously as the Arve, but the barge enters it only by moments, and those moments may be determined by changes in the Rhone's bed as well as in the Arve's. For the most part, the reef which raises breakers in the one stream will raise them in the other also; and imminent death, for instance, may jerk us into clairvoyance by a shock communicated at once to our conscious and to our unconscious being. But there may also be crises which involve not so much a confusion of the normal life as an expansion or liberation of the supernormal; and when we become clairvoyant in deep sleep or the mesmeric trance this is because the turbid waters are running in a narrower channel, and the barge sways into the broadening current of the pellucid stream. Again, there may be crises which are merely dissociative or disintegrant; where the barge poises on the very boundary line between the two currents, and both streams of personality are manifested at once. It is thus that I explain Mrs. Newnham's case (Vol. I., pp. 63-9), where the intelligence which wrote the replies to unseen questions would seem to have consisted of an unconscious current of Mrs. Newnham's own existence, exercising supernormal percipience, but dreamlike and incomplete in co-ordinating power. And with Mrs. JSTewnham's case I should compare certain cases which bear, indeed, no plain resemblance thereto, and which Mr. Gurney has treated as almost obviously morbid and delusive, — cases wherw the " double " of a living person has been seen together with that person himself. Take the most bizarre of these cases, that of Mrs. Hall, (No. 333,) where, as a lady sits at table with three friends, her phantom semblance is seen by herself and by all present, standing at the end of the sideboard. Now the analogy between Mrs. Newnham and Mrs. Hall seems to me to be this; that in the compound personality of each of them the " critical point " of dissociation was reached (so to say) at a very low temperature.^ In Mrs. Newnham's case, her unconscious self exercised supernormal percipience, and manifested itself by controlling her motor system, while her conscious self maintained its ordinary way. In Mrs. Hall's case, her unconscious self, assuming a too facile independence, and possibly exercising a

1 I should explain in the same way cases 327, 328, 329, 348. Note that the girl seen in case 329 had previously been phantasmally seen, (like Mrs. Stone,) in the same apparently casual way.

supernormal percipience, manifested itself by its phantasmogenetic efficacywhile her conscious self was unaware of any inward excitement or "shearing stress." I venture, however, to surmise that had Mrs. Hall been thrown into a mesmeric trance directly after her " double " had shown itself, she might have remembered contemplating the room as though from the position which the " double " appeared to occupy.

§ 35. There is thus a point of view from which these " apparitions of the double" represent the most developed type to which our veridical phantasms can attain. But in the process of development their veridicality, so to say, has become a quite subsidiary thing. Mrs. Stone's double ^ was, I believe, veridical, in the sense that it announced the fact of an exceptionally easy dissociation between the currents of her being. But this was not a fact of evidential value — it was not supported, as our cases in general are, by any coincidence with an external and objective incident.

Our preferable type, therefore, of a fully-developed veridical hallucination,— the "perfect flower" to which we may,for clearness' sake, suppose that so many rudimentary or partially-aborted psychical efflorescences are tending to conform themselves, — will be a complete case of reciprocal percipience, where the dying A clairvoyantly perceives B in B's entourage, and narrates that experience, while at the same time B discerns A's phantasmal figure in a place corresponding to that from which A conceives himself to be exercising his supernormal vision. In such a type as this, I conceive, the phenomena which we investigate separately under the titles of thoughttransference, clairvoyance, apparitions, mix and meet; and though their very juxtaposition suggests fresh difficulties, these, as I claim, are not imported by any theorising of mine, but are inherent in all attempts to correlate tilings psychical with physical things. As regards the relation of this clairvoyant perception, this phantasmogenetic energy, to space and matter, the theory here advanced leaves us entirely uncommitted. This book, indeed, contains no evidence of any real or registrable action of psychical energy on molecular matter; and much evidence that an apparent action on matter may turn out to be of a quite hallucinatory kind. And as regards sjjace we are left equally at liberty to suppose that the psychical energy here attributed to our own being, or to a part of our own being, operates in ordinary three-dimensional space, or in four-dimensional space (if that exists), or that it does not really operate in space at all, though its effects be necessarily apprehended as in space by the normal consciousness.

§ 36. Such emphatic expressions of ignorance as these must go hand in

1 See p. 85. Observe that in one of Mrs. Stone's cases her consciousness seemed for the moment to become external to her ordinary self, — the barge, floating on the dividing line between the two currents, swayed momentarily into the Rhone.

hand with any attempt at positive theorising. Our endeavour must be to give to our strange and scattered phenomena enough of coherence and co-ordination to enable the reader's mind to grasp them and work upon them, while we expi'essly avoid any such self-committal to any one hypothesis as may constrain rather than guide inquiry. In so new a subject, if the need of this resolute open-mindedness be recognised from the first, there should be little difficulty in maintaining it. The mere popular prepossessions which encumber the outset of our inquiry may readily be swept aside; and we must then watch that no dogmatic statement, unprovable by the evidence, be raised into authority in their room. Thus the writers who speak of a " force neurique rayonnante," of " brain- waves," of ''' ondulationnisme," of a " mentiferous ether," as if these were more than purely metaphorical expressions, seem to me to be falling into the same error which has encumbered hypnotic experiment with the question-begging terms of " animal magnetism " and " electro-biology." Let us use every analogy which helps us, but let us recognise that nothing has been discovered which shows that thought-transference has anything to do with ether or with vibrations. Everything in the universe may be reducible to vibrations, for aught we know; but until some definite experiment, as of reflection, interference, or the like, can be brought forward to connect telepathy with ether-waves, it is surely safer to avoid using that analogy in a way which suggests that it has a prior right over many others which might be proposed.

For our own part, though obliged by the very structure of language to make frequent use of terms which are primarily of physical import, we have kept as much as possible to the simplest, and have spoken of the telepathic impulse or impact for sheer lack of expressions more abstract still. We have varied the metaphor by suggesting that the brief energy of the psychical element in man which seems to accompany physical dissolution recalled the momentary energy of combination possessed, say, by "nascent hydrogen," hydrogen just released from union with some pther element. Electrical action, too — itself so unexplained — -has furnished us with several parallels, and Mr. Gurney (p. 270) has especially pointed to its latent pervasiveness, its seemingly accidental manifestations.

And yet again, the views suggested in this paper lead us on to a novel range of analogy. The conception of a percipient reciprocity, the hints which have seemed to come to us of the perpetual but unmanifested operation of an unconscious element in our own being; — these notions lift us above the conception of mere mechanical interforces, and suggest a more vital communication. In the relation of the cell to the complex organism, — in the relation of the diffused and multiplex "colonial consciousness " of the sponge or the hydrozoon to the concentrated conscious-

316 NOTE ON A SUGGESTED MODE, ETC.

ness of man; — here, it may be, are analogies which have a psychical counterpart behind the scenes of sense. When from these dim and incoordinated beginnings the individuation of the human animal has risen complete; when the hierarchy of his nervous centres has led up to highest centres which represent and govern his entire organism at once; — then we are accustomed to start, as it were, afresh, and to conceive his hardly-won unity as an elemental unit in a larger integration. We speak of him as a (Siov irokiriKov, as a " member of the body politic," as a component item in that Leviathan whose monstrous semblance, in Hobbes' frontispiece, is packed together from a myi-iad visages of men. But the growth of the social organism is rather a psychical than a physical thing. It may take outward form in railway or telegraph, but its vitality lies in the inter-connection of cognate minds, in the differentiations and integrations of the thought and emotion of speaking men. A common interest, a common passion, is the vein or nerve which interlinks and modifies the monotonous isolation of individual lives. Is it not, then, conceivable that in these direct telepathic transferences between mind and mind — these associations which seem to effect themselves beyond our threshold of consciousness, and only to startle us by their occasional intrusion into the field of sense — we may be gaining a first glimpse of a process of psychical evolution, as true and actual as any in the physical world? of some incipient organic solidarity between the psychical units which we call man and man 1 Perhaps beneath the body politic a soul politic is integrating itself unseen;—

totamque infusa per artus Mens agitat molem, et magno se corpore miscet.

Let this analogy take its place with the rest. It is too soon, indeed, to detect the law of these operations, but not too soon to affirm confidently tliat these operations obey their certain law; it is too soon to discern in this inextricabilis error the path by which Evolution seeks its goal, but not too soon to be assured that it is the principle of Evolution itself which, like Daedalus, cceca regens filo vestigia, will in its own time unlock the labyrinth which its own magic force has made; will conduct us from physical to psychical, perhaps from terrene to transcendent things.

F. W. H. M.

SUPPLEMENT.

^ The Supplement does not include the Additional Chapter at the end of the volume, which is to be regarded as belonging to the main body of the work.

SUPPLEMENT.

INTRODUCTION.

§ 1. The supplementary evidence now to be presented, like the larger body of the work, consists of two parts, pertaining respectively to experimental and to spontaneous telepathy.

The experimental cases, which will be given in the first chapter,, are all connected with a more or less abnormal state of the percipient; and they belong for the most part to the transitional class,^ where the mind of the agent is fixed on the sensation or idea which he desires to transfer, but the percipient is not aware that any experiment is being tried. Some of the cases are even spontaneous, in so far as the agent himself was not at the moment concentrating his attention on the effect to be produced; but they are experimental in the sense that they have belonged to a course of hypnotic treatment, deliberately pursued during a considerable period.

The subsequent chapters will be devoted to spontaneous phenomena, belonging to the various groups which have been already passed in review. And in relation to this branch of the subject, I must ask the reader throughout to bear in mind what the Supplement professes, or rather what it does not profess, to be,

§ 2. It does not constitute a case on which we should have felt that the reality of telepathy could be safely based.

It includes, in the first place, a large number of first-hand narratives where, for various reasons, the chance of error in some vital point seems less improbable than in those hitherto quoted. A detailed preliminary survey of these various reasons is scarcely necessary; the reader of the 4th chapter of the preceding volume will readily picture them, and they will be abundantly noted in connection with the testimony to which they apply. The chief points are

^ To such cases I have attached numbers, they being parallel to the cases in Vol. i., Chap, iii., where the numbering of examples began. The cases where the percipient was (certainly or possibly) aware of being the subject of an experiment, are given without numbers — not as an indication of evidential inferiority, but because of practical difficulties, a whole series of experiments having often been made on a single occasion.



Vol. Ii. Y

322 SUPPLEMENT.

naturally those which introduce a doubt as to the closeness of the alleged coincidence, or as to the unique or highly exceptional character of the percipient's impression.

In the second place, a large number of the included narratives are second-hand. They are of a good type, no doubt; being received not from persons who have only casually heard the first-hand account without any opportunities of judging of its correctness, but from persons for the most part intimately connected with the original witness, and well assured at any rate of his conviction as to the truth of what he told, and of the impression which the experience had made on him.^ Of the majority of these narratives, we think that the fair conclusion would be that, though possibly or probably inaccurate in minor points, they faithfully present the essential point which bears on the telepathic theory. But I cannot make the justice of this view evident; no such defence of it can be given as was attempted in Chapter IV. of the first volume, in respect of the first-hand testimony. It is an instinct, rather than a logically-grounded opinion — and is, in fact, the slowly-formed result of a very large amount of labour in the sifting and comparing of records, and in the examination of witnesses. But though the view cannot be proved correct, I may remind the reader that we who hold it have had exceptional opportunities of appreciating to the full the dangers which truth runs in passing from mouth to mouth; that we believe we do appreciate those dangers to the full; and that signs of this have not been lacking in the course of the work. And it may, I think, be taken as a further sign of such appreciation that we feel ourselves unable to regard the immense number of bond fide records that remain to be presented, as amounting to any sort of independent proof of our case.

§ 3. But in saying that our case could not be properly regarded as 'proved by the Supplement alone, I am far from saying that it is not supported. If the existence of spontaneous telepathy were a certainty, many of the experiences which follow might almost certainly be referred to it; and in proportion as the existence of spontaneous telepathy is probable, may they with probability be referred to it. The bond fide evidence for them exists, and has to be accounted for; and to us it seems just of the sort that we should expect to find, and exhibits just the sort of shortcomings that we should expect to find, on the hypothesis that telepathy is really a fact in Nature. This state-

1 As an illustration of the difference, see Colonel V.'s case below, Chap, v., § 3, and the note thereon.

ment will of course not have any weight with those who differ from us, on a priori grounds, from the very outset. Such persons may, and indeed almost must, affirm that the far stronger body of evidence which has been already passed in review is just what they would expect to find, on the hypothesis that telepathy is not a fact in Nature. Their position here would perhaps be stronger if they had actually made this affirmation before the body of evidence was there. It at any rate does not seem certain that those who have dogmatically asserted that there are no sober first-hand accounts of, e.^., apparitions at death from educated and unhysterical witnesses — or that there are not more than the very few which the doctrine of chances will at once account for — would have been ready, when our inquiry was taken up, to contradict themselves by predicting that many scores of such accounts could be had for the asking. But however that may be, my remarks are addressed only to those who would admit that the evidence already presented constitutes at least a solid argument for the reality of spontaneous telepathy. And these persons will probably agree, if a considerable number of cases are so attested that the rejection of the telepathic explanation of them would involve great improbabilities, that then (1) it is natural that a considerable number of cases should also be so attested that the rejection of the telepathic explanation of them would involve less, but still considerable, improbabilities; (2) the more completely evidenced cases establish a presumption that some, at any rate, of the less completely evidenced cases are genuine; and (3) the general objection to the reality of the class of phenomena, as out of relation to the general experience of mankind, is legitimately diminished by taking into account all the cases which, if the cause that we suggest be a reality, would more reasonably be referred to it than to any other cause. These last words of course involve the whole judgment of what follows; and I hope that, on the whole, they will seem defensible. In this, that, or the other case, a mistake may be easily imaginable. But here, as before, it may be represented that the argument is cumulative; that the body of narratives, as it stands, is harmonious and sober in character; that they introduce none of the obvious marvels which popular superstition is so ready to supply (Vol. I., p. 165); that they never pass the line up to which the more completely evidenced cases have carried us; — and that such are not the natural results of unconscious invention or exaggeration, playing at random over hundreds of disconnected instances.

[chap.



Chapter I. Fukther Examples of Thought-transference, Principally

IN HYPNOTIC CASES.

§ 1. This chapter will contain some specimens of the older observations in "thought-transference" referred to in Vol. I., p. 12; and also a few more recent instances.

I will take first the most rudimentary transferences — those of tastes and pains.

Mr. Esdaile, for many years Presidency Surgeon in Calcutta^ whose observations on hypnotic phenomena now form an accepted part of physiological science, gives the following case of transference of taste between himself and a patient whom he had mesmerised (Practical MesTnerism, p. 125). The subject was a young Hindoo, Baboo Mohun Mittre, who had been operated upon painlessly whilst in the mesmeric trance.

" One day that the Baboo came to the hospital to pay his respects, after getting well, I took him into a side room, and mesmerising him till he could not open his eyes, I went out and desired my assistant surgeon to procure me some salt, a slice of lime, a piece of gentian, and some brandy, and to give them to me in any order he pleased, when I opened my mouth. We returned, and blindfolding Lallee Mohun, I took hold of both his hands: and, opening my mouth, had a slice of half-rotten lime put into it by my assistant. Having chewed it, I asked, ' Do you taste anything? ' ' Yes, I taste a nasty old lime ': and he made wry faces in correspondence. He was equally correct with all the other substances, calling the gentian by its native name, cheretta; and when I tasted the brandy, he said it was Shrdh (the general name for wine and spirits). Being asked what kind, he said, ' What I used to drink — brandy.' For I am happy to say he is cured of his drunken habits (formerly drinking two bottles of brandy a day) as well as of his disease."

The Rev. C. H. Townshend, in his Facts in Mesmerism, gives several examples. (See especially pp. 68, 72, 76, 122, 150, 151, 184.) The following experiments were made on a servant of his own, in.

whom he had produced the trance- condition; but it cannot be held impossible, from his description, that the results should have been due to an acute sense of smell, combined with a certain amount of luck.

" Wine, water, and coffee were handed to me successively, in such a way as to prevent the patient from perceiving, by any usual means, what the liquors were. He, however, correctly named them in order. The order was then changed, and the results of the experiments were the same. Flowers were given me to smell. I was holding the patient by one hand at the time, but turning altogether away from him to a table, over which I bent, so as to interpose myself between him and anything that might be handed to me. He, however, when I smelt of the flowers, imitated the action, and on my asking him what he perceived, replied without hesitation, ' Flowers.' Upon this, one of the party silently changed the flowers for a bottle of eau de Cologne, when he observed, ' That is not the same smell; it is eau de Cologne.' With the manner of conducting this experiment and its results, all who were present declared themselves perfectly satisfied."

" Three of my sleep-wakers," Mr. Townshend says in another place, " could in no way distinguish substances when placed in their own mouths, nor discriminate between a piece of apple and a piece of cheese; but the moment that I was eating, they, seeming to eat also, could tell me what I had in my mouth."

The next case is also one of Mr. Townshend's.

(358) " Did any one strike or hurt me in any part of the body when Anna M. was in sleep-waking, she immediately carried her hand to a corresponding part of her own person. Then she would rub her own shoulder when mine was smarting with a blow, manifesting that the actual nerves of that part were, pro tempore, restored to their functions. Once an incredulous person came near me unawares, and trod upon my foot, which was quite hidden under a chair. The sleep-waker instantly darted down her hand and rubbed her own foot with an expression of pain. Again, if my hair was pulled from behind, Anna directly raised her hand to the back of her head. A pin thrust into my hand elicited an equal demonstration of sympathy."

