" I cannot remember distinctly that I found any gharry at the Bari*ackpore train, Calcutta Station, but you may probably remember whether you sent the gharry; but I do remember my astonishment that you had put back dinner against my return from Barrackpore by that particulartrain, you having had no previous direct knowledge of my having gone to Barrackpore at all.

" I remember, too, your telling me generally what I had been doing at Barrackpore, and how I had missed the earlier train. And on my inquiry, ' How on earth do you know these things 1 ' you said, ' I saw you.' Expecting me by that train, I can quite understand your having sent the carriage for me, although that particular item is not clearly on my memory.

" I can well remember that at the time of the incident you were in a very delicate state of health.

" Do you remember that other occasion in Calcutta, a holiday, when

Mrs. called, I being out, and on her inquiring for me your informing

her that I had gone to the bootmakers and the hatters, you having had no previous intimation from me of any such intention on my part? and our astonishment and amusement when I did a little later turn up, a new hat in my hand, and fresh from registering an order at the bootmakers?

" These have always appeared to me very extraordinary incidents, and the first, especially, incapable of explanation in an ordinary way."

Mrs. L. recollects the other incident referred to, but she is not inclined to think it of much importance.

She adds: —

"The river crossed was the Hooghly from Serampore to Barrackpore, where the house was situated which Mr. A. looked over. The station he arrived at was in Calcutta, I think called the South Eastern, but of this I am not sure."

The next account is from a lady who is an active philanthropist, and as practical and unvisionary a person as could be found. She has no special interest in our work, and withholds her name on the ground that her friends would dislike or despise the subject. This is one of the ways in which the present state of thought and feeling often prevents the facts from having their legitimate force.

"May 9th, 1883. (63) " It happened one Tuesday last January. I was going to start for one of my usual visits to Southampton. In the morning I received a letter from a friend saying he was going to hunt that day, and would write next day, so that I should get the letter on my return home. In the train, being tired, I put down my book and shut my eyes, and presently the

264.TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

whole scene suddenly occurred before me — a hunting field and two men riding up to jump a low stone wall. My friend's horse rushed at it, could not clear it, and blundered on to his head, throwing off his rider, and the whole scene vanished. I was wide awake the whole time. My friend is a great rider, and there was no reason why such an accident should have befallen him. Directly I arrived at Southampton I wrote to him, simply saying I knew he had had a fall, and hoped he was not hurt. On my return late on Wednesday night, not finding the promised letter, I wrote a few lines, merely saying I should expect to hear all about his spill next day, and I mentioned to two people that evening on my return what I had seen; also that Tuesday evening, dining with friends, I spoke of what had happened in the train, and they all promptly laughed at me. On Thursday morning I received a letter from my friend, telling me he had had a fall, riding at a low stone wall, that the horse had not been able to clear it, and had blundered on to his head, that he was not much hurt, and had later on remounted. He had not, when he wrote, received either of my letters, as my Tuesday one only arrived in Scotland on Thursday morning, and my Wednesday one on Friday. When he received my letters, he only declared I must have been asleep. Nothing of the sort ever happened to me before or since. It all seemed very natural and did not alarm me. « jj q. jj »

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. B. adds: —

" My friend, who is a hard-headed Scotchman, declined to say another word about it. All I know is that there were two horsemen riding up to the same spot."

In a personal interview, Mrs. B. told the present writer that her vision took place about 3 o'clock in the afternoon, and that she had heard from her friend that his accident took place " after lunch." She had no idea of disaster, and felt sure he was not much hurt. She cannot say whether her eyes were open or shut, but is certain that the experience was an altogether unique one.

Very similar to this incident is the following, which seems to take us up to the very furthest point where the experience can still be described as a mental picture. The percipient herself might have been puzzled to say afterwards whether the vision had or had not seemed to engage her bodily eye. (Compare the parallel quasiauditory impression above, case 49.) The account is in Sir L.'s

own words. His reason for withholding his name is Lady L.'s dislike of the subject.

(64) " Some time ago Mr. and Mrs. [now Sir — and Lady] L. were at his father's country house at S., where they generally spent the autumn. Mrs. L. was not feeling well, and lay on the sofa or bed all the day.

"About 11 o'clock Mr. L. told her he was going to drive in the dog-cart to the neighbouring town, about nine miles off. This was not an unusual thing, and he left her to go. Some four or five hours afterwards, on his return home, he went straight up to her room to see how she was, and found her greatly disturbed. She said, ' Oh, I am so glad to see you back;

T have had such a horrid fright, a sort of dream, or rather vision, for I was not asleep. I thought I saw you run away with; but it was quite absurd, for I knew you were in the dog-cart, and I fancied I saw two horses.' Mr. L. inquired when she saw it, and she, said about an hour ago.

"Now the facts were these: On leaving Mrs. L. about 11 that morning, Mr. L.'s father said he would accompany him, and Mr. L. accordingly counter-ordered the dog-cart and ordered a phaeton and pair, but naturally he did not think of telling Mrs. L. of the change of plan. Coming out of the town, Mr. L. was driving, and they were run away 'with, one of the horses having bolted, and for about 200 yards or more it was found impossible to stop the horses, when an intervening hill gave them the opportunity. The time when this happened, as nearly as possible, coincided with the time when Mrs. L. saw what she described as a vision, not a dream, and the detail as to the two horses is remarkable, because Mrs. L. was ignorant of the change of plan."

In answer to inquiries, Sir — L. adds: —

"September 15th, 1884.

" The narrative has often been told by me in my wife's presence, and there can be no discrepancy or doubt. It is a true and circumstantial account of what happened, about 1866 or 1867, I think."

We received the next account through the kindness of Mr. J. Bradley Dyne, of 2, New Square, Lincoln's Inn. The incident took place in his house at Highgate, and the narrator is his sister-in-law. The case brings us again to the very verge of actual sensory hallucination. It seems also to be an extreme instance of a deferred or a latent telepathic impression— the death of the agent (allowing for longitude) having preceded the percipient's experience by about 10 hours. This feature does not seem specially surprising, when we remember how a.ctual impressions of sense may pass unnoted, and yet emerge into consciousness hours afterwards, either in dream or in some moment of silence or recueillement. (See above, pp. 201-2.)

"1883.

(65) " I had known Mr. as a medical man, under whose treatment I had been for some years, and at whose hands I had experienced great kindness. He had ceased to attend me for considerably more than a year at the time of his death. I was aware that he had given up practice, but beyond that I knew nothing of his proceedings, or of the state of his health. At the time I last saw him, he appeared particularly well, and even made some remark himself as to the amount of vigour and work left in him.

" On Thursday, the 16th day of December, 1875, I had been for some little time on a visit at my brother-in-law's and sister's house near London. I was in good health, but from the morning and throughout the day I felt unaccountably depressed and out of spirits, which I attributed to the gloominess of the weather. A short time after lunch, about 2 o'clock, I thought I would go up to the nursery to amuse myself with the children, and try to recover my spirits. The attempt failed, and 1 returned to the

266 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

dining-room, where I sat by myself, my sister being engaged elsewhere.

The thought of Mr. came into my mind, and suddenly, with my eyes

open, as I believe, for I was not feeling sleepy, I seemed to be in a room in which a man was lying dead in a small bed. I recognised the face at

once as that of Mr., and felt no doubt that he was dead, and not

asleep only. The room appeared to be bare and without carpet or

furniture. I cannot say how long the appearance lasted. I did not

| mention the appearance to my sister or brother-in-law at the time. I

tried to argue with myself that there could be nothing in what I had seen,

chiefly on the ground that from what I knew of Mr. 's circumstances

it was most improbable that, if dead, he would be in a room in so bare and unfurnished a state. Two days afterwards, on December 18th, I left my sister's house for home. About a week after my arrival, another of

my sisters read out of the daily papers the announcement of Mr. 's

death, which had taken place abroad, and on December 16th, the day on which I had seen the appearance.

" I have since been informed that Mr. had died in a small village

hospital in a warm foreign climate, having been suddenly attacked with illness whilst on his travels."

In answer to an inquiry Mr. Dyne says: —

"My sister-in-law tells me that the occasion which I mentioned to you is absolutely the only one on which she has seen any vision of the kind."

We learn from Mr. 's widow that the room in which he died

fairly corresponded with the above description, aud that the hour of death was 3.30 a.m.

 «/ These latter narratives might suggest a sort of incipient clairvoyance} But in the present state of our knowledge, it would be rash to ascribe any phenomenon to independent clairvoyance, which could by any possibility be regarded as telepathic; for the simple reason that the phenomena on record which (if correctly reported) must beyond doubt have been due to independent clairvoyance, are extremely rare in comparison with those which, if correctly reported, can be accounted for by thought-transference. Thus in the last example — granting the possibility of deferred impressions — there is no difficulty in connecting the idea of the room, and even the idea of actual death, with the perceptions and thoughts of the dying man. It would be inconvenient, however, to refuse the term clairvoyance to cases where telepathic action reaches such a pitch that the percipient seems actually to be using the senses of some person or persons at the distant scene. And it will perhaps suffice to save confusion, if I note at once the difference between clairvoyance of this extreme telepathic type (which is still fairly

1 As regards the appearance of the agent's own figure in the scene, see the remarks on some parallel dream-cases, Chap, viii., Part ii., end of § 5.

within the scope of this book), and any supposed extension, for which

no conditioning " agency " can be assigned, of the percipient's own

senses.

Among the cases to be here quoted, none perhaps strains the

hypothesis of a conditioning " agency " more than the following. It is

from a Fellow of the College of Physicians, who fears professional

injury if he were "supposed to defend opinions at variance with

general scientific belief," and does not therefore allow his name to

appear. He is candid enough to admit that if every one argued as he

does, " progress would be impossible."

"May 20th, 1884.

(66) "Twenty years ago [abroad] I had a patient, wife of a parson. She had a peculiar kind of delirium which did not belong to her disease, and perplexed me. The house in which she lived was closed at midnight, that is. the outer door had no bell. One night I saw her at 9. When I came home I said to my wife, ' I don't understand that case; I wish I could get into the house late.' We went to bed rather early. At about 1 o'clock I got up. She said, ' What are you about; are you not well 1 ' I said, ' Perfectly so.' ' Then why get up? ' ' Because I can get into that house.' ' How, if it is shut up 1 ' 'I see the proprietor standing under the lamp-post this side of the bridge, with another man.' ' You have been dreaming.' ' No, I have been wide awake; but dreaming or waking, I mean to try.' I started with the firm conviction that I should find the individual in question. Sure enough there he was under the lamp-post, talking to a friend. I asked him if he was going home. (I knew him very well.) He said he was, so I told him I was going to see a patient, and would accompany him. I was positively ashamed to explain matters; it seemed so absurd that I knew he would not believe me. On arriving at the house I said, ' Now I am here, I will drop in and see my patient.' On entering the room I found the maid giving her a tumbler of stronggrog. The case was clear; it was as I suspected — delirium from drink. The next day I delicately spoke to the husband about it. He denied it, and in the afternoon I received a note requesting me not to repeat the visits. Three weeks ago I was recounting the story and mentioned the name. A lady present said: ' That is the name of the clergyman in my parish, at B., and his wife is in a lunatic asylum from drink! ' "

Tn conversation with the present writer, the narrator explained that the vision — though giving an impression of externality and seen, as he believes, with open eyes — was not definitely located in space. He had never encountered the proprietor on the spot where he saw him, and it was not a likely thing that he should be standing talking in the streets at so late an hour.

This is certainly a perplexing incident. But if we regard it as more than an accidental coincidence, we can hardly help supposing that the connection between the proprietor of the house and the desire with which the physician was preoccupied was at any rate one of the

268 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS. [CHAP-

conditions which enabled the proximity of the former to affect the latter; so that we may still be within the limits of telepathic communication between mind and mind.

I had hoped to conclude this chapter with a case showing how a special condition of the percipient's mind may open the door (so to speak) to a telepathic impression, and also exemplifying the occurrence of a series of these vivid mental pictures to a single percipient. On the occasions referred to, a deliberate effort on the percipient's part seems to have been involved in receiving, or rather in obtaining, a true impression of the aspect and surroundings of absent persons; but unless we would assert (which we have no grounds for doing) that the continued existence of those persons, and their pre-established relation to the percipient, were not necessary conditions for the impression, we must still hold them to have been technically the agents. One of these agents, however — a medical man — while unable to resist the proofs which he has received of this sort of telepathic invasion, has so invincible a dread and dislike of the subject that for the present, in deference to his wishes, the account is withheld from publication. To " believe and tremble " is not a very scientific state of mind, and it is one for which we trust that there will be less and less excuse, as psychical research is gradually redeemed from supernatural and superstitious associations. Meanwhile, we must treat it with indulgence; merely noting how the very qualities which have so often operated to swell lists of spurious marvels may equally operate to hamper the record and recognition of facts.



Chapter VII. Emotional and Motor Effects.

§ 1. We come next to a class of cases which are characterised not so much by the distinctness of the idea as by the strength of the emotion produced in the percipient. In some of these the emotion has depended on a definite idea, and has been connected with a sense of calamity to a particular individual, or a particular household: in others it has not had reference to any definite idea, and has seemed at the time quite causeless and unreasonable. Sometimes, again, the analogy with experimental cases, in the direct reflection of experience from mind to mind, is distinctly retained,1 the experience of the percipient seeming actually to reproduce that of a relative or friend who is in some physical or mental crisis at a distance; while in other cases a peculiar distress on the one side is so strikingly contemporaneous with a unique condition on the other, that we cannot refuse to consider the hypothesis of a causal connection.

From the point of view of evidence, this class of emotional impressions clearly requires the most careful treatment. There is all the difference between a sensory impression, and even between the more distinct " mental pictures " of the last chapter, and a mere mood. We have no grounds for assuming that the news (for instance) of a

_ 1 The emotional class of impressions is, of course, a field peculiarly ill-adapted for deliberate experiment. Strong emotion cannot be summoned up at will by an experimenter even in his own mind; while, if it exists, it probably betrays itself in ways beyond his control. Cases are, indeed, alleged where a secret grief or anxiety on a mesmeriser's part has been reflected in the demeanour of his "subject." But this would not necessarily prove more than that the "subject" was, so to speak, hypersesthetic to slight physical signs of mental disturbance — which would be quite in accordance with the one-sided concentration of his mind that is shown in other ways, e.g., in his frequent deafness to any other voice than that of his operator. I may quote for what they are worth the following observations of Mr. H. S. Thompson [Zoist, v. 257): "One patient who was highly sensitive, and whom I mesmerised for a nervous disorder, could, when awake, point out immediate y whatever part of my head was touched by a third person. If I mesmerised her when I was in spirits, she was in spirits also; if I was grave, she was grave; and I never dared mesmerise her when I was suffering from any annoyance. I did not find that she often had distinct thoughts corresponding with my own, even when I tried to impress her by will with them. But she has experienced and shown a feeling corresponding with the thoughts I had."

270 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

friend's death will incite a man of sense and honesty to say that he saw, heard, felt, or strongly pictured, something unusual at or near the time of its occurrence, unless he really did so; but it is easy to suppose that, having chanced to be slightly out of spirits at the time, he afterwards seems to remember that he was very much depressed indeed, and even filled with a boding of some impending calamity. Nay, since a person who is oppressed by gloom and apprehension will often embrace in mental glances the small group of persons with whom his emotional connection is strongest, he may recall, when one of these persons proves actually to have been passing through a crisis at the time, that this particular one was present to his mind, and may easily glide on into thinking that it was with him that the sense of apprehension was specially connected. In these cases, then, it is of prime importance that the percipient's impression shall be mentioned or otherwise noted by him in an unmistakeable way, before the receipt of news as to the supposed agent's condition. And even when we have clear proof that the emotion was really of a strongly-marked character, it is necessary further to obtain some assurance that such moods are not of common occurrence in the percipient's experience. Failing this, it is safest to regard any unusual character that may afterwards be attributed to the emotion as the result of its being afterwards dwelt on in connection with the coincident event.

It need hardly be added that all cases must be rejected where there has been any appreciable cause for anxiety, however unmistakeable and unique the impression may be shown to have been. Thus it cannot be regarded as usual for a lady who is at a friend's house, and intending to remain there for a week or two, to find herself suddenly and irrationally impelled, by the certainty of a domestic calamity, to pack her boxes and sit waiting for a telegram — which (to borrow the phrase of a business-like informant) was shortly delivered " as per presentiment." But the surmise which was thus confirmed related to a baby grandchild at home; and though she had not heard that it was ailing, those who watch over the health of young children are often, of course, in a more or less chronic state of nervousness.

| 2. I will first quote a case where the emotional impression had a certain definiteness of embodiment. The narrator unfortunately does not allow the publication of his complete name; but he impressed Professor Sidgwick, who examined him personally, as a sensible and trustworthy witness.

" Edinburgh.

"December 27th, 1883.

(67) " In January, 1871, I was living in the West Indies. On the 7th of that month I got up with a strange feeling that there was something happening at my old home in Scotland. At 7 a.m. I mentioned to my sister-in-law my strange dread, and said that even at that hour what I dreaded was taking place.

"By the next mail I got word that at 11 a.m. on the 7th January my sister died. The island I lived in was St. Kitts, and the death took place in Edinburgh. Please note the hours and allow for difference in time, and you will notice at least a remarkable coincidence. I may add I never knew of her illness.

"Andrew C n."

The longitude of St. Kitts is about 62° — which makes 4 hours and a few minutes difference of time.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. C n adds: —

"January 8th, 1884.

" I never at any other times had a feeling in any way resembling the particular time I wrote about.

" It would be very difficult to get the note from my sister-in-law, as she now lives in Cincinnati, Ohio, and I seldom hear of her.

" At the time I wrote about I was in perfect health, and in every way in comfortable circumstances."

[We have, of course, repeatedly urged our informant to apply, or to allow us to apply, for his sister-in-law's recollection of this incident; but without success.]

The next case, from our friend the Hon. Mrs. Fox Powys, is still

more indefinite, and would not be worth quoting but for our own

well-grounded assurance that the account is free from exaggeration.

" Milford Lodge, Godalming.

"February 16th, 1884.

(68) " About 3 months ago as I was sitting, quietly thinking, between 5 and 7 p.m., I experienced a very curious sensation. I can only describe it as like a cloud of calamity gradually wrapping me round. It was almost a physical feeling, so strong was it; and I seemed to be certain, in some inexplicable way, of disaster to some one of my relations or friends, though I could not in the least fix upon anybody in particular, and there was no one about whom I was anxious at the time. I do not remember ever experiencing such a thing before. I should say it lasted about half-an-hour. This happened on a Saturday, and on Monday I got a letter from my sister, written on the Saturday evening to go by the post which leaves at 7 p.m., in which she told me she had received a telegram, an hour or so ago, informing her of the dangerous illness of her brother-inlaw, at which she was greatly upset. This appeared to be a very probable explanation of my extraordinary presentiment, and I wrote and told her all about it at once.

" A. C. Powys."

[Mrs. Powys tells us that she mentioned her impression at the time to her husband; but he cannot recall the fact.]

272 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

A single impression of so vague a kind as this cannot, of course, go for much. And though it is so far against the hypothesis of accidental coincidence that the narrator states — and we believe, accurately — that the experience was unique, yet this very uniqueness involves a certain difficulty. For if she could be once telepathically impressed by an agent whose emotional excitement at the time, though considerable, was clearly not extreme, we cannot but wonder that so remarkable a sensibility should have found no other occasion to manifest itself. There is more evidential force in the occurrence of several such impressions to the same person — provided, of course, that they have all corresponded with facts. Such seems to have been the experience of Mr. J. D. Harry, whom we do not know personally, but who has been described to us by two common acquaintances as an acute man of the world. He wrote to us as follows, in 1882, from The Palms, St. Julian's, Malta: —

(69) "I lost my brother in Cornwall, and. my uncle in Devonshire. Neither of them had been ill more than three days, and no communication whatever had taken place with me from the time they were first attacked until their deaths; nevertheless I felt so depressed on each occasion, from the time they were taken ill, that I could scarcely perform the duties of my office, the peculiar feeling lasting until tne announcements in each case were made. It was nearly the same feeling of depression previous to my mother's death, whose illness was likewise very sudden and unknown to me.

" John D. Harry."

In answer to the question whether he had ever had similar depressions which had not had any correspondence with reality, Mr. Harry replied: —

"You ask if I ever felt similarly depressed. You have my assurance that I never experienced a like feeling, except in the three instances named; indeed, all those who know me well would tell you that in their belief I am the last person to become so affected. During the three or four serious illnesses I have undergone, when the hopes of my family and friends were despaired of, I was still cheery."

/ [Here we have to depend entirely on the narrator's memory; and the case does not conform to the rule that the marked character of the experience shall be en evidence, before the news is known.]

In the next example there can no doubt as to the striking nature of the percipient's experience; which, indeed, was so distinctly physical in character as to suggest the actual sensory transference of which Mrs. Severn's case (p. 188) was our most precise example. The narrator is Mrs. Reay, of 99, Holland Road, Kensington.

"August 14th, 1884-.

(70) " I will endeavour to write you an account of the incident, related for you by my friend, Mr. E. Moon. His sister was staying with me at the time. It was in February, but I don't remember what year. "We were sitting chatting over our 5 o'clock tea; I was perfectly well at the time, and much amused with her conversation. As I had several notes to write before dinner, I asked her to leave me alone, or I feared I should not get them finished. She did so, and I went to the writing-table and began to write.

" All at once a dreadful feeling of illness and faintness came over me, and I felt that I was dying. I had no power to get up to ring the bell for assistance, but sat with my head in my hands utterly helpless.

" My maid came into the room for the tea things. I thought I would keep her with me, but felt better while she was there, so did not mention my illness to her, thinking it had passed away. However, as soon as I lost the sound of her footsteps, it all came back upon me worse than ever. In vain I tried to get up and ring the bell or call for help; I could not move, and thought I was certainly dying.

" When the dressing bell rang it roused me again, and I made a great effort to rise and go to my room, which I did; but when my maid came in I was standing by the fire, leaning upon the mantelpiece, trembling all over. She at once came to me and asked what was the matter. I said I did not know, but that I felt very ill indeed.

"The dinner-hour had arrived, and my husband had not come home. Then, for the first time, it flashed upon my mind that something had happened to him when I was taken ill at the writing-table. This was the first time I had thought about him, so that it was no anxiety on my part about him that had caused my illness. The next half-hour was spent in great suspense; then he arrived home with his messenger with him; he was almost in an unconscious state, and remained so for about 24 hours. When he was well enough for me to ask him about his illness, he said he had been very well indeed all day, but just as he was preparing to leave his office he became suddenly very ill (just the same time that I was taken ill at the writing-table), and his messenger had to get a cab and come home with him; he was quite unable to be left by himself.

"Emily Reay."

Mr. Reay, Secretary of the London and North- Western Railway, confirms as follows: —

"September 18th, 1884.

" " I perfectly well recollect, on the evening of my severe and sudden attack of illness, my wife asking me some questions about it, when, after hearing what I had to say, she told me that almost at the same instant of time (soon after 5 p.m.), when writing, she was seized with a fit of trembling and nervous depression, as if she were dying. She went to her room and remained there in the same state until the dinner hour, and as I did not arrive by that time she instinctively felt that something had happened to me, and was on the point of sending to the office to inquire when I left, when I was brought home in a cab. At the time of my seizure I was writing, and it was with much difficulty that I was enabled to finish the letter. " S. Reay."

274 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS [chap.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Reay adds: —

" 1 never at any other time in my life had the slightest approach to the sensations I experienced when the sudden illness came over me, under the circumstances mentioned to you. I never in my life fainted, nor have I any tendency that way. The feeling which came over me was a dreadful trembling, with prostration, and a feeling that I was going to die; and I had no power to rise from the writing-table to ring for assistance. I have never had the same feeling since, and never before that time."

The uniqueness of the experience may be readily accepted as •tated, in a case where its physical character was so distinct as this. But even in judging of more doubtful cases, an inference which the percipient's description might hardly warrant may sometimes be fairly drawn from the permanent effect made on his mind. The following account, for instance, is very likely to provoke a smile, and is in itself wholly inconclusive; yet the impression was at any rate sufficiently marked to force the reality of sympathetic transferences on the mind of a scientific witness, who candidly records it in a book largely devoted to the exposure of spurious " psychical " marvels. Dr. E. L. Fischer, of Wurzburg, in his Dev Sogenannte Lebens-Magnetismus oder Hypnotismus (Mainz, 1883), says that as a student at the University he enjoyed extremely good spirits, but was one morning oppressed by an extraordinary gloom, which his companions noticed.

(71) " During the whole afternoon I remained in this state of dismal wretchedness. All at once a telegram arrived from home, informing me that my grandmother was taken very ill, and that she was earnestly longing for me. There I had the solution of the riddle. Nevertheless from that hour my melancholy gradually decreased, and in spite of the telegram it completely disappeared in the course of the afternoon. In the evening I received a second message, to the effect that the danger was over. In this way the second phenomenon, the rapid decrease of my wretchedness — a circumstance which in itself was surprising, inasmuch as the melancholy should naturally rather have increased after the receipt of the first news — received its explanation. For the afternoon was just the time when the change in the patient's condition for the better took place; and the danger to her life once over, her yearning for my presence had decreased; while simultaneously my anxiety was dispelled."

Dr. Fischer was, I think, wrong in accepting this incident, (and a very few more like it), as sufficient evidence for the fact of telepathy; but right in placing it on record for what it is worth.

In the majority of the emotional cases, the natural bond between the two persons concerned has been of the closest. And, ceteris

paribus, the nearer tie of blood increases the probability of the telepathic explanation, wherever the hypothesis of natural anxiety for a beloved relative is excluded by the fact that the emotion is connected with no special person. We received the following case from

Mrs. Bull, of Mossley Vicarage, Congleton.

"January 3rd, 1885.

(72) "On the evening of January 28th, 1863, I had met several old friends at dinner at a friend's house near Manchester, in which neighbourhood I had been paying visits. My return home to my father's house was fixed for the next afternoon. I ought to say that between that father and me, his first-born child, a more than common bond of affection and sympathy existed, arising from circumstances I need not mention, and I was looking forward to my return with earnest longing. The evening had been bright and happy, surrounded by friends I valued. When I was about to leave, my hostess pressed me to play for her a very favourite old march. I declined, on account of the lateness of the hour, and keeping horses standing. She said, ' It is not yet 1 2, and I have sent the carriage away for a quarter of an hour.' I sat down laughing, and before I played many bars, such an indescribable feeling came over me, intense sadness heralded a complete break down, and I was led away from the piano in hysterics. By 10 o'clock the next morning I got a telegram, to say my father had gone to bed in his usual health, and at a quarter to 12 the night before had passed away in an epileptic fit, having previously said to my sister how glad he was to think of seeing me so soon, and when she bid him good-night, praying God to give them both a quiet night and sleep.

" A. M. Bull."

The Chester Courant for February 4th, 1863, says that the death of the Rev. J. Jackson took place on January 28th, very suddenly. He had preached on the Sunday, and had been out on the Tuesday preceding the Wednesday night when his fatal fit attacked him.

In reply to inquiries, Mrs. Bull says: —

" Since reading your letter last night, I have carefully gone over the guests of that dinner party, and find them all gone but one, Frank Ashton, Esq., The Laurels, Twickenham, and he is too ill to read or to answer a letter. At the time I speak of, I was the widow of the Rev. J. Lowthian, vicar of Wharton. My father was the Rev. John Jackson, vicar of Over. / never experienced a similar feeling. I am not at all naturally inclined to depression, and am perfectly free from what is commonly understood by superstition."

In conversation, Mrs. Bull told me that she has never in her life had a fit of hysterics, or of unaccountable weeping, except on this occasion.

The writer of the following narrative is the editor of a well-known northern newspaper, and was formerly special foreign correspondent of a London paper. A few weeks before the occurrence here described, he had a curious impression corresponding with the death of a friend, which is narrated in the following chapter (case 103).

t 2

276 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

"December 11th, 1884.

(73) "On the 3rd of May in the same spring [1882], my wife, while taking tea with my daughter, was suddenly seized with an epileptic fit, and fell heavily to the floor, striking her forehead on the fender; she was never conscious again, but died the next day. This accident happened between 3 and 4 o'clock in the afternoon. For nearly 5 years my wife had intermittently suffered from epilepsy, but for some 3 months before her death seemed to have completely recovered, which apparent fact had caused much joy in our little family circle, as the poor dear had been a great sufferer. I set this down to show that her death or serious illness was not at all expected at the time it happened.

" On the morning of the 3rd of May I left for the City, and as my wife kissed her hand to me at the window, I thought how remarkably well and ' like her old self she appeared. I went to business in ' high spirits,' and left her in the same; but somewhere about the time she fell — neither my daughter nor I have been able to fix the time within an hour — I suddenly fell into such a fit of gloom that I was powerless to go on with my work, and could only sit with my face between my hands, scarcely able to speak to my colleagues in the same office, who became alarmed as they had never seen me in any but a cheerful mood. I was at the time editing England, and as friend after friend dropped into my room, and wanted to know what ailed me, I could only explain my sensation in a phrase (which they and I well remember) which I kept repeating, namely, ' I have a horrible sense of some impending calamity.' So far as I am aware, my thoughts never once turned to my home. If they had, I think I should not have accepted, as I did, an invitation to dine with a friend at a restaurant in the Strand, pressed on me for the express purpose of ' cheering me up.' "I was telegraphed for to our office in the Strand, but by an accident it was not forwarded to me to Whitefriars Street at my editorial room: so that I never saw my wife until after 12 at night, when my 8 or 9 hours of fearful depression of spirits (as it instantly struck me) were accounted for. I may add that I am naturally of a buoyant temperament, in fact I may say far above the average of people in that respect, and I was never to my knowledge ever so suddenly or similarly depressed before. My wife, in this case, you will observe, was not dead but simply unconscious when my fit of low spirits set in.

" There are several witnesses who can testify to these facts, for when it became known at the office that my wife was dead the strong coincidence of my suddenly ' turning so queer ' was a topic of conversation there. I have nothing to add but that we (my wife and I) had been married for 25 years, and were extremely fond of.each other, and we were both, I should say, of a sympathetic temperament, perhaps more than ordinarily so."

Mr. Podmore writes on Sept. 1, 1885: —

" I called to-day at Mr. 's house. He was out of town, but his

son and daughter were at home.1

" As regards Mr. 's depression on the day of his wife's fatal attack,

1 Our informant has since this date removed to the North of England, where apersonal interview with him might easily have been obtained, but was lately missed through an accident.

vil] EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. 'Ill

they both assured me that he spoke of this immediately after his return home on the evening of that day, and has frequently mentioned it since The son has also heard one of his father's colleagues, Mr. Green, describe the circumstance as something quite remarkable. Mr. Green told him that both himself and others present in the office did all they could to rally Mr. but failed."

[A full vivd voce account of the incident has been given by the narrator to our friend and helper, Mr. A. G. Leonard.]

Mr. Green writes: —

" Nether worton House, Steeple Aston, Oxon.

"September 16th, 1885.

" Dear Sir, — My friend, Mr., of England, has asked me to

corroborate the fact that he suffered from a singular depression all the day of his wife's fatal seizure. I was in his company most of the day, and can fully corroborate his statement. — Yours truly, «q ^ Green "

The next case is from a lady who is willing that her name should be given to any one genuinely interested in this case. She is known to the present writer as a sensible and clear-headed witness, as far from sentimentality or superstition as can well be conceived.

" October 27th, 1885. (74) "On the Saturday before Easter, 1881, my husband left London for Paris. On the Saturday or Sunday evening he was taken ill, at the hotel, with congestion of the brain, and wandered about the place delirious. Subsequently he was put in a room, and although a man was in attendance, he was, in regard to medical advice, <fec, quite neglected. He remained there some days, and by looking in his papers his name was discovered, and his family were communicated with.

" On the afternoon of Easter Monday, my sons and my daughter had gone out, leaving me at home. I fell into an altogether extraordinary state of depression and restlessness. I tried in vain to distract myself with work and books. I went upstairs and felt beside myself with distress, for what reason I could not tell; I argued with myself, but the feeling increased. I even had a violent fit of weeping — a thing absolutely alien to my character. I then put on my things, and, in the hope of ridding myself of the uncomfortable feeling, took a hansom cab, and drove about Hyde Park for about three hours — a thing which I should have considered myself stark mad for doing at any other time. I should have been the last person to spend eight shillings on cab fare for nothing. On receiving the news I went over to Paris, where I arrived on the Thursday, and my husband just knew me. The nurse engaged to nurse him told me that she was asked by the waiter if my Christian name was M. [Mrs. S.'s name, and a not very common one], as that was the name that my husband was constantly calling out during his delirium. He died some days afterwards.

" M. S."

I learn from both Mrs. S. and her son that she mentioned her remarkable experience to her family on the Monday evening. Her son writes as follows: —

278 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

" I beg to corroborate my mother's account of the circumstances mentioned. Her distress and the circumstances of the cab drive are entirely foreign to her character. My father was in delicate health, although seldom actually ill.

" E. S."

In answer to some questions addressed to Mrs. S., Mr. E. S., replies: — " My mother had no particular anxiety about my father's health. He

left on the Saturday for Paris, and was then in his usual health, and she

did not particularly connect her feelings with him."

[I suggested a difficulty as to the driving about Hyde Park, since it is only in a restricted portion of that park that cabs are permitted to pass. But Mrs. S. adheres to the word.]

In the following case a very marked depression of spirits was

followed by a vivid dream. The latter may of course be easily

accounted for as following naturally on the former; but the emotional

depression, which coincided in time with the fatal turn in the illness

of a near relative, seems to have been a unique experience in the

life of a person of strong mental and physical health. The narrator,

a physician, refuses permission to publish his name on the ground

that he is a " confirmed unbeliever "; though in conversation with

him I was unable to learn what exactly his unbelief was of, and in

what exactly its confirmation had consisted.

"March 7th, 1885.

(75) " When a boy about 14 years of age, I was in school in Edinburgh, my home being in the West of Scotland. A thoughtless boy, free from all care or anxiety, in the ' Eleven ' of my school, and popular with my companions, I had nothing to worry or annoy me. I boarded with two old ladies, now both dead.

" One afternoon — on the day previous to a most important cricket match in which I was to take part — I was overwhelmed with a most unusual sense of depression and melancholy. I shunned my friends and got ' chaffed ' for my most unusual dulness and sulkiness. I felt utterly miserable, and even to this day I have a most vivid recollection of my misery that afternoon.

" I knew that my father suffered from a most dangerous disease in the stomach — a gastric ulcer — and that he was always more or less in danger, but 1 knew that he was in his usual bad health, and that nothing exceptional ailed him.

" That same night I had a dream. I was engaged in the cricket match. I saw a telegram being brought to me while batting, and it told me that my father was dying, and telling me to come home at once. I told the ladies with whom I boarded what my dream had been, and told them how real the impression was. I went to the ground, and was engaged in the game, batting, and making a score. I saw a telegram being brought out, read it, and fainted. I at once left for home, and found my father had just died when I reached the house. The ulcer

in the stomach had suddenly burst about 4 o'clock on the previous day, and it was about that hour that I had experienced the most unusual depression I have described. The sensations I had on that afternoon have left a most clear and distinct impression on my mind, and now, after the lapse of 15 years, I well remember my miserable feelings.

"J.D., M.D." In reply to inquiries, Dr. D. says: —

" I most certainly never had a similar experience of depression, or such a vivid dream as the one I tried in my letter to explain. Both the depression and the dream were quite exceptional, and have left a most clear impression on my memory.

"I fear I cannot name any individual schoolfellow who noticed my most unwonted silence and quietness on that afternoon, but I distinctly remember their chaffing me for not joining as usual in the afternoon's practice."

§ 3. On the supposition that a close natural bond between two persons is a favourable condition for telepathic influence, there is one group of persons among whom we might expect to find a disproportionate number of instances — namely, twins. As a matter ot fact, we have a certain number of twin cases, which, though actually small, is indisputably disproportionate, if we remember what an infinitesimally small proportion of the population twins form. I will quote here the three examples which properly belong to this chapter. It may be of interest to compare them with the cases given by Mr. F. Galton (Inquiries into Human Faculty, pp. 226-31), ot consentaneous thought and action on the part of twins. Mr. Galton attributes the coincidences to a specially close similarity of constitution. The pair may be roughly compared to two watches, which begin to go at the same hour, and keep parallel with one another in their advance through life. This theory seems fairly to account for the occurrence of special physiological or pathological crises at the same point of the two lives. The twins, though separated, have their croup or their whooping-cough simultaneously. The explanation, however, seems a little strained when applied to the simultaneous purchase in different towns of two sets of champagne-glasses of similar pattern, owing to a sudden impulse on the part of each of the twins to surprise the other with a present. If it were possible — which it can hardly be — to make sure that there had been no previous mention of the subject between the brothers, and that the idea was really and completely impromptu, one might hint that the coincidence here was telepathic. And, at any rate, the cases to be now quoted seem outside

280 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

the range of a pre-established physiological harmony; with them, the alternative is between telepathy and accident.

The first account is from the Rev. J. M. Wilson, head-master of Clifton College, a Senior Wrangler and well-known mathematician.

"Clifton College.

"January 5th, 1884.

(76) " The facts were these, as nearly as I can remember.

" I was at Cambridge at the end of my second term, in full health, boating, football-playing and the like, and by no means subject to hallucinations or morbid fancies. One evening I felt extremely ill, trembling, with no apparent cause whatever; nor did it seem to me at the time to be a physical illness, a chill of any kind. I was frightened. I was totally unable to overcome it. I remember a sort of struggle with myself, resolving that I would go on with my mathematics, but it was in vain: I became convinced that I was dying.

" I went down to the rooms of my friend, W. E. Mullins, who was on the same staircase, and I remember that he exclaimed at me before I spoke. He put away his books, pulled out a whisky bottle and a backgammon board, but I could not face it. We sat over the fire for a bit, and then he fetched some one else (Mr. E. G-. Peckover), to have a look at me. I was in a strange discomfort, but with no symptoms I can recall, except mental discomfort, and the conviction that I should die that night.

"Towards 11, after some 3 hours of this, I got better, and went upstairs and got to bed, and after a time to sleep, and next morning was quite well.

" In the afternoon came a letter to say that my twin brother had died the evening before in Lincolnshire. I am quite clear of the fact that I never once thought of him, nor was his presence with me even dimly imagined. He had been long ill of consumption; but I had not heard of him for some days, and there was nothing to make me think that his death was near. It took me altogether by surprise.

" James M. Wilson."

CWe have applied to Mr. Mullins, but he cannot now recall the incident.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Wilson says: —

" 1 never experienced any similar nervous depression. It was a sort of panic fear, the chill of approaching death that was on me. The hours did not exactly coincide; my brother died some 4 hours before I was so seized."

If we are right in regarding this incident as probably telepathic, it is one of the numerous cases where the impression has lain latent for a considerable time before affecting consciousness. Mr. Wilson's description of his experience strongly recalls case 22, where the percipient, it will be remembered, " became quite cold, and had a firm presentiment that she was dying"; and compare also case 70.

The next case is from Mr. James Carroll, who, when he wrote, was in attendance on an invalid, under the care of Dr. Wood, The Priory, Roehampton. I have had a long interview with him, as well as a good deal of correspondence; and I have no doubt whatever that the facts are correctly recorded.

"July, 1884.

(77) " I beg to forward my experience of about six years ago, while living in the employment of Colonel Turbervill, near Bridgend, Glamorgan, and a twin brother in the same capacity with a lady at Chobham Place, Bagshot, Surrey.

" I may mention that my brother and I were devotedly attached from children, and our resemblance to each other so remarkable that only one or two of our family then living, and oldest friends, could distinguish any difference between us. Up to June 17th, 1878, I had not known my brother to have one day's illness, and in consequence of having about this time recovered heavy financial loss, there was this and other unusual cause for cheerfulness. But on the morning of the date given, about half-past 11, I experienced a strange sadness and depression. Unable to account for it, I turned to my desk, thinking of my brother. I looked at his last letter to see the date, and tried to detect if there was anything unusual in it but failed. I wrote off to my brother, closed my desk, and felt compelled to exclaim quite aloud, ' My brother or I will break down.' This I afterwards found was the first day of his fatal illness.

" I wrote again to him, but in consequence of his being ill I received no reply. We usually wrote twice a-week. I tried to persuade myself his silence was due to being busy. On the following Saturday, the 22nd, while speaking to Mr. Turbervill, a sudden depression, which I had never before realised, and which I feel impossible to describe, came over me. I felt strange and unwell. I retired as soon as possible, thankful my state of mind had not been noticed. I would have gone to my room, but felt it might be noticed, and felt frightened too, as if something might suddenly happen to me.

" I went, instead, into the footman's pantry, where they were cleaning the plate, and sat down, suppressed my feelings, but alluded to a dulness and concern for my brother. I was speaking, when a messenger entered with a telegram to announce my brother's dangerous state, and requesting my immediate presence. He died on the following Monday morning. It is clearly proved that at the time I felt the melancholy described he was speaking of me in great distress. We were never considered superstitious, and I was never apt to feelings of melancholy.

"My brother and I were well known to Dr. Young, of 30, Westbourne Square, Paddington; and to Mr. Trollope, Solicitor, 31, Abingdon Street, Westminster.

"James Carroll."

In reply to inquiries Mr. Carroll says: —

"August 8th, 1884.

" I find it difficult now, after the lapse of time and many changes, to get the memory of friends to recall the subjects of our correspondence. I left South Wales on the death of my brother, and have been moving about

282 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

among strangers ever since; circumstances on this part of the matter are singularly against me.

" You asked in your previous letter, was the impression of distress and apprehension which 1 described, rare to me in my experience 1 I never before felt anything like it, except in a milder form, before the death of my mother, about 14 years ago, while I was at Lord Robarts' seat in Arnhill, and my mother in London. The sensation then was about two or three days previous to her death. I have always been an opponent to ghost theory, and till my brother's death I never thought to entertain the idea that there could be any unseen power in the thought of apparitions.

" My brother's death was from a cold neglected, and inflammation rapidly setting in. We were twins, his age at time of death 39 about. From our extraordinary resemblance we were well known. I may mention my brother being the only near relation left.

" I sent to Ireland for signatures to a distant relative, who was with me as an adopted son shortly after my brother's death, for about two years. He is about 1 8 years of age; his name, too, is James Carroll. His corroboration comes very close to the time.

"An old friend, of 25 years, 30 I think, holding a good position in one of our chief banking houses, also promised to corroborate, a day or two ago. I enclose now a note from him, just received. He remembers the subject. I often, just after my brother's death, spoke of it to him.

"J. C."

A nephew and namesake of Mr. Carroll's writes as follows: —

" Clonmel, Ireland.

"August 10th, 1884. "I hereby certify that Mr. Carroll frequently, during the early part of my residence with him, about 5 years ago, spoke of the presentiment he describes in a letter written to you, a copy of which he has sent me.

"James Carroll."

The following is a letter to Mr. Carroll from Mr. James Martin, of 1, Oak Villa, Avenue Road, Acton.

"August 16th, 1884. " Dear James, — From the time of your brother's death till the present, I have spent much time in your society. I remember well the account you gave me of the dreadful depression of mind you passed through just previous to his death. It was singular, but true.

"James Martin."

Mr. Carroll showed me a letter written by Mrs. Benyan, his brother's employer, at the time when the brother was dangerously ill. The letter is to a solicitor, and expresses a desire that he, James Carroll, should be informed of the illness. It proves that the illness was sudden and that Mr. Carroll was unaware of it.

The following case is less striking, but is worth giving in connection with the others. We received it from Mr. (now the Rev.) A. J. Maclean, of Tewkesbury.

" Clergy School, Leeds.

"June 8th, 1884.

(78) " About three years ago my twin brother was yachting off Norway for six weeks. One Sunday I (who was then at college) felt certain that there was something wrong with my brother and spoke of it freely (I cannot remember to whom). When I saw my brother I mentioned this circumstance. My brother had kept a diary, and on the day in question they had encountered a storm, in which the masts were injured and things washed away. They gave up all for lost."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Maclean says: —

"June, 1884.

" I could not say whether my brother had any thoughts about me on the day he was in danger of being shipwrecked, but I certainly had a vivid impression that he was in danger the same day on which it happened. He was yachting at the time, and was off the coast of Norway. He is not the sort of man to experience anything in the way of hallucination, and if he did think of me at the time he would take no notice of it, or even forget it altogether the next minute. I feel sure I should get very little information bearing on the subject from him. I only know that he was in actual danger, and furthermore that I myself was convinced at the time that something was happening to him, and mentioned the fact to several friends at the time — being at Oxford — though I cannot possibly remember to whom I expressed my fears. He is a twin brother.

" Arthur J. Maclean."

In answer to further inquiries, especially as to whether he had ever had similar impressions which had not corresponded with reality, Mr. Maclean says: —

"June 20th, 1884.

" My impression with regard to my brother's danger is the only one I ever remember having.

" I am afraid I cannot possibly remember to whom I mentioned my fears at the time, as I was at college, and there were so many I might have told."

§ 4. We may now pass to a group of these cases in which the primary element of the emotional impression is a sense of being wanted — an impulse to go somewhere or do something.

The first example is from the Rev. E. D. Banister, of Whitechapel Vicarage, Preston.

"November 12th, 1885.

(79) " My father on the day of his death had gone out of the house about 2.30 p.m., to have his usual afternoon stroll in the garden and fields. He had not been absent more than 7 or 8 minutes when, as I was talking to my wife and sister, I was seized with a very urgent desire to go to him. (The conversation related to a visit which we proposed to pay that afternoon to a neighbour, and no allusion was made to my father.) The feeling that I ought to go and see him came upon me with irresistible force. I insisted upon all in the house going out to find my father. I was remonstrated with — my very anxiety seeming so unreasonable. My father's afternoon stroll was a regular habit of life in fine

284 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

weather, and I had no reason to give why on that particular occasion I must insist on his being found. Search was made, and it was my sad lot to find him dead in the field, in a place which, according to the route he ordinarily adopted, he would have reached about 7 or 8 minutes after leaving the house.

" My idea is that when he felt the stroke of death coming upon him he earnestly desired to see me, and that, by the operation of certain psychical laws, the desire was communicated to me.

"E. D. Banister."

In reply to inquiries Mr. Banister adds: —

" In reply to your letter I have to state: —

" 1. Vivid impressions of the kind I have related are utterly unknown to me; the one related is unique in my experience.

"2. There was not the least cause for anxiety owing to the absence of my father. It only seemed a short time since he had gone out of the room, and on this account my urgency was deemed unreasonable.

" 3. The date was January 9th, 1883."

We have confirmed this date by the obituary notice in the Preston Chronicle.

Mr. Banister's wife and sister supply the following corroboration: —

" We have seen the statement which Mr. Banister has forwarded to the Psychical Research Society, relating to the strong impression by which he was irresistibly urged in search of his father on the afternoon of January 9th, 1883, and we are able to confirm all details given in that statement. "Mary Banister.

"Agnes Banister."

In conversation Mr. Banister informed me that his father was a remarkably hale old man, and there had never been the slightest anxiety about his being out alone. He further mentioned that the compulsion seemed to come to him " from outside."

The following instance is from Mrs. C, of 11, Upper Hamilton

Terrace, N.W.

"December 17th, 1883.

(80) " On December 2nd, 1877, I was at church. My children wished to remain to a christening. I said, ' I cannot, somebody seems calling me; something is the matter.' I returned home to find nothing; but next morning two telegrams summoned me to the deathbed of my husband, from whom I had had a cheerful letter on the Saturday, and who left me in excellent spirits the Thursday before. I only arrived in time to see him die."

The following is the sons' corroboration: —

" We remember, perfectly, our mother leaving the church, saying she felt she was wanted, someone was calling her. The next day our father died, December 3rd, 1877. "George C.

"John A. C." In answer to inquiries, Mrs. C. says: —

"February 19th, 1884.

(1) "I cannot say that the experience of some one calling me was

unique. I have often had strong impressions of things occurring, and such

things have happened, but not having set down the dates, I could not be sufficiently certain to satisfy myself.1

(2) "My husband wrote me a cheerful letter on the Friday, November 30th,and on the Saturday, December 1st, only mentioning that he was a little bilious, but that he was going to Leicester that afternoon. He was, however, so much worse that afternoon that he went to bed. In the night he was found by a gentleman to be out of bed, and unable to get in, and he mistook the gentleman for me. All Sunday he was dying, and my friends could not telegraph, and there was no train. On Monday I received two telegrams, early in the morning. As soon as I read your letter my sons both said they remembered the circumstance quite well and signed the enclosed. George was 10 years old, John 12 years."

Asked whether she would have been certain to stay for the christening under ordinary circumstances, Mrs. C. replied in the affirmative; and that the boys were disappointed. She is without any theory on these matters; and simply reports an undoubted experience.

The following case is very similar. The narrator is Mr. A. Skirving, foreman at Winchester Cathedral.

" Cathedral Yard, Winchester.

"January 31st, 1884.

(81 ) "I respectfully beg to offer you a short statement of my experience on a subject which I do not understand. Let me premise that I am not a scholar, as I left school when 12 years of age in 1827, and I therefore hope you will forgive all sins against composition and grammar. I am a working foreman of masons at Winchester Cathedral, and have been for the last 9 years a resident in this city. I am a native of Edinburgh.

" It is now more than 30 years ago that I was living in London, very near where the Great Western Railway now stands, but which was not then built. I was working in the Regent's Park for Messrs. Mowlem, Burt, and Freeman, who at that time had the Government contract for 3 years for the masons' work of the capital, and who yet carry on a mighty business at Millbank, Westminster. I think it was Gloucester Gate, if I mistake not. At all events, it was that gate of Regent's Park to the eastward of the Zoological Gardens, at the north-east corner of the park. The distance from my home was too great for me to get home to meals, so I carried my food with me, and therefore had no call to leave the work all day. On a certain day, however, I suddenly felt an intense desire to go home, but as I had no business there I tried to suppress it, — but it was not possible to do so. Every minute the desire to go home increased. It was 10 in the morning, and I could not think of anything to call me away from the work at such a time. I got fidgety and uneasy, and felt as if I must go, even at the risk of being ridiculed by my wife, as I could give no reason vhy I should leave my work and lose 6d. an hour for nonsense. However, I could not stay, and I set off for home under an impulse which I could not resist.

1 One of these cases, however, seems to have been quite precise, and will be found below (No. 204).

286 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

" When I reached my own door and knocked, the door was opened by my wife's sister, a married woman, who lived a few streets off.,She looked surprised, and said, ' Why, Skirving, how did you know 1 ' ' Know what? ' I said. ' Why, about Mary Ann.' I said, ' I don't know anything about Mary Ann ' (my wife). ' Then what brought you home at present 1 ' I said, ' I can hardly tell you. I seemed to want to come home. But what is wrong? ' I asked. She told me that my wife had been run over by a cab, and been most seriously injured about an hour ago, and she had called for me ever since, but was now in fits, and had several in succession. I went upstairs, and though very ill she recognised me, and stretched forth her arms, and took me round the neck and pulled my head down into her bosom. The fits passed away directly, and my presence seemed to tranquillise her, so that she got into sleep, and did well. Her sister told me that she had uttered the most piteous cries for me to come to her, although there was not the least likelihood of my coming. This short narrative has only one merit; it is strictly true.

" Alexander Skirving."

In answer to the question whether the time of the accident corresponded with the time when he felt a desire to go home, Mr. Skirving says: —

" I asked my wife's sister what time the accident occurred, and she said, An hour and a-half ago ' — that is from the time I came home. Now, that was exactly coincident with the time I wanted to leave work. Ittook me an hour to walk home; and I was quite half-an-hour struggling in my mind to overcome the wish to leave work before I did so."

He adds: " You ask me if I ever had a similar impression on any other occasion. I never had. It was quite a single and unique experience."

Mr. Skirving's wife is dead. His sister-in-law, Mrs. Vye, is in New Zealand. Her husband, writing from Otago on July 1st, 1885, says that she cannot now give particulars of the occurrence, though she remembers the accident very well.

In the next case — from Mrs. Wirgman, of 121, Dawson Place, Westbourne Park, W. — the percipient's line of action was still more abnormal.

(82) "In 1845 I had moved from Germany to a small town in Belgium; on my arrival an English lady called on me to offer her aid in finding a house. While talking to her I suddenly exclaimed, ' I must <*o to England.' I then and there started in order to catch the boat from Antwerp. On reaching London I remarked the numerous persons I saw in mourning.1 I drove to my parents' lodgings at the West End, and on my cousin coming to the cab door, I inquired who it was, my father or my mother. I found my mother well, my father dying; his last conscious words had been, ' Fan will be here on Thursday,' and so I was to the intense surprise of my relations, some of whom had written, not anticipating immediate danger, and had it not been for the inexplic-

1 This is merely intended to mark the gradually increasing definiteness of the alarm.

able impulse, I certainly should not have readied London in time to see my father again."

In conversation Mrs. Wirgman described to Mr. Myers the extreme inconvenience, and apparent folly, of her return to England, which she undertook without any definite notion as to its object, and, as it were, in spite of herself.

In the next case — from Mr. Pae, of 30, Gordon Street, Gatesheadon-Tyne — there may have been a certain amount of latent anxiety on the narrator's part respecting his father's condition of health. On the other hand his impression seems to have reached the pitch of actual physical discomfort, and certainly affected his actions in an unexpected way.

(83) " I dreamt that my father died before I got his portrait painted. This dream I told so often when my father was in good health that it became a standing jest. Three months before he died he took a slight pain in his shoulder, and I said to myself, ' Is he going to die 1' So I did begin to paint his portrait, but next day he was all right again, so the portrait did not make headway. Three months after, Isabella (my wife) and I had arranged to go to the theatre one night. It was arranged that I would get tea in Newcastle, and meet Isabella at the High Level Bridge end (she had to come in from the Low Fell, where we lived). All went well. I got to the High Level. As I was standing waiting for her, I felt all of a sudden that if I could wish myself anywhere in the world at that moment it would be in our kitchen at the Low Fell. I tried to shake the feeling off, but it got worse and worse. When Isabella came, I didn't make any movement in the direction of the theatre. She saw something was the matter. I explained the feeling. She said, ' Try and shake it off.' But no! I couldn't. She said, ' Then let us go home.' When we got home to the kitchen we found my father in an apoplectic fit — quite powerless. He had remained to take care of the children. He died the next day. He never spoke; and of course the portrait was never finished.

"William Pae."

" I distinctly remember my husband's concern when I met him at the High Level, and confirm all he relates about his father's death.

"Isabella Pae."

[Our active helper, Mr. E. T. Nisbet, of 51, Eldon Street, Newcastleon-Tyne, mentions that " Mr. Pae, when describing the feeling that came over him while waiting at the High Level, put his hands on his chest and pressed them against it at short intervals, saying, 'Just like that.'"

The late Mr. Cromwell F. Varley, F.R.S.,the well-known electrician, records an experience in which, as he believed, he made a deliberate and successful attempt to impress his wife's mind, not, however, by way of experiment, but in a crisis of great danger (Report of

288 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

a Committee of the Dialectical Society on Spiritualism, p. 162). He had been in the habit of inhaling chloroform to relieve constriction of the throat, and one day fell back on his bed, powerless to move, with the sponge on his mouth. Mrs. Varley was in the room above, nursing a sick child.

(84) " I made, of my will, a distinct impression on her brain that I was in danger. Thus aroused, she came down, and immediately removed the. sponge, and was greatly alarmed. I then used my body to speak to her, and I said, ' I shall forget all about it, and how this came to pass, unless you remind me in the morning, but be sure to tell me what made you come down, and I shall then be able to recall the circumstances.' The following morning she did so, but I could not remember anything about it; I tried hard all the day, however, and at length I succeeded in remembering, first a part, and ultimately the whole."

With so much forcing of the memory, however, the evidence here cannot be ranked as much better than second-hand; and Mrs. Varley's account of the incident has not, I believe, been placed on record.1

The next case involves a less momentous experience, but perhaps a more improbable coincidence. Still, it is scarcely too much to say that cases of this character, in whatever number accumulated, could never decisively exclude the hypothesis of accident. The narrator is Bt. Major Kobbe, U.S. Army.

" Mt. Vernon Barracks, Ala.

"July 31st, 1884.

(85) "In 1858 or 1859, while at home in New York city, I one day felt a desire to visit Greenwood Cemetery some six or seven miles distant, on Long Island, where my family owned a vault, &c.

" When I arrived there I found my father standing uncovered at an open grave, in which he had just had placed the remains of an infant son, who had died before my birth; he had had the remains removed from the vault and placed in the grave for final interment, and the workmen were on the point of putting in the first spadeful of earth as I came up.

" When we left the cemetery together I remarked on the singular coincidence which had brought me there at the nick of time; it quickly and naturally came out that my father had left a message at home for me to meet him there at the time I really did do so. This message I never received, for the simple reason that I had not gone home.

" The ' coincidence ' is remarkable because —

" 1. In those days the cemetery was not pleasant or convenient of access.

1 I should mention that Mr. Varley's own view of this occurrence, and of another which will be quoted later (case 305), is different from that here adopted. But telepathy seems quite adequate to cover the facts. The sense of being ' ' out of the body, " which is what appears most powerfully to have impressed him, is a known form of pathologic experience, or — as I should regard it — of hallucination. (See p. 555, note. )

" 2. Neither my father, myself, nor other members of the family ever went there, or for that matter ever spoke of the place. With the exception of two infant children who had died many years before, none of our relatives were buried there, and, as far as I know, no one of the family had been there for many years. Most of them had never been there.

" 3. There was and had been no reason why I should ever think of the place, and I had never had any intention or desire to visit it.

" 4. Had I been a few minutes earlier or later (say half-an-hour at the most) 1 would not have met my father, and it is probable would never have heard of the matter. His messenger would have reported to him that I had not received his message, and he would probably not have mentioned it to me.

" To put the matter in a nutshell, a message was left for me to be at a certain undesirable and unfrequented place, inconvenient of access and taking some hours to reach by boat and other conveyance. I do not receive the message, but obey it implicitly to the minute.

"William A. Kobbe."

In answer to inquiries, Major Kobbe says: —

" My father died about 4 years ago. Since my very remarkable meeting with him in the cemetery I have been at home at long intervals only, and for short periods of time, and for this reason, I suppose, never had occasion to mention the matter to him, or to any other member of the family. I have, since his death, spoken of it to others. I am now, and always have been, entirely free from superstition of any kind, and have, in common with all of my relatives and race, uncommonly strong nerves, unexcitable temperament, and an aversion to ' isms ' of all kinds. Nothing of a similar nature ever happened to me before or since, and I never had any premonition or impression of any kind that I could not and did not carefully and easily trace to its source."

We requested Major Kobbe to find out if his mother remembered the incident. He finds that she does not remember it, adding, " The part my mother played in the matter, while all-important as evidence, was a matter of slight moment to her at the time."

It is necessary, of course, to be sure that the line of action adopted by the percipient was really an unlikely one. It may look so, without really having been so. For instance, Miss Lindsay, of 58. Lloyd Street, Greenheys, Manchester, has given us an account of an unusually long walk which she suddenly undertook against advice, with the view of seeing an aunt who was almost a stranger to her.

" The day was very unsuitable for a walk of a number of miles. It threatened to rain, and began before I had got far on my way. I took a wrong turning, too, in a brown study, and returned in a loop to the same road, so that I found myself, late in the afternoon, again near the tram terminus, by which I might have gone home, instead of near my destination. By this time my thin print dress was soaked through by the rain, for I had

c

290 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

no cloak, yet I never thought of turning homewards. After walking some 14 miles, I arrived at the house, to find that my aunt had died suddenly of acute rheumatism that morning.

" Now, looking back on the matter, I see that native obstinacy might account for my starting in spite of counsel and weather, but it would not account for my visiting a relation I did not know well, and whom I did know to be particular about appearances, in a dripping dress. What I am particularly sure about is that it never once struck me that my proceeding was odd; which, to my mind, proves conclusively that the initial impulse must have been stronger than an every-day freak."

Still, it may have been a freak, though, not an " every-day " one. Miss Lindsay had just returned from the seaside " in excellent health, though in circumstances of considerable worry." Thus an excuse for a long walk may have been readily caught at, and the "native obstinacy" may have done the rest.. The case, moreover, lacks the important evidential point which marked those that preceded it — the desire on the part of the supposed agent for the other person's presence. We have another case where a walk was suddenly taken, and pursued in torrents of rain, in spite of two attempts to return, under an idea that an acquaintance was on the point of death. She died the same evening. But she had been for some years an object of care to the person who visited her, and though the latter says, " I had not seen her for some weeks, possibly months before, and I did not know she was ill or likely to die," the case is one which we can hardly include.

The doubt as to what can be considered unlikely conduct on the percipient's part has relegated several alleged cases of this class to the Supplement. Among these are two of considerable interest. One of them is from Mr. Frederick Morgan, of Nugent Hill, Bristol, who records how he once made a sudden and unaccountable exit in the middle of a lecture, and walked home, unconscious of having done anything unusual, to find his house in imminent danger from fire, and his mother strongly desiring his presence. We have Mr. Morgan's assurance that he was thoroughly interested in the discourse, and had even noticed a friend with whom he had planned to walk home when it was over; otherwise the impulse to leave a lecture-room might not seem the best possible specimen of an abnormal experience. The second case is from the Dr. Fischer quoted a few pages back; who went to a jubilee dinner, and " had not been at table more than an hour," when he was forced to go out by an overpowering conviction that some one was in need of his assistance. This heroic step, taken

on a comparatively empty stomach, was (as it turned out) fully justified. But we must remember that an impression of being wanted is a very deep and abiding element of a medical man's experience.

The following case is better worth quotation, for the very reason that the percipient was not a doctor. We received it from Mr. Rowlands, of Bryncethin, near Bridgend, mentioned above (p. 252).

"July 2nd, 1884.

(86) "There was a Calvinistic Methodist minister, named Thomas Howell, Kinffig Hill, near Bridgend. He was preaching at Pen-y-graig, and resided not far from my house. I was disturbed in my mind about him about 12 or 1 o'clock in the morning. I rose from bed, and put my clothes on, went to his lodgings and knocked at his door, and told them that I was disturbed about the minister. I went in and up to his bedroom, and found him sitting down on the side of the bed, sweating, and as ill and as painful as could be. This happened about 6 years ago. You can write to Mr. Howell if you wish.

" Rowland Rowlands."

Mr. Howell writes to us as follows: —

" Longlands, Wyle.

"July 16th, 1884.

" I beg to inform you that the contents of the enclosed letter, which I received from you, sent to you from Mr. Rowland Rowlands, are quite true, and more than is stated in his letter. The night it took place, August 10th, 1879, I shall never forget, for, I believe, had it not been that some unknown agency sent me assistance, that I would have realised the mysteries of another world in a short time.

" The narrative is simply this. I was preaching at Pen-y-graig, the Sabbath referred to. I slept in a house near the chapel. After the service a few friends sat awhile with me conversing. After they left, about 10 o'clock, I took a little food, a cup of tea and a small bit of bread and butter, and retired to sleep about half -past 10, quite healthy, feeling no pain or uneasiness whatever. Somewhere between 12 and 1 o'clock I awoke with a severe attack of pain in the stomach, — remained a little in bed, but thinking death had struck me, I turned out on the bedside and attempted to call the landlady, but failed to do so. I could not move any further nor speak. In a few minutes I heard a voice at the door, outside, calling the landlady, who was in bed. He succeeded in awaking her and she replied from the landing — ' Who is there 1 ' To which Mr. Rowlands replied, ' Open the door at once • I have been disturbed in bed; there is something the matter with the preacher.' To which she replied, ' I don't think so; he has not called.' I heard Mr. Rowlands speak again: ' Make haste, Mrs. Phillips,' which time I believe, Mrs. Phillips, the landlady, was dressing herself, and ran downstairs and opened the door. Mr. Rowlands and herself came to my bedroom at once and knocked at my door. Receiving no answer, Mr. Eowlands opened the door, and found me in the position mentioned in his letter to you. He asked me, ' What is the matter with you, Mr. Howell? ' to which I could not reply. I was by this time speechless. He told me again, ' I was disturbed in my bed

u 2

292 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

about you; shall we have a doctor 1 ' to which I shook my head, meaning 'No.' I thought everything was almost over. A few moments again I was unconscious and for hours after knew nothing. When I came to myself, I saw Mr. Rowlands and Mrs. Phillips in the room. They remained with me till the morning. I gradually got better, and when Mr. Rowlands left me between 7 and 8 o'clock he remarked to me, 1 1 really thought you were going to die. How strange, was it not, that I was disturbed so! Can you account for it 1 ' I replied ' No, if it was not that the Almighty had sent you to save me.'

" I have no more to say nor explain, but I know the facts are true.

"Thos. Howell."

Another letter of Mr. Howell's explains that the illness consisted in painful spasms, from which he had occasionally suffered, and that Mr. Rowlands " held him quiet." It is not clear that Mr. Rowlands' presence had anything to do with his recovery, though it was a great support to him. But as the illness and pain seem to have been extremely sudden, the coincidence is striking.

And here I may recall what was said above (p. 92) on the subject of will in relation to telepathy. The remarks which were made a propos of experimental cases derive strong confirmation from the more recent evidence. It is clear, I think, that in the cases last considered the telepathic influence should be interpreted as primarily emotional, rather than controlling or directive. In none of them should I regard the determination of the percipient's motor-impulse as at all directly due to the strong desire of the agent that he should act in that particular manner. I doubt if any amount of the most determined " willing," on the part of the strongest-minded friend or relative, would have brought Mr. Skirving from his work, Mr. Rowlands from his bed, or Dr. Fischer from his dinner. But we may quite conceive that Mrs. Skirving's distress and agitation might set up in her husband's mind a disturbance associated with the idea that he was needed; and this might naturally affect his behaviour in the same way as an actual knowledge of the circumstances would have done, without the slightest abrogation of his normal power of choice. In Mr. Morgan's case the transferred impression (if it was one) did not reach the level of an idea at all, nor did the disturbance even take the form of distress, but only made itself felt in the complete distraction of his mind from its obvious and normal activities. But such distraction implies a genuine disturbance; and since the idea of the locality — ■ home — would naturally have a permanent place at the background of his mind, it is not hard to see how the disturbance

might be attracted into this obvious channel, and might thus transform itself into a motor-impulse by a process which quite eluded consciousness.

I will illustrate this view by a final and extreme case, where the movements produced in the percipient were not such as the agent can have desired, or even thought of. The narrator is Dr. Liebeault, of 4, Rue Bellevue, Nancy.

" 4 Septembre, 1885.

(87) " Je m'empresse de vous e*crire au sujet clu fait de communication de pensee dont je vous ai parle, lorsque vous m' avez fait l'honneur d'assister a mes seances hypnotiques a Nancy. Ce fait se passa dans une famille frangaise de la Nouvelle-Orleans, et qui dtait venue habiter quelque temps Nancy, pour y liquider une affaire d'interet. J'avais fait connaissance de cette famille parceque son chef, M. G., m'avait amene sa niece, Mile. B., pour que je la traitasse par les precedes hypnotiques. Elle etait atteinte d'une anemie legere et d'une toux nerveuse contractees a Coblentz, dans une maison d'education ou elle etait professeur. Je parvins facilement a la mettre en somnambulisme, et elle fut guerie en deux seances. La production de cet etat de sommeil ayant demontre" a la famille G. et a Mile. B. qu'elle pourrait facilement devenir medium (Mme. G. etait medium spirite), cette demoiselle s'exerga a evoquer, a l'aide de la plume, les esprits, auxquels elle croyait sincerement, et au bout de deux mois elle fut un remarquable medium ecrivante. O'est elle que j'ai vue de mesyeux tracer rapidement des pages d'ecriture qu'elle appelait des messages, et cela en des termes choisis et sans aucune rature, en meme temps qu'elle tenait conversations avec les personnes qui l'entouraient. Chose curieuse, elle n'avait nullement conscience de ce qu'elle ecrivait; ' aussi,' disait-elle, ' ce ne peut etre qu'un esprit qui dirige ma main, ce n'est pas moi.' 1

"Un jour — c'etait, je crois, le 7 Fevrier, 1868 — vers 8 heures du matin, au moment de se mettre a table pour dejeuner, elle sentit un besoin, un quelque chose qui la poussait a ecrire (c'etait ce qu'elle appelait une trance) — et elle courut immediatement vers son grand cahier, ou elle traga febrilement, au crayon, des caracteres indechiffrables. Elle retraga les memes caracteres sur les pages suivantes, et enfin l'excitation de son esprit se calmant, on put lire qu'une personne nominee Marguerite lui annongait sa mort. On supposa aussitot qu'une demoiselle de ce nom qui etait son amie, et habitait, comme professeur, le meme pensionnat de Coblentz ou elle avait exerce les meme fonctions, venait d'y mourir. Toute la famille G., compris Mile. B., vinrent immediatement chez moi, et nous decidames de verifier, le jour meme, si ce fait de mort avait reellement eu lieu. Mile. B. e'crivit a une demoiselle anglaise de ses amis, qui exergait aussi les memes fonctions d'institutrice dans le pensionnat en question; elle pretexta un motif, ayant bien soin de ne pas reveler le motif vrai. Poste pour poste, nous regumes une reponse en anglais, dont on me copia la partie essentielle — reponse que j'ai retrouvee dans une portefeuille il y

1 I need hardly point out the fallacy of this argument. See the discussion and examples of automatic writing in Chap, ii., § 12.

294 EMOTIONAL AND MOTOR EFFECTS. [chap.

a a peine quinze jours, et egaree de nouveau. Elle exprimait retonneinent de cette demoiselle anglaise au sujet de la lettre de Mile. B., lettre qu'elle n'attendait pas sitot, vu que le but ne lui en paraissait pas assez motive. Mais en meme temps, Famie anglaise se hatait d'annoncer a notre medium que leur amie commune, Marguerite, etait morte le 7 Fevrier vers les 8 heures du matin. En outre, un petit carre de papier imprime etait interre dans la lettre; c'etait un billet de mort et de faire part. Inutile de vous dire que je verifiai l'enveloppe de la lettre, et que la lettre me parut venir reellement de Coblentz.

" Seulement j'ai eu depuis des regrets. C'est de n'avoir pas, dans l'interet de la science, demande" a la famille G. d' aller avec eux verifier au bureau telegraphique si, reellement, ils n'auraient pas recu une depeche telegraphique dans la matinee du 7 Fevrier. La science ne doit pas avoir de pudeur; la verite ne craint pas d'etre vue. Je n'ai comme preuve de la veracite du fait qu'une preuve morale: c'est l'honorabilite de la famille G-., qui m' a paru toujours au dessus de tout soupgon.

[Apart from the improbability that the whole family would join in a conspiracy to deceive their friend, the nature of the answer received from Coblentz shows that the writer of it cannot have been aware that any telegraphic announcement had been sent. And it is in itself unlikely that the authorities of the school would have felt it necessary instantly to communicate the news to Mdlle. B.]

This example, it will be seen, differs from the preceding in the distinctness of the idea which — albeit latent in the percipient's mind — we must hold to have been transferred. Its chief interest, however, lies in the completeness and complexity of the automatism evolved. It exhibits a spontaneous telepathic impulse taking effect through the motor-system of the percipient in the very way that M. Richet's or our own deliberate efforts took effect on the " medium " (pp. 72-8). The parallel could not well be closer; and our view of the essential continuity of experimental and spontaneous telepathy 1 could hardly receive stronger support.

1 See above, pp. 171-2.



Chapter VIII. Dreams.

Part I. — The Relation op Dreams to the Argument for Telepathy.

§ 1. The inward impressions of distant events with which I have so far dealt have all been waking impressions. They have visited the percipient in the midst of his daily employments, and have often caused emotions that seemed quite incongruous with the normal current of life in which they mingled. But there is another department of experience which we are accustomed to consider as par excellence the domain of inward impressions, and from which the normal current of life is altogether shut off — the department of dreams. And this department, where inward ideas and images dominate unchecked, is also one which covers so large a period of human existence as to make it a "priori probable that a considerable number of " transferred impressions " (supposing such things to exist) would fall within it. It would naturally, therefore, suggest itself as our next field of inquiry.

But dreams not only fall in naturally at this point; they are a means of advance. They comprise in themselves the whole range of transition from ideal and emotional to distinctly sensory affections; and they thus supply a most convenient link between the vaguer sort of transferred impressions and the more concrete and definitely embodied sort. The telepathic communications of the last two chapters, even where connected with recognisable images of persons and things, did not affect sight or hearing in such a way as to suggest the physical presence of the objects. Now many dreams are of just this impalpable kind. The material objects which figure in them are often the very vaguest of images, not localised in any particular spot. It is the general idea, the generalised form, of a person that presents itself, not a figure in a special attitude or clad in a special dress; events pass through the mind clothed in the faintly represented imagery in which a waking train of memory or of

296 THE RELATION OF DREAMS [chap.

reverie will embody its contents. Such a dream only differs from a waking reverie in that it has not to compete, on the field of attention, with any objective facts; it is not contrasted with the immediate experience which the external world forces at every moment on the waking senses; and it is, therefore, itself accepted as immediate experience. With some persons it is rare for their dreams ever to emerge into more concrete actuality than this; and telepathy often seems to act in dreams of just such a veiled and abstract kind. From this lowest stage the transition is a gradual one up to the most vivid and detailed dream-imagery, the features of which are engraved on the memory as sharply as those of a striking scene in waking life; 1 and at every step of the transition we find evidence (how far conclusive will be seen later) to the action of telepathy.

It is only, however, when we come to the most distinctly sensory class of all, that the full theoretic importance of dreams can be realised. To make this clear, I must ask a moment's indulgence for a statement of some very obvious facts. Vivid dreams present themselves to us in two very different aspects. There is first the standpoint which we occupy when we are dreaming them. From that standpoint, the world with which they present us is often as external as the real one; and our perceptions in that world are perceptions of outward and abiding things, among which we live and move with as much sense of reality as if we had never known the disillusion of waking. To the dreamer, his more vivid and concrete images are actual percepts, calling his senses (in physiological language his sensory centres) into play just as external reality would. But there is of course a totally different standpoint from which to regard dreams, namely, the external and critical one that we habitually assume during waking life. We then think of them merely as that floating phantasmagoria whose transience and unreality have been the theme of philosophers and poets; which has very singular relations to time, and no real relations

