[Mr. and Mrs. N, who were Spiritualists, then obtained what purported to be a message from their strange visitant, saying that he had been killed that afternoon by a wound in the breast; but the message may perfectly well have been the automatic result of their own ideas, as it contained nothing beyond what they might have guessed from the nature of the apparition. This occurred at 9 in the evening; and the date was fixed as the fourteenth of November, by the date on a bill which was receipted, as it was remembered, on the same evening.]

" This confirmation of the widow's conviction as to the day of her husband's death produced so much impression on Mr. Wilkinson that he called at the office of Messrs. Cox and Greenwood, the army agents, to ascertain if there was no mistake in the certificate. But nothing there appeared to confirm any surmise of inaccuracy. Captain W.'s death was mentioned in two separate despatches of Sir Colin Campbell; and in both the date corresponded with that given in the telegram.

" So matters rested, until, in the month of March, 1858, the family of Captain W. received from Captain G. C, then of the Military Train, a letter dated near Lucknow, on the 19th December, 1857. This letter informed them that Captain W. had been killed before Lucknow, while gallantly leading on the squadron, not on the 15th of November, as reported in Sir Colin Campbell's despatches, but on the fourteenth in the afternoon. Captain C. was riding close by his side at the time he saw him fall. He was struck by a fragment of shell in the breast, and never spoke after he was hit. He was buried at the Dilkoosha; and on a wooden cross erected by his friend, Lieutenant R., of the 9th Lancers, at the head of his grave, are cut the initials G. W., and the date of his death, the 14th of November, 1857.1

" The War Office finally made the correction as to the date of death, but not until more than a year after the event occurred. Mr. Wilkinson, having occasion to apply for an additional copy of the certificate in April, 1859, found it in exactly the same words as that which I have

1 It was not in his own regiment, which was then at Meerut, that Captain W. was serving at the time of his death. Immediately on arriving from England at Cawnpore, he had offered his services to Colonel Wilson, of the 64th. They were at first declined, but finally accepted, and he joined the Military Train, then starting for Lucknow. It was in their ranks that he fell. ' [R. D. O.]

given, only that the 14th of November had been substituted for the 15th.1

" This extraordinary narrative was obtained by me directly from the parties themselves. The widow of Captain W. kindly consented to examine and correct the manuscript, and allowed me to inspect a copy of Captain C.'s letter, giving the particulars of her husband's death. To Mr. "Wilkinson also the manuscript was submitted, and he assented to its accuracy so far as he is concerned. That portion which relates to Mrs. N. I had from that lady herself. I have neglected no precaution, therefore, to obtain for it the warrant of authenticity.

"It is especially valuable, as furnishing an example of a double apparition. Nor can it be alleged (even if the allegation had weight) that the recital of one lady caused the apparition of the same figure to the other. Mrs. W. was at the time in Cambridge, and Mrs. N. in London; and it was not till weeks after the occurrence that either knew what the other had seen.

" Those who would explain the whole on the principle of chance coincidence have a treble event to take into account; the apparition to Mrs. N., that to Mrs. W., and the actual time of Captain W.'s death, each tallying exactly with the other."

Mr. Wilkinson, of Winton House, Ealing, W., writes to us: —

"November 5th, 1884. " Mr. Robert Dale Owen personally investigated the case, and submitted the messages to Captain Wheatcroft's widow. I revised the part belonging to me, and that part which referred to the appearance to Mrs. Nenner was revised by her and her husband, Professor Nenner. I gave the original certificates of death by the War Office to Mr. Owen.

" W. M. Wilkinson."

[The Mr. N. mentioned was the Rev. Maurice Nenner, Professor of Hebrew at the Nonconformist College, St. John's Wood. Both Mr. and Mrs. Nenner are dead.

It should be observed that there was no provable recognition of Captain Wheatcroft by Mrs. Nenner. We only know of the following points to connect her vision with Captain Wheatcroft's death: — Similarity of attitude; uniform of a British officer; wound in the breast; date; and, apart from Mrs. Wheatcroft's vision, there is nothing remarkable in this combination. But it is certainly curious that on that clay she should have had a vision which corresponded, at least up to a certain point, with what Mrs. Wheatcroft saw.2

We do not know the hour of Captain Wheatcroft's death, as he may

1 The originals of both these certificates are in my possession; the first bearing date 30th January, 1858, and certifying, as already shown, to the 15th; the second dated 5th April, 1859, and testifying to the 14th. [R. D. O.]

2 There is another curious incident, connected with this case. In a letter written on July 28th, 1876, to the Rev. B. Wrey Savile, and kindly sent by him to me, a clergyman of the Midland counties, gives permission to use his wife's testimony to the fact that Captain Wheatcroft " appeared, on the date named, to an old playfellow and friend of his "— herself. I have corresponded with the clergyman in question, but further details cannot now be procured.

424 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

not have died the moment that he was struck. If the death was immediate, it must have preceded Mrs. Wheatcroft's vision by at least 12 hours. See p. 140, note.]

The next account was received, in 1883, from M. de Guerin, now residing at 98, Sandgate Road, Folkestone. It is impossible to be certain that the coincidence was as close as the narrator imagines; but the presumption is to some extent favoured by the fact that he was the percipient in a similar but more remarkable case, which will be cited in a later chapter (No. 315).

(167) "My brother Henry died in Exeter in July, 1855. I was then on a voyage home [from Shanghai]. I was very ill at the time. We were within one or two degrees of the line, fearfully hot. I had been in bed about a couple of hours and was wide awake, when I saw an almost exactly similar vision [i.e., similar to the other case referred to] of Henry. I immediately called out to my fellow passenger: ' Frank, my brother Henry is dead, I have just seen him.' I wrote to this gentleman [Mr. Francis L. Brine, Finsbury Distillery, Finsbury Square] to ask if he remembered anything about it. He replies: ' Too many years have rolled by since to enable me to recall the details to which you refer, but I believe every word of it. When my father died, I wrote to my sister in India, and she wrote back to say, " I knew of our sad loss at the time it occurred; dear father came to wish me good-bye also." ' i « Wm. C. L. de Guerin."

In conversation, Mr. de Guerin told the present writer that he believes his brother to have died on the day of the vision. We find from the Registrar of Deaths that the death took place on July 19th, 1855; but the day of the vision cannot now be independently fixed. It occurred at about 11 p.m., near the island of Ranbon, which is almost exactly antipodal to England; and the death took place at 3 p.m.; so that, if the day was the same, the vision preceded his death by some 4 hours. Mr. de Guerin knew his brother to have been suffering from a lingering illness, but had no immediate apprehension of the end. He had last heard of him in April.

1 Mr. Brine has kindly sent us a letter from his sister (who is too much out of health to be questioned in detail) in which the following passage occurs:—

' ' You remember my seeing poor father when he was dying. And you must have heard our poor mother speak of her brother, when at Bishop's Waltham school, seeing his father (our grandfather) when dying. When he was sent for his remark was, ' I know what I have to go home for; my father is dead; I saw him pull the bed-curtain aside in the night.' " Another sister of Mr. Brine's mentions a still more striking experience of her own, which should have been a good case, as she at once wrote down the date of her seeing the phantasm; but she declines further correspondence.

As bearing on this family susceptibility to telepathic influences, I may mention that a sister of Mr. de Guerin's was a joint percipient with him in the case which is to be cited later; and also that Mr. de Guerin told me that there had been similar instances in their mother's (the Read) family; one of whom (Mr. de Guerin's grandfather) had seen a jihantasmal hearse drive up to his father's door on the morning that the father died — he himself not knowing of the death or of its imminence, as he was not staying at the house and was approaching it as a visitor. This incident does not now admit of verification; but we shall find further on that quite as bizarre experiences can be telepathically explained (see Chap, xii., § 7).

The next narrative is of a more uncommon character. There are

reasonable grounds, in this instance, for withholding the name of the

narrator, Mrs. T., from publicity.

"1883.

(168) "On November 18th, 1863, I was living near Adelaide, and not long recovered from a severe illness at the birth of an infant, who was then 5 months old. My husband had also suffered from neuralgia, and had gone to stay with friends at the seaside for the benefit of bathing. One night during his absence the child woke me about midnight; having hushed him off to sleep, I said, ' Now, sir, I hope you will let me rest! ' I lay down, and instantly became conscious of two figures standing at the door of my room. One, M. N. [these are not the real initials], whom I recognised at once, was that of a former lover, whose misconduct and neglect had compelled me to renounce him. Of this I am sure, that if ever I saw him in my life, it was then. I was not in the least frightened; but said to myself, as it were, ' You never used to wear that kind of waistcoat.' The door close to where he stood was in a deep recess close to the fireplace, for there was no grate; we burnt logs only. In that recess stood a man in a tweed suit. I saw the whole figure distinctly, but not the face, and for this reason: on the edge of the mantelshelf always stood a morocco leather medicine chest, which concealed the face from me. (On this being stated to our friends, the Singletons, they asked to go into the room and judge for themselves. They expressed themselves satisfied that would be the case to anyone on the bed where I was.) I had an impression that this other was a cousin of M. N.'s, who had been the means of leading him astray while in the North of England. I never saw him in my life; he died in India.

" M. N. was in deep mourning; he had a look of unutterable sorrow upon his face, and was deadly pale. He never opened his lips, but I read his heart as if it were an open book, and it said, ' My father is dead, and I have come into his property.' I answered, ' How much you have grown like your father! ' Then in a moment, without appearing to walk, he stood at the foot of the child's cot, and I saw distinctly the blueness of his eyes as he gazed on my boy, and then raised them to Heaven as if in prayer.

" All vanished. I looked round and remarked a trivial circumstance, viz., that the brass handles of my chest of drawers had been rubbed very bright. Not till then was I conscious of having seen a spirit,1 but a feeling of awe (not fear) came over me, and I prayed to be kept from harm, although there was no reason to dread it. I slept tranquilly, and in the morning I went across to the parsonage and told the clergyman's wife what I had seen. She, of course, thought it was merely a dream. But no — if it were a dream, should I not have seen him as I had known him, a young man of 22, without beard or whiskers 1 2 But there was all the difference that 1 6 years would make in a man's aspect.

" On Saturday my husband returned, and my brother having ridden out to see us on Sunday afternoon, I told them both my vision as we sat together on the verandah. They treated it so lightly that I determined

1 See p. 409, note.

2 Of. cases 194, 449, 515.

426 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

to write it down in my diary and see if the news were verified. And from that diary I am now quoting. Also I mentioned it to at least 12 or 14 other people, and bid them wait the result.

" And surely enough, at the end of several weeks, my sister-in-law

wrote that M. N.'s father died at C Common on November 18th,

1863, which exactly tallied with the date of the vision. He left £45,000 to be divided between his son and daughter, but the son has never been found.

" Many people in Adelaide heard the story before the confirmation came, and I wrote and told M. N.'s mother. She was much distressed about it, fearing he was unhappy. She is now dead. My husband was profoundly struck when he saw my diary corresponding exactly to the news in the letter I had that moment received in his presence."

Mrs. T. states that she has never experienced a hallucination of vision on any other occasion.

Mr. T. has confirmed to us the accuracy of this narrative; and Mrs. T. has shown to one of us a memorandum of the appearance of two figures under date November 18th, in her diary of the year 1863; and a newspaper obituary confirms this as the date of the death. We learn from a gentleman who is a near relative of M. N.'s, that M. N., though long lost sight of, was afterwards heard of, and outlived his father.

If we regard this vision as telepathic, the agent can apparently only have been the dying man; and the case would then seem to be an extreme instance of the very rare type where the agent's personality does not appear, but some idea or picture in his mind is reproduced in the percipient's mind with a force that leads to an actual percept. For, as the narrator herself suggests, had she bodied forth the idea of M. N. from her own unaided resources, she would almost certainly have pictured him with the aspect that had been familiar to her. But though we have to draw on the father's mind for the unfamiliar features, we must not forget the possibilities of agency below the threshold of consciousness (pp. 78-9, 230). And it is at least worth suggesting that the percipient's mind brought its own affinities to bear — exercised, so to speak, a selective influence; and that thus it was rather owing to her special interest in the son than to the conscious occupation of his father's mind with him, that the telepathic impulse which was able to affect her took this particular form. As to the appearance of the second figure, it may possibly have been also telepathically produced; but I prefer to lay stress on it simply as one of the numerous indications that these waking percepts are really dream-creations, not objective presences.

We obtained the next case through the kindness of Miss Beale, Principal of the Ladies' College, Cheltenham, to whom it was sent some years ago by the narrator, Miss T. J. C.

(169) " When I was between 13 and 14, I went to spend a few days at the house of some friends, where I shared a room with a companion a year older. Happening to awake one night, I saw distinctly the figure of a man (in what might have been a loose dressing-gown) standing before the dressing-table with his back towards the bed, and holding out one hand as if feeling his way. I remember rubbing my eyes to convince myself I was not dreaming, and on my looking up a minute after, the figure was gone. This startled me, and I awoke my companion. She, however, tried to persuade me it must have been her brother (the only man in the house), and that he had probably come in to look what o'clock it was by an old watch which always stood on the dressing-table, and was considered a great authority in the house. (I forgot to say there was bright moonlight shining into the room.) Only half convinced I fell asleep again, and at breakfast next morning asked C. (my companion's brother) what he had been doing in our room the previous night. He said he had certainly not been there, but asked what I had seen, and on my telling him, looked so startled and pained that I did not pursue the subject.

" A few days after this, his mother told me that C. had seen the figure in his room the same night on which I had seen it in mine, and had recognised it as that of a very great friend and old shipmate of his own. When C. left the navy on account of ill-health, this friend got leave to spend a few days on shore with him, and on parting with him, said, ' Well, whoever dies first will come and see the other.' On the day on which Mrs. B. spoke to me of the occurrence, C. had heard of the death of his old shipmate. It had taken place on board ship, off the coast of Spain, on the night on which the apparition was seen by C. and myself.

Miss 0. writes to us: —

"1, Clarendon Place, Stirling.

"February 28th, 1884.

" The above story' was sent by me to Miss Beale some years ago. The ' C mentioned in it has been dead for many years, and his mother's memory is so much impaired by age and infirmity as to make her evidence of no value. I do not know that I can add anything to what I have already written. The occurrence is as fresh in my memory as when it happened. I was almost a child at the time, and no idea of my having seen a spirit ever entered my head, until Mrs. B. spoke to me of the death of her son's friend. The two rooms (the one in which ' C slept and that in which my companion and I slept) were on, the same floor, and near each other."

In conversation, Miss C. told me that she had never experienced a hallucination of vision on any other occasion. The figure which she saw corresponded with " C." 's description of what he saw, except that she did not see the face.

This case, if correctly reported, contains the remarkable feature of double percipience; which, however, will be more conveniently discussed at a later stage (Chap. XVIII.). Evidentially, I may observe, the narrator's recollection of what she learnt about " C" 's experience

428 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

makes it more probable that she is accurate as to the coincidence, than if she were merely recalling a childish experience of her own.

We owe the following case to the Rev. T. Williams, Rector of Aston- Clinton, Tring. The first note, written down by Mr. Williams from his sister's account of the occurrence, was copied from his diary by the present writer.

(170) "Mrs. Stewart, sister-in-law of Jane, my sister's servant, came up to ask if any news from home. She said, with her husband in bed — moonlight— chest of drawers between window — saw her mother standing — felt perfectly awake — she hid her face — a third time looked up — heard [? saw] nothing, but heard men calling up — knew exact time. She came up to my sister's and related this the same day — said dreading to hear knock at door all day — fearing to hear of something having happened to her mother. Her friends, who lived at Church Stretton, came a month after to christening of her baby; in mourning — said mother's sister, who exact image of her mother, had died at the very time of her vision — but friends did not tell Mrs. Stewart, because of her condition. This written from my sister's account, who saw Mrs. Stewart on the day of the vision, and heard account of what seen from herself." The date 1880 is added.

The following account is from the husband of the percipient, who is herself dead. His mother's name is also appended to the statement.

"April, 1885. " Mrs. Stewart, the wife of a carpenter, living in Abergavenny, Monmouthshire, and who [Mrs. S.] is since dead, was, in the year 1874, in bed, and early one morning, being sure she was awake (for she had just heard the railway men being called to their work by the call boy), she looked up to see the time, and in one corner of her room she saw distinctly what she thought was her mother, intently looking at her. She was startled, and hid her face. On looking again the vision was still there, but on looking up a third time it had disappeared. Mrs. Stewart came up that day to see a sister-in-law who was in service near the town, to ask if she had had any tidings from her home (the impression the vision had made was so great), but nothing had been heard. Time passed on, and all seemed forgotten, when some of her friends came up to Abergavenny, to the christening of a little baby, born in the meantime. They were in mourning, and inquiries were made as to the friend mourned for, when it was told that on the night Mrs. Stewart thought she saw her mother, a sister of the mother's, to whom she bore a great likeness, had died about the hour named, at some distance off; but they did not tell Mrs. Stewart of the death until some weeks after it happened, as Mrs. Stewart was in delicate health and much attached to her aunt. " John Stewart."

Miss Williams, of Abergavenny, writes on July 1, 1885: — -

" Mrs. Stewart was not an excitable woman, had never had any hallucination of the senses, and was a quiet, somewhat silent person. Her mother-in-law is now living in Abergavenny, and is a very sensible, respectable, practical woman. She probably heard Mrs. Stewart speak of the occurrence soon afterwards, and was anxious to add her testimony to

the statement. I probably mentioned the statement to my brother in 1880, and he set it down in his notebook."

In reference to this last sentence, Mr. Williams says: — " I am more inclined to think that I heard of it within a day or two after it happened, and that if I added the date 1880, it must have been the date of my copying it into my notebook from some loose memoranda."

Here we have a singular feature — an appearance which suggested not the agent but a person closely resembling her. The case thus stands in a sort of midway position between the more normal cases and the class of unrecognised phantasms, of which several specimens have already been given (pp. 218, 384, 409, 427). The same peculiarity occurs in the next case. The narrator, Miss R, was willing to have her name and address published; but her family disliked the idea, and we have acted in accordance with their wishes.

"May 8th, 1879.

(171) "In the year 1861 my parents were living in Soho Square, and I and my brother Alfred, aged 24, were living with them. On the 15th October my brother went to spend the evening at the house of an old schoolfellow, where it was not unusual for him to remain for the night, in order to avoid coming home at a late hour. It was customary for him, if he happened to come home after my parents had gone to bed, to go quietly to my mother's bedside and to give her a kiss if she were awake, and if not, to leave his hat upon the dressing-table as a sign that he had been there.

"She went to bed on October 15th without expecting his return that night, but after her first sleep she awoke up suddenly and saw him, as she thought, standing at the foot of the bed; she said softly, ' I am not asleep, my dear,' but he went away instead of going to kiss her; and this surprised her.

" On the morning of the 16th October, at breakfast time, she said to me: ' Where is Alfred 1 ' I replied, ' He did not come home last night, mamma.' She answered, ' Oh, yes, he did; and he came into my room when he was partly undressed, but he did not speak to me as usual.' In the course of an hour my brother came in, and my mother asked him if he had been into her room during the night. He assured her he had not been home. She said, ' It is very strange, for I am quite convinced that someone was standing at the foot of my bed when I awoke in the night.'

"At about mid-day a letter arrived to inform us that our cousin, Frank, only a few years older than my brother Alfred, had died at 1 o'clock that morning in London. My mother instantly exclaimed, ' It was Frank whom I saw! I can recall him to mind distinctly as I saw him, and though at the time I thought I was looking at Alfred, yet I thought there was something strange in his appearance, and I could not understand why he came in to see me without his coat on.' "

We find the date of death, October 16th, 1861, confirmed by the obituary in the Times.

On March 20th, 1884, the narrator informed Mr. Podmore as follows: —

430 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

" Before writing this account, I wrote a letter to my cousin's family to confirm my recollection of the time at which he died, and received an answer to the effect that he died at 1 a.m. There was no very great I likeness between my brother and my cousin; merely a general family resemblance. Both were fair: but Frank was taller than Alfred, and had a fine beard, whilst Alfred had but a slight one. « ]\I. J]. R."

Miss R.'s brother says:— « March 20th, 1884,

" I remember this circumstance, but attach no importance to it, and '• detect nothing of the marvellous in the narrative. " G. A. R."

The next case is from Mrs. Duthie, housekeeper to the Rev. J. C. Macphail, of Pilrig Manse, Edinburgh, who writes: —

"December 8th, 1885.

(172) '-'My son has shown me the paper signed by our housekeeper, Mrs. Elizabeth Duthie, and has told me of your desire to be assured of her reliability. Mrs. Duthie has been with me for more than 30 years, and I know her to be one on whose statement the fullest reliance may be placed. " J. Calder Macphail."

Mrs. Duthie writes: —

" Pilrig Manse, Edinburgh, August 22nd, 1885.

" In August, 1883, the family of the Rev. J. C. Macphail had all gone to the country, leaving me alone in the house. An intimate friend of mine, a Miss Grant, who lived in Aberdeen, had been for some time seriously ill, and I was anxious about her, though I did not know that death was near. On Sunday night, the 26th of August, about 8 o'clock, I retired to my room, which is separated from the rest of the house, with a flight of stairs leading up to the door. I got into bed, and was lying half-asleep, with my face to the wall, when I felt that someone was bending over me, looking into my face. I opened my eyes, and looked up into the face of my friend Miss Grant. I started up in bed, and, looking round, saw Miss Grant's figure leaving the room. I then got out of bed, and going to the door, looked down stairs, but no one was to be seen. I went down the stairs into the kitchen, but no one was there, nor was there a trace of anyone. I looked at the clock, and saw it was a few minutes past 9, and then went back to bed, feeling very uncomfortable, and certain something had happened to my friend. All next day (Monday) I felt unhappy about it, and waited anxiously to hear of my friend; but, as there was no one else in the house, I did not mention my experience of the previous night to anyone. That night I received information from Aberdeen that my friend had died at 9 o'clock on the previous night — at the very time I had seen her form in Edinburgh.

" I have never had a hallucination of the senses on any other occasion.

"Elizabeth Duthie."

Mrs. Duthie's vivd voce account, given to the present writer a year later, exactly corresponded with the above. She is quite certain that her eyes were open when she saw the face.

In answer to inquiries Mrs. Duthie says: —

" I am quite certain that this experience fell on a Sunday, though I forget the exact day of the month; and I could not have imagined that it

fell on the Sunday after I got the news, for I heard of the death the very next day."

She has sent us a printed notice which she received, to this effect: —

" 22, Thistle Street, Aberdeen.

"27th August, 1883. " Helen Grant died here last night at 9 o'clock.

(Signed) " Wm. Grant." Mr. G. W. Macphail writes: —

" Mrs. Duthie told my mother of her strange experience less than a month after the event, and I learnt it shortly after from Mrs. Duthie."

The next case is a deposition made by Mrs. Still, (known in her professional capacity as Mrs. Byrne), who was introduced to Mr. Myers by Mrs. Longe, of Coddenham Lodge, Cheltenham.

"Cheltenham, December 27th, 1882.

(173) "Mrs Byrne was stewardess on the steamer ' Lyra,' Captain * Gilpin, in the River Plata line of steamers. One morning — probably between 6 and 7, but she had no watch — she was lying in her berth. She awoke, and saw Captain Gilpin's head passing slowly along her berth and looking at her. This was a familiar gesture on his part, as he used to be friendly with Mrs. Byrne, and ask her to sit on a seat outside his cabin, and used to look through his window in this way when he thought she was sitting there. Mrs. Byrne got up at once, and went into the: pantry, and there heard that Captain Gilpin had been killed (though not instantaneously) by the fall of a spar at 6 that morning."

An extract from the official log-book, obtained by us from the General Register and Record Office of Shipping and Seamen, shows that the accident to Captain Prince Gilpin took place at 5.30 a.m., February 19th, 1878, on the " Laplace," not the " Lyra." He was crushed against the engine-room skylight by a heavy sea; and his death was due to fracture of the ribs and injuries to the lungs. This would quite correspond with Mrs. Byrne's statement that his death was not instantaneous.

[The coincidence here must have been very close; as there cannot have been more than a short interval between Captain Gilpin's death and Mrs. Byrne's natural time for rising, and in this interval, apparently, the vision occurred. The short period within which the whole contents of the narrative are comprised is further of importance as making the case an easy one to carry correctly in the memory; and it seems very unlikely that the percipient should have come to imagine that she got up immediately after her vision and ascertained what had occurred, if the vision really took place on some other morning. Mrs. Byrne had been on two previous voyages with Captain Gilpin. She has experienced one other visual hallucination, which may have been purely subjective.]

The lady who narrates the following case desires that her name

may not be published.

"May, 1885.

(174) "An attack of rheumatism and nervous prostration left me far from well for some weeks last spring, and one night I had a strange

432 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

unaccountable vision which has left a vivid impression upon my memory. I had gone to bed early and was lying awake alone, with a night-light burning in order in some degree to dispel the gloom. Suddenly across the lower end of the room passed Major G.'s figure, dressed in his usual everyday costume, neither his features nor his figure any whit altered. It was no dream, nor was I in the least delirious or wandering, therefore a conviction seized me that something must have occurred; in consequence I particularly marked the hour, when the clock struck 11 shortly afterwards. The next morning I was not the least surprised when my sister handed me a note from Miss G-. announcing her brother's death, and was fully prepared before reading it to find that he had passed away before 11 the previous evening — which presentiment, strange to say, was fully verified; Major G. having died at a quarter to 11. Major G. had returned in a bad state of health from Egypt, where he had been serving in the campaign of 1883. For some time he appeared to recover and was able to go about and enter into society during the winter, but during the last month the old symptoms had returned, and gradually he grew worse and worse, until no hopes of his recovery were entertained. Though not personally intimate with him, we were well acquainted with his family, and naturally his case formed a topic of conversation among us. We had also received bad accounts a few days before and were aware that he was in a critical condition; nevertheless at the time of his death he had been quite out of my thoughts and mind. I had never before had any apparition of any description whatsoever, nor has this one been followed by any other.

"C. P."

Miss Scott Moncrieff, of 44, Shooter's Hill Road, Blackheath, says: — " As I was at [the town where Miss P. lives] at the time, I can myself so far confirm the story as to mention that, on the day after it occurred, we heard that the young lady had been so shaken in her nerves by her illness that she had been seeing what you would call a ' hallucination,' and was going to Malvern for change of air."

She adds that Miss P. was staying with her when the above account was written, and that as to the date, " both she and I remembered that it was on a Thursday near the end of March or beginning of April."

"We find from an obituary notice that Major G. died on Thursday, April 3rd, 1884.

In an interview with Mr. Myers, December 26th, 1885, Miss P. added the following details: —

" Major G.'s phantom was in his ordinary walking costume — hat and ulster — in which Miss P. was accustomed to see him. The figure passed quickly across the end of the room without turning its head, but the face as well as the figure were distinctly recognisable. The figure made no noise, and disappeared as it reached the wall.1 Miss P. at once conjectured that Major G. must be passing away; but she felt no fear. Although

1 The mode of movement and of disappearance here described are not infrequent in visual hallucinations. In my collection (p. 392), besides about a dozen cases where the disappearance was through a door, behind a curtain, into a corner, and so on, I find four where it was respectively through the wall, into the wall, through the window, and into a bookcase. Movement of some sort, as will be seen later, is an extremely frequent feature of both subjective and telepathic phantoms.

Major G. was known to be fatally ill, there was no expectation of his death from day to day. He was not prominently before Miss P.'s mind. Miss P. was somewhat out of health at the time, but never suffered from any kind of hallucination of sight or hearing. She did not mention the incident to her family for fear of ridicule.

Miss P.'s sister (to whom the incident was first told) said that she remembered receiving next morning the letter as to Major G.'s death; and also remembered that some time later Miss P. told her of the incident.

[Here the knowledge of the percipient that Major G-. was in a critical state is, of course, an element of weakness; but it remains a remarkable coincidence that she should have had her one experience of a sensory hallucination at the exact hour of his death.]

The next account is from Mr. Runciman, of Oak Villa, Geraldine

Road, Wandsworth.

"May 5th, 1884.

(175) " On the morning of December 2nd, 1883, at about 7 o'clock in the morning, I had a dream which merged into a waking hallucination as follows: — I dreamt Mr. J. H. Haggit was lying on my bed, beside me, outside of the bedclothes. I dreamt I saw him there, and I also thought I saw him there after dreaming. I arose and rested on my right elbow, looking at him in the dusky light. There was a very small jet of gas burning in the room. I reflected, ' Am I awake, or is this a dream % 7 I cannot yet answer this question to my own satisfaction ] I cannot tell when my dream merged in my waking thoughts. I only am sure that as the figure disappeared I was as wide awake as I am now. He was dressed in grey tweed, as I had been used to see him actually dressed.1 He was turned from me so that I could only partially see his face. Yet I was certain it was he. I was alarmed and shocked to find my dream a reality — as I then thought it. I was about to speak when, in a twinkling, the image of Mr. H. was gone. I was leaning on my right arm and half raised from the bed. It was only half light, our gas burning but turned low. I mentioned the matter on that day to Mr. G. Aynsley, of No. 3, Glover Terrace, South Shields. I was oppressed during the whole day by the unusual experience of the morning, and hence spoke to the above and another twice about the incident.

" I had a note, next day I think, saying that Mr. H. died about 6 hours after his fancied presence in my bed.

" I knew that Mr. H. was afflicted, as he had been for 8 years or so, by bronchial asthma. As he had lived so long in spite of great suffering, I quite thought he would live longer. I had no idea he was near death.

" I believe this was a merely natural occurrence. I am not orthodox in religion. " Thomas Runciman."

We find the date of the death confirmed by the obituary of the Darlington and Stockton Times.

Mr. Aynsley corroborates as follows, on May 20, 1884: —

" 3, Glover Terrace, South Shields. " I remember hearing Mr. Thomas Runciman speak of a vivid dream

l See pp. 539-40.

434 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

and hallucination which he had had on the day that Mr. Haggit died. He told me that he dreamt that he saw him lying on the bed beside him, in his ordinary dress, but very pale and haggard. He was so impressed that he awoke, and saw him quite plainly there. I ascertained afterwards that he had died about 6 hours after, on the day that Mr. Runciman related the circumstance. "George Aynsley."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Runciman writes: —

" With regard to my having had any other hallucination, I have had others, but lapse of time and inattention have quite dimmed the remem brance of them. They were of a different kind to this last case. They were, I should say, simply ' nightmare ' or ' daymare.' That is, they were such, that I quite believe I was asleep while experiencing them. In the last case I had not a peculiar sense of breaking out of sleep at once, and with a snap, as it were. I render my idea but imperfectly in the preceding sentence — perhaps I would more truly describe myself as breaking free, not from what was sleep, but from a tyrannous mistake as to my circumstances at the time. This sense was absent in the last case. I believe I might be awake, I even think I was awake, with the image of a dream still strongly on my mind. But in the earlier cases I concluded long ago that I was asleep and vividly dreaming till the image disappeared. Briefly, I cannot be sure in the latter case that I was asleep, although all experience would go to say I was. In the earlier cases many years ago I concluded that waking had caused what looked real to disappear. But do not think for one moment that I consider the last case any less a delusion than the former. I only try to describe my experience and belief at the moment of hallucination. It is difficult to define the difference in these cases."

In conversation with our colleague, Mr. R. Hodgson, Mr. Runciman mentioned that he found afterwards from the servant that at the time of his hallucination Mr. Baggit was apparently suffering intense agony. The figure was not part of his dream at all; he saw it when he woke. It appeared to be lying almost on its right side, between Mr. Runciman and his wife, with the left side-face exposed and eye open, but the body was motionless, though it seemed to Mr. Runciman to be alive. In addition to the low gaslight, the dusky light of the morning was coming through the window, the blind of which was up. The light was sufficient for Mr. Runciman to see the time by his watch. He tells us that he made a written note of the experience, but does not remember whether this was done before he heard of the death. He has searched for the note, but cannot find it, and thinks that it must have been lost at the time of a removal.

§ 7. I will now give some examples where two senses were concerned. The following, from Mr. D. H. Wilson, of Rosemont, Hyeres, includes an impression of weight as well as of sight. The case belongs to the group where the agent is comatose (pp. 230, 406).

" 1876. (176) "My mother told me one morning, when I went to see her, that in the previous night she had had a startling experience. She was awakened by feeling a heavy weight on her feet, and on sitting up saw the form of her

husband (my father was then thousands of miles away) seated on the bed, in his nightshirt, and having the appearance of a corpse. After a few moments the form vanished. I recommended my mother to record this experience in her diary, and she did so. In due course she was informed by her husband that on that particular night he was in a state of coma, having been delirious for some days, and his life was quite despaired of by the doctors. " D. H. Wilson."

In answer to our inquiries, Mr. Wilson wrote in February, 1884: — " My mother (who is no longer alive) had never seen anything of the kind previously, to the best of my knowledge." He thinks that the occurrence was in the winter of 1862.

Mr. Wilson's sister, Mrs. Kimber, of 3, Roland Gardens, S.W., has given us a completely concordant account, but cannot recall how long after the incident it was that her mother told her of it. She says, " At the time of the apparition, all hope of his [her father's] life had ceased."

In the following cases the sense of touch becomes more definite; and in the first of them, if memory can be trusted, even the sense of smell was concerned — projected, as we may suppose, like the other sensory features, from the percipient's own mind.1 Mrs. Brooke, of Woodlands, Kenford, Exeter, narrates: —

"June 29th, 1884.

(177) "I have a very vivid recollection that, towards dawn (?) on the morning of August 3rd, 1867, I was roused from my sleep to find my brother, an officer in the 1 6th Lancers, then quartered in Madras, standing by the bed. My impression is that he bent over me, kissed me, and passed quietly from the room, making signs to me not to speak, and that I was full of joy, thinking he had returned home unexpectedly, and lay awake till the maid called me, when my first words to her were that my brother had come home and I had seen him. I remember my bitter disappointment when at last made to believe that this was not so, and that it was quite impossible I could have seen him; also that I was scolded and silenced for holding to my story.

" I cannot remember how much time elapsed before the news came by telegram that my brother died suddenly of jungle fever on August 2nd; full particulars did not reach us for weeks later, and it was not till long afterwards that I put two and two together, as the saying is, and, found that, as I then and now firmly believe, my favourite brother came to me at the hour of his death.

" The date I fixed by reference to a childish diary I then kept, long since destroyed, but I cannot give you the exact hours. I know by letters that my brother died soon after 10 o'clock p m. on August 2nd, and I

1 This feature occurred in case 18, p. 191, which, however, differed in the point that the smell represented what was occupying the agent's mind. I may remark that, except in disease, subjective hallucinations of smell — or at any rate cases that can be clearly identified as such — seem very rare; I have only two first-hand specimens in my large collection — besides one or two where a hallucination of smell has survived as the consequence of a dream. In one case of this latter sort (which I cannot obtain first-hand for publication), a distinct smell of death followed on a dream which is alleged to have coincided with the unexpected death of the person dreamt of.

2 E 2

436 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

know that my room was not quite dark when I saw him, and that I did not fall asleep again before morning on August 3rd. "M. A. Brooke."

The Army List confirms Aug. 2, 1867, as the date of death. The vision seems to have followed the death by 9 or 10 hours. In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Brooke says: —

" I fear that at this distance of time, 1 7 years, I shall not be able to find anyone who remembers my mentioning my vision of my brother, unless it might be the maid, who was with me for more than 15 years, and I will write to her and find out if she recollects it.

" I have never had any 'hallucination of the senses,' on any other occasion than that you know of."

[In this other case what seemed to be seen was the unaccountable opening of a locked door — which, as I have before remarked, is a known form of hallucination. See p. 102, note.]

In a personal interview with Mrs. Brooke, Professor Sidgwick obtained the following additional details: —

She was 13 years old. She was quite sure it was not a dream. It was quite impossible that it could have been some one else, mistaken for her brother. The room seemed to be full of a peculiar scent which her brother was fond of. She had written to the maid who, however, said, in reply, that she had only a vague recollection of the incident.

We must not forget that " borderland " impressions, or rather, perhaps I should say, dreams which the dreamer mistakes for waking percepts, are probably commoner in early youth than in later years: and in such a case as Mrs. Brooke's, therefore, the evidential superiority which I have pointed out as distinguishing waking from sleeping experiences could not rightly be insisted on. At the same time, whatever name we give them, we have no grounds for thinking that imaginary percepts so vivid and convincing as those here described fall to the lot of any considerable proportion of children.

In the next case the imagery supplied by the percipient's mind is very marked, and reminds us of some of the former dream-cases. The narrator is Miss Schmidt, of Ducklington Rectory, near Witney.

"June, 1884. (178) "On New Year's Eve, 1852, 1 awoke about 12.40 a.m. and found my room so brilliantly illuminated that I imagined I had forgotten to put out my candle, and that something must have caught fire. I got up and, on looking round, saw at the foot of the bed a coffin resting on chairs, on each of which was a silver candlestick with a large wax taper alight; in the coffin was a figure of my father. I put out my hand and touched him, when it became quite dark. I felt for my matchbox and lighted a candle, looked at my watch and wrote down the time. The next morning I told my friend, with whom I was staying in Paris at the time, and on the morning of the 2nd of January we received a letter from Marseilles, saying that my father had died suddenly at 12.40 on New Year's Eve, and

that he had expressed such a strong wish to see his youngest child (i.e., myself) again just before his death. " E. A. Schmidt."

On one, and only one other occasion in her life, Miss Schmidt has seen an appearance of an unusual kind; this, however, was seen on different occasions by several persons, and, whatever it was, can scarcely be taken to prove any special liability to hallucinations. She was requested to put us in the way of procuring the corroboration of her friend, who is a Russian. On March 12th, 1885, she writes: —

" I have taken all the steps I feel I can justifiably take with regard to securing for you the testimony of the Princess D. [name given]. It has already given me a great deal of awkward unpleasantness when inquiring at the Russian Embassy, &c, as the Prince and Princess are much mixed up in politics, and Russians are, as perhaps you know, not a little suspicious of the inquiries of strangers."

The most remarkable feature in this case is the light. The appearance of a dark room as being filled with light is a form of hallucination (or of hyperesthesia) which is occasionally experienced on waking, apart from any further abnormality. I have received at least five well marked instances of the sort, not including those where there has been a further development of the hallucination — a luminous figure, or a figure in addition to the light.1 The full interest of this point will appear later. (See Chap. XII., §7.)

The next case was first printed in the Spiritual Magazine for February, 1863. The narrator is the late Mr. George Barth, of 6, Highfield Villas, Camden Road, N.

(179) "On the 14th of May, 1861, our son George, a most excellent and religious youth of 19 years, was removed from this to the spiritworld. Perceiving that the time of his departure was near, his mother and I alone watched by his bedside. When the last breath had been taken in and expired, I quietly remarked, ' He is now gone.' His mother inquired the time, and then observing the rising sun just shining over the blind of the room, which had an aspect to the east, she said, ' See! the natural sun is just rising as our dear boy is rising to his Heavenly home.' I have an object in noting the rising of the sun at the moment of his departure.

" Mr. Williams, of Romford and Bishopsgate Without, a highly intelligent and worthy man, is united to our eldest daughter. At this time he was staying at his house in the City, his wife having been only a few days previously confined. He was sleeping in a room, the window of which faced the east. He states that he was soundly asleep, his hands outside the bedclothes, when he was suddenly aroused by feeling each of his hands firmly grasped and pressed. He instantly sat up, and by the

1 It is recorded by Despine pere, De VEmploi du Magnetisme Animal (Paris, 1840), p. 240, that his patient, Estelle, saw all the objects in a perfectly dark room. A friend tells me that she has on several occasions, when feverish, had a " borderland " hallucination of a cat, which she has actually pursued about the room. On all these occasions the room, which was in reality dark, has appeared light — the light fading out as the hallucination vanished.

438 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

bedside stood George, holding his hands and smiling in his face with a look of peculiar sweetness and kindness. George was attired (seemingly) in his nightdress. Mr. Williams was not at all alarmed; he knew it was George in the spirit, and his presence filled his brother-in-law with a calm feeling of peace and happiness, which remained for many hours. They thus held hands and looked on one another for a minute or longer;, then the grasp relaxed, and George's spirit 1 faded away.

" Mr. Williams noticed that the rising sun was shining into his room over the blind. His impression was, and still is, that he saw George by this light and not by any other. At 8 o'clock Mr. Williams went to his wife's room and told her, in the presence of his mother and the nurse, that George was dead. ' Have you heard from father? ' was the natural query. ' No; but I have seen George — he came for a minute this morning at sunrise.' ' Oh, nonsense! you have been dreaming, James.' ' Dreaming! I never was more awake in my life. I not only saw him, but I felt his hands pressing mine.' ' Nonsense, James; I know, poor boy, how ill he is, but father does not expect him to go yet. I still hope to be up and able to see him.' Mr. Williams quietly rejoined, ' You will see, dear. Mind, we shall presently have a letter or messenger from papa, telling us.' In an hour later Mr. Williams received the letter which he expected.

" Mr. Williams and George were mutually much attached; in all his boyhood anxieties his brother James was George's confidant and friend. Hence a parting visit and a parting smile, and last friendly grasp of the hands was that which a departing spirit might be glad to give to his friend and brother; but he could not go in the body, nor give it while his body kept him. « c«E0RGE Earth."

The Times obituary confirms the date of the death.

Two daughters of Mr. Barth write to us as follows: —

" Delmar Villa, 520, Caledonian Road.

"April 20vh, 1882. " The extract you send from the Spiritual Magazine was written by my dear father, in order to give a correct account of my brother George's appearance to my brother-in-law, Mr. James Williams. The incident was spoken of at the time it occurred amongst us all in my father's house; likewise I visited my sister and brother-in-law the day following George's death, and heard the account from himself.

" My father's reason for sending the notice to the magazine arose from some friend having published an incorrect statement.

" Charlotte Walenn." " 3, Park Place West, Gloucester Gate, N.W.

« July 29th, 1884. " I was a very young child at the time of my brother George's death. The only confirmation I can give you is the fact of hearing my father speak of the occurrence to friends interested in such matters, on several occasions, just as it is stated in his narrative. My eldest sister, Mrs. Williams, has been dead some years, but my brother-in-law is still alive, and will, no doubt, give you any help in the matter.

"Alice Barth (Mrs. Frederick Usher)." The account was sent to Mr. Williams, who resides at Fern Bank, 1 See p. 409, note.

Crowborough, Tunbridge Wells. He made no corrections in it, and referred to it in a manner which implied its substantial accuracy; but he declined any further correspondence on the subject.

The following account is from Mr. George J. Coombs, Sheriff's Officer for the County of Nottingham. He tells me that he enjoys singularly robust health, and he is certainly as free from superstitious fancies as can well be conceived.

" Journal Chambers, Pelham Street, Nottingham.

" December 28th, 1883.

(180) " In the middle of the month of June, 1880, my aunt left Salisbury and went to the Washington Hotel, Liverpool, where I joined her from Nottingham, for the purpose of seeing her off to America, on board the Allan Line steamer, Circassian, the following day.

" Her business was to realise some property. She was getting into years, and very much pressed me to accompany her, but I was unable to leave my business for so long a time. She, however, made me promise to meet her on her return, and said it was her intention to spend the winter at Nottingham before returning to Salisbury.

" About the 25th July following, at 4 o'clock in the morning, while in bed, I suddenly awoke and said to my wife, ' Someone has taken hold of my hand; the hand was quite cold. I believe it was my aunt; I saw her rush out of the room.' The door was open on chain, and I immediately jumped out of bed to see, and the chain was still on. I said to my wife, ' My aunt is dead, and she has come again over the water,' to which she replied, ' You are dreaming; you had too much supper last night '; to which I said, ' No, I am positive of the impression.'

"1 received a letter from a solicitor in Hamilton, about a fortnight afterwards, announcing my aunt's decease, and a reference to the dates convinced my wife that she died at the very time I had the visitation. When I left my aunt in the steam tug which accompanied the Circassian down the Mersey, her farewell words were, 'I shall see you first when I come back.'

"Geokge J. Coombs."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Coombs adds that the vision was not distinct, but that the hallucination is unique in his experience. In conversation, he described the impression as extremely striking and startling. The door was so chained that it was impossible for anyone to enter the room.

Mrs. Coombs corroborates as follows: — " Julv 25th 1884.

" I very well remember the morning when my husband awoke early, and said he saw his aunt rush out of the bedroom, and that she had taken hold of his hand; also that, when the news of Mrs. Rumbold's death came from Hamilton, the remark was made that it was the very date my husband narrated his dream. I cannot fix the date without an Almanac of 1880, but it was our Village Feast Monday morning, which is, I believe, the third week in July. " S. A. Coombs."

We asked if it was possible to obtain corroboration as to the date of the death. Mr. Coombs sent us the solicitor's letter; but this letter assumes

440 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

knowledge of the death, and was not written till September 27th. The letter received by Mr. Coombs " about a fortnight " after the death, and which must be the one by which the coincidence was fixed, is the following. It is undated, but the postmarks are Hamilton, July 21st, and Nottingham, August 5th, 1880.

" 188, King Street East, Hamilton, Canada. " Dear Sir, — I am sorry to have the painful task to inform you of the death of your aunt, Mrs. Rumbold. She came to me on a visit on July 3rd, feeling very poorly. I thought it must be over-fatigue, and probably after a rest she would be better. She continued getting worse and lingered on till the 19th. — Yours truly, "A. Jarvis."

[Monday in the third week of July, 1880, fell on the 19th, which is so far in favour of the accuracy of Mrs. Coombs' memory. It seems practically beyond doubt that at the time that the news arrived, Mr. Coombs, as well as his wife, fixed the date of the dream as Monday the 1 9th; and the fact that in his letter to us, written more than 3 years afterwards without reference to documents, he says " about the 25th," is, therefore, unimportant.

We learn, however, from Mrs. Jarvis that Mrs. Rumbold died at 4 p.m.; so that the impression, though falling, of course, within a time of most serious illness altogether unknown to the percipient, preceded the actual death by about 16 hours.]

In the next case, the sense of touch, was associated with that of

hearing. Though the evidence is that of an uneducated witness, the

facts are well-evidenced; and it is at any rate a prima facie mark of

accuracy that the want of exact coincidence of time is expressly noted.

The first part of the account was written down by a careful assistant

at Bangor.

"December, 1883.

(181) " My present housemaid's mother, Ellen Williams, one night in 1872, distinctly and suddenly felt the pressure, as of some one's hand upon her breast, at the same time heard the voice of her son, ' Ffoulk,' then a lad at sea, saying, twice 'Mother, mother.' She was not asleep, and she told her husband at once that she was sure it was her boy's voice, and that she feared there was something the matter with him. When they saw notice of the arrival of the ship in Liverpool, they wrote at once. A reply came from the captain that the boy had died of yellow fever, six clays out from Rio de Janeiro, giving the date, which corresponded exactly with the mother's note of the occurrence. She is still living in the same place, near Port Dinorwic, in Carnarvonshire. She never had any similar experience before or since, and has no objection to the mention of her name."

In answer to inquiries our informant writes: —

" I fear Mrs. Williams could not write the details herself, but she might dictate to another. Her daughter tells me she was then a child at home, and remembers that her father, who has since died, did all he could to convince his wife that her fears were groundless, and would not let

her dwell on the subject. They did not hear of the death till some months after, and the captain sent the date, which was copied into the family Bible."

And later she adds: —

"I have had an interview with Mrs. Ellen Williams, in the presence of her daughter, and have translated exactly what she said in Welsh. She insisted upon the night of the Ipth being the time of her impression. The captain's statement that the 6th was the date of death makes a material difference. I copied the spelling of Pernambuco as it was written on the fly-leaf of the Bible."

The following is the percipient's testimony: —

"January 9th, 1884.

" I hereby declare that on the night of the 4th of February, 1872, about 1 o'clock, I distinctly saw my son Ffoulk, looking very weak and ill, and felt the pressure of his hands and heard his voice, saying, ' Mother! mother! ' I did not know if I was asleep. I believed not. I mentioned it at once to my husband, who did not understand my feelings.

" We did not hear till the following Good Friday of his death, which the captain said took place on the 6th of February, I do not know at what hour.

" Witness my mark, Ellen Williams her + mark.

" In the presence of my daughter, who also testifies that I spoke of

it at once, and commonly, and remained in great anxiety until

the news reached us.,,,T,TT „

"Mary Williams.

The record in the family Bible stands: —

" Ffoulk died at sea, • 6th of February, 1872, in lat. 5.51 S., long. 34.35 W., of the yellow fever, on board the barque ' Barbadoes,' on his passage from Pernabucca to Liverpool."

Our original informant adds: — ■ u june 25th 1884.

"I recollect pressing the question at the time as to whether Ellen Williams had ever had any impression or hallucination of any kind, and she positively denied ever having experienced such, except on that one occasion."

[The two days' interval between the impression and the death, if correctly remembered, of course weakens the case for evidential purposes. Still, the impression almost certainly corresponded with a time of unforeseen and desperate illness.]

§ 8. Lastly, we have a group where the two higher senses of sight and hearing were both concerned. The following account is from Miss Kate Jenour, of 23, Belsize Square, South Hampstead, N.W.

"November, 1884. (182) "On the 4th of May, 1883, when on board H. M. S. Spartan, on my way to Capetown, I was awoke by hearing someone in my cabin, which I alone occupied, when to my surprise I saw the figure of a friend of mine standing by my berth. It then disappeared, and by the first mail after my arrival at Capetown, I received the news of my friend's death,

442 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

which took place at 10.30 p.m. on that night. I told 2 or 3 passengers on board, who made a note of it."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Jenour says: —

" I was certainly awake; I had no sense of awaking afterwards, but the sense of waking before I saw the figure, ray first impression having been that the steward had come in to shut the port-hole. I had a light burning in my cabin. The figure looked quite solid and natural, and was in day-dress. I knew the girl to be consumptive, but had not thought of her as likely to die, and indeed had not been thinking about her at all; she was an acquaintance and neighbour, but not an intimate friend.

" I think the vessel was about half-way to the Cape. Next day I described what I had seen to my cousin, Mr. Jenour, Captain Wait, Mr. Frames, who is now a lawyer in Grahamstown, and Mr. Hope Hall. I was so impressed that I could not help speaking of it, in spite of expecting to be laughed at: had it been a dream, I should have thought nothing of it.

" I am certain I mentioned the date of my vision in my first letter to my father, written when I got to the Cape, and before the news of the death reached me; and I am also certain that when I received the news of the death, I noted, and my cousin noted, that the dates were the same. I cannot now be sure of the exact day.

" I have had no other such waking vision except once, soon after, at Capetown; when I saw the figure of a dressmaker whom I knew in England, and who (as I learnt on my return to England) had died about the same time; but the date was not fixed. a j£ j»

We find from the obituary in the Times that the death took place on May 2, 1883.

Miss Jenour's cousin is unfortunately at a distance, and his address cannot at present be ascertained. Captain Wait writes, in April, 1886, that he does not recall Miss Jenour's mention of the incident. The fact of the coincident death not being then known, such a narration might naturally make very little impression. I wrote to ask Mr. Frames if he remembered any singular announcement made by Miss Jenour during the voyage; but he replied in the negative.

Miss Jenour's father writes on Nov. 1, 1885: —

" I can positively state that by the next mail to the Cape, after the death of a young friend of ours, I wrote to my daughter; but before my letter can have reached her, she, on arriving at Capetown, wrote to me to say that the lady in question had appeared to her in her cabin, at sea, between Madeira and the Cape, and that she mentioned the fact the following morning to her relatives and friends on board. On comparing dates, it was certain that the appearance was on the same day that the lady died. Since then my relatives have confirmed this in every particular.

"H. J. Jenour."

Mr. Jenour is certain that his daughter's letter contained the date of her vision, and he has kindly searched for the letter. He writes, on Dec. 1, 1885:—

" The letter I most wanted I cannot find, but have one dated June 5th, in which my daughter again refers to Miss B.'s death, and adds, ' On the

2nd of May,1 in the night, or rather morning,2 I awoke up and saw Edith standing by my bed. I told about it at the time.' The lady died at half -past 10 o'clock at night."

Mr. Jenour tells me that it was the close coincidence of time that specially struck him, and he mentioned the circumstance to others. Miss Jenour is equally confident that the coincidence of time was noted in Capetown; though, as she has mentioned, her memory does not retain the exact date. We find from the Times that the Spartan left Plymouth on the 20th of April, and arrived at Capetown on the 10th of May; therefore her recollection that " the vessel was about half-way " is not far wrong.

The next case is from Mrs. Richardson, of Combe Down, Bath.

"August 26th, 1882.

(183) "On September 9th, 1848, at the siege of Mooltan, my husband, Major-General Richardson, C.B., then adjutant of his regiment, was most severely and dangerously wounded, and supposing himself dying, asked one of the officers with him to take the ring off his finger and send it to his wife, who at that time was fully 150 miles distant, at Ferozepore. On the night of September 9th, 1848, I was lying on my bed, between sleeping and waking, when I distinctly saw my husband being carried off the field, seriously wounded, and heard his voice saying, ' Take this ring off my finger, and send it to my wife.' All the next day I could not get the sight or the voice out of my mind. In due time I heard of General Richardson having been severely wounded in the assault on Mooltan. He survived, however, and is still living. It was not for some time after the siege that I heard from Colonel L., the officer who helped to carry General Richardson off the field, that the request as to the ring was actually made to him, just as I had heard it at Ferozepore at that very time.

" M. A. Richardson."

The following questions were addressed by us to General Richardson, whose answers are appended.

(1) Does General R. remember saying, when he was wounded at Mooltan, ' Take this ring off my finger, and send it to my wife,' or words to this effect?

" Most distinctly; I made the request to my commanding officer, Major E. S. Lloyd, who was supporting me while my man had gone for assistance. Major Lloyd, I am sorry to say, is dead."

(2) Can he remember the time of this incident 1 Was it morning, noon, or night 1

" As far as memory serves, I was wounded about 9 p.m. on Sunday, the 9th September, 1848."

(3) Had General R., before he left home, promised or said anything to Mrs. R. as to sending his ring to her, in case he should be wounded 1

" To the best of my recollection, never. Nor had I any kind of presentiment on the subject. I naturally felt that with such a fire as we were exposed to I might get hurt."

1 The date of the dream in the first account, the 4th of May, was given from memory only, under the impression that the death had occurred on that day — not from any independent record.

- The vision took place soon after midnight — which of course would make its actual date May 3.

444 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

Four years after the above was written, Mrs. Richardson gave me viva voce a precisely accordant account. She described, herself as a matter-of-fact person, and does not have frequent or vivid dreams.

The details as to the ring seem fairly to raise this case out of the category of mere visions of absent persons who are known to be in danger, and with whom the percipient's thoughts have been anxiously engaged.

The next case was received towards the end of 1882, from Mr. J. G. Keulemans, who has already been mentioned more than once (pp. 196, 235, 255).

(184) In December, 1880, he was living with his family in Paris. The outbreak of an epidemic of small-pox caused him to remove three of his children, including a favourite little boy of 5, to London, whence he received, in the course of the ensuing month, several letters giving an excellent account of their health.

" On the 24th of January, 1881, at half-past 7 in the morning, I was suddenly awoke by hearing his voice, as I fancied, very near me. I saw a bright, opaque, white mass before my eyes, and in the centre of this light I saw the face of my little darling, his eyes bright, his mouth smiling.1 The apparition, accompanied by the sound of his voice, was too short and too sudden to be called a dream: it was too clear, too decided, to be called an effect of imagination. So distinctly did I hear his voice that I looked round the room, to see whether he was actually there. The sound I heard was that of extreme delight, such as only a happy child can utter. I thought it was the moment he woke up in London, happy and thinking of me. I said to myself, ' Thank God, little Isidore is happy as always.' "

Mr. Keulemans describes the ensuing day as one of peculiar brightness and cheerfulness. He took a long walk with a friend, with whom he dined ■ and was afterwards playing a game of billiards, when he again saw the apparition of his child. This made him seriously uneasy, and in spite of having received within 3 days the assurance of the child's perfect health, he expressed to his wife a conviction that he was dead. Next day a letter arrived saying that the child was ill; but the father was convinced that this was only an attempt to break the news; and, in fact, the child had died, after a few hours' illness, at the exact time of the first apparition.

Mrs. Keulemans says:— "May 29th, 1885.

" I remember that, the day when little Isidore died, my husband said that he felt strongly impressed that there was something wrong

1 Mrs. Luther, of Adelaide Crescent, Brighton, has supplied us with a very close parallel to this form of impression, in a case which we do not include in our evidence, since the vision, though coinciding with the death of the person seen, may have been due to the percipient's state of anxiety about him. The incident was related to Mrs. Luther by her friend, Miss D. Brooke (since dead), within a year of its occurrence. " Suddenly her attention was called from the thoughts of her young friend, which filled her mind at the time, by a bright light shining in the looking-glass. She thought some one must have entered the room, but on looking at the glass, she saw in the midst of the bright light which therein appeared, her young friend, with a peaceful, happy smile upon his face. As she looked, it and the light gradually disappeared, and she was left again in comparative darkness." See also cases 1G3 and 178 above, and compare the disc of light in case 220.

with the little boy in London. It was in the evening that he asked me whether I had received any news from my mother about Isidore. I replied that no letter had come, and asked him why he wanted to know. He made the same remark as before, but would not further explain himself. I tried to expel his gloomy forbodings by referring to a letter we had from my mother, stating that Isidore was very happy, and was singing all day long. My husband did not seem pacified. When the letter mentioning his illness came, my husband was very much dejected, and told me that it was no use trying to make a secret of it, as he knew the worst had happened. He said afterwards that he had seen a vision.

"A. Keulemans."

The second apparition in this case may be regarded as a sort of recrudescence of the first. (See, however, Chap. XII., § 6.) With respect to this feature of repetition after a good many hours or days, I may mention that I have but one example of it in my collection of purely subjective hallucinations, and, except in very markedly pathological cases, it seems to be extremely rare — rarer than the more immediate repetition of which I spoke in connection with case 159, above. It is perhaps allowable to surmise its connection with a special character of intensity in some of these telepathically produced impressions. Other telepathic examples are Nos. 213 and 240.

In the next example the repetition was of the more immediate sort, recalling cases 159 and 160, above. The account is from Mrs. Sherman, of Muskegon, Michigan, and was received through the kindness of Mr. F. A. Nims, solicitor, of that city, who has known Mrs.

Sherman and her family for years.

" Muskegon, Michigan.

"November 18th, 1885. (185) " On the 4th of July, 1868, my sister Lizzie and myself left Detroit and went to Saginaw, for the purpose of making a short visit with friends there. Our train was due in Saginaw about 7 p.m., but through detention did not arrive there until between 10 and 11. Owing to the lateness of the hour of arrival, we did not go to the residence of our friends, but to the Bancroft House, then the principal hotel in that city. The weather was very warm, our ride had been very dusty, and we were very tired. We had supper, and soon after retired. My sister and I occupied the same room and bed. It was nearly or quite 1 2 o'clock when we retired. As I now recollect, I went immediately to sleep. I was awakened by feeling what seemed to be a hand on my shoulder. I saw my brother Stewart standing by the bedside, and I had an impression at the same time that my brother-in-law Phillip Howard was also in the room. My brother said to me: ' Kate, mother wants you! get up and go home.' I at once became very much excited and awakened my sister, and told her that I had seen Stewart and what he had said, and that 1 felt sure that mother was sick or in trouble, or that something unusual had happened to her. We got up, and immediately after heard the clock strike one. There

446 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

was bright moonlight that night, and all objects in the room and outside the windows were plainly visible. There had been a menagerie in town that day, and it was yet in the neighbourhood, and we could hear the noises of the animals, and talked about them. My sister did not share in my alarm or anxiety, and ridiculed what she called my ' Ghost Story,' and we soon retired again. My mind was somewhat troubled with what had occurred, and I did not go to sleep quite so soon as my sister did, but I did go to sleep again, and the air being somewhat cooler, before going to sleep I had pulled the sheet up over my neck. While asleep I was again awakened by feeling the sheet pulled down off me,1 and I again saw my brother Stewart, and he repeated the same language as on the first occasion. At this time his appearance was very much more persistent than before, but his face seemed to retire and gradually fade away.2 He looked pale and ill, but at that time my concern and anxiety was on account of my mother. I supposed that she was threatened with some serious illness, and that the appearance had relation to that. I again aroused my sister and told her what had occurred, and we both got up and dressed, and did not retire again that night. I am not sure that I mentioned the circumstance to any of our friends that day. If I did, I am not in a position now to obtain the verification of it.

" We returned home on the afternoon of Monday, the 6th of July, arriving there between 6 and 7 o'clock. We found our father and mother very much disturbed in consequence of a telegram which they had received to the effect that Stewart was dying. When my mother communicated the news to us, I answered ' He is dead '; for then the significance of what had occurred at Saginaw first flashed upon me. It was but a very short time after this, the same evening, that we received another telegram giving the tidings of his death. My sister Lizzie had received a letter from him but a day or two before we went to Saginaw, in which he promised to make us a visit in the following October, and there was nothing to afford any ground for anxiety on his account in the letter. As I have been since informed, he died about a quarter before 1 o'clock on the morning of the 5th of July, about the time of his first appearance to me, as near as I can ascertain.

" I have a letter from my sister Lucy, the wife of Phillip Howard, at whose house he died, giving full particulars of his death, from which it seems that he was taken suddenly and violently ill on the 3rd or 4th of July, of what was supposed to be yellow fever.

"During his illness he talked a great deal about our mother, and seemed in his delirium to be watching for her and to think that she was coming to see him. He died, as stated, that Sunday morning, and was buried by order of the authorities on the afternoon of the same day.

" You inquire if I have ever had any previous hallucination of that kind. I have never had but one; that occurred when I was 7 years old At that time a young girl, a relative and playmate of mine, was ill with some form of fever. I had not been allowed to see her for two or three days. On waking one morning, I saw or dreamed she came and kissed me and bade me good-bye. This was before I had arisen. My mother

1 I need hardly point out that this sensation is no more a proof of an objective presence than any other feature of the hallucination.

2 Compare p. 444, note; and see Chap, xii., § 10, and Vol. ii., p. 97, first note.

soon afterwards came into the room, and I told her that had come

and kissed me and bid me good-bye. Within a few minutes after this some one of the family came from the house where the little girl resided, and said that she was dying. My mother immediately went over to the house, which was not far off, and when she arrived there the little girl was already dead.

" These are the only cases of what you call ' hallucination ' that have occurred in my experience.

" The occurrences at Saginaw were real, and I have never had a doubt about my brother, in some way or form, appearing to and communicating

with me- " Kate Sherman."

Mrs. Sherman's sister, Mrs. Park, corroborates as follows: —

" Muskegon, Michigan.

"I have read the foregoing statement signed by my sister, Mrs. S., and am able from my own recollection to confirm the same, except, of course, that I did not myself see my brother, Stewart Paris, or his apparition, at the same time that my sister did.

" At the time of the occurrences at Saginaw, I supposed what my sister said that she saw to be a dream, or something of that character, and gave the matter no serious thought or consideration until our return home the next day, when we learned of our brother's illness and death.

" I remember, however, that what my sister said she saw made a very strong impression upon her, and that she said, and seemed to believe, that some serious illness or misfortune had occurred or was about to occur to our mother. "Elizabeth 0. Park."

Mr. Nims adds that he had hoped to get a statement from Mrs. Paris, mother of Mrs. Sherman and Mrs. Park; but " while she remembers hearing about the vision on her daughters' return from Saginaw, she is unable to say whether it was before or after the news of the death."

The next case is from Miss Bibby, of Chaceley Lodge, Tewkesbury.

"1883.

(186) " In the early autumn of 1860, when I was between 19 and 20, I was staying with friends who lived near Rugby. I had gone to bed and fallen asleep, and was awakened by a consciousness of some one being in the room. I saw, as I imagined, my grandfather standing at the foot of the bed. He was then, as far as I knew, at his own house a few miles out of Liverpool. Immediately the figure moved to the side of the bed, the curtains of which had not been drawn. The figure did not, so far as I remember, touch either the bed or the curtains. The only remark he made was ' Good-night, Miss Nellie, Ma'am' — he was always in the h abit of calling me ' Nellie ' and sometimes in fun, ' Miss Nellie, Ma'am,' quoting the way in which Irish servants used to address my grandmother, after whom I was christened. He was the only person who ever called me 'Miss Nellie ' or ' Nellie,' my father having a great objection to all pet names.

" I soon fell asleep again, and next day mentioned the circumstance to my friends, and the day after received from my father the news of my grandfather's sudden death, about the time when he had appeared to me

448 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

So little did I anticipate such news that before I broke the black seal on my father's letter I exclaimed, ' Dear me, I fear poor Edward has gone,' alluding to my youngest brother who had been ailing for some time.

"Ellen Bibby."

[The corroboration of the friends with whom Miss Bibby was staying cannot unfortunately be obtained, as she has lost sight of them.]

The next account is from Miss Hosmer, the celebrated sculptor.

(187) " An Italian girl named Rosa was in my employ for some time, but was finally obliged to return home to her sister on account of confirmed ill-health. When I took my customary exercise on horseback I frequently called to see her. On one of these occasions I called about 6 o'clock p.m., and found her brighter than I had seen her for some time past. I had long relinquished hopes of her recovery, but there was nothing in her appearance that gave me the impression of immediate danger. I left her with the expectation of calling to see her again many times. She expressed a wish to have a bottle of a certain kind of wine, which I promised to bring her myself next morning.

" During the remainder of the evening I do not recollect that Rosa was in my thoughts after I parted from her. I retired to rest in good health and in a quiet frame of mind. But I woke from a sound sleep with an oppressive feeling that someone was in the room. I reflected that no one could get in except my maid, who had the key of one of the two doors of my room — both of which doors were locked. I was able dimly to distinguish the furniture in the room. My bed was in the middle of the room with a screen round the foot of it. Thinking someone might be behind the screen I said, ' Who's there 1 ' but got no answer. Just then the clock in the adjoining room struck 5; and at that moment I saw the figure of Rosa standing by my bedside; and in someway, though I could not venture to say it was through the medium of speech, the impression was conveyed to me from her of these words: ' Adesso son felice, son contenta.' And with that the figure vanished.

" At the breakfast table I said to the friend who shared the apartment with me, 'Rosa is dead.' ' What do you mean by that?' she inquired; ' You told me she seemed better than common when you called to see her yesterday.' I related the occurrence of the morning, and told her I had a strong impression Rosa was dead. She laughed, and said I had dreamed it all. I assured her I was thoroughly awake. She continued to jest on the subject, and slightly annoyed me by her persistence in believing it a dream, when I was perfectly sure of having been wide awake. To settle the question I summoned a messenger, and sent him to inquire how Rosa did. He returned with the answer that she died that morning at 5 o'clock.

" I was living in the Via Babuino at the time.

" The above has been written out by Miss Balfour, from the account given by Lydia Maria Child [to whom Miss Hosmer had narrated the facts] in the Spiritual Magazine for September 1st, 1870, with corrections [of a trifling kind] dictated by me, July 15th, 1885. •

"H. G. Hosmer."

The account given by Miss Child, which Miss Hosmer pronounced correct at the time, gives a few more details, tending to show that she was quite awake for an appreciable time before her vision. " I heard in the apartments below familiar noises of servants opening windows and doors. An old clock, with ringing vibrations, proclaimed the hour. I counted one, two, three, four, five, and resolved to rise immediately. As I raised my head from the pillow, Rosa looked inside the curtain and smiled at me. I was simply surprised, &c."

[Miss Hosmer does not remember the exact date of the occurrence, but says it must have been about 1856 or 1857. The old lady with whom she was residing is dead.]

We received the following account from the Rev. J. Barmby, of

Pittington Vicarage, Durham, who writes: —

" December 29th, 1884.

(188) " What follows was communicated orally to the Rev. J. T. Fowler, Librarian and Hebrew Lecturer in the University of Durham, by Mr. Clarke, one of the principal tradesmen in Hull, on the 9th of October, 1872. Mr. Fowler took notes in writing of what Mr. Clarke told him at the time, which notes he handed to me in the same month of October. I put them into the following form after receiving them, and have no doubt of their substance and details being exactly given. The events related had occurred about four years previously to Mr. Fowler's interview with Mr. Clarke."

"Mr. Clarke, of Hull, had known for twenty years a Mrs. Palliser, of the same place. She had an only child, a son called Matthew, who was a sailor. Being of the age of 22, he had sailed from Hull to New York. About a month after his departure, Mrs. Palliser came to Mr. Clarke in tears, and said, ' Oh, Mr. Clarke, poor Mat's drowned.' Mr. C. said, ' How have you got to know 1 ' She replied, ' He was drowned last night going on board the ship, in crossing the plank, and it slipped; I saw him, and heard him say, "Oh, mother.".' She stated that she had been in bed at the time, but was sure she was wide awake: and that she had seen also her own mother, who had been dead many years, at the bedfoot crying, and making some reference to the event. Mr. C. said to her, ' Oh, it's all nonsense, I don't believe anything of the sort.' She earnestly persisted in her conviction, and called on Mr. C. perhaps half-a-dozen times during the ensuing week. In order to pacify her, he undertook to write to the agent of her son's ship at New York. This she had wished him to do, thinking that he, as a business man, would know better how to write than herself. After the despatch of the letter, Mrs. P. kept calling on Mr. C. about every week, to ask if he had heard anything. In about a month's time a letter arrived from New York, addressed to ' Mrs. Palliser, care of Mr. Clarke.' It was opened by Mr. Clarke's son, in the presence of Mrs. Palliser, who, before it was opened, said, ' Aye, that'll contain the news of his being drowned.' The letter conveyed the intelligence that Matthew Palliser, of such a ship, had been drowned on such a night, through the upsetting of a plank, as he was going aboard the ship. The night specified was that of Mrs. P.'s vision.

" Mr. Clarke described Mrs. Palliser as ' a well-educated woman, a very respectable old lady who had seen better days,' about 65 years of age. She

2 F

450 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

had, he said, been a widow for some years before her son was drowned. She was then living in a passage leading out of Blackf riars Gate, in Hull. He had seen her ' the day before yesterday.' She had told the story ' thousands of times,' and it was well-known in Hull."

The Rev. J. T. Fowler, of Bishop Hatfield's Hall, Durham, writes: —

" November 26th, 1884.

" I know nothing about the case I mentioned to Mr. Barmby beyond what I gave him in writing.

" Mr. Clarke, a tradesman in Hull, told me of the case of Mrs. Palliser, and got her to come to his office, in Queen Street, Hull, for me to take down from her own lips the notes I gave to Mr. Barmby. I took great pains to get the whole of the story correctly. u j rp Fowler "

Mr. Clarke writes:— „ Winterton Hall, Doncaster.

" January 20th, 1885.

" Widow Palliser was a woman who had seen better days, and worked for my firm, Clarke and Son, Clothiers, Queen Street, Hull. She had an only son, Matthew. I assisted her in getting him to sea. One morning she came to me with tears rolling down her cheeks and said, ' Mat's dead; I saw him drowned! Poor Mat, the last words he said were, " Oh! my dear mother." He threw up his hands and sank to rise no more.' I asked how she knew. She said, ' I saw him going on board his ship, and the plank that he walked upon slipped on one side, and he fell overboard between the quay and the ship, and was drowned. My own mother, who had been dead many years, came to the foot of my bed and said, " Poor Mat's gone; he's drowned." '  I then said, ' Why, Mat's in New York ' (I always felt interested in this woman and her son). ' Yes,' she said,  he was drowned last night at New York; I saw him.'

" Mrs. P.'s object in coming to me was to ask if I would write to the agent in New York, to ascertain the facts. I said I would, and wrote stating that a poor widow had an only son on board such a ship, and she had a vision that an accident (I said nothing about drowning) had happened to her son, and I would take it as a great favour if he would ascertain and tell me all particulars. In about 3 to 5 weeks (she came day by day to ask if we had received a reply, always saying that she knew what the answer would be), at length, the letter arrived. We sent for Mrs. P., and before the letter was opened by my son, I said to her, ' What will be its contents 1 ' She at once and decidedly said that ' Mat was drowned on the very night that she saw him, and in going on board the ship the plank slipped, and he fell overboard between the quay and the ship.' So it was. Mrs. P. was then wearing mourning for Mat.

" My son and half-a-dozen young men can verify this if needful.2

" Mrs. P. died soon after. « jyj- yy Clarke.

" Reproduction of the letter received from the agent of the ship, as nearly as I and my son can remember: —

" ' New York, date unknown. " ' I have made inquiries of Matthew Palliser, age about 20, and learn

1 Mr. Clarke is quite confident that Mrs. Palliser spoke of her experience as a waking one.

2 In conversation, Mr. Clarke's son has completely confirmed the account.

that he fell off a plank in going on board his ship, and got drowned on ' The date was the same as Mrs. Palliser said.

" ' The mate has charge of his chest, and will give it to his mother when the ship arrives in Liverpool.' "

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Clarke adds: — "April 6th 1885.

" We have no copy of the agent's letter, but both my son and myself and others are certain that Mrs. P.'s vision and the agent's account of the accident were the same, both as to the time and cause, viz., that Mrs. P. saw her son slip off the plank in going on board his ship, and that he was drowned between the quay and the ship; agent's account that he fell off the plank and was drowned, at the time mentioned, between the ship and the quay. Mrs. P. died soon after the event, which in my opinion shortened her life."

[In the absence of a written note, we cannot of course be perfectly certain that Mrs. Palliser did not read back the details of the plank and the quay into her vision after the arrival of the news, and that Mr. Clarke is right in his recollection of having heard these details from the first. But there can hardly be a doubt that the vision was described as a very impressive one before the arrival of the news; and Mr. Clarke's interest in the matter may fairly be supposed to have made him careful in his scrutiny of the dates.]

If correctly reported, this case curiously combines a sort of clairvoyant vision1 with a more ordinary apparition, the figure at the foot of the bed — the latter being of an eminently " borderland " type. Such dream-like combinations (see pp. 425-6) have a very special bearing on the connection which I am seeking to establish between sleeping and waking telepathic percepts.2

The next account — from Mrs. Woodham,of 5, Royal Naval Cottages, Penge — was obtained through the kindness of the Hon. Roden Noel.

"June 26th, 1884.

(189) " I had in my service a charwoman, of about 60 years of age, who had served me faithfully for more than 20 years. Her husband had been one of my husband's coastguardmen, and on his death the poor woman had to work to support herself and four children, two of whom turned out badly. I had helped her as much as I could besides employing her, and found her very valuable in being trustworthy. She regarded me with great affection, and used to say to my daughters that there was no one to her like ' the mistress,' as she always called me.

" In August [a mistake for October] of last summer I had agreed to visit my sister, who resides in Edinburgh, and having fixed the day, a Wednesday, had arranged for Mrs. Halahan to come as usual. My son, who was going with me, persuaded me to set out on the day previous. Mrs. H. arrived, expecting to see me. Strange to say, she was very much taken aback and moved, and exclaimed, ' The mistress gone without seeing

1 See pp. 266, and 368-9.

2 For a purely subjective waking hallucination which represented a living and a dead person, see p. 499, note.

2 p 2

452 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

nie! ' She went to my house as usual during my absence (about a month). One day, while working at my married daughter's house, she was taken suddenly ill, about 6 o'clock in the evening — was conveyed home in a cab, and died next morning.

