PHANTASMS OF THE LIVING

by Edmund Gurney, Frederic W. H. Myers, and Frank Podmore

Basis: Clean reading edition of Phantasms of the Living by Edmund Gurney, Frederic W. H. Myers, and Frank Podmore (London, 1886, two volumes complete; Internet Archive phantasmsoflivin001gurn and phantasmsoflivin02gurn); spelling and wording original; running headers, signature marks, page numbers and scanner noise removed

Rare & Obscure Books series


* * *

PHANTASMS OF THE LIVING

BY EDMUND GURNEY, M.A., LATE FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE

FREDERIC W. H. MYERS, M.A., LATE FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE

FRANK PODMORE, M.A.

VOLUMES I AND II

LONDON: ROOMS OF THE SOCIETY FOR PSYCHICAL RESEARCH, 14, DEAN'S YARD, S.W.

TRÜBNER AND CO., LUDGATE HILL, E.C.

1886



Preface

A large part of the material used in this book was sent to the authors as representatives of the Society for Psychical Research; and the book is published with the sanction of the Council of that Society.

The division of authorship has been as follows. As regards the writing and the views expressed, — Mr. Myers is solely responsible for the Introduction, and for the " Note on a Suggested Mode of Psychical Interaction," which immediately precedes the Supplement; and Mr. Gurney is solely responsible for the remainder of the book. But the most difficult and important part of the undertaking — the collection, examination, and appraisal of evidence — has been a joint labour, of which Mr. Podmore has borne so considerable a share that his name could not have been omitted from the title-page.

In the free discussion and criticism which has accompanied the progress of the work, we have enjoyed the constant advice and assistance of Professor and Mrs. Sidgwick, to each of whom we owe more than can be expressed by any conventional phrases of obligation. Whatever errors of judgment or flaws in argument may remain, such blemishes are certainly fewer than they would have been but for this watchful and ever-ready help. Professor and Mrs. Sidgwick have also devoted some time and trouble, during vacations,

vi PREFACE.

to the practical work of interviewing informants and obtaining their personal testimony.

In the acknowledgment of our debts, special mention is due to Professor W. F. Barrett. He was to a great extent the pioneer of the movement which it is hoped that this book may carry forward; and the extent of his services in relation, especially, to the subject of experimental Thought-transference will sufficiently appear in the sequel. Mr. Malcolm Guthrie, Professor Oliver J. Lodge, and M. Charles Richet have been most welcome allies in the same branch of the work. Professor Barrett and M. Richet have also supplied several of the non-experimental cases in our collection. Mr. F. Y. Edgeworth has rendered valuable assistance in points relating to the theory of probabilities, a subject on which he is a recognised authority. Among members of our own Society, our warmest thanks are due to Miss Porter, for her well-directed, patient, and energetic assistance in every department of the work; Mr. 0. C. Massey has given us the benefit of his counsel; and Mrs. Walwyn, Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood, the Rev. A. T. Fryer, of Clerkenwell, the Rev. J. A. Macdonald, of Rhyl, and Mr. Richard Hodgson, have aided us greatly in the collection of evidence. Many other helpers, in this and other countries, we must be content to include in a general expression of gratitude.

Further records of experience will be most welcome, and should be sent to the subjoined address.

IJf., Dearis Yard, S. W. June, 1886.

SOCIETY FOR PSYCHICAL RESEARCH.

1886.

PRESIDENT. Professor Balfour Stewart, F.R.S.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

The Right Hon. Arthur J. Balfour, M.P.

Professor W. F. Barrett, F.R.S.E.

The Right Rev. the Bishop of Carlisle.

John R. Hollond, M.A.

Richard H. Hutton, M.A., LL.D.

The Hon. Roden Noel.

Lord Rayleigh, M.A., F.R.S.

The Right Rev. the Bishop of Ripon.

Professor Henry Sidgwick, Lit. D., D.C.L.

W. H. Stone, M.B.

Hensleigh Wedgwood, M.A.

HONORARY MEMBERS.

J. C. Adams, M.A., F.R.S.

William Crookes, F.R.S.

The Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M.P.

John Ruskin, LL.D., D.C.L.

Lord Tennyson.

Alfred Russel Wallace, F.R.G.S.

G F. Watts, R.A.

SOCIETY FOR PSYCHICAL RESEARCH.

CORRESPONDING MEMBERS.

H. Beaunis, Professeur de Physiologie a la Faculte de Medecine de Nancy.

Dr. Bernheim, Professeur a la Faculte de Medecine de Nancy.

Henry P. Bowditch, M.A., M.D., Professor of Physiology, Harvard

University, U.S.A. Theodore Bruhns, Simferopol, Russia. Nicholas M. Butler, M.A., Ph.D., Acting Professor of Philosophy,

Ethics, and Psychology, Columbia College, New York, U.S.A. A. Dobroslavin, M.D., Professor of Hygiene in the Imperial Academy

of Medicine, St. Petersburg. The Chevalier Sebastiano Fenzi, Florence. Dr. C. Fere, Hopital de la Salpetriere, Paris. George S. Fullerton, M.A., B.D., Adjunct Professor of Philosophy,

University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, U.S.A. Grenville Stanley Hall, M.A., Ph.D., Professor of Psychology and

Pedagogics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, U.S.A. Dr. Eduard von Hartmann, Berlin.

William James, M.D., Professor of Philosophy, Harvard University,U.S.A. Pierre Janet, Professeur agrege de Philosophie au Lycee du Havre. Mahadeva Vishnu Kane, B.A., Bombay.

P. Kovalevsky, M.D., Professor of Psychiatry in the University of Kharkoff.

Dr. A. A. Liebeault, Nancy.

Jules Liegeois, Professeur a la Faculte de Droit de Nancy.

Edward C. Pickering, M.A., S.B., Phillips Professor of Astronomy, and

Director of the Observatory, Harvard University, U.S.A. Th. Ribot, Paris.

Dr. Charles Richet, Professeur agrege a la Faculte" de Me'decine de

Paris. H. Taine, Paris.

Dr. N. Wagner, Professor of Zoology in the Imperial University, St. Petersburg.

The Rev. R. Whittingham, Pikesville, Maryland, U.S.A.

COUNCIL.

J. C. Adams, M.A., F.R.S., Lowndean Professor of Astronomy, Cambridge.

W. F. Barrett, F.R.S.E., Professor of Physics, Royal College of Science,

Dublin. Walter H. Coffin. Edmund Gurney, M.A. Richard Hodgson, M.A. Oliver J. Lodge, D. Sc, Professor of Physics, University College,

Liverpool.



Society for Psychical Research. Ix

A. Macalister, M.D., F.R.S., Professor of Anatomy, Cambridge

Frederic W. H. Myers, M.A.

Frank Podmore, M.A.

Lord Rayleigh, M.A., F.R.S.

C. Lockhart Robertson, M.D.

E. Dawson Rogers.

Henry Sidgwick, Lit. D., D.C.L., Knightbridge Professor of Moral

Philosophy, Cambridge. Henry A. Smith, M.A. J. Herbert Stack. Balfour Stewart, F.R.S., Professor of Physics, The Owens

College, Manchester. J. J. Thomson, M.A., Professor of Experimental Physics,

Cambridge. James Venn, D.Sc, F.R.S. Hensleigh Wedgwood, M.A.

HONORARY TREASURER. Henry A. Smith, 1, New Square, Lincoln's Inn, W.C.

HONORARY SECRETARY. Edmund Gurney, 14, Dean's Yard, Westminster, S.W.

In addition to the above, the Society includes over 600 Members and Associates. The privileges and conditions of membership are thus defined in the Rules: —

Rule IY. — The Society shall consist of: —

(a) Members, who shall contribute not less than two guineas annually, or a single payment of twenty guineas, and who shall be entitled to hold any of the offices of the Society; to vote in the election of the Governing Council; to attend all meetings of the Society; to use its Reading Room and Library; to borrow books from its Library; and to the free receipt of any journal, transactions, or periodical publication which may be issued by the Council.

(b) Associates, who shall contribute not less than one guinea annually, or a single payment of ten guineas, and who shall be entitled to attend all meetings of the Society, except such as are convened for business purposes only; to use its Reading Room and Library; and to the free receipt of the ordinary published Proceedings of the Society, and of the monthly Journal.

x. SOCIETY FOR PSYCHICAL RESEARCH.

Rule V. — -All Members and Associates of the Society shall be elected by the Council. Every candidate for admission shall be proposed by two persons who are Members or Associates of the Society, or shall give such references as shall be approved by the Council. Rule VI. — The subscription shall become due immediately on election, and afterwards in advance on the first day of January in each year. In the case of any Member or Associate elected on or after the 1st October, the subscription then paid shall be accepted as for the following year. Ladies are eligible either as Members or Associates. Members and Associates are entitled to purchase copies of all the periodical publications of the Society at half their published price.

The following note appears on the first page of the Society's Constitution: —

" To prevent misconception, it is here expressly stated that Membership of this Society does not imply the acceptance of any particular explanation of the phenomena investigated, nor any belief as to the operation, in the physical world, of forces other than those recognised by physical science."

Reports of investigation, or information relating to any branch of the Society's work, should be addressed to the Hon. Secretary, 14, Dean's Yard, Westminster, S.W.; letters of inquiry, or applications for Membership, should be addressed to the Assistant-Secretary at the same address.

The Proceedings of the Society (of which ten parts have been published — the first nine making three bound volumes) may be obtained from all booksellers through Messrs. Triibner and Co., Ludgate Hill, London, E.C.; or on direct application to the Assistant-Secretary, 14, Dean's Yard,

Westminster S.W.

SYNOPSIS OF VOLUME I,

INTRODUCTION.

I.

§ 1. The title of this book embraces all transmissions of thought and feeling from one person to another, by other means than through the recognised channels of sense; and among these cases we shall include apparitions xxxv-xxxvi

§ 2. We conceive that the problems here attacked lie in the main track of science........ xxxvi

§ 3. The Society for Psychical Research merely aims at the free and exact discussion of the one remaining group of subjects to which such discussion is still refused. Reasons for such refusal.. xxxvi- xxxix

§ 4. Reasons, on the other hand, for the prosecution of our inquiries may be drawn from the present condition of several contiguous studies. Reasons drawn from the advance of biology.. xxxix-xli

§ 5. Specimens of problems which biology suggests, and on which inquiries like ours may ultimately throw light. Wundt's view of the origination of psychical energy...... xli-xlii

§ 6. The problems of hypnotism...... xlii-xliii

§ 7. Hope of aid from the progress of "psycho-physical" inquiries xliii-xliv

§ 8. Reasons for psychical research drawn from the lacuna of anthropology.......... xliv-xlv

§ 9. Reasons drawn from the study of history, and especially of the comparative history of religions. Instance from the S.P.R.'s investigation of so-called " Theosophy " xlvi-xlviii

§ 10. In considering the relation of our studies to religion generally, we observe that, since they oblige us to conceive the psychical element in man as having relations which cannot be expressed in terms

xii SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I.

of matter, a possibility is suggested of obtaining scientific evidence of a supersensory relation between man's mind and a mind or minds above his own.. xlviii-li

§ 11. While, on the other hand, if our evidence to recent supernormal occurrences be discredited, a retrospective improbability will be thrown on much of the content of religious tradition.... li-liv

§ 12. Furthermore, in the region of ethical and aesthetic emotion, telepathy indicates a possible scientific basis for much to which men now cling without definite justification.... liv-lvii

13. Investigations such as ours are important, moreover, for the purpose of checking error and fraud, as well as of eliciting truth lvii-lix

II.

§ 14. Place of the present book in the field of psychical research. Indications of experimental thought-transference in the normal state. 1876-1882 lx

§ 15. Foundation of the Society for Psychical Research, 1882. Telepathy selected as our first subject for detailed treatment on account of the mass of evidence for it received by us..... lxi

§ 16. There is also a theoretic fitness in treating of the direct action of mind upon mind before dealing with other supernormal phenomena.......... lxii-lxiii

§ 17. Reasons for classing apparitions occurring about the moment of death as phantoms of the living, rather than of the dead.. lxiii-lxv

§ 18. This book, then, claims to show (1) that experimental telepathy exists, and (2) that apparitions at death, &c, are a result of something beyond chance; whence it follows (3) that these experimental and these spontaneous cases of the action of mind on mind are in some way allied lxv-lxvii

§ 1 8. As to the nature and degree of this alliance different views may be taken, and in a " Note on a Suggested Mode of Psychical Interaction," in Vol. II., a theory somewhat different from Mr. Gurney's is set forth........... lxvii-lxix

§ 20. This book, however, consists much more largely of evidence than of theories. This evidence has been almost entirely collected by ourselves......... lxix-lxx

SYNOPSIS OF VOL I.

xm

§ 21. Inquiries like these, though they may appear at first to degrade great truths or solemn conceptions, are likely to end by exalting and affirming them lxx-lxxi

Additions and Corrections..... lxxiii-lxxxiv

Preliminary Remarks: Grounds op Caution.

§ 1. The great test of scientific achievement is often held to be the power to predict natural phenomena; but the test, though an authoritative one in the sciences of inorganic nature, has but a limited application to the sciences that deal with life, and especially to the department of mental phenomena......... 1-3

§ 2. In dealing with the implications of life and the developments of human faculty, caution needs to be exercised in two directions. The scientist is in danger of forgetting the unstable and unmechanical nature of the material, and of closing the door too dogmatically on phenomena whose relations with established knowledge he cannot trace; while others take advantage of the fact that the limits of possibility cannot here be scientifically stated, to gratify an uncritical taste for marvels, and to invest their own hasty assumptions with the dignity of laws. 3-5

§ 3. This state of things subjects the study of " psychical " phenomena to peculiar disadvantages, and imposes on the student peculiar obligations........... 5-6

§ 4. And this should be well recognised' by those who advance a conception so new to psychological science as the central conception of this book — to wit, Telepathy, or the ability of one mind to impress or to be impressed by another mind otherwise than through the recognised channels of sense. (Of the two persons concerned, the one whose mind impresses the other will be called the agent, and the one whose mind is impressed the percipient).......... 6-7

§ 5. Telepathy will be here studied chiefly as a system of facts, theoretical discussion being subordinated to the presentation of evidence. The evidence will be of two sorts — spontaneous occurrences, and the results of direct experiment; which latter will have to be carefully distinguished from spurious " thought-reading " exhibitions. 7-9

xiv SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I.

The Experimental Basis: Thought-Transference.

§ 1. The term thought-transference has been adopted in preference to thought-reading, the latter term (1) having become identified with exhibitions of mwscZe-reading, and (2) suggesting a power of reading a person's thoughts against his will....... 10-11

§ 2. The phenomena of thought-transference first attracted the attention of competent witnesses in connection with " mesmerism," and were regarded as one of the peculiarities of the mesmeric rajjport; which was most prejudicial to their chance of scientific acceptance.. 11-13

§ 3. Hints of thought-transference between persons in a normal state were obtained by Professor Barrett in 1876; and just at that time the attention of others had been attracted to certain phenomena of the " willing-game," which were not easily explicable (as almost all the socalled "willing" and "thought-reading" exhibitions are) by unconscious muscular guidance. But the issue could never be definitely decided by cases where the two persons concerned were in any sort of contact 13-17

§ 4. And even where contact is excluded, other possibilities of unconscious guidance must be taken into account; as also must the possibility of conscious collusion. Anyone who is unable to obtain conviction as to the bona fides of experiments by himself acting as agent or percipient (and so being himself one of the persons who would have to take part in the trick, if trick it were), may fairly demand that the responsibility for the results shall be spread over a considerable group of persons — a group so large that he shall find it impossible to extend to all of them the hypothesis of deceit (or of such imbecility as would take the place of deceit) which he might apply to a smaller number... 17-20

§ 5. Experiments with the Creery family; earlier trials. 21-22

More conclusive experiments, in which knowledge of what was to be transferred (usually the idea of a particular card, name, or number) was confined to the members of the investigating committee who acted as agents; with a table of results, and an estimate of probabilities 22-26

In many cases reckoned as failures there was a degree of approximate success which was very significant...... 27-28

The form of the impression in the percipient's mind seems to have been sometimes visual and sometimes auditory.... 28-29

§ ■ 6. Reasons why these experiments were not accessible to a larger



Synopsis of Vol. I. Xv

number of observers; the chief reason being the gradual decline of the percipient faculty......... 29-31

§ 7. In a course of experiments of the same sort conducted by M. Charles Richet, in France, the would-be percipients were apparently not persons of any special susceptibility; but a sufficient number of trials were made for the excess of the total of successes over the total most probable if chance alone acted to be decidedly striking.. 31-33

The pursuit of this line of inquiry on a large scale in England has produced results which involve a practical certainty that some cause other than chance has acted....... 33-35

§ 8. Experiments in the reproduction of diagrams and rough drawings. In a long series conducted by Mr. Malcolm Guthrie, two percipients and a considerable number of agents were employed.. 35-38

Specimens of the results....... 39-48

§ 9. Professor Oliver J. Lodge's experiments with Mr. Guthrie's " subjects," and his remarks thereon..... 49-51

§ 10. Experiments in the transference of elementary sensations — tastes, smells, and pains........ 51-58

§ 11. A different department of experiment is that where the transference does not take effect in the percipient's consciousness, but is exhibited in his motor system, either automatically or semi-automatically. Experiments in the inhibition of utterance.... 58-62

§ 12. The most conclusive cases of transference of ideas which, nevertheless, do not affect the percipient's consciousness are those where the idea is reproduced by the percipient in writing, without his being aware of what he has written. Details of a long series of trials carried out by the Rev. P. H. and Mrs. Newnham 62-69

The intelligence which acted on the percipient's side in these experiments was in a sense an unconscious intelligence — a term which needs careful definition......... 69-70

§ 13. M. Richet has introduced an ingenious method for utilising what he calls " mediumship " — i.e., the liability to exhibit intelligent movements in which consciousness and will take no part — for purposes of telepathic experiment. By this method it has been clearly shown that a word on which the agent concentrates his attention may be unconsciously reproduced by the percipient........ 71-77

And even that a word which has only an unconscious place in the agent's mind may be similarly transferred.... 77-79

xvi SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I.

These phenomena seem to involve a certain impulsive quality in the transference.......... 79-80

§ 14. Apart from serious and systematic investigation, interesting results are sometimes obtained in a more casual way, of which some specimens are given. It is much to be wished that more persons would make experiments, under conditions which preclude the possibility of unconscious guidance. At present we are greatly in the dark as to the proportion of people in whom the specific faculty exists.. 81-85

The Transition prom Experimental to Spontaneous Telepathy. § 1. There is a certain class of cases in which, though they are experiments on the agent's part, and involve his conscious concentration of mind with a view to the result, the percipient is not consciously or voluntarily a party to the experiment. Such cases may be called transitional. In them the distance between the two persons concerned is often considerable 86-87

§ 2. Spurious examples of the sort are often adduced; and especially in connection with mesmerism, results are often attributed to the operator's will, which are really due to some previous command or suggestion. Still, examples are not lacking of the induction of the hypnotic trance in a " subject " at a distance, by the deliberate exercise of volition......••••• 87-89

§ 3. Illustrations of the induction or inhibition of definite actions by the agent's volition, directed towards a person who is unaware of his intent 89-91

The relation of the will to telepathic experiments is liable to be misunderstood. The idea, which we encounter in romances, that one person may acquire and exercise at a distance a dangerous dominance over another's actions, seems quite unsupported by evidence. An extreme example of what may really occur is given.... 92-94

§ 4. Illustrations of the induction of definite ideas by the agent's volition 94-96

§ 5. The transference of an idea, deliberately fixed on by the agent, to an unprepared percipient at a distance, would be hard to establish, since ideas whose origin escapes us are so constantly suggesting themselves spontaneously. Still, telepathic action may possibly extend considerably beyond the well-marked cases on which the proof of it must depend 96-97

SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I. xvii

§ 6. Illustrations of the induction of sensations by the agent's volition 97-99

§ 7. And especially of sensations of sight... 99-102

§ 8. The best-attested examples being hallucinations representing the figure of the agent himself....... 102-110

§ 9. Such cases present a marked departure from the ordinary type of experimental thought-transference, inasmuch as what the percipient perceives (the agent's form) is not the reproduction of that with which the agent's mind has been occupied; and this seems to preclude any simple physical conception of the transference, as due to " brain- waves," sympathetic vibrations, &c. A similar difficulty meets us later in most of the spontaneous cases; and the rapprochement of experimental and spontaneous telepathy must be understood to be limited to their psychical aspect — a limitation which can be easily defended.... 110-113



Chapter IV

General Criticism of the Evidence for Spontaneous Telepathy.

§ 1. When we pass to spontaneous exhibitions of telepathy, the nature of the evidence changes; for the events are described by persons who played their part in them unawares, without any idea that they were matter for scientific observation. The method of inquiry will now have to be the historical method, and will involve difficult questions as to the judgment of human testimony, and a complex estimate of probabilities. 114-115'

§ 2. The most general objection to evidence for phenomena transcending the recognised scope of science is that, in a thickly populated world where mal-observation and exaggeration are easy and common, there is-(within certain limits) no marvel for which evidence of a sort may not be obtained. This objection is often enforced by reference to the superstition of witchcraft, which in quite modern times was supported by a large array of contemporary evidence.....•• 115-116

But when this instance is carefully examined, we find (1) that the direct testimony came exclusively from the uneducated class; and (2) that, owing to the ignorance which, in the witch-epoch, was universal as to the psychology of various abnormal and morbid states, the hypothesis of unconscious self-deception on the part of the witnesses was never allowed

for 116-117

b

xviii SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I.

Our present knowledge of hypnotism, hysteria, and hystero-epilepsy, enables us to account for many of the phenomena attributed to demonic possession, as neither fact nor fraud, but as bond fide hallucinations 117-118

While for the more bizarre and incredible marvels there is absolutely no direct, first-hand, independent testimony.... 118

The better-attested cases are just those which, if genuine, might be explained as telepathic; but the evidence for them is not strong enough to support any definite conclusion.......119

§ 3. The evidence for telepathy in the present work presents a complete contrast to that which has supported the belief in magical occurrences. It comes for the most part from educated persons, who were not predisposed to admit the reality of the phenomena; while the phenomena themselves are not strongly associated with any prevalent beliefs or habits of thought, differing in this respect, e.g., from alleged apparitions of the dead. Still we must not, on such grounds as these, assume that the evidence is trustworthy 120-122

§ 4. The errors which may affect it are of various sorts. Error of observation may result in a mistake of identity. Thus a stranger in the street may be mistaken for a friend, who turns out to have died at that time, and whose phantasm is therefore asserted to have appeared. But it is only to a very small minority of the cases which follow that such a hypothesis could possibly be applied. 123-125

Error of inference is not a prominent danger; as what concerns the telepathic evidence is simply what the percipient seemed to himself to see or hear, not what he inferred therefrom.... 125-126

§ 5. Of more importance are errors of narration, due to the tendency to make an account edifying, or graphic, or startling. In first-hand testimony this tendency may be to some extent counterbalanced by the desire to be believed; which has less influence in cases where the narrator is not personally responsible, as, e.g., in the spurious and sensational anecdotes of anonymous newspaper paragraphs, or of dinner-table gossip. 126-129

§ 6. Errors of memory are more insidious. If the witness regards the facts in a particular speculative or emotional light, facts will be apt, in memory, to accommodate themselves to this view, and details will get introduced or dropped out in such a manner as to aid the harmonious effect. Even apart from any special bias, the mere effort to make definite what has become dim may fill in the picture with wrong detail; or the tendency to lighten the burden of retention may invest the whole occurrence with a spurious trenchancy and simplicity of form... 129-131

SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I. xix

§ 7. We have to consider how these various sources of error may affect the evidence for a case of spontaneous telepathy. Such a case presents a coincidence of a particular kind, with four main points to look to: — (1) A particular state of the agent, e.g., the crisis of death; (2) a particular experience of the percipient, e.g., the impression of seeing the agent before him in visible form; (3) the date of (1); (4) the date of (2) 131-132

§ 8. The risk of mistake as to the state of the agent is seldom appreciable: his death, for instance, if that is what has befallen him, can usually be proved beyond dispute........ 132

For the experience of the percipient, on the other hand, we have generally nothing but his own word to depend on. But for what is required, his word is often sufficient. For the evidential point is simply his statement that he has had an impression or sensation of a peculiar kind, which, if he had it, he knew that he had; and this point is quite independent of his interpretation of his experience, which may easily be erroneous, e.g., if he attributes objective reality to what was really a hallucination 133-134

The risk of misrepresentation is smallest if his description of his experience, or a distinct course of action due to his experience, has preceded his knowledge of what has happened to the agent. 134-136

§ 9. "Where his description of his experience dates from a time subsequent to his knowledge of what has happened to the agent, there is a possibility that this knowledge may have made the experience seem more striking and distinctive than it really was. Still, we have not detected definite instances of this sort of inaccuracy. Nor would the fact (often expressly stated by the witness) that the experience did not at the time of its occurrence suggest the agent, by any means destroy — though it would of course weaken — the presumption that it was telepathic -. 136-138

§ 10. As regards the interval of time which may separate the two events or experiences on the agent's and the percipient's side respectively, an arbitrary limit of 12 hours has been adopted — the coincidence in most cases being very much closer than this; but no case will be presented as telepathic where the percipient's experience preceded, by however short a time, some grave event occurring to the agent, if at the time of the percipient's experience the state of the agent was normal. 138-140

§ 11. It is in the matter of the dates that the risk of mis-statement is greatest. The instinct towards simplification and dramatic completeness naturally tends to make the coincidence more exact than the facts warrant.......... 140-142

b 2

xx SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I.

§ 12. The date of the event that has befallen the agent is often included in the news of that event; which news, in these days of posts and telegraphs, often follows close enough on the percipient's experience for the date of that experience to be then safely recalled. 142-144

§ 13. But if a longer interval elapse, the percipient may assume too readily that his own experience fell on the critical day; and as time goes on, his certainty is likely to increase rather than diminish. Still, if the coincidence was then and there noted, and if the attention of others was called to it, it may be possible to present a tolerably strong case for its reality, even after the lapse of a considerable time.. 144-146

§ 14. These various evidential conditions may be arranged in a graduated scheme........ 146-148

§ 15. Second-hand evidence (except of one special type) is excluded from the body of the work; but the Supplement contains a certain number of second-hand cases, received from persons who were well acquainted with the original witnesses, and who had had the opportunity of becoming thoroughly acquainted with their statement of the facts 148-149

In transmitted evidence all the risks of error are greatly intensified, there being no deeply-graven sense of reality to act as a check on exaggeration or invention. Some instances are given of the breakingdown of alleged evidence under critical examination.. 149-154

A frequent sort of inaccuracy in transmitted evidence is the shortening of the chain of transmission — second or third-hand information being represented as first-hand; and the alleged coincidence is almost always suspiciously exact........ 154-157

§ 16. A certain separation of cases according to their evidential value has been attempted, the body of the work being reserved for those where the 'prima, facie probability that the essential facts are correctly stated is tolerably strong. But even where the facts are correctly reported, their force in the argument for telepathy will differ according to the class to which they belong; purely emotional impressions, for instance, and dreams, are very weak classes........ 158

The value of the several items of evidence is also largely affected by the mental qualities and training of the witnesses. Every case must be judged on its own merits, by reference to a variety of points; and those who study the records will have an equal opportunity of forming a judgment with those who have collected them — except in the matter of

SYNOPSIS OF VOL. L xxi

personal acquaintance with the witnesses, the effect of which it is impossible to communicate....... 159-161

§ 17. An all-important point is the number of the coincidences adduced. A few might be accounted accidental; but it will be impossible to apply that hypothesis throughout. Nor can the evidence be swept out of court by a mere general appeal to the untrustworthiness of human testimony. If it is to be explained away, it must be met (as we have ourselves endeavoured to meet it) in detail; and this necessitates the confronting of the single cause, telepathy, (whose a priori improbability is fully admitted,) with a multitude of causes, more or less improbable, and in cumulation incredible........ 161-164

§ 18. With all their differences, the cases recorded bear strong signs of belonging to a true natural group; and their harmony, alike in what they do and in what they do not present, is very unlikely to be the accidental result of a multitude of disconnected mistakes. And it is noteworthy that certain sensational and suspicious details, here conspicuous by their absence, which often make their way into remote or badly-evidenced cases, are precisely those which the telepathic hypothesis would not cover 164-166

§ 19. But though some may regard the cumulative argument here put forward for spontaneous telepathy as amounting to a proof, the proof is not by any means of an eclatant sort: much of the evidence falls far short of the ideal standard. Still, enough has perhaps been done to justify our undertaking, and to broaden the basis of future inquiry. 166-169

§ 20. The various items of evidence are, of course, not the links in a chain, but the sticks in a faggot. It is impossible to lay down the precise number of sticks necessary to a perfectly solid faggot; but the present collection is at least an instalment of what is required. 169-170

§ 21. The instinct as to the amount of evidence needed may differ greatly in a mind which has, and a mind which has not, realised the facts of experimental telepathy (Chap, ii.), and the intimate relation of that branch to the spontaneous branch. Between the two branches, in spite of their difference — a difference as great in appearance as that between lightning and the electrical attraction of rubbed amber for bits of straw — the great psychological fact of a supersensuous influence of mind on mind constitutes a true generic bond...... 171-172

SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I.

Note on Witchcraft.

The statement made in Chapter iv. as to the lack of first-hand evidence for the phenomena of magic and witchcraft (except so far as they can be completely accounted for by modern psychological knowledge) may seem a sweeping one. But extensive as is the literature of the subject, the actual records are extraordinarily meagre; and the staple prodigies, which were really nothing more than popular legends, are quoted and requoted ad nauseam. Examples of the so-called evidence which supported the belief in lycanthropy, and in the nocturnal rides and orgies 172-175

The case of witchcraft, so far from proving (as is sometimes represented) that a more or less imposing array of evidence will be forthcoming for any belief that does not distinctly fly in the face of average public opinion, goes, in fact, rather surprisingly far towards proving the contrary.......... 176-177

This view of the subject is completely opposed to that of Mr. Lecky, whose treatment seems to suffer from the neglect of two important distinctions. He does not distinguish between evidence — of which, in respect of the more bizarre marvels, there was next to none; and authority — of which there was abundance, from Homer downwards. Nor does he discriminate the wholly incredible allegations {e.g., as to transportations through the air and transformations into animal forms) from the pathological phenomena, which in the eyes of contemporaries were equally supernatural, and for which, as might be expected, the direct evidence was abundant 177-179

A most important class of these pathological phenomena were subjective hallucinations of the senses, often due to terror or excitement, and sometimes probably to hypnotic suggestion, but almost invariably attributed to the direct operation of the devil. Other phenomena — of insensibility, inhibition of utterance, abnormal rapport, and the influence of reputed witches on health — were almost certainly hypnotic in character; "possession " is often simply hystero-epilepsy; while much may be accounted for by mere hysteria, or by the same sort of faith as produces the modern "mind-cures" 179-183

Learned opinion on the subject of witchcraft went through curious vicissitudes; the recession to a rational standpoint, which in many ways was of course a sceptical movement, being complicated by the fact that many of the phenomena were too genuine to be doubted. Now that the separation is complete, we see that the exploded part of witchcraft never had any real evidential foundation; while the part which had a real evidential foundation has been taken up into orthodox physiological and psychological science. With the former part we might contrast, and with the latter compare, the evidential case for telepathy. 183-185

SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I. xxiii



Chapter V

Specimens op the Various Types op Spontaneous Telepathy.

§ 1. As the study of any large amount of the evidence that follows is a task for which many readers will be disinclined, a selection of typical cases will be presented in this chapter, illustrative of the various classes into which the phenomena fall...... 186-187

§ 2. The logical starting-point is found in the class that presents most analogy to experimental thought-transference — i.e., where the percipient's impression is not externalised as part of the objective world. An example is given of the transference of pain, and a possible example of the transference of smell; but among the phenomena of spontaneous telepathy, such literal reproductions of the agent's bodily sensation are very exceptional.......... 187-191

§ 3. Examples of the transference of a somewhat abstract idea; of a pictorial image; and of an emotional impression, involving some degree of physical discomfort........ 191-198

§ 4. Examples of dreams, — a class which needs to be treated with the greatest caution, owing to the indefinite scope which it affords for accidental coincidences. One of the examples (No. 23) presents the feature of deferment of percipience — the telepathic impression having apparently failed at first to reach the threshold of attention, and emerging into consciousness some hours after the experience on the agent's side in which it had its origin...... 198-203

§ 5. Examples of the " borderland " class — a convenient name by which to describe cases that belong to a condition neither of sleep nor of provably complete waking consciousness; but it is probable that in many of the cases so described (as in No. 26), the percipient, though in bed, was quite normally awake......... 203-208

§ 6. Examples of externalised impressions of sight, occurring in the midst of ordinary waking life. In some of these we find an indication that a close personal rapport between the agent and percipient is not a necessary condition of the telepathic transference; and another is peculiar in that the phantasmal figure is not recognised by the percipient 208-221

§ 7. Examples of externalised impressions of hearing; one of which was of a recognised voice, and one of an inarticulate shriek. 221-224

§ 8. Example of an impression of touch; which is also, perhaps, an

xxir STJVOPSIft OF VOL. I.

example of the reciprocal class, where each of the persons concerned seems to exercise a telepathic influence on the other.. 225-227

§ 9. Example of the collective class, where more percipients than one take part in a single telepathic incident.... 227-229

§ 10. Among the various conditions of telepathic agency, the deathcases form by far the commonest type. Now in these cases it is not rare for the agent to be comatose and unconscious; in other cases, again, he has been in a swoon or a deep sleep; and there is a difficulty in understanding an abnormal exercise of psychical energy at such seasons. The explanation may possibly be found in the idea of a wider consciousness, and a more complete self, which finds in what we call life very imperfect conditions of manifestation, and recognises in death not a cessation but a liberation of energy........ 229-231



Chapter VI

Transference op Ideas and Mental Pictures.

§ 1. The popular belief in the transference of thought, without physical signs, between friends and members of the same household, is often held on quite insufficient grounds; allowance not being made for the similarity of associations, and for the slightness of the signs which may be half -automatically interpreted...... 232-233

It often happens, for instance, that one person in a room begins humming a tune which is running in another's head; but it is only very exceptionally that such a coincidence can be held to imply a psychical transference. Occasionally the idea transferred is closely connected with the auditory image of a word or phrase.... 234-236

§ 2. Examples of the transference of ideas and images of a simple or rudimentary sort......... 236-240

§ 3. Examples of the transference of more complex ideas, representing definite events; and of the occurrence of several such "veridical" impressions to the same percipients..... 241-251

§ 4. Cases where the idea impressed on the percipient has been simply that of the agent's approach — a type which must be accepted with great caution, as numerous coincidences of the sort are sure to occur by pure accident 251-254

SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I. xxv

§ 5. Transferences of mental images of concrete objects and scenes with which the agent's attention is occupied at the time. 254-566

Some of these impressions are so detailed and vivid as to suggest clairvoyance; nor is there any objection to that term, so long as we recognise the difference between such telepathic clairvoyance, and any supposed independent extension of the percipient's senses. 266-268

Occasionally the percipient seems to obtain the true impression, not by passive reception, but by a deliberate effort.... 268



Chapter VII

Emotional and Motor Effects.

§ 1. Emotional impressions, alleged to have coincided with some calamitous event at a distance, form a very dubious class, as (1) in retrospect, after the calamity is realised, they are apt to assume a strength and definiteness which they did not really possess; and (2) similar impressions may be common in the soi-disant percipient's experience, and he may have omitted to remark or record the misses — the many instances which have not corresponded with any real event. All cases must, of course, be rejected where there has been any appreciable ground for anxiety 269-270

§ 2. Examples which may perhaps have been telepathic; some of which include a sense of physical distress.... 270-279

§ 3. Examples of such transferences between twins. 279-283

§ 4. Examples where the primary element in the impression is a sense of being wanted, and an impulse to movement or action of a sort unlikely to have suggested itself in the ordinary course of things. 283-292

The telepathic influence in such cases must be interpreted as emotional, not as definitely directing, and still less as abrogating, the percipient's power of choice: the movements produced may be such as the agent cannot have desired, or even thought of 292-294



Chapter VIII

Dreams. Part I. — The Relation of Dreams to the Argument for Telepathy.

§ 1. Dreams comprise the whole range of transition from ideal and emotional to sensory affections; and at every step of the transition we find instances which may reasonably be regarded as telepathic 295-296

xxvi SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I.

The great interest of the distinctly sensory specimens lies in the fundamental resemblance which they offer, and the transition which they form, to the externalised " phantasms of the living " which impress waking percipients; the difference being that the dream-percepts are recognised, on reflection, as having been hallucinatory, and unrelated to that part of the external world where the percipient's body is; while the waking phantasmal percepts are apt to be regarded as objective phenomena, which really impressed the eye or the ear from outside.. 296-297

§ 2. But when we examine dreams in respect of their evidential value — -of the proof which they are capable of affording of a telepathic correspondence with the reality — we find ourselves on doubtful ground. For (1) the details of the reality, when known, will be very apt to be read back into the dream, through the general tendency to make vague things distinct; and (2) the great multitude of dreams may seem to afford almost limitless scope for accidental correspondences of a dream with an actual occurrence resembling the one dreamt of. Any answer to this last objection must depend on statistics which, until lately, there has been no attempt to obtain; and though an answer of a sort can be given, it is not such a one as would justify us in basing a theory of telepathy on the facts of dreams alone......... 298-300

§ 3. Most of the dreams selected for this work were exceptional in intensity; and produced marked distress, or were described, or were in some way acted on, before the news of the correspondent experience was known. In content, too, they were mostly of a distinct and unusual kind; while some of them present a considerable amount of true detail. 300-302

And more than half of those selected on the above grounds are dreams of death — a fact easy to account for on the hypothesis of telepathy, and difficult to account for on the hypothesis of accident.. 303

§ 4. Dreams so definite in content as dreams of death afford an opportunity of ascertaining what their actual frequency is, and so of estimating whether the specimens which have coincided with reality are or are not more numerous than chance would fairly allow. With a view to such an estimate, a specimen group of 5360 persons, taken at random, have been asked as to their personal experiences; and, according to the result, the persons who have had a vividly distressful dream of the death of a relative or acquaintance, within the 12 years 1874-1885, amount to about 1 in 26 of the population. Taking this datum, it is shown that the number of coincidences of the sort in question that, according to the law of chances, ought to have occurred in the 1 2 years, among a section of the population even larger than that from which we can suppose our telepathic evidence

SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I. xxvii

to be drawn, is only 1. Now, (taking account only of cases where nothing had occurred to suggest the dream in a normal way,) we have encountered 24 such coincidences — i.e., a number 24 times as large as would have been expected on the hypothesis that the coincidence is due to chance alone......... 303-307

Certain objections that might be taken to this estimate are to a considerable extent met by the precautions that have been used. 308-310

§ 5. The same sort of argument may be cautiously applied to cases where the event exhibited in the coincident dream is not, like death, unique, and where, therefore, the basis for an arithmetical estimate is unattainable.......... 311-312

But many more specimens of a high evidential rank are needed, before dreams can rank as a strong integral portion of the argument for telepathy. Meanwhile, it is only fair to regard them in connection with the stronger evidence of the waking phenomena; since in respect of many of them an explanation that is admitted in the waking cases cannot reasonably be rejected.......... 312-313

Part. II. — Examples of Dreams which may be Reasonably Regarded

as Telepathic.

§ 1. Examples of similar and simultaneous dreams. 313-318

An experience which has coincided with some external fact or

condition may be described as a dream, and yet be sufficiently exceptional

in character to preclude an application of the theory of chances based on

the limitless number of dreams.... 318-320

§ 2. Examples of the reproduction, in the percipient's dream, of a special thought of the agent's, who is at the time awake and in a normal state 320-322

§ 3. Examples of a similar reproduction where the agent is in a disturbed state. 322-329

§ 4. Cases where the agent's personality appears in the dream, but not in a specially pictorial way. Inadmissibility of dreams that occur at times of anxiety, of dreams of trivial accidents to children, and the like. 329-337

§ 5. Cases where the reality which the eyes of the agent are actually

xxviii SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I.

beholding is pictorially represented in the dream. Reasons why the majority of alleged instances must be rejected... 337-340

The appearance in the dream of the agent's own figure, which is not presumably occupying his own thoughts, suggests an independent development, by the percipient, of the impression that he receives. 340-341

§ 6. The familiar ways in which dreams are shaped make it easy to understand how a dreamer might supply his own setting and imagery to a " transferred impression." Examples where the elements thus introduced are few and simple........ 341-356

§ 7. Examples of more complex investiture, and especially of imagery suggestive of death. Importance of the feature of repetition in some of the examples......... 357-368

§ 8. Examples of dreams which may be described as clairvoyant, but which still must be held to imply some sort of telepathic " agency "; since the percipient does not see any scene, but the particular scene with some actor in which he is connected..... 368-388



Chapter IX

" Borderland " Cases.

§ 1. The transition-states between sleeping and waking — or, more generally, the seasons when a person is in bed, but not asleep — seem to be specially favourable to subjective hallucinations of the senses; of which some are known as illusions hypnagogiques; others are the prolongations of dream-images into waking moments; and some belong to neither of these classes, though experienced in the moments or minutes that precede or follow sleep......... 389-393

§ 2. It is not surprising that the same seasons should be favourable also to the hallucinations which, as connected with conditions external to the percipient, we should describe, not as subjective, but as telepathic 393

As evidence for telepathy, impressions of this " borderland " type stand on an altogether different footing from dreams; since their incalculably smaller number supplies an incalculably smaller field for the operation of chance........ 393-394

Very great injustice is done to the telepathic argument by confounding such impressions with dreams.; as.where Lord Brougham explains away the coincidence of a unique " borderland " experience of his own with the death of the friend whose form he saw, on the ground that the

SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I. xxix

" vast numbers of dreams " give any amount of scope for such " seeming miracles" 394-397

§ 3. Examples where the impression was not of a sensory sort 397-400

§ 4. Example of an apparently telepathic illusion hypnagogique 400-402

§ 5. Auditory examples. Cases where the sound heard was not

articulate 402-405

Cases where distinct words were heard.... 406-413

§ 6. Visual examples: of which two (Nos. 159 and 160) illustrate the feature of repetition; another (No. 168) that of the appearance of more than one figure; and two others (Nos. 170 and 171) that of misrecognition on the percipient's part..... 414-434

§ 7. Cases where the sense of touch was combined with that of sight or hearing. One case (No. 178) presents the important feature of marked luminosity......... 434-441

§ 8. Cases affecting the two senses of sight and hearing. One case (No. 189) presents the feature of non-recognition on the percipient's part 441-456



Chapter X

Hallucinations: General Sketch.

§ 1. Telepathic phantasms of the externalised sort are a species belonging to the larger genus of hallucinations; and the genus requires some preliminary discussion........ 457

Hallucinations of the senses are distinguished from other hallucinations by the fact that they do not necessarily imply false belief.. 458

They may be defined as percepts which lack, but which can only by distinct reflection be recognised as lacking, the objective basis which they suggest; a definition which marks them off on the one hand from true perceptions, and on the other hand from remembered images or mental pictures 459-460

§ 2. The old method of defining the ideational and the sensory elements in the phenomena was very unsatisfactory. It is easy to show that the delusive appearances are not merely imagined, but are actually seen and heard — the hallucination differing from an ordinary percept only

xxx SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I.

in lacking an objective basis; and this is what is implied in the word psycho-sensorial, when rightly understood.... 461-464

§ 3. The question as to the physiological starting-point of hallucinations— whether they are of central or of peripheral origin — has been warmly debated, often in a very one-sided manner. The construction of them, which is central and the work of the brain, is quite distinct from the excitation or initiation of them, which (though often central also) is often peripheral — i.e., due to some other part of the body that sets the brain to work 464-468

§ 4. This excitation may even be due to some objective external cause, some visible point or mark, at or near the place where the imaginary object is seen; and in such cases the imaginary object, which is, so to speak, attached to its point, may follow the course of any optical illusion (e.g., doubling by a prism, reflection by a mirror) to which that point is subjected. But such dependence on an external stimulus does not affect the fact that the actual sensory element of the hallucination, in these as in all other cases, is imposed from within by the brain 468-470

§ 5. There, are, however, a large number of hallucinations which are centrally initiated, as well as centrally constructed — the excitation being due neither to an external point, nor to any morbid disturbance in the senseorgans themselves. Such, probably, are many visual cases where the imaginary object is seen in free space, or appears to move independently of the eye, or is seen in darkness. Such, certainly, are many auditory hallucinations; some hallucinations of pain; many hallucinations which conform to the course of some more general delusion; and hallucinations voluntarily originated....... 470-480

§ 6. Such also are hallucinations of a particular internal kind common among mystics, in which the sensory element seems reduced to its lowest terms; and which shade by degrees, on the one side into more externalised forms, and on the other side into a mere feeling of presence, independent of any sensory affection....... 480-484

§ 7. A further argument for the central initiation may be drawn from the fact that repose of the sense-organs seems a condition favourable to hallucinations; and the psychological identity of waking hallucinations a,nd dreams cannot be too strongly insisted on 484-485

§ 8. As regards the construction of hallucinations — the cerebral process involved in their having this or that particular form — the question is whether it takes place in the specific sensory centre concerned, or in some higher cortical tract....... 485-488

SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I. xxxi

§ 9. There are reasons for considering that both places of construction are available; that the simpler sorts of hallucination, many of which are clearly "after-images," and which are often also recurrent, may take shape at the sensory centres themselves; but that the more elaborate and variable sorts must be traced to the higher origin; and that when the higher tracts are first concerned, the production of the hallucination is due to a downward escape of the nervous impulse to the sensory centre concerned.......... 488-494

§ 10. The construction of hallucinations in the cortical tracts of the brain, proper to the higher co-ordinations and the more general ideational activities, is perfectly compatible with the view that the specific sensory centres are themselves situated not below, but in, the cortex. 494-495



Chapter XI

Transient Hallucinations of the Sane: Ambiguous Cases.

§ 1. Transient hallucinations of the sane (a department of mental phenomena hitherto but little studied) comprise two classes: (1) hallucinations of purely subjective origin; and (2) hallucinations of telepathic origin — i.e., " phantasms of the living " which have an objective basis in the exceptional condition of the person whom they recall or represent. Comparing the two classes, we should expect to find a large amount of resemblance, and a certain amount of difference, between them 496-497

§ 2. Certain marked resemblances at once present themselves; as that (generally speaking) neither sort of phenomenon is observably connected with any morbid state; and that each sort of phenomenon is rare — occurring to a comparatively small number of persons, and to most of these only once or twice in a lifetime..... 497-499

§ 3. But in pressing the comparison further, we are met by the fact that the dividing line between the two classes is not clear; and it is important to realise certain grounds of ambiguity, which often prevent us from assigning an experience with certainty to this class or that 500-502

§ 4. Various groups of hallucinations are passed in review; — "after images "; phantasmal objects which are the result of a special train of thought; phantasms of inanimate objects, and of animals, and non- vocal auditory phantasms; visual representations of fragments of human forms; auditory impressions of meaningless sentences, or of groaning, and the

xxxii SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I.

like; and visions of the " swarming " type. Nearly all specimens of these types may safely be referred to the purely subjective class. 502-504

It is when we come to visual hallucinations representing complete and natural-looking human forms, and auditory hallucinations of distinct and intelligible words, (though here again there is every reason to suppose the majority of the cases to be purely subjective,) that the ambiguous cases are principally to be found; the ground of ambiguity being that either (1) the person represented has been in an only slightly unusual state; or (2) a person in a normal state has been represented in hallucination to more than one percipient at different times; or (3) an abnormal state of the person represented has coincided with the representation loosely, but not exactly; or (4) the percipient has been in a condition of anxiety, awe, or expectancy, which might be regarded as the independent cause of his experience.......... 504-506

§ 5. The evidence that mere anxiety may produce sensory hallucination is sufficient greatly to weaken, as evidence for telepathy, any case where that condition has been present...... 506-509

§ 6. The same may be said of the form of awe which is connected with the near sense of death; and (except in a few " collective " cases) abnormal experiences which have followed death have been excluded from the telepathic evidence, if the fact of the death was known to the percipient. As to the included cases that have followed death by an appreciable interval, reasons are given for preferring the hypothesis of deferred development to that of post mortem influence — though the latter hypothesis would be quite compatible with the psychical conception of telepathy 510-512

§ 7. There is definite evidence to show that mere expectancy may produce hallucination....... 510-512

One type which is probably so explicable being the delusive impression of seeing or hearing a person whose arrival is expected.. 515-517

§ 8. There is, however, a group of arrival-cases where the impending arrival was unknown or unsuspected by the percipient; or where the phantasm has included some special detail of appearance which points to a telepathic origin....... 517-518

SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I. xxxiii



Chapter XII

The Development op Telepathic Hallucinations

§ 1. There are two very principal ways in which phantasms of telepathic origin often resemble purely subjective hallucinations: (1) gradualness of development; and (2) originality of form or content, showing the activity of the percipient's own mind in the construction. 519-520

§ 2. Gradual development is briefly illustrated in the purely subjective class 520-522

§ 3. And at greater length in the telepathic class. It may exhibit itself (1) in delayed recognition of the phantasm on the part of the

percipient 522-525

Or (2) in the way in which the phantasm gathers visible shape 525-528

Or (3) in the progress of the hallucination through several distinct

stages, sometimes affecting more than one sense... 528-534

§ 4. Originality of construction is involved to some extent in every sensory hallucination which is more than a mere revival of familiar images; but admits of very various degrees.... 534-536

§ 5. In telepathic hallucinations, the signs of the percipient's own constructive activity are extremely important. For the difference from the results of experimental thought-transference, which telepathic phantasms exhibit, in representing what is not consciously occupying the agent's mind — to wit, his own form or voice — ceases to be a difficulty in proportion as the extent of the impression transferred from the agent to the percipient can be conceived to be small, and the percipient's own contribution to the phantasm can be conceived to be large. 536-537

It may be a peculiarity of the transferred idea that it impels the receiving mind to react on it, and to embody and project it as a hallucination; but the form and detail of the embodiment admit — as in dream — of many varieties, depending on the percipient's own idiosyncrasies and associations......... 537-540

§ 6. Thus the percipient may invest the idea of his friend, the agent, with features of dress or appurtenance that his own memory supplies. (One of the examples given, No. 202, illustrates a point common to the purely subjective and to the telepathic class, and about equally rare in either — the appearance of more than one figure)... 540-546

§ 7. Or the investing imagery may be of a more fanciful kind — sometimes the obvious reflection of the percipient's habitual beliefs, sometimes

xxxiv SYNOPSIS OF VOL. I.

the mere bizarrerie of what is literally a "waking dream." Many difficulties vanish, when the analogy of dream is boldly insisted on 547-548

Examples of phantasmal appearances presenting features which would in reality be impossible....... 548-550

The luminous character of many visual phantasms is specially to be noted, as a feature common to the purely subjective and to the telepathic class........... 550-551

Examples of imagery connected with ideas of death, and of religion.......... 551-554

§ 8. Sometimes, however, the phantasm includes details of dress or aspect which could not be supplied by the percipient's mind. Such particulars may sometimes creep without warrant even into evidence where the central fact of the telepathic coincidence is correctly reported; but where genuinely observed, they must apparently be attributed to a conscious or sub-conscious image of his own appearance (or of some feature of it) in the agent's mind, to which the percipient obtains access by what may be again described as telepathic clairvoyance. Examples.. 554-569

In cases where the details of the phantasm are such as either mind might conceivably have supplied, it seems simpler to regard them as the contributions of the percipient, than to suppose that a clean-cut and complete image has been transferred to him from indefinite unconscious or sub-conscious strata of the agent's mind.... 569-570

§ 9. The development of a phantasm from the nucleus of a transferred impression is a fact strongly confirmatory of the view maintained in the preceding chapters, as to the physiological starting point of many hallucinations. Especially must the hypothesis of centrifugal origin (of a process in the direction from higher to lower centres) commend itself in cases where the experience seems to have implied the quickening of vague associations and distant memories, whose physical record must certainly lie in the highest cerebral tracts...... 570-572

§ 10. Summary of the various points of parallelism between purely subjective and telepathic phantasms, whereby their identity as phenomena for the senses seems conclusively established. But they present also some very important contrasts....... 572-573

INTRODUCTION.

Kal rbv deov toiovtov e^eTTLara^iai, <ro<po1s fiev alviKTrjpa decrffxircov aei, crKatots 8e (fyaiikov kclv /3pa^€t 8i8d(TKa\ov.

Sophocles.

§ 1. The subject of this book is one which a brief title is hardly sufficient to explain. For under our heading of " Phantasms of the Living," we propose, in fact, to deal with all classes of cases where there is reason to suppose that the mind of one human being has affected the mind of another, without speech uttered, or word written, or sign made; — has affected it, that is to say, by other means than through the recognised channels of sense.

To such transmission of thoughts or feelings we have elsewhere given the name of telepathy; and the records of an experimental proof of the reality of telepathy will form a part of the present work. But, for reasons which will be made manifest as we proceed, we have included among telepathic phenomena a vast class of cases which seem at first sight to involve something widely different from a mere transference of thought.

I refer to apparitions; excluding, indeed, the alleged apparitions of the dead, but including the apparitions of all persons who are still living, as we know life, though they may be on the very brink and border of physical dissolution. And these apparitions, as will be seen, are themselves extremely various in character; including not visual phenomena alone, but auditory, tactile, or even purely ideational and emotional impressions. All these we have included under the term phantasm; a word which, though etymologically a mere variant of phantom, has been less often used, and has not become so closely identified with visual impressions alone.

Such, then, is the meaning of our title; but something more of explanation is necessary before the tone and purport of the book can

c 2

xxxvi INTRODUCTION.

be correctly apprehended. In a region so novel we could hardly be surprised at any amount of misinterpretation. Some readers, for instance, may fancy that a bulky and methodical treatise on phantoms can be but a half-serious thing. Others may suspect that its inspiration is in the love of paradox, and that a fantastic craving for originality has led the authors along a path where they cannot expect, and can hardly desire, that the sober world should follow them.

§ 2. It is necessary, therefore, to state at once that we have no wish either to mystify or to startle mankind. On the contrary, the conjoint and consultative scheme according to which this book has been compiled is thus arranged mainly with a view to correcting or neutralising individual fancies or exaggerations, of leaving as little as possible to the unchecked idiosyncrasy of any single thinker. And, again, we wish distinctly to say that so far from aiming at any paradoxical reversion of established scientific conclusions, we conceive ourselves to be working (however imperfectly) in the main track of discovery, and assailing a problem which, though strange and hard, does yet stand next in order among the new adventures on which Science must needs set forth, if her methods and her temper are to guide and control the widening curiosity, the expanding capacities of men.

We anticipate, in short, that although it may at first be said of us that we have performed with needless elaboration a foolish and futile task, the ultimate verdict on our work will rather be that we have undertaken — with all too limited a knowledge and capacity — to open an inquiry which was manifestly impending, and to lay the foundationstone of a study which will loom large in the approaching age.

Our only paradox, then, is the assertion that we are not paradoxical; and that assertion it is the main business of this Introduction to justify.

§ 3. For this purpose two principal heads of exposition will be required. In the first place, since this book (for whose contents we are solely responsible) was undertaken by us at the request of the Council of the Society for Psychical Research, and is largely based on material which that Council has placed at our disposal, it will be necessary to say something as to the scope and object of the Society in question; — its grounds for claiming a valid scientific position, and its points of interconnection with established branches of philosophic inquiry.

INTRODUCTION. xxxvii

And, secondly, it will be needful to indicate the precise position which the theme of this book occupies in the field of our investigations; the reason why we have isolated these special phenomena in a separate group, and have selected them for discussion at this early stage of the Society's labours.

A reader of the programme of the Society will probably feel that although the special topics to which attention is there invited may be unfamiliar, yet its general plea is such as he has often noted in the history of science before. " To approach these various problems without prejudice or prepossession of any kind, and in the same spirit of exact and unimpassioned inquiry which has enabled Science to solve so many problems, once not less obscure nor less hotly debated;" — phrases like these have no more of novelty than there might be, for instance, in the proposal of a Finance Minister to abolish the last of a long series of protective embargoes. Free Trade and free inquiry have each of them advanced step by step, and by dint of the frequent repetition, under varying difficulties, of very similar, and very elementary, truths. The special peculiarity of our topic is that it is an article (so to say) on which the Free Traders themselves have imposed an additional duty; that it has been more sternly discountenanced by the men who appeal to experiment than by the men who appeal to authority; — that its dispassionate discussion has since the rise of modern science been tabooed more jealously than when the whole province was claimed by theology alone. There have been reasons, no doubt, for such an exclusion; and I am not asserting that either Free Trade or free inquiry is always and under all circumstances to be desired. But it is needful to point out yet once more how plausible the reasons for discouraging some novel research have often seemed to be, while yet the advance of knowledge has rapidly shown the futility and folly of such discouragement.

It was the Father of Science himself who was the first to circumscribe her activity. Socrates, in whose mind the idea of the gulf between knowledge and mere opinion attained a dominant intensity which impressed itself on all ages after him, — Socrates expressly excluded from the range of exact inquiry all such matters as the movements and nature of the sun and moon. He wished — and as he expressed his wish it seemed to have all the cogency of absolute wisdom — that men's minds should be turned to the ethical and political problems which truly concerned them, — not wasted in speculation on things unknowable — things useless even could they be known.

xxxviii INTRODUCTION.

In a kindred spirit, though separated from Socrates by the whole result of that physical science which Socrates had deprecated, we find a great modern systematiser of human thought again endeavouring to direct the scientific impulse towards things serviceable to man; to divert it from things remote, unknowable, and useless if known. What then, in Comte's view, are in fact the limits of man's actual home and business? the bounds within which he may set himself to learn all he can, assured that all will serve to inform his conscience and guide his life? It is the solar system which has become for the French philosopher what the street and market-place of Athens were for the Greek. And this enlargement (it need hardly be said) is not due to any wider grasp of mind in Comte than in Socrates, but simply to the march of science; which has shown us that the whole solar system does, in fact, minister to our practical needs, and that the Nautical Almanack demands for its construction a mapping of the paths of those ordered luminaries which in the time of Socrates seemed the very wanderers of Heaven.

I need not say that Comte's prohibition has been altogether neglected. No frontier of scientific demarcation has been established between Neptune and Sirius, between Uranus and Aldebaran. Our knowledge of the fixed stars increases yearly; and it would be rash to maintain that human conduct is not already influenced by the conception thus gained of the unity and immensity of the heavens.

To many of the comments that have been made on our work, even by men who are not formal Comtists, the above reflections furnish a fitting reply. But it is not only, nor perhaps mainly, on account of the remoteness of our subject, or its unimportance to human progress, that objection is taken to our inquiry. The criticisms which have met us, from the side sometimes of scientific, sometimes of religious orthodoxy, have embodied, in modernised phraseology, nearly every well-worn form of timid protest, or obscurantist demurrer, with which the historians of science have been accustomed to give piquancy to their long tale of discovery and achievement. It would have been convenient had these objections been presented to us in a connected and formal manner. But this has not been the case; and, in fact, they are in their very nature too incoherent, too self-contradictory, for continuous statement. Sometimes we are told that we are inviting the old theological spirit to encroach once more on the domain of science; sometimes that we are endeavouring to lay the impious hands of Science upon the mysteries

INTRODUCTION. xxxix

of Religion. Sometimes we are informed that competent 8a/vant8 have already fully explored the field which we propose for our investigation; sometimes that no respectable man of science would condescend to meddle with such a reeking mass of fraud and hysteria. Sometimes we are pitied as laborious trifiers who prove some infinitely small matter with mighty trouble and pains; sometimes we are derided as attempting the solution of gigantic problems by slight and superficial means.

§ 4. The best way of meeting objections thus confused and contradictory will be to show as clearly as we can at what points our inquiries touch the recent results of science; what signs there are which indicate the need of vigorous advance along the lines which we have chosen. We shall show, perhaps, that there is a kind of convergence towards this especial need — that in several directions of research there is felt that kind of pause and hesitancy which is wont to precede the dawn of illuminating conceptions. We shall not, of course, thus prove that our own attempt has been successful, but we shall prove that it was justified; that if the problems which we set ourselves to solve are found to be insoluble, the gaps thus left in the system of thought on which man's normal life is based will be such as can neither be ignored nor supplied, but will become increasingly palpable and increasingly dangerous.

Let us consider how far this remark can be justified with regard to some of the leading branches of human knowledge in turn. And let us take first Biology, the science which on the whole approaches the closest to our own inquiries. Biology has, during the last halfcentury, made an advance which, measured by the hold exercised on the mass of cultivated minds, has perhaps had no parallel since the forward stride of astronomy and physics in the days of Newton. A glance at the text-books of the last generation, in physical or mental science — Whewell's History of the Inductive Sciences, or Mill's Logic, — as compared, for instance, with the works of their immediate successor, Mr. Herbert Spencer, shows something which is not so much progress as revolution — the transformation of Biology from a mere special department of knowledge into the key to man's remotest history, the only valid answer to the profoundest questions as to his present being.

For, in truth, it is Biology above all other sciences which has profited by the doctrine of evolution. In evolution, — in the doctrine

xl INTRODUCTION.

that the whole cosmical order is the outcome of a gradual development, — mankind have gained for the first time a working hypothesis which covers enough of the known facts of the universe to make its possible extension to all facts a matter of hopeful interest. And Biology, which even at the date of Whewell's book could barely make good its claim to be regarded as a coherent science at all, has now acquired a co-ordinating and continuous principle of unity which renders it in some respects the best type of a true science which we possess. It traces life from the protozoon to the animal, from the brute to the man; it offers to explain the complex fabric of human thought and emotion, viewed from the physical side, as the development of the molecular movements of scarcely-differentiated fragments of protaplasm.

And along with this increased knowledge of the processes by which man has been upbuilt has come also an increased knowledge of the processes which are now going on within him. The same inquiries which have brought our organic life into intelligible relation with the whole range of animal and vegetable existence have enabled us also to conceive more definitely the neural side of our mental processes, and the relation of cerebral phenomena to their accompanying emotion or thought. And hence, in the view of some ardent physiologists, it is becoming more and more probable that we are in fact physiological automata; that our consciousness is a mere superadded phenomenon — a mere concomitant of some special intensity of cerebral action, with no basis beyond or apart from the molecular commotion of the brain.

But this view, as it would seem, depends in a great part upon something which corresponds in the mental field to a familiar optical illusion. When we see half of some body strongly illuminated, and half of it feebly illuminated, it is hard to believe that the brilliant moiety is not the larger of the two. And, similarly, it is the increased definiteness of our conception of the physical side of our mental operations which seems to increase its relative importance, — to give it a kind of priority over the psychical aspect of the same processes. Yet, of course, to the philosophic eye the central problem of the relation of the objective and subjective sides of these psycho-neural phenomena can be in no way altered by any increase of definiteness in our knowledge of the objective processes which correspond to the subjective states.

INTRODUCTION. xli

And, on the other hand, there is one singular logical corollary which seems thus far to have escaped the notice of physiologist and psychologist alike. It is this: that our increased vividness of conception of the physical side of mental life, while it cannot possibly disprove the independence of the psychical side, may quite conceivably prove it. I will again resort to the (very imperfect) analogy of a partially-illuminated body. Suppose that one hemisphere of a globe is strongly lit up, and that the other is lit up by faint and scattered rays.1 I am trying to discern whether the two hemispheres are symmetrically marked throughout. Now no clearness of marks on the bright hemisphere can disprove the existence of corresponding marks on the dim one. But, on the other hand, it is conceivable that one of the few rays which fall on the dim hemisphere may reveal some singular mark which I can see that the bright hemisphere does not possess. And the brighter the bright hemisphere is made, the more certain do I become that this particular mark is not to be found on it.

§ 5. I will give two concrete examples of what I mean — one of them drawn from the conclusions of a great physiologist, the other from the obvious condition of a new branch of experimental inquiry. I shall not discuss either instance in detail, since I am here only endeavouring to show that with increased precision in psychophysical researches the old problems of free-will, soul and body, &c, are presenting more definite issues, and offering a far more hopeful field to the exact philosopher than their former vagueness allowed.

My first illustration, then, is from the form which the old free-will controversy has assumed in the hands of Wundt. Wundt stands, of course, among the foremost of those who have treated human thought and sensation as definite and measurable things, who have computed their rate of transit, and analysed their elements, and enounced the laws of their association. It is not from him that we need look for any lofty metaphysical view as to the infinite resources of spiritual power, — the transcendental character of psychical phenomena. But, nevertheless, Wundt believes himself able to assert that there is within us a residue — an all -important residue — of psychical action which is incommensurable with physio-

1 The analogy will be closer if we suppose that the second half is lit, not dimly but from within, — since in one sense consciousness gives us Trior e information as to the psychical than as to the physical side of life, though it is information of a different quality.

xlii INTRODUCTION.

logical law. So far, he holds, is the principle of conservation of energy from covering the psychical realm, that the facts of mental evolution proclaim that the very contrary is the case; — and that what really obtains is rather "an unlimited new creation of psychical energy."1 Nay, so convinced is he of the inadequacy of any system of physiological determinism to explain psychical facts, that he holds that we must directly reverse the materialistic view of the relation of the corporeal to the psychical life. " It is not the psychical life," he says, " which is a product of the physical organisation; rather it is the physical organism which, in all those purposive adjustments which distinguish it from inorganic compounds, is itself a psychical creation." 2

I am not here expressing either agreement or disagreement with this general view. I am merely pointing out that here is an opinion which, whether right or wrong, is formed as a result not of vagueness but of distinctness of physiological conceptions. And my illustration shows at any rate that the development of physiology is tending not always to make the old psychical problems seem meaningless or sterile, but rather to give them actuality and urgency, and even to suggest new possibilities of their solution.

§ 6. But, to come to my second instance, it is perhaps from the present position of hypnotism that the strongest argument may be drawn for the need of such researches as ours, to supplement and co-ordinate the somewhat narrower explorations of technical physiology. For the actual interest of the mesmeric or hypnotic trance — I am not now dealing with the rival theories which these words connote — the central interest, let us say, of induced somnambulism, or the sleep-waking state — has hardly as yet revealed itself to any section of inquirers.

That interest lies neither in mesmerism as a curative agency, as Elliotson would have told us, nor in hypnotism as an illustration of inhibitory cerebral action, as Heidenhain would tell us now. It lies in the fact that here is a psychical experiment on a larger scale than was ever possible before; that we have at length got hold of a handle which turns the mechanism of our being; that we have found

1 "Hier gilt vielmehr ein Gesetz unbegrenzter Neuschopfung geistiger Energie, welches nur durch die sinnliche Bestimmtheit des geistigen Lebens gewisse Hemmungen erleidet. "— Wundt, Logik, II., p. 507.

2 "Nicht das geistige Leben ist ein Erzeugniss der physischen Organisation, sondern diese ist in allem, was sie an zweckvollen Einrichtungen der Selbstregulirung und der Energie-verwerthung vor den Substanzcomplexen der unorganischen Natur voraushat, eine geistige Schopfung." — Wundt, Logik, II., p. 471.

INTRODUCTION. xliii

a mode of shifting the threshold of consciousness which is a dislocation as violent as madness, a submergence as pervasive as sleep, and yet is waking sanity; that we have induced a change of personality which is not per se either evolutive or dissolutive, but seems a mere allotropic modification of the very elements of man. The prime value of the hypnotic trance lies not in what it inhibits, but in what it reveals; not in the occlusion of the avenues of peripheral stimulus, but in the emergence of unnoted sensibilities, nay, perhaps even in the manifestation of new and centrally-initiated powers.

The hypnotic trance is an eclipse of the normal consciousness which can be repeated at will. Now the first observers of eclipses of the sun ascribe them to supernatural causes, and attribute to them an occult influence for good or evil. Then comes the stage at which men note their effects on the animal organism, the roosting of birds, the restlessness of cattle. Then come observations on the intensity of the darkness, the aspect of the lurid shade. But to the modern astronomer all this is trifling as compared with the knowledge which those brief moments give him of the orb itself in its obscuration. He learns from that transient darkness more than the noon of day can tell; he sees the luminary no longer as a defined and solid ball, but as the centre of the outrush of flaming energies, the focus of an effluence which coruscates untraceably through immeasurable fields of heaven.

There is more in this parallel than a mere empty metaphor. It suggests one of the primary objects which psychical experiment must seek to attain. Physical experiment aims at correcting the deliverances of man's consciousness with regard to the external world by instruments which extend the range, and concentrate the power, and compensate the fallacies of his senses. And similarly, our object must be to correct the deliverances of man's consciousness concerning the processes which are taking place within him by means of artificial displacements of the psycho-physical threshold; by inhibiting normal perception, obliterating normal memory, so that in this temporary freedom from preoccupation by accustomed stimuli his mind may reveal those latent and delicate capacities of which his ordinary conscious self is unaware.

§ 7. It was thus, in fact, that thought-transference, or telepathy, was first discovered. In the form of community of sensation between operator and subject, it was noted nearly a century ago as a

xliv INTRODUCTION.

phenomenon incident to the mesmeric trance. Its full importance was not perceived, and priceless opportunities of experiment were almost wholly neglected. In order to bring out the value and extent of the phenomenon it was necessary, we venture to think, that it should be investigated by men whose interest in the matter lay not in the direction of practical therapeutics but of psychical theory, and who were willing to seek and " test for it " under a wide range of conditions, not in sleep- waking life only, but in normal waking, and normal sleep, and, as this book will indicate, up to the very hour of death.

The difficulties of this pursuit are not physiological only. But, nevertheless, in our endeavours to establish and to elucidate telepathy, we look primarily for aid to the most recent group of physiological inquirers, to the psycho-physicists whose special work — as yet in its infancy — has only in our own day been rendered possible by the increased accuracy and grasp of experimental methods in the sciences which deal with Life.

The list of Corresponding Members of our Society will serve to show that this confidence on our part is not wholly unfounded, and to indicate that we are not alone in maintaining that whatever may be the view of these perplexing problems which ultimately prevails, the recent advances of physiology constitute in themselves a strong reason — not, as some hold, for the abandonment of all discussion of the old enigmas, but rather for their fresh discussion with scientific orderliness, and in the illumination of our modern day.1

§ 8. From Biology we may pass, by an easy transition, to what is commonly known as Anthropology, — the comparative study of the different races of men in respect either of their physical characteristics, or of the early rudiments of what afterwards develops into civilisation.

The connection of anthropology with psychical research will be evident to any reader who has acquainted himself with recent expositions of Primitive Man. He may think, indeed, that the connection is too evident, and that we can hardly bring it into notice without proving a good deal more than we desire. For as the creeds and customs of savage races become better known, the part played by sorcery, divination, apparitions becomes increasingly predominant.

1 The French Soci^te" de Psychologie Physiologique, whose President is M. Charcot, has already published several observations with an important bearing on our subject, some of which will be found in Vol. ii. of this work.

INTRODUCTION. xlv

Mr. Tylor and Sir John Lubbock have made this abundantly clear, and Mr. Spencer has gone so far as to trace all early religion to a fear of the ghosts of the dead. In the works of these and similar authors, I need hardly say, we are led to regard all these beliefs and tendencies as due solely to the childishness of savage man — as absurdities which real progress in civilisation must render increasingly alien to the developed common-sense, the rational experience of humanity. Yet it appears to me that as we trace the process of evolution from savage to civilised man, we come to a point at which the inadequacy of this explanation is strongly forced on our attention. Certainly this was my own case when I undertook some years ago to give a sketch of the Greek oracles. It soon became evident to me that the mass of phenomena included under this title had, at any rate, a psycho-physical importance which the existing works on the subject for the most part ignored. I scarcely ventured myself to do more than indicate where the real nodi of the inquiry lay. But when a massive treatise on Ancient Divination appeared from the learned pen of M. Bouche-Leclercq, I looked eagerly to see whether his erudition had enabled him to place these problems in a new light. I found, however, that he explicitly renounced all attempt to deal with the phenomena in more than a merely external way. He would record, but he would make no endeavour to explain; — taking for granted, as it appeared, that the explanation depended on fraud alone, and on fraud whose details it would now be impossible to discover.

I cannot think that such a view can any longer satisfy persons adequately acquainted with the facts of hypnotism. Whatever else, whether of fraud or reality, there may have been on the banks of Cassotis or Castaly, — unde superstitiosa primwm sacra evasit vox fera, — there were at least the hypnotic trance and hystero-epilepsy. And until these and similar elements can be sifted out of the records left to us, with something of insight gained by familiarity with their modern forms, our knowledge of Pythia or of Sibyl will be shallow indeed.

Still more markedly is such insight and experience needed in anthropology proper — in the actual observation of the savage peoples who still exist. It is to be hoped that shamans and medicine-men will not vanish before the missionary until they have yielded some fuller lessons to the psycho-physicist — until the annals of the Salpetriere and the experiments of Dean's Yard have been invoked in explanation of the weird terrors of the Yenisei and the Congo.

xlvi INTRODUCTION.

§ 9. Passing on from Anthropology to history in its wider acceptation, we find these psycho-physical problems perpetually recurring, and forming a disturbing element in any theory of social or religious evolution. The contagious enthusiasms of the Middle Ages — the strange endemic maladies of witchcraft, vampirism, lycanthropy — even the individual inspiration of a Mahomet or a Joan of Arc — these are phenomena which the professed historian feels obliged to leave to the physician and the alienist, and for which the physician and the alienist, in their turn, have seldom a satisfactory explanation.

Nor do phenomena of this kind cease to appear with the advance of civilisation. In detailed modern histories, in the biographies of eminent men, we still come upon incidents which are, at any rate at first sight, of a supernormal l kind, and over which the narrator is forced to pass with vague or inadequate comment.

