1 See Vol. i., p. 462, note, and Chap, xii., § 7. A case of subjective hallucination exjDeriencedbythe Rev. P. H. Newnham further illustrates the point. He distinctly saw in church the figure of a parishioner of marked appearance, who, it turned out, had not been there, and whose place had not been occupied by anyone else. " When I became convinced it was a hallucination, it then occurred to me that the clearness with which I had noted the eyes and the careworn look proved it; for my eyesight is now unable to distinguish such details of features at the distance of the pew in question." It is interesting in this connection to remark that Mr. Newnham, for the larger part of his life, enjoyed particularly good sight; while another corresijondent, who occasionally sees subjective phantoms, and who has been short-sighted from birth, says, "I experience the same difficulty in discerning the unreal that I do when viewing real objects; unless the persons come near, I cannot clearly distinguish their features."

one knows are seen in places where it is very natural that they should be, one often accepts a very slight and general glance as a sufficient ground of recognition; and it is easy afterwards to mistake the inference that one drew from this glance for actual ocular observation. But, on the other hand, Mr. Schofield spoke to the figure, and it did not answer him; which would at any rate be unlikely conduct on the part of a real person.

§ 4. The next type that presents itself is different from any that has yet been mentioned. We have encountered several cases, which there seemed strong grounds for considering telepathic, where the phantasmal form was not recognised; and we have seen that on the theory that the telepathic impulse may take place on various levels, or even below any level, of consciousness, and maybe projected into sensory form by the percipient with various degrees of distinctness, this lack of recognition is not surprising. But all the visual cases so far examined have presented a human appearance: the hallucination has been developed at any rate up to that point. It will be remembered, however, that there have been instances where the human appearances developed out of something of a formless kind, which gradually assumed outline and detail (Chap. XII., § 3); and this might naturally lead us to expect that other cases might occur of a more rudimentary type — hallucinations, as we might say, of arrested development, and not suggestive or but faintly suggestive of any human likeness. Instances of the undeveloped type are met with among the purely subjective hallucinations of the sane; but they are very rare in comparison with the hallucinations which represent a definite figure; ^ it need not, therefore, surprise us to find that the analogous group, which there are grounds for regarding as very possibly telepathic, is a small one. Physiologically, we might compare these undeveloped flashes of hallucination to a motor effect

1 In my collection of purely subjective hallucinations of the sane, the only visual examples that I find of a quite rudimentary type are a star, and two or three appearances of shapeless cloudy masses; to which I might add a few of the " collective " cases m Chap, xviii., § 5. But since this chapter was written, M. Marillier's paper, above cited, has supplied me vidth a case eminently in point. After describing some most distinct and complete hallucinations from which he suffered at one period of his life, he continues:— " Depuis lors, je n'ai plus eu d'hallucinations trfes nettes; parfois encore je vols des lueurs, j'entends des craquements, des bruissements, je sens en moice sentiment d'attenteanxieuse qui precfede d'ordinaire I'apparition d'une hallucination; mais rien ne paralt: Thallucmation est r^duite avant meme qu'elle ait eu le temps de se produire." This seems exactly to illustrate "arrested development." See also case 311 below, where a hallucination of light develops into a human form; a converse case, No. 553, where a developed hallucination passes into a mere impression of light; case 332 where it seems probable that what appeared to one percipient as a complete and recognised figure appeared to another as a formless luminous cloud; and case 346 where what appeared to one percipient as a complete figure, which touched him, appeared to another as a misty shadow.

74 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

which, instead of taking the complex form of automatic writing, is limited to a single start or twitch. The experiments in Chap. II., §13, seemed to indicate that the sequel of a telepathic impulse might be a single tremor or vibration, sent down to the motor centre from the higher tracts of the brain; just so may we suppose the speech-centre to have been stimulated in the case of Mrs. K.'s cry (Vol. I., p. 398); and in the rudimentary hallucinations the stimulation of the sensory centre may be conceived as of the same simple and explosive sort.

The following case stands in an intermediate position, as there was a suggestion, but not exactly a representation, of human form. The account is from a witness whom we believe to have stated the facts correctly. She is the wife of an Inspector on the G.N. Railway, and resides at 4, Taylor's Cottages, London Road, Nottingham.

"April 23rd, 1883.

(251) " We received a letter a few days since, asking me to give you the account of our dear little girl's death, which took place on the 17th of May, 1879. I beg to state it is as fresh on my mind as if it only occurred a few days ago. The morning was very bright, and I think the sun shone more bright than I had ever seen it before. The child was four years and five months old, and a very fine girl. A few minutes after 1 1 she came running into the kitchen and said to me, ' Mother, may I go and play? ' I said, ' Yes.' She then went out. Soon after I spoke to her, I went and fetched a pail of water from the bedroom. As I was walking across the yard, the child came in front of me like a bright shadow, 1 and I stopped quite still and looked at her, and turned my head to the right, and saw her pass away. I emptied my water, and was coming in. My husband's brother, who was staying with us, called to me, and said, ' JFanny have got runned over.' I then came through the house and went just across the road, and found her. She was knocked down by the horse's feet, and the wheel of a baker's cart had broken the brain at the back of her neck. She only breathed a few minutes in my arms.

" This is just as the sad accident occurred. I have been looking for the piece of paper with it in, but I cannot find it. "Anne E. Weight."

The accident occurred at Derby. The Derby and Chesterfield Rei^orter gives a full account of it, whicli completely corresponds with the above.

[In a conversation with Mr. and Mrs. H. Sidgwick on December 16th, 1883, Mrs. Wright explained that the apparition was "like a flash of lightning in the form of a child's shadow." It could not have been a real child; it was " not the least like one," nor did she recognise in it the image of any particular child; but it gave her a kind of shock and made her think, " I wonder where those children are." It lasted long enough for her to gaze steadily at it — " about half a minute " — and " moved away to the right, with her eyes upon it," and so dis-

1 Cf. Case 491, where a "shadowy light" seems to have developed into more definite form.

appeared. Not more than a quarter or three-quarters of a minute passed before her brother-in-law called to her. It must have been 5 or 7 minutes since the child had gone to play, when the accident happened. Mrs. Wright afterwards learnt from an eye-witness what the child had been doing out in the road for some minutes previously to the accident. While holding the dying child in her arms, she said to the people standing by, " This is her death-blow. I saw her shadow in the yard." She has had no hallucination of vision on any other occasion.]

It is open to doubt, of course, whether the experience here was of a sufficiently marked kind to have remained in the percipient's mind, had no accident occurred. But the description of the phantasm appears at any rate to point to something more than a mere illusion caused by the sunlight; nor is it of a sort that seems specially likely to have been unconsciously invented or exaggerated after the event..

The next two cases are of a much more rudimentary type. The narrator of the first is the Rev. James Went, M.A., of Southlea, Knighton, Leicester, Headmaster of the Leicester Grammar School.

" December 21st, 1885, (252) " In the year 1870, 1 held an assistant-mastership in a large grammar school in the Midland counties. At the beginning of one of the school terms a boy had come to the town to reside with his uncle, for the sake of attending the school. He was a quiet, thoughtful-looking boy, and he and I were, I think, attracted to each other. A short time after he had come to the school, he was taken ill during school hours. Seeing that he was in pain I suggested that he should go home, and he did so. He was absent for perhaps three or four days, and, I think, meantime I made inquiries of his cousin, who also attended the school, and got the impression that he was not seriously ill. At all events, I had no idea that he was in any danger, nor, indeed, as I ascertained afterwards, had his friends. One evening I was sitting in my drawing-room reading, my wife being in the dining room behind, when I became aware of a vague presence within a few feet of me. It assumed no shape, and was nothing more than an indefinable dark appearance as of massed and disordered drapery, though there was no rustling. Slight as it was, however, I was quite conscious of it, and I can recall it at this distance of time. It made me feel a little uncomfortable, and I put down my book and joined my wife in the next room. The discomfort passed away at once, and I thought no more of it. In the course of an hour, however, I received a note which informed me that my pupil had died at about the same time, so far as I could make out, that I had been conscious of this appearance. I was, of course, at once reminded of it, and took some little trouble to ascertain the time. When I received the note informing me of his death I mentioned the incident to my wife, and she at the present time remembers my doing so.

" I give the narrative for what it is worth. It is very vague, but I have endeavoured not to overstate the incident. " James Went."

In answer to an inquiry, Mr. Went says: — " I have never on any other occasion had any hallucination of the senses."

76 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

Mrs. Went writes as follows on Dec. 29, 1885: —

" I remember well my husband mentioning to me, directly after he heard of the boy's death, a queer sensation that he had experienced an hour previously that evening, and his belief that he had seen something which he could not describe. " Feances J. Went."

The stage of development here seems just on a par with that out of which the appearances in cases 193, 194, and 315 took definite shape.

The next case is from the late Rev. Stephen H. Saxby, of Mount Elton, Clevedon, who was present when the incident occurred.

" 1883.

(253) "About the year 1841, I was in a room with my father in our house in the Isle of Wight, when he exclaimed, ' Good God, what is thaf?' starting up as he spoke, and apparently looking at something. He then turned to me and said that he had seen a ball of light pass through the room, and added, ' Depend upon it. Nurse Simonds is dead.' This was an old servant in London, to whom he had been sending money, in illness. In course of post came information that she passed away at the very time in question. " S. H. S."

[The exact date of death cannot be traced, the name being a common one.]

It is superfluous to remark that such an incident as this would deserve no attention if it stood alone; for therein it only resembles almost any example of coincidence that can be adduced. But in the case of the rudimentary visual phantasmfs, the evidential weakness extends to the whole class, which is far too small to carry any conviction, or to be even worth presenting on its own account; and to many, I am aware, the very mention of it will seem rather to weaken than to strengthen my argument. But it is only, I think, the vague habit of conceiving death-apparitions as objective presences instead of as hallucinations, that makes a " ball of light " appear so much more bizarre and improbable a manifestation than the semblance of the distant person's form. If the percipient has never on any other occasion had an experience of the kind, it seems unreasonable to leave the fact of the coincidence out of account, merely because the hallucination is of a rare type; and seeing that this small rudimentary class is backed by the far larger and more convincing class of recognised phantasms, we may admit the presumption thus raised that the smaller group, like the larger, is telepathic, while still admitting that the smaller group adds no appreciable weight of its own to the cumulative proof of telepathy. The same remarks apply to the rudimentary auditory cases, some of which will be given in the next chapter — though to these the conception of arrested development is less applicable.

§ 5. The types that next claim notice are peculiar in that they involve no coincidence with any ostensibly abnormal condition of the agent. Evidence that certain hallucinations are telepathic, and not purely subjective, in origin may be afforded by coincidences of a different sort. Thus, a person may have a hallucination representing a friend in some costume in which he has never seen him or imagined him, but which proves to have been actually worn by him at the time. Or again, several persons, at different times, may have had a hallucination representing the same person, though that person was apparently experiencing nothing unusual on any of the occasions when his form was thus seen. Clearly it would be difficult to regard a repetition of this sort as accidental. It being comparatively a rare event for a sane and healthy person to see the form of an absent person at all, that two or more sane and healthy persons at different times should see the form of the same absent person, is, on the theory of chances, so unlikely as to suggest a specific faculty on the absent person's part for promulgating telepathic impulses.

This latter type is important from its bearing on the question whether the peculiarity of organisation which conduces to telepathic transferences belongs rather to the percipient or to the agent, or (as experiment would lead us to suppose) in some measure to both. To decide this question we should naturally ask which happens the more frequently — that the same percipient, or that the same agent, is concerned in several telepathic incidents. Now of repetitions to the same percipient we have several examples;^ but that the same agent should figure repeatedly is made unlikely by the very nature of the ordinary type of case, which implies (over and above any natural peculiarity of organisation) an exceptional crisis — indeed, more often than not the crisis of death, through which no one can pass more than once. The only chance for a dying agent to show a special faculty for originating telepathic impressions is by impressing several persons; and cases of simultaneous or collective percipience, which may possibly be so

1 The evidence for one instance may of course be better than for another or others which may have fallen to the experience of the same percipient; but the following cases seem at any rate worth considering in respect of this feature of repetition:— Nos. 21, 38, 56, and 184; 41 and 477; 44 and 116; 53, with the preceding incidents; 69; 73 and 103; 74 and 423; 77 and 263; 80 and 201; 86, 479 and 480; 111, 161 and 464; 126 and 201; 129, 164 and 551: 136 and 137; 140 and 642; 167 and 315; 191 and 280; 198 and 274; 279; 311, 367 and 693; 370 and 665; 408, 553, 554 and 650; 411 and 463; 502; 513; 514 and 515; 559 and 560; the case on p. 355; and perhaps Nos. 99, 392, 619, 625, 692. See also the account which Thomas Wright, of Birkenshaw (the champion of the Wesleyans in the North of England), gives of his aunt's experiences (Autobiography pp. 5-7). Mrs. Newnham affords another instance, but with her the agent has always been her husband (Vol i., pp. 63-70, and cases 18 and 35). Compare in this respect cases 90 and 700; and also case 55.

u

78 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

explicable, will be considered later (in Chap. XVIII.). Meanwhile the cases where telepathic impressions seem now and again to be throwTi off at haphazard, and independently of death or any other crisis, are theoretically of at least equal interest. For they tend to confirm what experiment would lead us to suppose, that agency as well as percipience depends on specific conditions as yet unknown; and this dependence on peculiarity of constitution in two people would go far to account for an otherwise puzzling fact — the rarity, in comparison with the number of deaths and crises that take place, of spontaneous telepathic incidents connected with them.

Of the class of repeated hallucinations representing the same person, we have about five presentable records.^ Most of the incidents therein described seem to illustrate what may be called purely casual agency; but in a few of them the agent's state was more or less abnormal — which is so far of course in favour of a telepathic explanation of the phenomena. The first account is from Mrs. Hawkins, of Beyton Rectory, Bury St. Edmunds.

" March 25th, 1885. B / (254) " I send you my cousins' accounts of my apparition.

" I have also sent you the account of my next appearance, which unfortunately cannot now be related by the eye-witness.

" Again, a third time one of my little sisters reported that she had seen me on the stairs, when I was seven miles off — but she might so easily have been mistaken that I have never put any faith in that appearance. Then I was about 20.

" For many years after that these appearances seem to have entirely ceased, but in the autumn of 1877 I was seen in this house by my eldest son, then aged 27, who may, I hope, give you his own account of it. " Lucy Hawkins."

Mrs. Hawkins prefaces her cousins' accounts thus: —

" The event described in the enclosed accounts took place at Cherington, near Shipston-on-Stour, in Warwickshire, the residence of my uncle, Mr. William Dickins, who was for many years chairman of Quarter Sessions in

1 1 am excluding from the list a case received from Miss E. D. Jackson, of Strangeways, Manchester, where she and her hostess, on separate occasions, saw the figure of a maidservant who was not really present; partly because the experiences both took place when the percipient was in bed in the morning, which we have seen to be a condition favourable to purely subjective hallucinations; partly because the sight of a person who is daily before the eyes is a common form for such hallucinations to take. (See Vol. i., p. 505.)

None of the hitherto published cases of the repeated appearance of the same person's "double" rest on good traceable authority. The case of Mdlle. Sag4e, published in Mr. Dale Owen's Footfalls (p. 348), in 1863, was withdrawn in a later edition, as second-hand and not well substantiated. Some instances are recorded in connection with witchcraft — e.g., in Mather's Wonders of the Invisible World (Boston, 1693), pp. 106-112; but here tiie'idea of the person whose form appeared was present as a permanent source of apprehension in the minds of all the percipients.

the county. The ladies who saw the appearance are two of his daughters, one of them a little older than myself, the other 3 or 4 years younger. I was then just 17.

" The only mistake that I can discover in either of the accounts is that Mrs. Malcolm says I had been hiding with her ' brother,' whereas I had really been all the time with her sister, Miss Lucy Dickins — a fact of no importance except that she (Miss D.) might (if necessary) bear witness that I had really been with her all the time in the washhouse, and so could not have been near where I was seen.

" I remember we were all somewhat awed by what had happened, and that it broke up our game. I myself quite thought it was a warning of speedy death; but as I was not a nervous or excitable girl, it did not make me anxious or unhappy, and in course of time the impression passed oflF.

Writing to Mrs. Hawkins in September, 1884, Miss Dickins said: —

" Georgie [Mrs. Malcolm] is coming here on Friday, and 1 propose then to show her your letters, and Mr. Gurney's, and that we should each write our impressions of what we saw independently, and see how far they agree, and we will send the result to you. It is all very fresh in my memory, and I can at this moment conjure you up in my mind's eye, as you appeared under that tree and disappeared in the yard. I even recollect distinctly the dress you wore, a sort of brown and white, rather large check, such as was in fashion then, and is now, but was in abeyance in the intermediate years."

Shortly afterwards Miss Dickins wrote: —

" Cherington, Shipston-on-Stour.

"September 29th, 1884.

" I send the two accounts which Georgie and I wrote about your apparition. We wrote them independently, and so I think they are wonderfully good evidence, as they tally to almost every particular, except the little fact that I thought she joined me in searching the yard for you, and she thinks not — but that has nothing to do with the main fact of the story, our entire belief that we saw you in the body."

" In the autumn of 1845, we were a large party of young ones staying in the house, and on one occasion were playing at a species of hide-andseek, in which we were allowed to move from one hiding-place to another, until caught by the opposite side. At the back of the house there was a small fold-yard opening on one side into the orchard, on the other into the stableyard, and there were other buildings to the left. I came round the corner of these buildings, and saw my cousin standing under some trees about 20 yards from me, and I distinctly saw her face; my sister, who at the moment appeared on the other side, also saw her and shouted to me to give chase. My cousin ran between us in the direction of the fold-yard, and when she reached the door we were both close behind her and followed instantly, but she had entirely disappeared, though scarcely a second had elapsed. We looked at one another in amazement, and searched every corner of the yard in vain; and when found some little time afterwards, she assured us that she had never been on that side of the house at all, or anywhere near the spot, but had remained hidden in the same place until discovered by one of the enemy. " S. F. D."

80 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

" I well remember the incident of your ' fetch ' appearing to us. I believe I wrote down the details at the time, but do not know what has become of that record, so must trust to my memory to recall the circumstances, and do not fear its [not] being faithful though nearly 40 years have passed.

" We were playing our favourite game of Golowain, which consisted in dividing into sides at hide-and-seek, the party hiding having the privilege of moving on from place to place until they reached the ' Home,' unless meanwhile caught by the pursuing party.

" As I stood towards the end of the game, as a seeker, in the orchard, I saw you, who belonged to the opposite party, stealing toward me. As your dress was the same as your sister's, and there was the possibility of my mistaking you for her, who was on my side, I shouted her name, and she answered me from the opposite side of the wood. I then gave chase, and you turned, and looked at me laughing, and I saw your face distinctly. But at the same instant, Nina, also my friend, but your enemy, appeared round some corner, and being still nearer to you than I was, I left the glory of your capture to her. She was close upon you as you fled into a cow-yard. I was so sure your fate was sealed that I followed more slowly, and hearing the bell ring, that, according to the rules of our game, recalled us to the ' Home,' I went on there, to find Nina upbraiding you for having so mysteriously escaped her in this cow-yard.

" In astonishment you said you never had been near the place. Of course I supported my little sister in her assertion; whilst our brother supported you, saying he had been hiding with you, and that, being tired, you had both remained hidden in one place until the bell warned you that the game was over — that place being a washhouse in a distinct part of the premises from the cow or fold-yard, into which we believed we had chased you.

"G. M. (wee Dickins)."

In answer to inquiries, both Miss Dickins and Mrs. Malcolm say that they have never had any other experience of visual hallucination.

Mrs. Hawkins continues: —

" The second appearance of my ' double ' was in the spring (February or March) of 1847, at Leigh Rectory, in Essex, my father, the Rev. Robert Eden (now Primus of Scotland), being rector of the parish.

" The person who saw it was the nurserymaid. I am not quite sure of her name; but if, as I think, she was a certain ' Caroline,' she has been dead many years, therefore I can only give you my own very vivid recollections of her story, told with tears of agitation.

"But first I should mention that I had the mumps at that time, and was going about with my head tied up, and the only other person in the house who had it was my little brother, nearly 10 years younger than myself, who could not possibly be mistaken for me.

" On the first floor of Leigh Rectory there is a passage which runs the length of the house, terminated at one end by the door of a room that was then the nursery. One morning, about 10.30, ' Caroline ' came out of the nursery, and, walking along the passage, had to pass a doorway opening on to the stairs which led down into the front hall. As she passed, she glanced down, and saw me (conspicuous by the white handkerchief round my head,

and facing her) come out of the drawing-room door and walk across the corner of the hall to the library. She proceeded along the passage, and, coming to the foot of the attic stairs, met our maid, who said to her, ' Do you know where Miss Eden is 1 I want to go to her room.' ' Oh yes,' answered Caroline, ' I just saw her go into the library. So they came together up to my room, which was one of the attics, and found me sitting there, where I had been for at least half an hour, writing a letter. After a moment's pause of astonishment, they fled, though I called to them to come in. When I went downstairs a few minutes afterwards, and reached the passage, I saw in the nursery a group of maids, all looking so perturbed that, instead of proceeding down the front stairs, I went on to the nursery and asked what was the matter. But as no one answered, and I saw the nurserymaid was crying, I thought they had been quarrelling, and went away, quite unconscious that it was on my account they were so disturbed. " Lucy Hawkins."

The following account is from Mrs. Hawkins' son: —

"June 20th, 1885.

"In the autumn of 1877, I was living at my father's house, Beyton Rectory, Bury St. Edmunds. The household consisted of my father, mother, three sisters, and three maid servants. One moonlight night I was sleeping in my room, and had been asleep some hours, when I was awakened by hearing a noise close to my head, like the chinking of money. My waking idea, therefore, was that a man was trying to take my money out of my trousers pocket, which lay on a chair close to the head of my bed. On opening my eyes, I was astonished to see a woman, and I well remember thinking with sorrow that it must be one of our servants who was trying to take my money. I mention these two thoughts to show that I was not thinking in the slightest degree of my mother. When my eyes had become more accustomed to the light, I was more than ever surprised to see that it was my m,oiher} dressed in a peculiar silver-grey dress, which she had originally got for a fancy ball. She was standing with both hands stretched out in front of her as if feeling her way; and in that manner moved slowly away from me, passing in front of the dressing-table, which stood in front of the curtained window, through which the moon threw a certain amount of light. Of course, my idea all this time was that she was walking in her sleep. On getting beyond the table she was lost to my sight in the darkness. I then sat up in bed, listening; but hearing nothing, and, on peering through the darkness, saw that the door, which was at the foot of my bed, and to get to which she would have had to pass in front of the light, was still shut, I then jumped out of bed, struck a light, and instead of finding my mother at the far end of the room, as I expected, found the room empty. I then for the first time supposed that it was an 'appearance,' and greatly dreaded that it signified her death.

"I might add that I had, at that time, quite forgotten that my mother had ever appeared to any one before, her last appearance having been about the year 1847, three years before I was born.

" Edward Hawkins."

^ This is an excellent instance of delayed recognition; cf. case 249 above, and Chap, xii., §§ 2 and 3.



Vol. Ii. G

82 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. E. Hawkins says: — " I can assure you that neither before nor since that time have I ever had any experience of the sort."

The second account is from the Rev. T. L. Williams, Vicar of

Porthleven, near Helston.

"August 1st, 1884.

(255) " Some years ago (I cannot give you any date, but you may rely /f—^pn the facts), on one occasion when I was absent from home, my wife awoke one morning, and to her surprise and alarm saw my si'^w^ov standing by the bedside looking at her. In her fright she covered her face with the bedclothes, and when she ventured to look again the appearance was gone. On another occasion, when I was not absent from home, my wife went one evening to week-day evensong, and on getting to the churchyard gate, which is about 40 yards or so from the church door, she saw me, as she supposed, coming from the church in surplice and stole. I came a little way, she says, and turned round the corner of the building, when she lost sight of me. The idea suggested to her mind was that I was coming out of the church to meet a funeral at the gate. I was at the time in church in my place in the choir, where she was much surprised to see me when she entered the building. I have often endeavoured to shake my wife's belief in the reality of her having seen what she thinks she saw. In the former case I have told her, ' You were only half awake and perhaps dreaming.' But she always confidently asserts that she was broad awake, and is quite certain that she saw me. In the latter case she is equally confident.

"My daughter also has often told me, and now repeats the story, that one day, when living at home before her marriage, she was passing my study door which was ajar, and looked in to see if I was there. She saw me sitting in my chair, and as she caught sight of me I stretched out my arms, and drew my hands across my eyes, a familiar gesture of mine, it appears. I was not in the house at the time, but out in the village. This happened many years ago, but my wife remembers that my daughter mentioned the circumstance to her at the time.

" Now nothing whatever occurred at or about the times of these appearances to give any meaning to them. I was not ill, nor had anything unusual happened to me. I cannot pretend to ofier any explanation, but simply state the facts as told me by persons on whose words I can depend.

" There is one other thing which I may as well mention. A good many years ago there was a very devout young woman living in my parish, who used to spend much of her spare time in church in meditation and prayer. She used to assert that she frequently saw me standing at the altar, when I was certainly not there in the body. At first she was alarmed, but after seeing the appearance again and again she ceased to feel anything of terror. She is now a Sister of Mercy at Honolulu.

" Thomas Lockyer Williams."

[The circumstances, and the frequency, of this third percipient's experiences decidedly favour the view that they were merely subjective.]

Mrs. Williams writes: —

"June 20th, 1885. "As requested, I write to tell you what I saw on two occasions. I

am sorry that I am unable to give you the dates, even approximately, as many years have passed since I had the experiences referred to. On one occasion my husband was absent in Somersetshire, and on waking one morning I distinctly saw him standing by my bedside. I was much alarmed, and instinctively covered my face with the bedclothes. My friends have often tried to persuade me that I was not broad awake, but I am quite certain that I was, and that I really saw my husband's appearance.

" The other occasion was on a certain evening I was going to church, and on getting to the churchyard gate, which is about 20 yards from the door of the church, I saw my husband come out of the church in his surplice, walk a little way towards me, and then turn off round the church. I thought nothing of it until on entering the church I was startled at seeing him in his place in the choir, about to conduct the service. It was then broad daylight, and I am quite sure that I saw the appearance. Nothing whatever occurred after either of these appearances, and, of course, I can in no way account for them.

" Emma Williams."

In reply to the qiiestion whether his wife or daughter had ever experienced any other hallucination of the senses, Mr. Williams replies confidently in the negative.

The following account is from Miss Hopkinson, of 37, Woburn

Place, W.C. It will be seen that in this case and the next, the

evidence is not first-hand from any of the percipients; nor are the

cases strictly covered by the rule (Vol. I., p. 148) which admits to the

body of this work the evidence of persons to whom the percipient's

experience has been described before the arrival of news of the agent's

exceptional condition.^ But that there was here no such exceptional

condition does not in any way increase the probability that the

narrator has imagined that she was informed of experiences of which

in fact she was not informed. And the news that some one has

had a waking vision of oneself being calculated to make rather a

special impression on the mind and memory, the agent in these

instances is at any rate in a different position from an ordinary

second-hand witness.

" February 20th, 1 886. a', ^-^.^

(256) "In the course of my life I have been accused four times of appearing to people; neither can I account for those supposed visits."

Asked to give details, and to obtain corroboration. Miss Hopkinson replied: —

" It would be really quite excusable if you did not believe one word of my statements. I can get you no further information to support them. In the first instance of my supposed appearance, which happened

^ Miss Hopkinson's case, however, as regards one incident in it — the third — is not even an apparent exception to the rule.

84 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

some years ago, the young lady died very shortly afterwards. Her parents, too, are also dead. In the second, I gave the gentleman on whom I called to understand that he had made a mistake — I could not ask him about it now. In the third, though the lady only a day or two ago repeated to me her original account of my visit to her, she totally declined writing it out for me, or letting me use her name, on the idea, which I find very common, that these soi-t of things are irreligious. The fourth time rather differed from the others; but the young lady in that case died soon after. I am conscious that in all these cases I was thinking intensely of the individuals."

The following are the fuller details: —

" Case 1 occurred many years ago. A young lady, sleeping in a house next door to the one I was in, declared that I visited her during the night when she was lying awake, and that I performed some slight service for her. She was so positive in her statements that my denial was not believed by those around her. I was perfectly certain I had never left my room, nor could I have done so without its being known. I will not draw on my memory for further particulars; I might be wrong after so long a time.

" Case 2. Seven years ago. I had gone into the City (a place I always avoid) on a small matter of business connected with a relative of mine, and I was very anxious he should know nothing about it; my thoughts therefore were occupied by him. I was almost startled from my reverie by the clock of Bow Church striking 3. In the evening I saw my relative, and the first thing he said was, ' L., where did you go to-day? I saw you come in to my place, but you passed my office and I don't know what became of you.' I said, 'At what time were you ridiculous enough to think I should call upon you?' 'As the clock struck 3,' he replied. I turned the subject — nor have I ever reverted to it since. This gentleman knew my dress and general appearance most intimately. Of course, I was not likely to visit him except on business, and by appointment.

" Case 3. About 6 years ago. I was staying in a country town 100 miles from London, at a busy, matter-of-fact home, with bright young people. One morning I came down to breakfast oppressed with a sensation I could not understand nor shake off. It resolved itself towards the afternoon in an absorbing thought of a relative in London, and I then wrote to ask her what she was doing. But a letter from her crossed mine, to ask me the same question. When I next saw her she told me what only last week she exactly repeated again: she was sitting quietly working, when the door opened, and I walked in, looking as usual; and though she believed I was miles away, she concluded I had come back, and did not realise to the contrary till I turned and walked out of the room.

" Case 4. Four years ago. A young lady asserted I stood at the bottom of her bed (she was not well at the time) and told her distinctly to get up and dress herself, and that I thought her well enough to do so. She obeyed. I told her she was quite mistaken; I had done nothing of the sort. She evidently thought I was denying the fact for some reason. I was about 20 minutes' walk from this young lady's room at the time.

t/V^

She was perfectly clear in her statement; and I would not argue the point with her. Her illness was not in the least mental.

" Louisa Hopkinson."

The next account is from Mrs. Stone, of Shute Haye, Walditch,

Bridport.

" 1883.

(257) " On three occasions, each time by different persons, I have been seen when not present in the body. The first instance that I was thus seen was by my sister-in-law, who was sitting up with me, the night after the birth of my first child. She looked towards the bed where I was sleeping, i^ y^^. and distinctly saw me and my double; the first my natural body, the ^^ Z second spiritualised and fainter; several times she shut her eyes, but on opening them there was still the same appearance, and the vision only faded away after some little time. She thought it a sign of my death. I did not hear of it for many months.

" The second instance was by my niece; she was staying with us at Dorchester. It was rather early on a spring morning; she opened her bedroom door, and saw me ascending the flight of steps opposite her room, fully dressed in the mourning black gown, white collar, and cap, which I was then wearing for my mother-in-law. She did not speak, but saw me, as she thought, go into the nursery. At breakfast she said to her uncle, ' My aunt was up early this morning, I saw her go into the nursery.' ' Oh! no, Jane,' my husband answered, ' she was not very well, and is going to have her breakfast before coming down.'

" The third instance was the most remarkable. We had a small house at Weymouth, where we occasionally went for the sea. A Mrs. Samways waited on us when there, and took care of the house in our absence; she was a nice quiet woman, thoroughly trustworthy, the aunt of my dear old servant Kitty Balston, then living with us at Dorchester. She had written to her aunt the day before the vision occurred, telling her of the birth of my youngest child, and that I was going on well. The next night Mrs. Samways went to a meeting-house, near Clarence Buildings; she was a Baptist. Before leaving, she locked an inner door leading into a small courtyard behind the house, and the street-door after her, carrying both keys in her pocket. On her return, unlocking the street-door, she perceived a light at the end of the passage, and on going nearer saw, as she thought, the yard-door open. The light showed the yard and everything in it, but in the midst she clearly recognised me, in white garments, looking very pale and worn. She was terribly frightened, rushed into a neighbour's house (Captain Court's), and dropped in the passage. After recovering. Captain Court went with her into the house, which was exactly as she had left it, and the yard-door securely locked. I was taken very faint about the same time, and lingered for many weeks, hovering between life and death. "^

1 Taken in connection with these instances, the following experience of Mrs. Stone's own is of considerable interest. (See Vol. i., p. 555, note.)

"When about 9 or 10 years old I was sent to a school in Dorchester as a day boarder; it was here my first curious experience occurred that I can clearly remember. I was in an upper room in the school, standing with some others, in a class opposite our teacher. Miss Mary Lock; suddenly I found myself by her side, and looking towards the class saw myself distinctly— a slim, pale girl, in a white frock and pinafore. I felt a strong anxiety

86 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

Professor Sidgwick has visited Mrs. Stone, and after thoroughly questioning her on her narrative, he writes (September 23rd, 1884): — " She certainly understands thoroughly the importance of accuracy. She said she had heard of her apparition direct from tlie seers, in the two first cases mentioned. She had never heard of her sister-in-law having had any other hallucination before this time (1833) or afterwards, until very lately, when she has had an apparition of a dead person. She is old, and Mrs. Stone is unwilling to trouble her on the matter. Nor does she think that her niece, Jane Studley (who is dead), ever had any other hallucination. As regards the third instance, Mrs. Stone only heard it after her recovery, from Kitty Balston, whose account — as repeated by Mrs. Stone — was that Mrs. Stone was taken ill in the evening, or rather just before the evening, and was quite unconscious at the time when she was seen by Mrs. Samways."

[In the last of Mrs. Stone's cases, we should naturally conclude that the appearance, if telepathic, was connected with her illness; but the other two appearances seem to have been purely casual. Possibly, however, the first may have been due to her sister-in-law's failing to focus the two eyes together, which is a common infirmity in some cases of debility; but we should expect a person who sufi^ered in this way to be aware that she was in the habit of seeing objects double.]

The remaining account is from Mr. Gorham Blake,^ mining engineer, now residing at Loudsville, White Co., Georgia, U.S.A., and was sent to Professor Barrett in the summer of 1884. Mr. Blake begins with an account of long-continued success in alleviating pain by hypnotic processes — a success which he attributes in great measure to abstinence from stimulants, and to the fact that his profession has necessitated much active exercise in the open air. He then narrates the following cases, in all of which (except the first, where the percipient's experience was not sensory in character) the agency, if such it was, seems to have been purely casual.

(258) " In 1869, I crossed the great Humboldt (40 mile) desert, in the

State of Nevada, for the sixth time, alone, in the saddle; by an accident

my horse, a wild mustang, escaped, leaving me at 10 a.m. on foot in that

x^ankle-deep alkali sand, under the blazing July sun, and twenty miles from

,^My^. a drop of water, except that in my saddle-bags on my horse. Hours were

,.^, spent in the chase for my horse. Then I tried to shoot him, but he

■""^^ escaped, leaving me exhausted, sunstruck, dizzy, and finally helplessly

dying on the hot shadeless alkali, about noon. I passed the agony of

death by thirst, heat, and exhaustion, and became insensible. It was rarely

to get back, as it were, but it seemed a violent and painful effort, almost struggle, when accomplished. I was much frightened, but did not mention it till many years after."

I may mention that Mrs. Stone's daughter has had a similar experience; so that here is perhaps another example of hereditary tendency.

1 In the case of foreign informants whose personal acquaintance we have been unable to make, we have taken pains to assure ourselves as to their character and position. I mention this because the absence of testimonials has led some jiersons to imagine that we accept accounts without criticism or inquiry.

a traveller passed that way in that season, the track marked only by the bones of dead animals. A chance traveller came, saw my horse, and found me insensible, laid me in the shade of his waggon, and bathed me with water and vinegar until I came back to life. He lassoed my horse, and at sundown I mounted and rode to the settlements. Between 2.30 and 3 o'clock that afternoon one of my sensitive lady friends in Boston, Massachusetts (2,600 miles distant), while talking with her husband, suddenly threw up her hands and said, ' Mr. Blake is dead,' and could not be reconciled to the contrary. She persuaded her husband to visit my father in the same city, and learn where I was, &c. Two years after (in 1871) I visited the friends, and was immediately asked, ' Where were you two years ago, the last week in July % ' On comparing notes, and allowing for the difference in time, we concluded that at the time I became insensible in the desert my lady friend received the intelligence. I know I thought of the lady and her husband while lying on the sand, as we were long dear friends."

The percipient in this case, Mrs. Copp, and her husband, are dead. But I have copied the following extract from a letter (dated Boston, Dec. 19, 1885) written to Mr. Gorham Blake by Mrs. Dresser, who was one of their most intimate friends. She says: "It is written just as I remember Mrs. Copp and the Captain telling us on their side." Mrs. Dresser's account begins by describing how the friendship between the Copps and Mr. Blake began, through the latter's care of Captain Oopp in a dangerous illness on board ship.

" In the year 186 — [she is not sure of the date] Mr. B. had not been in Massachusetts for years. One day Mrs. C. was talking cheerfully with her sister about trifling matters, and, while walking across the room, holding a dish with both hands, suddenly the dish and contents were dropped on the floor, and at the same instant she exclaimed, ' Oh, dear! B. is dead! ' Her sister, surprised, said, ' What do you mean 1 ' The answer was, ' I don't know.' But again, in the same impulsive way, she cried out, ' Oh, he is dead! ' She could give no reason why she said this, only that she was raade to do it. This fact impressed her so sadly, and also her husband when he was told of it, although it was inexplicable, that they agreed to write down the date, so that they could refer to it should occasion require. A month afterwards. Captain C. inquired by letter of Mr. B.'s brother what news had been received from California, but gave no reasons for this inquiry. ' Yes,' was the reply, ' we have just heard from there; and he was in good health.' After this report Captain C. and wife did not trouble themselves about the above incident.

" It so happened that in that same autumn Mr. B. visited Massachusetts; and these friends were among the first seen. After a mutual interchange of the news which had occurred, Captain C. happened to remember that curious incident, and inquired at once, ' B., what were you doing one day last — —? Were you sick at the time 1 ' B. replied, ' No, I was well — nothing was the matter with me.' But after further inquiry about the time, Mrs. C. consulted the record she had made of the exact date when the event happened, and then told him of her peculiar experience," — whereupon Mr. B. narrated his adventure, of which Mrs. Dresser's version agrees with his own description above.

88 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

[It will be seen that the discrepancies between the two accounts are very trifling.]

Mr. Blake continues: —

" In the year 1870 I was in Cambridge, Massachusetts, near Boston, and had an occasional correspondence with Miss S., an American, then residing in Europe. I received a letter from her, dated Miirzzuschlag, August 6th, 1870, in which she says: ' Yesterday I sat alone in my room, arranging my herbarium, till I was very tired, but there was such a fascination in the work that I did not seem able to break the spell and leave it; but of a sudden someone touched my shoulder with such force that I immediately turned. You were as plainly to be seen as if in the body, and I said^ " Why, Mr. Blake, are you really here? " and directed by you I laid aside my work, and went to the woods. I do not know that my mind was upon you at the time. I tried to trace the influence to a concentration of thought upon you, but failed to do it. Whether it was your letter, your spirit, or my imagination, certainly it was a reality to me.' I wrote for more particulars. She answered: ' Vienna, Austria, 23rd October, 1870. In explanation of your coming to me, I heard your voice, or a voice, speak my name. I turned, and you stood near me. I arose as if it were a reality, and as I turned again you were gone; and yet before I did that it seemed many minutes, for I said, "Is it you? " and you replied, " Do you not know me 1 " and then you said, " I have come because you are tired, for you to go to the woods and rest yourself," and, as I told you, I obeyed the summons, and wished that I could have a tangible evidence of your companionship.' My diary does not record any dream or thought of Miss S. on August 5th, 1870. I was at home, and quiet, and under good conditions for such a visit as that described by Miss S.

"In November, 1883, being in New York, I was in correspondence with Mrs. G., who was residing in San Francisco. A letter written by her in November, says: ' Last evening, I saw you distinctly standing by my side; you seemed trying to speak, but did not; you made passes over me, and I felt your influence plainly; you were here several minutes, then disappeared.'

" In another letter she wrote: ' You came to me yesterday afternoon, in Market Street, at the corner of Stockton Street, you crossed the street with me. I turned to speak with you, and you were gone. I have seen you many times in this way.'

"While Mrs. G. has been sitting in a room, sewing and conversing, I, being in a room 40 feet distant, have willed, or asked, that she come to me, and she instantly broke off the conversation, came to my room, knocked, and on my asking her to come in she opened the door, entered, and seemed a little confused, and said, ' Well, I don't know what I came in here for.' I have had many instances of this kind."

Mr. Blake has forwarded to us the following letter, written to him by the Mrs. G. of these last incidents. It will be seen that she is to some extent predisposed to hallucination, which of course weakens these items of the evidence,

" San Francisco, Cal.

" March 22nd, 1885.

" Dear Sir, — You ask me to narrate the circumstances under which

I saw you, as I wrote you in November, 1883. At that time I was in my room in San Francisco, Cal., and I saw you distinctly standing by my side. It was about 1 1 o'clock p.m. You seemed trying to speak, but did not. You made passes over me, the influence of which I plainly felt. You remained several minutes, then disappeared.

" Another time you came to me at 12 o'clock, while I was walking on Market Street, near the corner of Stockton. You crossed the street with me. I turned to speak with you, but you had disappeared. I have seen you several times that way, as I have three other persons whom I know to be alive and in good health. — Yours truly, " Mary A. Gordon."

Mr. Blake continues: —

"On September 28th, 1870, I arrived in New York from Boston about 7 o'clock a.m., having with me a valise and umbrella. I went to Dr. P.'s house on Fourth Avenue, rang the bell, and Dr. P. came to the door, when the following conversation took place: — Blake: ' Good morning. Can you accommodate me with a room? ' Dr. P.: ' Yes, but why didn't you come in last evening V B.: ' Because I was in Boston last evening.' P.: ' Why you called here last evening! ' B.: ' That's impossible, for I have just arrived on the boat this morning.' P.; * I certainly saw you here last evening. You asked for a room. I asked you to walk in; you turned and went away. I thought it strange, and that you must have misunderstood me. I think my wife saw you too.' Turning to his wife: ' Did you see Mr. B. last evening 1 ' Mrs. P.: ' Yes, he was standing at the door with a valise in one hand and umbrella in the other; then turned and went away. I saw him as I passed through the hall.' ^ B.: ' It's a mistake, or my double, for you can see by my diary that I was in Boston yesterday, and the business I attended to.'

" I left my baggage in the room and went down town, returning in the evening. Dr. P. called me into the parlour, where I met an acquaintance. Dr. C. Dr. P. immediately said, ' Another witness on our side. Dr. C. saw you down town last evening.' ' Yes,' said Dr. C, ' I saw you walking along Broadway. You seemed to be in a hurry, and I was in a hurry to catch the ferry-boat; I bowed to you, and you returned it, and hurried on. You had a valise in your right hand and umbrella in your left hand, and had on a high silk hat, while I have seen you before in a felt hat, low crowned.' We all concluded it was my double, as at about the hour they saw me, 6 p.m., I was resting quietly aboard the boat before she left, and remembered thinking where I should take a room after getting to New York in the morning; but I did not remember the particulars related by Dr. and Mrs. P., or Dr. C. I think I fell into a doze, or short sleep, while resting, as has been the case several other times when my double has been seen at a distance from where my body was.

" GoRHAM Blake."

The first-hand testimony of the percipients is of course much needed, and I explained to Mr. Gorham Blake the importance of obtaining it. He has made efforts to do so, but cannot ascertain the present addresses of the persons concerned. He writes • —

1 It will be observed that this hallucination (if such it was, and not a mere case of mistaken identity) was collective, as also was the first experience described in case 254. The discussion of this feature is reserved for Chap, xviii.

90 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

" I enclose the only two papers on the subject that I can now find; one from Mrs. Gordon [quoted above], and one from Mrs. Gould, that I did not before write of. In connection with the latter I will say that I called at the Light for Thinkers office, Atlanta, Georgia, and saw Mrs. Gould for the first time. She said she had seen my face before, and told me as related in enclosed paper. She was not feeling well, and I held her hands, and placed mine on her head to impart magnetism, and relieved her. I saw her two or three times while in the city, and received the enclosed from her after my return home."

The enclosure is as follows: — "April 1885

" One day, while resting, I happened to glance towards a window, in the fifth story, and, just outside, beheld the spirit^ of my friend, Mr. Blake, who seemed unable to get into the room; but, on rising and throwing up the sash, he appeared to come in and stand by my chair, make passes over me, magnetising me, and seeming to envelope me with something, just as a spider does a fly in its web. Before this, in fact some three or four weeks before I had ever met or seen him, while in a passive mood, I saw his head clairvoyantly, so distinctly that when he came to my office for the first time I recognised him as the person. And although he was at these times alive and well, I saw and recognised his presence as distinctly as though he had been there in form. u q j^ Gould "

[The last incident cannot, of course, carry much weight, as the recognition was a completely retrospective act; and as regards Mrs. Gould's other experience, the fact that Mr. Blake had been hypnotising her must perhaps be regarded as favouring the hypothesis of a purely subjective hallucination. At the same time, I am not aware of any sufficient evidence that hypnotic treatment induces a liability to hallucinations representing the hypnotiser, unless that hallucination has been specially imposed on the " subject's mind — as any other might be — while in the state of trance.]

Another foreign example is omitted, as we have been unable to obtain the testimony of the percipients. It is clear that the fact of the telepathic transference in these casual cases cannot be considered to be proved f but the mention of the type here may serve to elicit further instances.

§ 6. Of the other class mentioned, where peculiarities of dress or aspect afford the only presumption that a hallucination was more than purely subjective — i.e., was due to an absent agent who, nevertheless, was in a perfectly normal state at the time — the following examples may serve.^ The first is from Captain A. S. Beaumont, of 1, Crescent Road, South Norwood Park.

1 See p. 48, note.

2 The class, it may be remembered, is the second of the four types of " ambiguous cases " defined in Vol. i., p. 505.

3 As regards the connection of these appearances with the agent's sub-conscious sense of his own aspect, I need not repeat the remarks already made (Chap, xii., § 8) in respect of the far stronger group where there were similar peculiarities plus some exceptional condition of the a^ent.

"February 24th, 1885.

(259) "About September, 1873, when my father was living at 57, Inverness Terrace, I was sitting one evening, about 8.30 p.m., in the large dining-room. At the table, facing me, with their backs to the door, were seated my mother, sister, and a friend, Mrs. W. Suddenly 1 seemed to see my wife bustling in through the door of the back dining-room, which was in view from my position. She was in a mauve dress. I got up to meet her, though much astonished, as I believed her to be at Tenby. As I rose, my mother said, ' Who is that? ' not (I think) seeing anyone herself, but seeing that I did. I exclaimed, ' Why, it's Carry,' and advanced to meet her. As I advanced, the figure disappeared. ^ On inquiry, I found that my wife was spending that evening at a friend's house, in a mauve dress, which I had most certainly never seen. I had never seen her dressed in that colour. My wife recollected that at that time she was talking with some friends about me, much regretting my absence, as there was going to be dancing, and I had promised to play for them. I had been unexpectedly detained in London. u Alex. S. Beaumont."

The following corroboration is from the friend who was present: —

"11, Grosvenor Street, W.

"March 5th, 18&5.

" As far as I can recollect. Captain Beaumont was sitting talking, V^ »,^ when he looked up, and gave a start. His mother asked him what was..,.^„:;XC.^ the matter. He replied, ' I saw my wife walk across the end of the room, but that is nothing; she often appears to people; her servants have seen her several times.' The room we were in was a double dining-room, one end was lit with gas, and the other, where Mrs. Beaumont appeared, was comparatively dark. Ko one else saw her except her husband. Mrs. Beaumont was at the time in Wales, and this happened in Inverness Terrace, Bayswater. u Florence Whipham."

Mrs. Beaumont says: —

" I distinctly remember hearing from my husband, either the next day or the second day after his experience; and in his letter he asked, ' What were you doing at such an hour on such a night % ' I was able to recall that I was standing in a group of friends, and that we were regretting his absence. I was in a mauve dress, which I am confident that he could never have seen.^ u q Beaumont "

1 The disappearance of the figure on sudden speech or movement is a feature which occurs both in subjective and telepathic phantasms, and there could not well be a clearer indication of the hallucinatory character of the latter. In my large collection of subjective cases I have only three or four distinct instances, e.g., the first narrative in Chap, xii., § 2; but then it is only in a few cases that the percipient, by speaking or distinctly moving, has afforded the condition. The point was one of those observed in Dr. Jessopp's well-known case (Athenceum for Jan. 10, 1880). For telepathic examples, see cases 26, 159, 163, 178, 192, 196, 201, 214, 241, 540.

2 A similar case is described by Miss E. M. Churchill, of 9, Eversley Park, Chester, who, in October, 1883, when at lunch, had a visual hallucination representing an absent sister.

" I remember remarking at the time that I thought I saw my sister all in brown, and that she had nothing of that colour as far as I knew. A few days afterwards I received a letter from another sister, in which she mentioned that my younger sister and she had

92 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

Captain Beaumont adds that he has never had any other hallucination of the senses except on the occasion next described. This other case, in which the same agent and percipient were concerned, and a third case appended to it (in which the sameness of agent and difference of percipient recall the repetitions of the preceding section), would be quite without evidential value if they stood alone; but they are of interest in connection with the foregoing stronger example.

"February 24tli, 1885.

(260) "In 1871 I was staying at Norton House, Tenby, for the first time, and had just gone to bed, and was wide awake. I had the candle on my right side, and was reading. At the foot of the bed and to the right was a door, which was locked, and, as I learnt afterwards, pasted up on the other side.

" Through this I saw the figure of my future wife (the lady of the house) enter, draped in white from head to foot. Oddly enough, I was not specially startled. My idea was that some one was ill, and that she had come to get something out of the room. I averted my head, and when I looked up again the apparition was gone. I suppose that I saw it for two or three seconds. c< ^^Bx. S. Beaumont."

Mrs. Beaumont says: —

"February 24th, 1885.

"In 1872, two or three months after my marriage. Captain Beaumont and I returned from London to Tenby. I went up into my dressing-room and gave the keys of my luggage to my servant, Ellen Bassett. I was standing before the looking-glass with my back turned to her, and I heard her utter a little sharp cry. I turned round, saying, ' What's the matter? ' and saw her with my nightcap in her hand. She said, ' O, nothing, nothing,' and I went downstairs. The day after, my husband saw her taking off the paper which pasted up the door between my bedroom and

been getting new winter things, and were dressed in brown from head to foot. I think I was quite well at the time, but my sister was ill, which I was not aware of for some weeks afterwards."

Miss Churchill has often had slight momentary hallucinations, as of some one at her side; but says that this one was far the most distinct that she has ever experienced. But brown is, of course, a common colour, and the case is only worth quoting in connection with the one in the text.

The following is a dream-case of the same type, which has been narrated to Mr. Myers by both the persons concerned. The narrator is Mrs. W.

"Mrs. P., a friend of Mrs. W., was staying in Devonshire, and one night had a curious dream about Mrs. W. She dreamt that she (Mrs. P.) came into the drawingroom in Mrs. W.'s house at T., and had not been many minutes in the room, before Mrs. W. came in in a loose, red dress, looking very ill. Mrs. P. said to her, ' How very ill you look! ' Mrs. W. then answered she had been very unwell, but was then rather better. Mrs. P. thought this dream odd, and mentioned it to her friends. About a week after, she came on a visit to Mrs. W., and while she was sitting in the drawing-room, mentioned the dream, and pointing to a rose-coloured flower, remarked that was the exact shade of the dress worn in the dream. After comparing notes as to the date, they found that on the day of Mrs. P. 's dream Mrs. W. had been very unwell, and had worn a dressing-gown of the exact shade almost all day. The chief peculiarity in this is, that Mrs. P. had never seen her friend in any colour, Mrs. W. always wearing black, so if she had thought of Mrs. W. naturally it would be in black, "

the dressing-room. He said, ' What are you doing 1 ' She said she was opening that door. He said, ' Why, the first night that I slept in this house, I saw your mistress walk through that door.' (I must explain that Captain Beaumont had been a guest in this house on a good many occasions before our marriage. On the occasion mentioned, he had imagined that perhaps someone was ill in the house, and that I had entered his room to get something, thinking him sure to be asleep.) Then the maid told him that she had seen me the night before we came home — she did not know exactly what day we were coming, and had been sleeping in the same bed as he had been in when he saw me. She was just going to step into bed, when she saw me enter ' through the door,' ^ with a nightcap on, and a candle in my hand. She was so terrified that she rushed out of the room by the other door, and told the other servants she was sure I was dead. They comforted her as well as they could, but she would not return to the room. The cause of her crying out, when I heard her do so, was that, in unpacking, she recognised the identical nightcap that the apparition had worn. The curious point is that the nightcap was one that I had bought in London, and had not mentioned to her, and was perfectly unlike any that I had ever worn before. It had three frills. I had been accustomed to wear nightcaps of coloured muslin without frills.

"The same servant, some months after the nightcap incident, went into the kitchen and said to the other servants, ' We shall have news of missus to-day; I've just seen her standing in the dining-room door; she had on a black velvet bonnet and black cloak.' (W^e had been in London some weeks.) This occurred about 9 o'clock a.m. About 10.30 she received a telegram from us to say we should be home that evening; the telegram was sent from Paddington Station as we waited for our train. The bonnet and cloak had been bought in town without her knowledge.

" The maid was with me for years, and was certainly not nervous or hysterical. I have now parted with her for some years.

"C. Beaumont."

The next case is from Mrs. Murray Gladstone, of Shedfield Cottage,

Botley, Hants.

"January 18th, 1886.

(261) "I went on Saturday afternoon [last] to see an old man and woman named Bedford, who live in a cottage about half a mile from our house. Mrs. Bedford was ill in bed, and I went upstairs to see her. I sat down by the bedstead, and talked to her for a few minutes. Whilst I was there, the thought struck me that the light from the window, which was opposite the foot of the bed, was too strong for the invalid; and I determined, without saying a word about it to either Mr. or Mrs. Bedford, to give her a curtain. This (Monday) afternoon I again went to see the old couple; but this time I only saw Mr. Bedford in the room downstairs. And after a few remarks he said, ' My wife has seen you yesterday (Sunday) morning; she turned her head towards the side of the bed and said, " Is that her 1 " (I did not speak, as I thought she was dreaming.) " Yes," she went on, " it is Mrs. Gladstone, and she is holding up a curtain with both her hands " (imitating the posture), " but she says it is not long enough. Then

1 See Vol. i., p. 432, note.

C^

94 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap

she smiled and disappeared." ' When Mr. Bedford had told me the above, I exclaimed, ' That is just what I did yesterday morning whilst I was dressing. I went to a cupboard in my room, and took out a piece of serge, which I thought would answer the purpose, and held it up with both hands to see the length, and said to myself, " It is not long enough.'" I may mention that I had only once before been to visit Mrs. Bedford, about a year ago, before I went on Saturday; and, of course, both times wore my walking dress. But when seen by Mrs. Bedford in this vision, she particularly noticed that I wore no bonnet, which must have been the case, as this occurred before 9 o'clock. u Augusta Gladstone "

Mrs. Gladstone adds: —

" Mrs. B. described me as being in white, and I asked her what I had on my head. She said, ' A thing like this ' — taking hold of a woollen cap which I had given her. It was the fac-simile of one which I must have had on at the time; and they were not common, for I had knitted them of wool and of a particular shape."

Mrs. Bedford has had one other hallucination, when she saw the figure of a young grandchild standing by her bedside. This, however, happened at night, and may have been half a dream.

When Mrs. Bedford described her experience to the present writer, she did not use the word curtain, and she did not recall the remark about the stuff not being long enough; which suggested that these items might have crept into the narrative after Mrs. Gladstone's side of the affair had been related. Mr. Bedford is, however, positive that they formed part of what his wife told him at the time, and before he saw Mrs. Gladstone; and Mrs. Gladstone is equally positive that they were included in his account to her, and also that she has herself heard of them from Mrs. Bedford.

The next example is from Colonel Bigge, of 2, Morpeth Terrace, S.W., who took the account out of a sealed envelope, in my presence, for the first time since it was written on the day of the occurrence.

(262) " An account of a circumstance which occurred to me when quartered at Templemore, Co. Tipperary, on 20 February, 1847.

"This afternoon, about 3 o'clock p.m., I was walking from my quarters towards the mess-room to put some letters into the letter-box, when I distinctly saw Lieut. -Colonel Reed, 70th Regiment, walking from the corner of the range of buildings occupied by the officers towards the messroom door; and I saw him go into the passage. He was dressed in a brown shooting jacket, with grey summer regulation tweed trousers, and had a fishing rod and a landing-net in his hand. Although at the time I saw him he was about 15 or 20 yards from me, and although anxious to speak to him at the moment, I did not do so, but followed him into the passage and turned into the ante-room on the left-hand side, where I expected to find him. On opening the door, to my great surprise, he was not there; the only person in the room was Quartermaster Nolan, 70th Regiment, and I immediately asked him if he had seen the colonel, and he replied he had not; upon which I said, ' I suppose he has gone upstairs,' and I immediately left the room. Thinking he might have gone

upstairs to one of the officer's rooms, I listened at the bottom of the stairs and then went up to the first landing place; but not hearing anything I went downstairs again and tried to open the bedroom door, which is opposite to the ante-room, thinking he might have gone there; but I found the door locked, as it usually is in the middle of the day. I was very much surprised at not finding the colonel, and I walked into the barrackyard and joined Lieutenant Caulfield, 66th Regiment, who was walking there; and I told the story to him, and particularly described the dress in which I had seen the colonel. We walked up and down the barrack -yard talking about it for about 10 minutes, when, to my great surprise, never having kept my eye from the door leading to the mess-room (there is only one outlet from it), I saw the colonel walk into the barracks through the gate — which is in the opposite direction — accompanied by Ensign Willington, 70th Regiment, in precisely the same dress in which I had seen him, and with a fishing-rod and a landing-net in his hand. Lieutenant Caulfield and I immediately walked to them, and we were joined by Lieut.-Colonel Goldie, 66th Regiment, and Captain Hartford, and I asked Colonel Reed if he had not gone into the mess-room about 10 minutes before. He replied that he certainly had not, for that he had been out fishing for more than two hours at some ponds about a mile from the barracks, and that he had not been near the mess-room at all since the morning.

" At the time I saw Colonel Reed going into the mess-room, I was not aware that he had gone out fishing — a very unusual thing to do at this time of the year; neither had I seen him before in the dress I have described during that day. I had seen him in uniform in the morning at parade, but not afterwards at all until 3 o'clock — having been engaged in my room writing letters, and upon other business. My eyesight being very good, and the colonel's figure and general appearance somewhat remarkable, it is morally impossible that I could have mistaken any other person in the world for him. That I did see him I shall continue to believe until the last day of my existence.

" William Matthew Bigge,

" Major, 70th Regiment."

On July 17th, 1885, after Colonel Bigge had described the occurrence, but before the account was taken from the envelope and read, he was good enough to dictate the following remarks to me: —

" When Colonel R. got ofi' the car about a couple of hours afterwards, Colonel Goldie and other officers said to me, ' Why that's the very dress you described.' They had not known where he was or how he was engaged. The month, February, was a most unlikely one to be fishing in. Colonel Reed was much alarmed when told what I had seen.

"The quartermaster, sitting at the window, would have been bound to see a real figure; he denied having seen anything.

" I have never had the slightest hallucination of the senses on any other occasion."

[It will be seen that these recent remarks exhibit two slips of memory. It is quite unimportant whether Colonel Reed was seen walking in at the gate or getting off a car. But in making the interval between the vision and the return two hours instead of ten minutes, the later account unduly diminishes the force of the case. If there is any justification at all for the

96 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

provisional hypothesis that the sense of impending arrival is a condition favourable for the emission of a telepathic influence, it is of importance that, at the time when the phantasmal form was seen. Colonel Reed was not busy with his fishing, but was rapidly approaching his destination; for thus the incident, at any rate, gets the benefit of analogy with other cases. This illustrates what was said above (Vol. I., p. 131), that where memory errs, it is not always in the direction of exaggeration.]

I 7. The last case quoted might equally well serve as an example of the next and concluding group, the peculiarity of which is that the real person whom the phantasm represents is — unknown to the percipient— actually approaching. When these " arrival cases " were referred to above (Vol. I., p. 517), it was noted that the mere sense of returning home cannot be held to constitute an abnormality in the least degree parallel to death, or the other recognised conditions of spontaneous telepathy; and our first-hand specimens are in themselves too few for complete assurance that we have in them a genuine t3rpe of transfer. At the same time they find a parallel in the i-jTipressioTi-cases quoted in Vol. I., pp. 252-4; and taken in connection with the two preceding groups, they at any rate increase the probability that impressions from a normal agent may be occasionally capable of acting as the germ of a telepathic phantasm.

The first example is from Mr. James Carroll, who gave the account

quoted in Vol. I., p. 281. The agent was the same twin-brother who

was concerned in that former case.

"September, 1884.

(263) " In the autumn of 1877, while at Sholebrook Lodge, Towcester, Northamptonshire, one night, at a little after 10 o'clock, I remember I was about to move a lamp in my room to a position where I usually sat a little while before retiring to bed, when I suddenly saw a vision of my brother. It seemed to affect me like a mild shock of electricity. It surprised me so that I hesitated to carry out what I had intended, my eyes remaining fixed on the apparition of my brother. It gradually disappeared, leaving me wondering what it meant. I am positive no light or reflection deceived me. I had not been sleeping or rubbing my eyes. I was again in the act of moving my lamp when I heard taps along the window. I looked towards it — the window was on the ground-floor — and heard a voice, my brother's, say, ' It's I; don't be frightened.' I let him in; he remarked, ' How cool you are; I thought I should have frightened you.'

" The fact was, that the distinct vision of my brother had quite prepared me for his call. He found the window by accident, as he had never been to the house before; to use his own words, ' I thought it was your window, and that I should find you.' He had unexpectedly left London to pay me a visit, and when near the house lost his way, and had found his way in the dark to the back of the place."

In reply to inquiries, Mr. Carroll says: —

"You are quite right in supposing the hallucination of my brother to be the only instance in my experience."

In another letter, Mr. Carroll says: —

"As to the apparition of my brother in Northamptonshire, at a place and window where he had never before been, — I think I said the room was very light indeed, the night very dark. Even had I looked out of the window I could not have seen him. With my head turned from the window, I distinctly saw his face. I was affected and surprised. It seemed like a slight shock of electricity. I had not recovered from the effects when the second surprise came, the reality — my brother. I did not mention the subject to him then, being rather flattered at his astonishment at my cool demeanour. The coolness was caused by the apparition first of him. The window my brother came to was at the back of the house. He found my window out only by accident, or, as he said, he thought it was my window."

[Mr. Carroll is a clear-headed and careful witness. He is quite positive as to this being his only experience of a hallucination. In conversation, he stated that there were no mirrors in the room, and that the figure was seen not in the direction of the window. He thinks that the interval between the hallucination and his brother's appearance was about a minute.]

Here the gradual disappearance, if correctly remembered, is interesting as a feature which is occasionally met with in purely subjective hallucinations (Chap. XII., §§ 2 and 10).^

The next example is a " collective " case,^ but had better be quoted in the present connection. The narrator is the late Rev. W. Mountford, of Boston, U.S.A., a minister and author of repute. ^^ v.^1 *•< ^

(264) " One day, some 15 years ago, I went from the place of my abode to see some friends who resided in the fen districts of Norfolk. They were ■ - f- " persons whom I knew, not merely well, but intimately. They were two brothers who had married two sisters. Their houses were a mile and a quarter apart, but standing on the same road, and with only two or three other habitations intervening. The road was a straight, bare, open road, like what is so often to be seen in the fens, and used chiefly and almost exclusively by the occupants of the few farms alongside of it. The house at which I was visiting stood about 10 yards from the edge of the road. The day was fine and clear — a day in March. About 4 o'clock in the afternoon I stood at the window, and looking up the road I said, ' Here is your brother coming.' My host advanced to the window and said, ' Oh yes, here he is; and see, Robert has got Dobbin out at last.' Dobbin was a horse which, on account of some accident, had not been used for some weeks. The lady also looked out at the window, and said to me, ' And I

1 Compare cases 185, 194, 207, 263, 311, 315, 331, 350, 488, 503, 514, 544, 553, 567, 672, 673; also cases 189 and 328, and the account in Vol. i., p. 454, note, where the expression " melted away " is used.

2 Compare the carriage cases described in Chap, xviii., § 5.



Vol. Ii. H

98 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

am so glad, too, that my sister is with him. They will be delighted to find you here.'

" I recognised distinctly the vehicle in which they rode as being an open one, also the lady and the gentleman, and both their dress, and their attitudes.

" Our friends passed at a gentle pace along the front of the window, and then turning with the road round the corner of the house, they could not longer be seen. After a minute my host went to the door and exclaimed, ' Why, what can be the matter? They have gone on without calling, a thing they never did in their lives before. What can be the matter 1 '

" Five minutes afterwards, while we were seated by the fireside, the parlour door opened, and there entered a lady of about 25 years of age; she was in robust health and in full possession of all her senses, and she was possessed, besides, of a strong common-sense. She was pale and much excited, and the moment she opened the door she exclaimed, ' Oh, aunt, I have had such a fright. Father and mother have passed me on the road without speaking. I looked up at them as they passed by, but they looked straight on and never stopped nor said a word. A quarter of an hour before, when I started to walk here, they were sitting by the fire; and now, what can be the matter *? They never turned nor spoke, and yet I am certain that they must have seen me.'

" Ten minutes after the arrival of this lady, I, looking through the window up the road, said, ' But see, here they are, coming down the road again.'

" My host said, ' No, that is impossible, because there is no path by which they could get on to this road, so as to be coming down it again. But sure enough, here they are, and with the same horse! How in the world have they got here % '

" We all stood at the window, and saw pass before us precisely the same appearance which we had seen before — lady and gentleman, and horse and carriage. My host ran to the door and exclaimed, ' How did you get here? How did you get on to the road to be coming down here again now 1 '

" ' I get on the road 1 What do you mean 1 I have just come straight from home.'

" ' And did you not come down the road and pass the house, less than a quarter of an hour ago 1 '

" ' No,' said the lady and gentleman both. ' This is the first time that we have come down the road to-day.'

" ' Certainly ' we all said, ' you passed these windows less than a quarter of an hour ago. And, besides, here is Mary, who was on the road and saw you.'

" ' Nonsense,' was the answer. ' We are straight from home, as you may be very sure. For how could you have seen us pass by before, when you did see us coming down now 1 '

" 'Then you mean to say that really you did not pass by here 10 or 15 minutes ago 1 '

" ' Certainly; for at that time, probably, we were just coming out of the yard and starting to come here.'

" We all of us remained much amazed at this incident. There were four of us who had seen this appearance, and seen it under such circum-

XIV.] OCCURRING TO A SINGLE PERCIPIENT, 99

stances as apparently precluded any possibility of our having mistaken some casual passengers for our intimate friends. We were quite satisfied that we had really not seen our bodily friends pass down the road, that first time when we thought that we saw them. As for myself, I was sure that it was not they; and yet hardly could I help feeling that it could have been no persons else.

" There is an old saying about keeping a thing 10 years, and then finding a use for it. This curious experience of mine is as vivid in my mind as though it were of yesterday. Is it of use as illustrating mistakes as to identity, or is it rather a singular instance of what is called second-sight?

This account was first published in the Spiritual Magazine for August, 1860. On our writing to Mr. Mountford on the subject he replied: —

" Beacon Street, Boston, U.S.A. "8th August, 1884.

"The narrative of which you have sent me a copy was written by myself, as you had rightly supposed. It was carefully prepared, and I believe it to be as exactly true as any report ever made by phonograph or photograph.

" At the time when the occurrence happened, I was simply amazed at it, and I felt but just simply as some untaught ploughman might have felt in the open field, if an aerolite had fallen at his feet, hot from the skies.

"The persons besides myself, of whom I wrote in that account, were all of the family name of Coe, and were all of Islington, near King's Lynn; and they were all living at the time when I wrote about them, but they have all been carried away.

" I have only to add that Mrs. Robert Coe said that she and her i husband knew of their daughter's having started to see her aunt, but that they had had no intention of following her till Mr. Robert Coe, ' suddenly starting from his chair by the fireside, exclaimed ' Let us go to Clement's.' "

[It is much to be regretted that this experience was not recorded in writing at the moment, and signed by all the persons concerned. At the same time the hypothesis that it was a mere mistake or illusion is strongly discountenanced by the persistence of the contrary impression in a sound and rationally sceptical mind. For the natural tendency of such a mind is undeniably to be less certain of the reality of abnormal facts after a long interval than at the time of their occurrence. ^J

It will be convenient to complete the account of this " arrival " type by citing at once a couple of auditory cases, which belong by rights to the next chapter. The following account is from Mr. J. Stevenson, of 28, Prospect Street, Gateshead.

1 It is interesting, for instance, to find an able observer, M. Marillier, candidly admitting that, but for written notes and other indisputable evidence, he could easily come to believe that his own very vivid subjective hallucinations of some years ago were a disease of memory, and were never really experienced (JRevue Philosophique for February, 1886, p. 206).

100 FURTHER VISUAL CASES. [chap.

" April 20th, 1885.

(265) "During the months of May and June, 1881, my brother was staying with us. He went out one Sunday night between 5 and 6 o'clock. He did not say what time he would return, but his time was generally about 10 p.m. About 7 o'clock, while I was reading by the window, and Mrs. Stevenson by the fire, all being quiet, I heard a voice say ' David is coming.' I instantly turned to Mrs. S., asking what she said. She said, 'I have not spoken a word.' I told her that I heard someone say that ' David is coming.' I then thought I had imagined it, but, lo and behold! in less than 3 minutes, in he comes, quite unexpected. I was surprised, but did not mention anything to him about it. The position of the house prevented us from seeing him until just about to enter the house. He was in good health, as we all were at the time. This is a candid statement of the facts,

" Jos. Stevenson."

In answer to an inquiry, Mr. Stevenson adds: —

" This was the sole experience I have had of the kind. I have never experienced any hallucination."

Mrs. Stevenson corroborates as follows: —

" In reference to my husband's letter of April 20th, I have pleasure in testifying to the accuracy of his account, and of his drawing my attention to the fact at the time mentioned.

"Serena Stevenson."

The remaining auditory specimen (266) is from Mrs. Robinson, residing at The Warren, Caversham, Reading, who has never experienced a hallucination on any other occasion. Some 14 years ago, she tells us, she was sitting at needlework in the evening, when she heard the voice of her son, Stansford Robinson — who was supposed to be abroad, but had not been heard of for some time — calling, " Nar, Nar, Nar," the pet name of an old family nurse. The triple call was twice repeated. Mrs. Robinson opened the door, fully expecting to find her son in the hall, but no one was there. The son " returned unexpectedly next day, very ill, and died soon after." ^

1 It is perhaps worth while to point out the wide difference between such hallucinations of voices and one of the alleged phenomena sonaetimes included under the general name of "second-sight" — to wit, notice given of the approach of travellers, some time before their actual arrival, by a sound of horses' feet outside the house. _ (See, e.g., Jjescription of the Isle of Man, by George Waldron, 1744, p. 75.) It is obvious (1) how easily an auditory impression of that sort may be a mere illusion — just as the swirling of leaves is probably accountable for many of the tales of phantom carriages driving up to the door; and (2) how certain it is that, among a population holding such a belief, the occasional coincidence, when the suggestive sound was heard and the guest arrived, would be noted as a marvel, and the sounds which no arrival followed would find no place in the reckoning. It would not occur to a Manx peasant to make capital out of even the failures — as I have actually seen done — by calling them " inverted coincidences "!

XV.]



Chapter XV. Further Auditory Cases Occurring to a Single

PERCIPIENT.

§ 1. In examining cases of auditory phantasms which have strikinglycorresponded with real events, we have two main points to look to. First, there is the phantasm regarded merely as a sensory phenomenon, on a par with the visual phantasms. This, of course, is the sound in itself; which is occasionally of an inarticulate sort, a simple noise; but which in the large majority of instances represents the tone of a human voice — the voice, like the visual phantasm, being either recognised or unrecognised. But, secondly, when the phantasm is a voice, there is a further element, which has as a rule no analogue in the visual class — namely, what the voice says; and this is likely to afford us some clue as to whether a complete and definite idea has been telepathically conveyed from the agent or merely an impulse or germ which the percipient has developed in his own way. We find that the auditory cases, like the visual, present various stages of apparent externalisation;^ but the discriminations here are less marked — it being more difficult in the case of sounds than of sights to decide, in recalling them, how far the impression seemed inward, and how far outward; while even if the special stage be clear in the percipient's mind, it is not easy to find words to describe it.

I will begin with recognised voices; and will first quote a few cases where the analogy to experimental thought-transference is strongest, inasmuch as what the percipient heard seems to have represented the actual sensation of the agent,^ the very words which he was hearing while he uttered them — in one instance, however, so dulled as to be indistinguishable as words. The following account

1 See the account of some of these stages as exemplified in purely subjective hallucinations, Vol. i., pp. 480-2.

2 See Vol. i., p. 536, note.

102 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

is from Mrs. Stone, of Walditch, Bridport, the narrator of case 257,

above.

-'^-■' "January 29th, 1883.

(S57) " On the 1 3th of January, 1882, my eldest son, who had been paying us a visit, left by a morning train for his home; but I did not know the exact time at which he would reach his destination. In the afternoon of that day, my daughter having gone to the neighbouring town (Bridport), I was sitting at work by a window of which the upper ventilator was open. Suddenly I heard my son's voice distinctly; I could not mistake it; he was speaking eagerly, and as if bothered; the voice seemed wafted to me by an air current, but I could not distinguish words. I was startled, but not very much frightened; the voice did not seem to indicate accident or calamity. I looked at my watch, which pointed to three minutes past 3. In perhaps a few seconds, his voice began again, but soon became faint, and died away in the distance. When my daughter came in, I told her, and mentioned the hour; she said that was just the time my son expected to arrive, if the train was punctual. I also mentioned it to my son who is living with me. The next morning I was very thankful to get a post-card from my eldest son: ' Arrived all right, train very punctual, just three minutes past 3; but to my annoyance, I found no carriage waiting for me, or my luggage, only Frank on his bicycle. He explained that they had made a mistake by looking at the station clock (which was an hour too slow), and had driven away again.' I wrote the whole account to my son, but he is rather sceptical on these subjects; he could not but own it was a strange coincidence, but asked, ' Why, mother, didn't you hear Frank's voice too? '

"Lucia C. Stone."

Miss Edith Stone has confirmed verbally what is recorded of her in the above account. Another son, Mr. Walter Stone, also recollects having been told of the incident.

