" I told my husband when he came in what I had seen, and also told his colonel's wife (now Lady Laff'an), but did not put down the date. But almost as soon, I believe, as a letter could have come from Inverness, my husband received one from his late sergeant, to say that Ramsay was dead, but giving no particulars. To this my husband wrote that he was sorry, and would like to hear ' any particulars of his illness and death.' This was the answer: ' Ramsay died in hospital, raving, and calling incessantly for Mrs. Borland.'

"I will only add that I believe the face of the man I saw was that of Ramsay as I had known him at first, when I visited him as a dying man ' in the infirmary. But seeing him every day as my servant, and in health, it had passed from my mind, or rather did not connect itself with this man in my memory.

" I may add that I had been in ill-health for some years, but at that time was stronger than I ever was in my life, the warm climate suiting me — so well that I felt a strength and enjoyment of life for its own sake, which was a delight to me. " Kate E. Bolland."

In reply to inquiries, Mrs. Bolland adds, " This is the only instance in which I have ever experienced a hallucination of the sense of sio-ht."

The following corroboration is from Lieut. -Colonel Bolland, R.E.:

"July 20th, 1884.

" With regard to the apparition at Gibraltar, Mrs. Bolland mentioned it to me an hour or two after she saw it, which would be about 4 or 5 o'clock in the afternoon. She said she knew the face, but she could not say whose it was, but distinctly recognised the clothes worn as being like a suit I had given to Ramsay when in Inverness.

" The news of his death was a shock, coming shortly afterwards; and I wrote to my late sergeant on the Ordnance Survey at Inverness (Sergeant Dedman, R.E.), for particulars, with the result which Mrs. Bolland has told you. " G. Herbert Bolland."

We learn from Mr. J. Wilson Black, house-surgeon at the Northern Infirmary, Inverness, who has kindly referred to the books, that Archibald Ramsay was admitted to that institution on Feb. 24, 1875, sufferino- from

tumour of the brain, and died on March 9. Mr. Black adds: " None of

the officials at present in the house were in it at the time; and I am consequently unable to say at what hour he died." Mrs. Bolland has kindly endeavoured to find out, from the Library at Gibraltar, on what day she took out the book that she was reading; but without success.

We find that the above account completely agrees with the fuller one in All the Year Round. That account, however, contains a more complete explanation of the non-recognition of the face. As regards the momentary mistaking of the man for a visitor, these words occur: " I will only remind you that, as far as appearances went, the man was a gentleman. He had gentle birth on one side, was always refined in his manners, and, moreover, was dressed in a suit of clothes of which no gentleman need have been ashamed." The paper ends with the following additional incident:

" There is one odd fact as a pendant to this little story. The man Pearson, whom we had just brought all the way from the Ultima Thule of the ancients, at great expense, gave warning that day, because, he said,

544 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

' the house was haunted.' He gave no explanation, and I said nothing, as the reason of his sudden wish to leave only reached me through my maid. You will remember that he stood at the door, having apparently shown in my mysterious visitor. Had his notice to quit come a day later, I should have said he heard other servants speaking of the circumstance in houses where I had mentioned it. But he gave it that day and before I had spoken of it at all. Nor have I heard up to this moment what he meant. Puzzled but not alarmed myself, I would not risk frightening my household, so when my maid told me what he had said, I only replied, 'Nonsense! ' and that was the end of it. He left us, and the news of Ramsay's death came after he had gone, or I think I should have felt inclined then to question him,"

The narrator in the following case, Miss S., fears that publication of her name might be disadvantageous to her.

"March 11th, 1884.

(202) " In August, 1881, I had been ordered by my doctor to take absolute rest, not even to read at all, and to do no work whatever. I therefore took lodgings in a cottage near London for a few weeks. During the last 6 or 7 years, I had been rather intimate with a lady (Mrs. A.), whose daughter I had instructed during that period. This lady had gone to the sea-side with her family during the summer holidays, but had sent me a message, before she left town, that the suddenness of her departure had prevented her from coming to see me, but that she would certainly do so on her return. In the meantime I had heard, through mutual friends, that she and her family were in good health, and would probably return about the middle of September.

" About 3 weeks after Mrs. A.'s departure, I was expecting a friend to come and see me, and had ordered a carriage, to take her a drive. The morning proved wet, and she did not come, and after waiting some time, I went out alone, in an open landau, at about 3.30 or perhaps as late as 4 p.m. I had not left the house more than 20 minutes, when, in an open lane, I saw coming towards me Mrs. A. with one of her younger children. She was sitting in her own victoria, which I knew well. As she sat I saw only the three-quarter face; but I recognised the bonnet, and also the sealskin jacket, which she was wearing, as one that she generally wore in winter. I remember them particularly, because it struck me, as the carriage approached, that it was very odd of her to be wearing a sealskin jacket in August. Just as the carriage came up to me, and was passing me, so near that if I had put out my arm I could have touched it, I sat up, and called out, ' Oh, Mrs. A ' She did not move or turn her form towards me, but seemed to be half-turned towards the child, who sat on the further side of me. I was very much astonished at this, and then I turned round to look after the victoria, and, as far as my recollection serves me, I saw it slowly drive away. I am perfectly sure that I could not have been mistaken; I was never more certain of anything in my life than that I had actually seen my friend and her little child.

"For the next 10 minutes or so, I was puzzling to think what could have brought her back to London, and was very vexed with myself for not having at once told the coachman to turn and drive after the carriage. I did, however, as soon as I could collect my senses, tell him to drive home

as quickly as possible; and as soon as I reached, the cottage I said to my landlady, ' There is a lady and a little girl waiting for me upstairs, I suppose 1 ' When she assured me that there was not, I at once sent the servant over to my sister's house, about 10 minutes' walk off, to see if Mrs. A. had perhaps gone there. When the servant came back with no tidings of her, I was very much astonished, and couldn't help wondering over it for the rest of the evening.

" Two or three days afterwards, I asked the landlady to get me a daily paper, feeling a longing to read something; and, at my landlady's urgent entreaty not to tire myself, I said that I would only look at the births, deaths and marriages. There I saw the announcement of the death of Mrs. A. at the sea-side, on the very day when, as I thought, I had passed her in her carriage, near London.

" I afterwards learned from her relations that she had died after a very short illness, at 6 p.m. on that day, and that she had lain in a state of unconsciousness for some hours before her death. It could not have been much less than two hours before her death — that is during the time when she lay unconscious — that I saw her. u g j^ g »

We find the announcement of the death in three London daily papers for August 30th, 1881.

In conversation, Miss S. stated that she had never been the subject of any hallucination. She is short-sighted, but wears suitable glasses, and was wearing them on this occasion. No corroborative testimony can be obtained. The landlady was very old, and very unlikely, even if now alive, to remember so trifling an incident as Miss S.'s question about the supposed callers; and Miss S.'s sister was absent from home when the inquiry was made at her house.

This might conceivably have been a case of mistaken identity. But it would have been an extraordinary one; and the sealskin jacket in August would have been as odd a costume for any real person as Miss S. conceived it to be for her friend. It is worth mentioning that visions of horses and carriages are a known species of purely subjective hallucination; x and it is therefore not as strange as it might appear that a telepathic hallucination should assume this elaborate form. But more important is the appearance of a second human figure — that of the dying friend's child. I have already (p.426) pointed to a similar feature in one of the " borderland " cases as an indication that telepathic percepts, in their sensory character,

1 Cf. Dr. C. M. Smith's case, p. 499, note; and see also some collective hallucinations in Chap, xviii., § 5, and the apparently telepathic case, No. 264. Occasionally a subjective experience takes a still more elaborate form. Thus an informant who at one time had a slight tendency to visual hallucination, describes seeing, when quite awake, the details of a complete funeral procession. A somewhat similar telepathic case will be quoted in the Supplement, No. 586; see also case 207 below. But the more elaborate scenes, so far as I can judge, are generally of the less externalised sort which were treated in Chap. vi. as vivid mental pictures, not sensory hallucinations.

2 M

546 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

are really projections from within. I may now point out, as a fresh instance of parallelism between telepathic and casual subjective phantasms, the extreme rarity of the cases in which a second figure thus appears. In my large collection of subjective hallucinations of vision — putting out of the question the peculiar illusions hyynagogiques (pp. 473-4) — I find only seven cases, that is, less than 3 per cent., presenting more than one human figure; l three of which occurred to percipients who were in bed, while in two others the percipients were extremely young. And among the telepathic examples in this book, I find almost exactly the same proportion.

As further illustrating the construction of the phantasm from material which the percipient's mind supplies, I may mention a point in case 184. On the day when little Isidore left Paris for London, his hair was cut very short; and the long " fringe," which was removed, could not (the narrator says) have grown to its customary length in the month which followed before the death. But, as he adds, " In my memory his image still preserved the usual features, with the fringe over his forehead; and on the morning when the vision awoke me, I saw him with the fringe over his forehead." 2 In another " borderland " case, No. 495, where the phantasm of a dying female relative appeared, the dress — " out-door walking costume, the bonnet being a prominent part of it " — was that in which the percipient had last seen her, nine years previously; in a waking case, No. 555, where the phantasm represented the percipient's mother, " the attire was the same in which I had last seen her several

1 See Dr. Smith's case, p. 499, note, and Mrs. Hunter's case described in § 4, above, ther telepathic instances are Nos. 188, 195, 492, 511, 519, 568, 673; besides the cases

in which a complete scene with several figures has been represented, as Nos. 299, 505, 548. In case 185 there was the sense of a second person's presence, but the hallucination was of one figure only. The dream-case, No. 128, is also worth comparing, as illustrating the identity of the process by which the sleeping and the waking mind may react upon and embody a telepathic impression.

2 It may be remembered that Mr. Keulemans had in the evening a second vision of his child, which was treated above as a mere recrudescence of the morning's hallucination. Mr. Keulemans himself, however, is inclined to explain it otherwise. His grounds are that this second vision, which took place in the bright gaslight of the billiard-room, represented the boy's figure, in an attitude suggestive of death, enclosed as it were in a dark cellar or vault, with a little window in it; and he afterwards found that at that hour the dead body had been taken to a mortuary, which he afterwards saw, and which vividly recalled the visionary scene. (I attach more importance to these details than I should otherwise do, on account of the care which Mr. Keulemans has brought to bear on the study of his own visual impressions, and of his training in habits of accurate observation. ) He suggests that this second vision was due to a telepathic impulse from his wife's mother, who had the body conveyed to the mortuary and whose thoughts were naturally directed to him. Now on this view of the "agency" the experience none the less involves an independent contribution on the part of the percipient. For he saw the child's figure, though as if dead, in his little Hue sailor suit; which was familiar to him, but which we can hardly conceive to have been present, in association with the ideas of death and burial, in his mother-in-law's mind.

years before; " and in another waking case, No. 645, the phantasm appeared in a dress which the agent had not worn or seen for nine months, but which she had been wearing during the weeks when the percipient had last been in her company. (See also case 552.)

§ 7. The examination of these precise points may lead us on to more general ground. If we admit a power in the percipient to evolve a waking dream from the nucleus of a " transferred impression," we at once get rid of what has been a very real obstacle to the recognition of the telepathic evidence. Phantasms having often been conceived as in some way objective and independent presences, it has seemed to the sceptic that all idea of reality about them was sufficiently refuted, if they possessed features which were a clear reflection of the percipient's beliefs and ideas. Students of folklore and of comparative thaumatology have observed that such phenomena, in various times and countries, have borne a perceptible relation to prevalent habits and opinions; and if specimens which have coincided with, and so seemed to announce and typify, unusual events, have borne a similar relation, it has been easy to argue for their purely subjective character from this subordinate point, and to ignore the essential point — the fact of the coincidence. This wrong issue is precluded as soon as the analogy of dream is boldly insisted on, and the phenomena are described as hallucinations, not presences, and as veridical, not objective. Any presumption against them, as sentimental, or superstitious, or fantastic, then loses its basis. The naked fact of coincidence can no more be sentimental or superstitious than stoical or sceptical; but subjective colourings may attach to waking hallucinations as easily as to dreams; and it cannot seem surprising that the same mental habits and traditions which give a particular character to so many of the hallucinations which are illusory through and through — hallucinations and nothing more — should give a similar character to some of the hallucinations which are not illusory through and through, but are projected under the stimulus of a true impression from the mind of some absent person. The same cast of ideas through the dominance of which a devote may receive a false impression that she has met the Virgin in a wood, may very naturally lead her, or one like her, on the receipt of a true impression that some beloved relative is dying, to body forth the figure as robed in white and with a radiant face; and much more bizarre apparitions than this might, on the same principle, be accepted as having a causal

2 m 2

548 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

connection with a real event. l The opportunity for observing such

phenomena in telepathic cases is, no doubt, limited by the fact that

cases of any evidential weight are almost confined to quite modern

days, and for the present to the more advanced nations; but it is

possible that as interest in the subject increases, a wider area will be

covered. Meanwhile we have quite enough cases to illustrate the

point.

As examples of phantasmal appearances presenting features which

would in reality be impossible, the following three accounts may

serve. The first is from Mrs. Allom, of 18, Batoum Gardens, West

Kensington Park, W.

"June 28th, 1885.

(203) " I have not the least objection to giving an account of the apparition I had of my mother, which appeared to me at the time of her death, although it is a subject I have very rarely mentioned, partly that it is an occurrence I hold very sacred, and partly that I do not care to have my story doubted or laughed at.

"I went to school in Alsace in October, 1852, when I was 17, leaving my mother in England in delicate health. About Christmas, 1853, 14 months after I left home, I heard that my mother's health was worse, but I had no idea that she was in any danger. It was the last Sunday in February, 1854, between 1 and 2 o'clock, I was seated in a large schoolroom reading, when suddenly the figure of my mother appeared to me at the far end of the room. She was reclining as if in bed, in her night-dress. Her face was turned towards me with a sweet smile, and one hand was raised and pointing upwards.

" Gently the figure moved across the room, ascending as it went until it disappeared. Both the face and figure were wasted as if by sickness, as I never had seen her in life, and deadly pale.

" From the moment I saw the apparition I felt convinced my mother was dead. So impressed was I that I was unable to attend to my studies; and it was positive pain to me to see my younger sister playing and amusing herself with her companions.

" Two or three days after, my governess, after prayers, called me to her private room..As soon as we entered I said, ' You need not tell me. I know my mother is dead! ' She asked me how I could possibly know. I gave no explanation, but told her I had known it for three days. I afterwards heard my mother died on that Sunday, at the time I had seen her, and that she had passed away in an unconscious state, having been unconscious for some day or two before her death.

" I am by no means an imaginative, sensitive woman, and never before or since have I experienced anything similar. u iSABEL Allom."

Mrs. Allom's mother was Mrs. Carrick, wife of Mr. Thomas Carrick, the well-known miniature-painter. Mrs. Allom has kindly procured a

1 See for instance, the narrative of the apparition of the Gwrachy Rhibyn, inSikes's British Goblins, p. 217, which was related to the author at first-hand, in 1878. This extraordinary phantasm, a dreaded local celebrity, seems on the occasion described to have supplied the embodiment for a real telepathic impression.

copy of an entry inscribed by her father in an old family Bible, which states that Mrs. Carrick died on January 30th, 1854; and we have verified the date in the Times. This day, we find, was a Monday, not a Sunday.

Mrs. Allom is sure that she has never had a hallucination on any other occasion. She once, however, had a rather marked illusion, when a Christmas-tree assumed momentarily, to her eyes, the aspect of her mother's form. She is a practical person, and assures me that she has all her life been free from fancies and superstitions. Her sister was delicate and nervous, and on that account Mrs. Allom did not tell her of the vision above described. If she is correct in her recollection that her experience was on a Sunday, and is not merely inferring that, by combining her recollection of the closeness of the coincidence with her idea that the death was on a Sunday, the hallucination must still have fallen at a time of most critical illness. That she has said February, instead of January, seems to be an obvious slip either of writing or memory; as that the vision should have followed the death by a month, or even by a week, is wholly inconsistent with the rest of the statement.

The next case is from Mrs. C, the narrator of case 80 above, to which the following sentence was appended: —

(204) "At another time I saw a figure of a friend pass before me, ascending. I received a letter to say she had died that night."

In answer to inquiries, the narrator added: —

"February 19th, 1884.

" As to your question relating to the vision of my friend, I was saying my prayers, and immediately mentioned it to my husband [since deceased], and have subsequently mentioned it to others. She was in Cheltenham, and I had left her shortly before, she promising to come to town to consult a doctor on a painful but not dangerous complaint. It appears she had eaten a pork chop, and was very sick. Her husband not apprehending any danger, asked a friend to see to her and stay with her, while he went to business. She was sick all day, and to their horror, died that night.

"E. C."

Mrs. C. further mentions that she has a ring which gives Sept. 25, 1852, as the date of her friend's death.

In conversation, Mrs. C, who is a practical person with no leaning to superstitious fancies, told me that she was not thinking of her friend when the vision was seen. It was completely external, but in the air, so to speak, and high up. It is the only hallucination that Mrs. C. has ever experienced.

The next case is from the Memoirs of Georgiana, Lady Chatterton (1878), by E. H. Dering, the second husband of Lady Chatterton, pp. 185-186. The author says: —

(205) " In March, 1869, while we were at Malvern Wells, an event occurred, which the reader will, of course, take for what he thinks it is worth, but which I cannot see my way to explain as a coincidence.1 She (i.e., Lady Chatterton) had a great regard for Father Hewitt, O.S.B.; and he had

1 This word is often, but very unfortunately, used as equivalent to chaneecoincidence.

550 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

always shown a very marked sympathy for her in her difficulties. One afternoon she said, ' I am sure that dear Father Hewitt is dead. I saw him just now, when I went upstairs, as clearly as possible, dressed in the Benedictine habit, only it was of dazzling whiteness. He seemed high above me in the air,1 and he looked at me. I knew then that he was dead.' It was about 2 o'clock in the afternoon. The next morning's post brought us the news that he died at the time when she saw him."

In reference to this incident, Lady Chatterton's niece, Mrs. Ferrers, of Baddesley Clinton, Knowle, writes to us as follows: —

"March 24th, 1885.

" I was with her at Malvern Wells at the time, in some lodgings that we hired for a few weeks; and Father Hewitt was then at Woolton, a village in Warwickshire, my aunt and Mr. Dering renting Woolton Hall that year. I cannot give you the exact date, but I remember that it was one day in Easter week of that year (1869). I was in the drawing-room of those lodgings after luncheon, about a quarter past 2 o'clock, when my aunt came downstairs from her bedroom and told me that she was quite sure Father Hewitt was dead for she had seen him, &c. We all knew that he was ill of one of his usual severe attacks of gall-stones, but that complaint is not considered a fatal one, and so we were full of hopes that we should find him better on our return home. He was one of the best and dearest of our friends, and his death, corroborated the next morning by hearing his name given out at Mass,2 to be prayed for among the dead, was a heavy blow to us all. We afterwards heard that he had died at 2 o'clock on the day my aunt saw him. " Rebecca H. Ferrers."

[We learn from the Provincial of Canterbury, the Rev. H. E. Moore, that the date of the Rev. Peter Joseph Hewitt's death was March 11th, 1869. Easter Sunday in that year fell on March 28th; Mrs. Ferrers is therefore mistaken in supposing the occurrence to have taken place in Easter week; but this is not material. The coincidence was probably exact to a quarter-of-an-hour.]

The luminous appearance of the figure here should be specially remarked. For luminosity is a sufficiently frequent feature both in purely subjective and in telepathic hallucinations, to be included as a fresh point of resemblance between the two classes. It is possibly to definite hallucinations of this character that we should trace the widely-diffused superstition which finds in a mysterious light the sign of a supernatural presence; 3 but considering how natural the

1 Other examples of a figure seen above the percipient, or ascending, are Nos. 163, 352, and 512.

2 In this detail there is an apparent, though perhaps not a real, discrepancy from Mr. Dering's account.

3 See Mr. Andrew Lang's remarks in the Nineteenth Century for April, 1885, p. 629. The following passage occurs in Rink's Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo (1875), p. 43. " The Supernatural Rulers, or Inue, as far as they may be perceived by the natural senses, generally have the appearance of a fire or bright light; and to see them is in every case very dangerous, partly by causing tantamingnek — viz., frightening to death — partly as foreshadowing the death of a relative (ndsdmek). " Superstitions of this sort are likely enough to produce the very experiences on which they feed; but the hallucinations of light described in the present work are certainly not suggestive of anything like tantamingnek.

symbolism of light is in connection with supernatural ideas, such a hypothesis is perhaps superfluous. It is at any rate not possible to reverse the process, and to trace the hallucinations to the superstition; for they go on occurring in the present day, as my collection alone would show, to persons who have no previous acquaintance with or belief in the superstition. The light occurs in various forms and degrees. One form already mentioned (p. 437) is the impression of a dark room as illuminated, which is sometimes experienced on waking. In the group of non-human phantasms described above, we found a star, a firework, a firefly, a bright oval, a chandelier (p. 503, and see also Vol. II., pp. 193-4). Among the subjective human phantasms, seven appeared with a candle in the hand. In a considerable number of the nocturnal cases, though no special radiance is mentioned, the aspect of the figure seems to have been far more distinct and detailed than that of a real person would have been,1 — e.g., the grotesque appearance mentioned in Vol. II., p. 237, note, which was remarkable for brilliance of costume, " disappeared, leaving the room in darkness "; and in other cases the figure has appeared as radiant.2 The position in which the phantasm was projected in the last two cases quoted may have been the result of some dim idea of departure or transition. In other cases there is the distinct symbolism of death. Two such cases, of the " borderland " class, have been already given (Nos. 178 and 190). The following example belongs to a season of active waking life. The percipient, Lieut. -Colonel Jones, of 8, Sussex Place, N.W., is a man as free from superstition as can well be imagined, who has never experienced any other hallucination whatever. He has shown us a letter, written at the time, in which his father alludes to the apparition.

" 1883.

(206) "In 1845 I was stationed with my regiment at Moulmein, in Burmah. In those days there was no direct mail, and we were dependent upon the arrival of sailing vessels for our letters, which sometimes arrived in batches, and occasionally we were months without any news from home.

" On the evening of the 24th of March, 1 845, I was, with others, dining at a friend's house, and when sitting in the verandah after dinner, with the other guests, in the middle of a conversation on some local affairs, I all at once distinctly saw before me the form of an open coffin, with a favourite sister of mine, then at home, lying in it apparently dead. I

1 See p. 462, note, and Vol. ii., p. 72, note.

2 As telepathic cases which present the same points, I may refer to Nos. 163, 178, 184, 210, 213, 220, 230, 250, 253, 311, 314, 315, 323, 332, 491, 494, 498, 512, 513 (2), 515, 550, 553, 567, 658, 673, 702. Luminosity is also a marked feature of some of the dream-cases, e.g., Nos. 449, 460, 464.

552 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

naturally ceased talking, and everyone looked at me in astonishment, and asked what was the matter. I mentioned, in a laughing manner, what I had seen, and it was looked upon as a joke. I walked home later with an officer very much my senior (the late Major-General George Briggs, retired, Madras Artillery, then Captain Briggs), who renewed the subject, and asked whether I had received any news as to my sister's illness. I said no, and that my last letters from home were dated some three months prior. He asked me to make a note of the circumstance, as he had before heard of such occurrences. I did so, and showed him the entry I made opposite the day of the month in an almanack. On the 17th of May following, I received a letter from home announcing my sister's death as having taken place on that very day — viz., the 24th of March, 1845.

"R. Waller Jones."

As to the coincidence of hour, Colonel Jones only learnt that the death occurred in the morning of the 24th. His vision was seen after an early dinner, so that, allowing for longitude, the correspondence of time was certainly near, and may have been exact. There had been a very close attachment between sister and brother.

We may regard the next two cases — one visual and one auditory

— as exemplifying the religious investiture of a telepathic impression.

The first, in which the accuracy of the description " waking dream "

is specially well shown, is from Mrs. Larcombe, of 8, Runton Street,

Hornsey Rise, N., a sensible and superior person who has seen a good

deal of the world. She has had no other hallucination, unless an

unexplained appearance seen by her in early childhood, and by others

as well as herself, was of that character.

"July 17th, 1882.

(207) " When I was about 18 or 19, I went to stay in Guernsey. This would be about 30 years ago. About 10 a.m., one day, I was sitting in the kitchen, blowing up the fire with the bellows. I heard some very beautiful music, and stopped to listen, at the same time looking up. I saw above me thousands of angels, as tight as they could be packed, seeming to rise far above and beyond me. They were only visible as far as the head and shoulders. In front of them all I saw my friend, Anne Cox. As I looked and listened, the music seemed to die away in the distance, and at the same time, the angels seemed to pass away into the distance, and vanish like smoke.

'' I ran up to Miss White, the young lady staying in the house, and told her what I had seen. She said, ' You may be sure your friend, Anne Cox, has gone to Heaven.' I wrote home at once, to Lyme Regis, and found that Anne Cox had died that very day.

" Anne Cox and I had been very close friends. She was just my own age, and was almost like a sister to me.

" M. A. Larcombe."

Mrs. Larcombe states positively that she was in no anxiety about her friend, and had no knowledge of her illness. She cannot recall where the

death occurred, and it has therefore been impossible to discover its exact date.

The next case is from Mrs. Udny, of 61, Westbourne Park Villas, W.

"July, 1883.

(208) " This family story fell within my own recollection, and I can vouch for the accuracy of the facts. The dates put it beyond any question of being imagined after the circumstances had occurred.

"In January, 1850, my husband (George Udny, of the Bengal Civil Service) was in Calcutta, and I was living in London. His sister Emily (Mrs. Ryan) was living near me in London, and her husband, Edmund Ryan, was in Calcutta.

"On the 20th February, 1850, I received a letter from my husband, saying poor Edmund was very ill. Owing to some political news of importance my letter of the 9th had come with a Government dispatch a day later than the ordinary mail of the 8th, the regular mail-day.

" Soon after receiving my letter, on the same day, my sister-in-law, Emily Ryan, came to me in great anxiety to know if I had any later news of her husband than the 9th, as she also had heard he was very ill. I explained to her how impossible it was that there should be any later news, as the 9th itself was later than I had ever known the mail leave before. She then explained the reason for her extreme anxiety for news to the 10th January, and told me the following curious circumstance: —

"On the 10th January, she had been engaged in her devotions between 1 1 a.m. and noon, according to her custom; for she was in the habit of rising late, and did not make her appearance in the family circle till the middle of the day. While thus engaged on her knees, and making her husband the special subject of her prayers, she thought some one spoke quite distinctly close to her ear, ' Pray not for him, he is in Eternity. Be still and know that I am God.'

" She was so much astonished, she thought some one must have come into the room unperceived by her, and rose from her knees and looked around her, but could see no one. She was, however, so much impressed by the circumstance that she wrote it down at once, with the elate of day and hour, and sealing up the paper, carried it downstairs and gave it to the care of a young niece living in the house (Tempe Raikes), telling her to keep the seal unbroken till she asked for it.

" On the morning she came to me, 20th February, hearing of her husband's serious illness on the 8th January, she had asked for her sealed note and had broken the seal and read in the presence of her mother and aunt the above circumstance, and finding the date, which she had forgotten, only two days later than her news from Calcutta, came off to me to inquire for later news, but only heard my letter of the 9th.

" She had, therefore, to await the arrival of another mail — a fortnight after — when the letters of the 23rd January, arriving on the 8th March, told her that her poor husband had died on the 10th January, between 5 and 6 p.m. — the exact time, allowing for the difference of longitude, that she had been forbidden to pray for him in London.

'• A. L. Udny."

We find from notices in the Gentleman's Magazine and the Annual Register that Mr. E. B. Ryan died at Calcutta, on Jan. 10, 1850.

554 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

Mrs. Udny showed Mr. Podmore the notes (committed to paper on April 27, 1861, in order to preserve the memory of the occurrence) from which this account was taken. Mrs. Ryan, now Mrs. Hermon, cannot be questioned on the subject.

In a second letter, Mrs. Udny adds: —

"I have just received the enclosed from my niece — the Tempe Raikes of my family story. I think you will find it very satisfactory as to the main facts of the story. I think you will find my dates are more accurate than my niece's; she has got a little confused as to the hours — perhaps not allowing for the difference of longitude. I distinctly remember Mrs. Ryan's telling me that she was praying between 11 and 12 a.m., and I think I mentioned in my mem. to you that her husband died about 5 o'clock p.m., because my husband wrote that to me from Calcutta. And the singular thing which struck me at the time was that the difference would be exactly that of the longitude."

The enclosure was as follows: —

"25, Victoria Square, Clifton.

"September 16th, 1883.

"About the story of Aunt Hermon [formerly Ryan], the facts, as far as I can recollect, are that she wrote out what had happened one morning at her private prayers, and gave me the sealed letter about it, and said in a few weeks she would either ask me for it to burn it, or to read it out. Six weeks after, when she heard of Uncle Ryan's death, she asked for it and gave it to her mother; and in it she had written that, while praying for her husband (from whom she had heard nothing for 6 months), a voice came to her ears, ' He is in Eternity.' She went on, thinking it a silly fancy, and again it said, ' It is too late, he is in Eternity.' She was so convinced of its truth she left off, and was sure she would hear something had happened. He had died that very morning at 4 o'clock, for she had dated her letter, and, moreover, she was quite prepared when his death was announced to her. The overland mail in those days took six weeks coming. "Tempe S. Bright (nee Raikes)."

§ 8. To return, however, to the details of the phantasmal appearance — the theory which I have advanced as to the projection of the percept has received illustration in cases where all its features could be, and in my view have been, supplied by the percipient's mind. But it must now be added that there is a converse type, where the dress or aspect includes features which equally clearly could not be supplied by the percipient's mind; and here the former explanation will, of course, not apply. In cases of this type, the actual aspect of the agent, at the time of the occurrence, has included some marked variation from anything that the percipient would naturally picture. If, then, the phantasmal appearance includes this same feature, it must be an element that the impressing mind has contributed, and not the

impressed; in other words, we must here admit that a ready-made concrete image, and not a mere idea, has been transferred from one to the other. There is no reason to doubt that such an image occupies a certain place in the agent's mind; and when a peculiarity of aspect is temporary and accidental, it is sometimes a very prominent part of consciousness. Even when the peculiarity (as it appears to the percipient) is one to which the agent himself has become accustomed — as a change in the growth or colour of the hair — the fact remains that a certain sense of one's own aspect probably always exists at the background of consciousness. This it is which sometimes, at the season when latent ideas are apt to assume arbitrary prominence, creates for the scantily-clad dreamer such embarrassing situations; this it is which, in rare but well-attested cases, projects the apparition (purely hallucinatory, as I should hold) of a person's own self or " double "; 1 and I may again recall the experimental indications that even ideas which cannot be recognised as part of consciousness at all may be susceptible of telepathic transference (pp. 78-9, 84). I do not indeed pretend that the analogy here can give entire satisfaction; or that the translation of a vague sub-conscious image in one mind into a sharply-defined, and at the same time a perfectly correct, percept in another, is a fact for which the rest of our evidence, whether of experimental or of spontaneous transferences, would have ever prepared us. All that I would claim is that it is a fact which the conception of psychical transferences is not inadequate to embrace. Another conception no doubt there is — that of some independent exercise of the percipient's own faculties — which suggests itself in respect of this type of experience, as before in the cases where the percipient's point of observation seemed transferred to a distant scene (pp. 266, 340, 368-9). But in the absence of more distinct

1 These experiences seem to be of two sorts. Sometimes the percipient's impression is that his own point of observation has been transferred to a point outside his body, whence he sees his body in the place where it really is. An instance is given in Vol. ii., p. 85, note; and my collection of hallucinations includes two other cases of the kind, in one of which the "subject " was under chloroform, and in the other was recovering from fever. Another correspondent has had impressions of the same sort, which seem to have stopped short of actual hallucination. He writes: " I have occasionally felt as though I knew that the body was lying in the bed, but that the spirit was hovering about it, and contemplating it. When this is the case I am apt to feel some difficulty in waking, and even feel a little unwell through the following morning. " With these experiences should be compared the less marked cases where the impression is simply of "going out of oneself " — a well-known feature of various abnormal conditions; see for instance Mr. Varley's description above referred to (p. 288, note); case 215, below; and Cardan, Be Varietate Berum (Basle, 1557), p. 314. But in another class of cases the percipient retains his normal point of observation, and simply sees a phantasm representing himself at a place which is really vacant. An instance of this is case 333 (Vol. ii., p. 217); and I have another chloroformcase in which the patient, a medical man, seemed to see his own "double" contemplating him.

556 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

contemporary evidence for such exercise, I think that we should avoid even provisionally resorting to a theory which introduces problems as formidable as any that it can be employed to explain. And in the present cases, as in the former ones, since nothing is perceived that is definitely outside the agent's range of knowledge, the extension of the percipient's faculties— his clairvoyance, if we like to call it so — may still be perfectly well regarded as a telepathic extension, an abnormally increased power of receiving impressions from another mind, or rather a power of receiving impressions from the more withdrawn strata of another mind, under conditions of crisis or excitement.

To come now to the evidence — as to which one preliminary remark is needed. Some of the cases to be quoted are, I think, clearly of the type described; others are also instances of it, if quite correctly recorded. But we must remember that a narrative which is completely correct as to the central facts which go to prove the telepathic origin of the phantasm, may yet be inexact in the particulars which now become important. A striking coincidence is rather apt to suggest to the imagination a detailed correspondence; and the percipient, in looking back to his experience after hearing of certain features which belonged to the aspect of his dying friend, may come to imagine that they were represented in the phantasm. Every example, therefore, must be weighed with this possibility in view.

A genuine instance of the type, I believe, was the one already quoted (No. 194) where the grey hair was a detail of appearance which Miss R. had never imagined, and was very unlikely to conjure up. Another is the following, received in 1882 from Captain G. F. Russell Colt, of Gartsherrie, Coatbridge, N.B.

(210) " I was at home for my holidays, and residing with my father and mother, not here, but at another old family place in Mid-Lothian, built by an ancestor in Mary Queen of Scots' time, called Inveresk House. My bedroom was a curious old room, long and narrow, with a window at one end of the room and a door at the other. My bed was on the left of the window, looking towards the door. I had a very dear brother (my eldest brother), Oliver, lieutenant in the 7th Royal Fusiliers. He was about 19 years old, and had at that time been some months before Sebastopol. I corresponded frequently with him; and once when he wrote in low spirits, not being well, I said in answer that he was to cheer up, but that if anything did happen to him, he must let me know by appearing to me in my room, where we had often as boys together sat at night and indulged in a surreptitious pipe and chat. This letter (I found subsequently) he received as he was starting to receive the Sacrament from a clergyman who

has since related the fact to me. Having clone this, he went to the entrenchments and never l'eturned, as in a few hours afterwards the storming of the Redan commenced. He, on the captain of his companyfalling, took his place, and led his men bravely on. He had just led them within the walls, though already wounded in several places, when a bullet struck him on the right temple and he fell amongst heaps of others, where he was found in a sort of kneeling posture (being propped up by other dead bodies) 36 hours afterwards. His death took place, or rather he fell, though he may not have died immediately, on the 8th September, 1855.

" That night I awoke suddenly, and saw facing the window of my room, by my bedside, surrounded by a light sort of phosphorescent mist, as it were, my brother kneeling. I tried to speak, but could not. I buried my head in the bedclothes, not at all afraid (because we had all been brought up not to believe in ghosts or apparitions), but simply to collect my ideas, because I had not been thinking or dreaming of him, and. indeed, had forgotten all about what I had written to him a fortnight before. I decided that it must be fancy, and the moonlight playing on a towel, or something out of place. But on looking up, there he was again, looking lovingly, imploringly, and sadly at me. I tried again to speak, but found myself tongue-tied. I could not utter a sound.1 I sprang out of bed, glanced through the window, and saw that there was no moon, but it was very dark and raining hard, by the sound against the panes. I tuimed, and still saw poor Oliver. I shut my eyes, walked through it,2 and reached the door of the room. As I turned the handle, before leaving the room, I looked once more back. The apparition turned round his head slowly and again looked anxiously and lovingly at me, and I saw then for the first time a wound on the right temple with a red stream from it. His face was of a waxy pale tint, but transparent-looking, and so was the reddish mark. But it is almost impossible to describe his appearance. I only know I shall never forget it. I left the room and went into a friend's room, and lay on the sofa the rest of the night. I told him why. I told others in the house, but when I told my father, he ordered me not to repeat such nonsense, and especially not to let my mother know.

" On the Monday following,3 he received a note from Sir Alexander Milne to say that the Redan was stormed, but no particulars. I told my friend to let me know if he saw the name among the killed and wounded before me. About a fortnight later he came to my bedroom in his mother's house in Athole Orescent, in Edinburgh, with a very grave face. I said, ' I suppose it is to tell me the sad news I expect; ' and he said, ' Yes.' Both the colonel of the regiment and one or two officers who saw the body confirmed the fact that the appearance was much according to my description, and the death- wound was exactly where I had seen it. But none could say whether he actually died at the moment. His appearance, if so, must have been some hours after death, as he appeared to me a few minutes after 2 in the morning. Months later, a small prayer-book and the letter I had written to him were returned to Inveresk, found

1 See p. 513, note.

2 In my collection of purely subjective hallucinations there is a case where this very expression is used. It occurs also in the " ambiguous " case, p. 517, note.

3 Communication with the Crimea was then conducted by telegraph for only part of the way.

558 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

in the inner breast pocket of the tunic which he wore at his death. I have them now."

The account in the London Gazette Extraordinary of September 22nd, 1855, shows that the storming of the Redan began shortly after noon on September 8th, and lasted upwards of an hour and a-half. We learn from Russell's account that "the dead, the dying, and the uninjured, were all lying in piles together "; and it would seem that the search for the wounded was still continuing on the morning of the 9th. The exact time of Lieut. Oliver Colt's death is uncertain.

In a further communication, Captain Colt says: —

" My father received Admiral Milne's message just as we were starting in the drag — -a large party — on a visit to some ruins, several miles off. He was driving, and I was sitting next to him, and he remarked, ' It was well I told you not to say anything about having seen your brother Oliver to your mother. I hope you will forbid it to be mentioned by any one whom you told, as it might doubly alarm her now, since this news."

Captain Colt told me in conversation that he has never on any other occasion experienced a hallucination of the senses.

He mentioned several persons who would be able to corroborate this narrative. We received the following letter from his sister, Mrs. Hope, of Fermoy.

" December 12th, 1882.

" On the morning of September 8th, 1855, my brother, Mr. Colt, told myself, Captain Ferguson of the 42nd Regiment, since dead, and Major Borthwick of the Rifle Brigade (who is living), and others, that he had during the night awakened from sleep and seen, as he thought, my eldest brother, Lieut. Oliver Colt of the Royal Fusiliers (who was in the Crimea), standing between his bed and the door; that he saw that he was wounded in more than one place — I remember he named the temple as one place — by bullet- wounds; that he aroused himself, rushed to the door with closed eyes and looked back at the apparition, which stood between him and the bed. My father enjoined silence, lest my mother should be made uneasy; but shortly afterwards came the news of the fall of the Redan and my brother's death. Two years afterwards, my husband, Colonel Hope, invited my brother to dine with him; the former being still a lieutenant in the Royal Fusiliers, the latter an ensign in the Royal Welsh Fusiliers. While dining, they were talking of my eldest brother. My husband was about to describe his appearance when found, when my brother described what he had seen, and to the astonishment of all present, the description of the wounds tallied with the facts. My husband was my eldest brother's greatest friend, and was among those who saw the body as soon as it was found."

[It will be seen that this corroboration varies from the previous account in two points, which, however, do not greatly affect its value. The date was really September 9th, not the 8th — but it is very natural that the vision should have become associated with the memorable date, which was of course the 8th; and the figure was kneeling, not standing.]

For present purposes, the detail to be noticed here is, of course, the

position of the wound: stress can hardly be laid on the correspondence

in the kneeling posture. But the appearance of " phosphorescent

mist " x is another point of interest (see p. 526, first note); as is also

the percipient's previous request to his brother to appear to him,

which assimilates the case to the one where a distinct compact to this

effect had been made (Vol. II., p. 66).

The next account, which we owe to the kindness of Major Taylor,

of the Royal Military College, Farnborough, is from a lady, Miss L.,

who withholds her name from publication, in deference to the views

of a near relative.

"Jan. 4th, 1886.

(211) "On one of the last days of July, about the year 1860, at 3 o'clock p.m., I was sitting in the drawing-room at the Rectory, reading, and my thoughts entirely occupied. I suddenly looked up, and saw most distinctly a tall, thin old gentleman enter the room and walk to the table. He wore a peculiar old-fashioned cloak, which I recognised as belonging to my great-uncle. I then looked at him closely, and remembered his features and appearance perfectly, although I had not seen him since I was quite a child. In his hand was a roll of paper, and he appeared to be very agitated. I was not in the least alarmed, as I firmly believed he was my uncle, not knowing then of his serious illness. I asked him if he wanted my father, who, I said, was not at home. He then appeared still more agitated and distressed, but made no remark. He then left the room, passing through the half-open door. I noticed that, although it was a very wet day, there was no appearance of his having walked in mud or rain. He had no umbrella, but a thick walking-stick, which I recognised at once when my father brought it home after the funeral. On questioning the servants they declared that no one had rung the bell, neither did they see anyone enter. My father had a letter by the next post, asking him to go at once to my uncle, who was very ill in Leicestershire. He started at once, but on his arrival was told that he had died exactly at 3 o'clock that afternoon, and had asked for him by name several times in an anxious and troubled manner, and a roll of paper was found under his pillow.

" I may mention that my father was his only nephew, and, having no son, he always led him to think that he would have a considerable legacy. Such, however, was not the case, and it is supposed that, as they were always good friends, he was influenced in his last illness, and probably, when too late, he wished to alter his will. u j£ jr j^w

In answer to inquiries, Miss L. adds: —

" I told my mother and an uncle at once about the strange appearance before the news arrived, and also to my father directly he returned, all of whom are now dead. They advised me to try to dismiss it from my memory, but agreed that it could not be imagination, as I described my uncle so exactly; and they did not consider me to be either of a nervous or superstitious temperament.

1 In conversation, Captain Golt applied almost the same words to the appearance of tenuous blue mist as Mr. J. Russell Lowell used (see Vol II., p. xxii.) in describing his purely subjective phantasms.

560 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

" I am quite sure that I stated the facts truthfully and correctly to Major Taylor. The facts are as fresh in my memory as if they ouly happened yesterday, although so many years have passed away.

"I can assure you that nothing of the kind ever occurred to me before or since. [This is in answer to the question whether Miss L. had ever had a hallucination of the senses on any other occasion.] Neither have I been subject to nervous or imaginative fancies. This strange apparition was in broad daylight, and, as I was only reading the Illustrated Newspaper, there was nothing to excite my imagination."

A notice in the Leicester Chronicle shows that the death occurred on August 4, 1855, and the incident is therefore more remote than Miss L. imagined.

The next account is from Dr. Bowstead, of Caistor. Though remote in date, the main incident does not seem likely to have been greatly modified in memory; and it has been regarded by the narrator as simply a most striking fact, for which he had no theory to

account.

"July, 1883.

(212) " In September, 1847, 1 was playing in a cricket match, and took the place of long-field. A ball was driven in my direction, which I ought to have caught, but missed it, and it rolled towards a low hedge; I and another lad ran after it. When I got near the hedge, I saw the apparition of my half-brother, who was much endeared to me, over the hedge, dressed in a shooting suit with a gun on his arm • he smiled and waved his hand at me. I called the attention of the other boy to the same, but when we looked again, the figure had vanished. I, feeling very sad at the time, went up to my uncle, and told him of what I had seen; he took out his watch and noted the time, just 10 minutes to 1 o'clock.

" Two days after, I received a letter from my father, informing me of the death of my half-brother, John Mounsey, which took place [at Lincoln] at 10 minutes to 1. His death was singular, for on that morning he said he was much better, and thought he should be able to shoot again. Taking up his gun, he turned round to my father, asking him if he had sent for me, as he particularly wished to see me. I was a great favourite of his. My father replied the distance was too far and expense too great to send for me, it being over 100 miles. At this he put himself into a passion, and said he would see me in spite of them all, for he did not care for expense or distance. Suddenly a blood vessel on his lungs burst, and he died at once. He was at the time dressed in a shooting-suit, and had his gun on his arm. I knew he was ill, but a letter from my father previous to the time I saw him told me he was improving, and that he might get through the winter; but his disease was consumption, and he had bleeding from the lungs three months before his death.

"Rowland Bowstead, M.D."

We find from the Register of Deaths that Mr. John Mounsey died on September 23, 1847.

In answer to inquiries, Dr. Bowstead says: —

" No note was taken at the time, only my uncle, at whose school I was

at the time, looked at his watch and noted the time, but never thought anything about the occurrence. He himself had once a similar thing happen to himself when an uncle died; but not so vividly as mine. There is not a soul now living to get any information from, for the lad who was with me and who did not see anything, although he looked in the same direction, is now dead; but the announcement of the death two days afterwards told of my brother's death at the time I saw him. All the family connection are dead; his son died in 1853, and his wife in 1854. I have had no hallucinations since."

In conversation, Dr. Bowstead told me that he was not in the least expecting his brother's death. He has a very vivid remembrance of his uncle's look, and of his pulling out his watch. The boy who was near him in the cricket-field, Fred Court by name, afterwards went to Australia, where he died.

Here, it will be seen, the dress of the apparition did not contain any features that were new to the percipient — to whom the sporting aspect of his brother was (as I learnt from him in conversation) both familiar and interesting; still, the correspondence, if accurately remembered, is remarkable. This case deserves consideration from those who would attribute " phantasms of the living " to a diseased state of body or mind in the percipient. A cricketing school-boy, in full exercise, is rarely a prey to physical ills: and though his mental condition after just missing a catch may be a pitiable one enough, it is not one that we commonly associate with hysteria or superstition.

The next case is from Mr. John Hernaman, F.S.A., Head Master of the Lambeth Boys' School, Hercules Buildings, London, S.E. He tells us that this account (which we received in 1884) was written within two years of the occurrence; and that he has had no other experience of hallucination.

(213) "When I lived in Bishopsgate, my rooms were at Salvador House. It was a grand old house. Formerly the home of a Spanish Ambassador, it had undergone strange vicissitudes.... My apartments consisted of a suite of five rooms, which I occupied with my housekeeper, a middle-aged woman, and her son, a youth of 18, who waited on me. I gave up three of the suite for their use, reserving only two very large rooms, which communicated with each other, for my own.

" Well, one night as I lay asleep, I all at once woke to perfect consciousness, as wide awake as I am now; and there, in the embrasure made by the thickness of the wall, stood a little old woman in her night-dress and cap, with a small black and white checked shawl, as far as I could make out, like a duster-pattern, over her shoulders. I want you particularly to remember the shawl. I knew her well, and, as I lay, remarked to myself on the beauty and transparency of her complexion, while a soft lambent light seemed to play over the whole figure, such as you would see on your fingers when you rub a match, or the liquid gleaming phos-

2 N

562 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

phorescence1 one sometimes finds ridging the wavelets at sea. On noting this, the work of an instant, an intense and indescribable feeling took possession of me, beginning somewhere in the region of the feet, and, passing up my spine,2 reached my head, where ' each particular hair did stand on end.' Vexed and annoyed with myself, I turned away from the sight, as the chime of St. Botolph s struck the quarter to 2. When the sounds had died, and after the clock had struck the hour, I fell asleep again, and rested undisturbed till morning.

" On going downstairs, I met one of our clergy, the Rev. George "Wrench, the greatest friend I had in Bishopsgate, [since deceased] and said, ' Laugh at me! Here am I, a man supposed to be educated, of average intelligence, at least, living in the very centre of the centre of civilisation, an utter disbeliever in ghosts, and yet last night I saw one.' ' Nonsense! ' said he. ' 'Tis true! ' I repeated. ' "Well, come, who was it? ' ' Mrs. P.,' I answered. ' You don't say so! Do you know she is very ill? ' ' Not I.' ' But she is though,' rejoined he, and we chaffed each other about the strange visitant.

" Well, all that day I went about my work and never gave my ghost a thought, retired to bed as usual, slept well and woke exactly at the same time as on the night previous. This I know by the jingle of the chimes immediately after waking, and the clock striking the succeeding hour of 2. The same intense, indescribable feeling passed over me — that horrid, creepy dread, but I resolutely turned from the side on which the embrasure lay, and reproached myself for being a fool. Nor would I look, and yet I felt assured of her presence.

" When I got up, I found that she had sent a message, wishing to see me. She was the attendant on the pews at my side of the church, a poor widow woman of quiet, gentle manners, a friend of my housekeeper's, who sometimes came in to help if we had any extra company. Often when I have gone round to the kitchen, she has risen up respectfully, while I used to say, ' How much you remind me of my dear old mother,' and have more than once caressingly stroked her hair. I went to see her. There she lay in her little bed — so clean and tidy — so peaceably passing away in a trance-like calm. She at once recognised my voice, when a pleased smile of restful satisfaction seemed to play over her face. [Mr. Hernaman then read a passage of the Bible to the patient.] As I was leaving the room, on turning to look at her, I noticed how striking were the points of resemblance to the figure in the embrasure, but it was incomplete — the shawl was wanting. So I said to her sister who was nursing her, ' Have you ever during her illness had thrown about her a little black-and-white checked shawl?' I gave no reason for my question. ' No, sir! ' was the answer, ' No! We haven't such a thing in the house! ' Then suddenly she exclaimed, ' Oh! do you mean a little brown-and-white plaid, like this?' making a sudden dive behind a box near the bed's head, from which she brought up the identical shawl, a brown-and-white checked, which she at once placed round the shoulders of the invalid, and the picture was complete,

[Next night, a friend of Mr. Hernaman's, Mr. James F. Maule, now residing at 61, Rouel Road, Bermondsey, spent the night with him.]

1 Of. the "phosphorescent mist " in case 210. J See Vol. ii., p. 37, note.

" My rest was sound and undisturbed till the morning when George my housekeeper's son, came rushing into the bedroom, after a hasty knock, with a face full of fright, and said, ' If you please, sir, Mrs. P wants you again!' "While I dressed, my friend laughed at me and joked immoderately. George brought me in a cup of coffee, which I hastily swallowed while dressing; but before I could get to her house, which was hard by, she had passed away.

" All I have said with regard to myself is true as it occurred to me and yet my judgment refuses to believe it. I consulted a medical friend, I was so annoyed with myself for thinking the thing possible for a moment. He too laughed at me, but wished George to occupy the spare bed till my holidays came, which were close at hand.

" I did learn some months later that she had saved a little money — not much, about,£90, I believe — and was very anxious indeed that I should have charge of it for her two children, who were living at home with her.

" John Hernaman."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Hernaman adds, on March 7th, 1885: —

"The matter to which you refer occurred some 14 years ago."

We applied to Mr. Francis Tee, of Finsbury Street, E.C., a brother of the Mrs. P. of the narrative, and he sent us a mourning card which showed that Mrs. P. died on Dec. 14th, 1871, aged 53 years.

Mr. Maule, writing to us on Dec. 19, 1886, says that he well recollects the incident, and " never saw anyone in such a state of mind as Mr. Hernaman was about the affair."

Here the shawl is the important detail. Other noteworthy points are the light (pp. 550-1), and the sort of attempt at a repetition on the second night, which may or may not have been a mere recrudescence of the previous impression (see p. 445).

The next account is from Mr. J. H. Redfern, of 20, Great Ancoats Street, Manchester, who has been carefully cross-examined viva voce.

"January, 1883.

(214) " My wife died in December, 1874. While apparently in her usual health, and without any premonitory symptoms, she was suddenly seized with an illness (effusion of serum on the brain), which in a few days terminated in death. For something like 36 hours previous to death she was in a comatose state,1 and thus she passed away. She had an aunt, a widow, to whom she was much attached. Her aunt resided 4 or 5 miles away from us, but twice or thrice a year she came to see us, and usually stayed a few days or a week, and one of these visits was always at New Year's time. My wife died a few days before Christmas Day, and in due course the funeral took place. The day after, having obtained the address of her aunt — for I did not before know it — I sent her a ' memorial card,' thinking it might prevent the shock she might probably experience if she came, and only then learned the death of her niece.

" The New Year came, but she came not. We wondered and talked about her for nearly 3 months, but heard nothing. One Sunday afternoon,

1 See Chap, v., § 10, and compare cases 128, 152, 176, 202, 203, 217, 277, 452, 5C1.

2 n 2

564 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

at tea my daughter sprang up from the table exclaiming, ' There's aunt coming up the garden; ' and surely it was her indeed. We ran to meet her, and brought her into the house. Overcome with emotion she sank into a chair, and wept for some time. At length, becoming calmer, we learned that she had been seriously ill for some time. Her account of the matter was this: —

"On the day of my wife's death she was — in the evening — engaged in the kitchen in the performance of some domestic duties. Turning round from a table at which she had been engaged, she saw my wife coming out of a lobby into the kitchen, and approaching her with a smile upon her face, her arms extended as if to greet her (her usual manner of welcominganyone). She herself advanced to meet her niece, and expecting to embrace her, when suddenly ' she was gone,' and she herself was alone. Confused and wondering, she looked about her, and noticed the time, 8.30 p.m. by the clock.

" I asked her if she had been thinking about her or talking of her. She said she had not thought of her for days. I asked her if there was any other woman in the house with herself.,,>She replied, 'Yes, one, who, feeling unwell, had gone to lie down some* hours before.' Shortly afterwards this person came downstairs. She asked her ' had she been down before? ' Her reply was ' No, I fell asleep.' ' I said nothing to her,' said she, ' for I knew she had not; besides I could never have mistaken her for Sarah ' (my wife). ' She was much older, and had dark hair, while Sarah's was light and golden. 1 could have mistaken no one for Sarah, but,' she added, ' I saw her as plainly as I see you now.'

" My wife died at 8.40 p.m. There might be a difference in the clocks.

" In answer to a question, she said that her niece was not in her usual dress. She had on a long white robe or night-dress, with frillings at the neck and wrists. Her hair was not gathered up and arranged as usual, but was drawn from the fore part of her head and fell clown her back. That described her appearance exactly. The doctors had directed her hair to be loosed and drawn back from the forehead, and it hung down her shoulders and back.

" She said that she had no idea that my wife was in any but her usual health, not thinking of any evil. A few days afterwards she went to spend a few days with a friend whom she had promised to stay with for a short time at Christmas. Returning home, the letter was handed her, and she was jokingly told that it had been waiting for her a week. Opening it, she saw the name and the date. The whole thing — forgotten for the time — flashed upon her mind, and she fell off from the chair, rememberingno more until days afterwards she found herself in bed, where she remained until within a few days of her coming again to see us.

" The letter was afterwards discovered upon the floor. She had said nothing of the appearance to any in the house. They did not understand the thing at all. The medical man called in to attend her, said that she had received some great mental shock, and for some time he feared that she would not recover from it.

" I give you these facts just as they are, making no comments upon them, simply vouching for their accuracy. « j jj Redfern."

"We find from a notice in the Manchester Guardian that Mrs. Redfern

died on December 18th, 1874. Mr. Redfern tells us that the aunt died about a year before he sent us the account.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Redfern adds, on March 19th, 1883:—

" I never knew who the medical man was; doubtless someone in the neighbourhood called in in a hurry. The woman in the house with my wife's aunt at the time, of whom she inquired as to whether she had before come downstairs, confirmed the fact that she had not; this woman has since left the place. The old lady was clear-headed and truthful, and repeated the story often, and in the same manner, to the last. I think upon referring to the MS. you will see that she had no knowledge or idea of her niece's illness; she said that the thought of her death never entered her mind. She noted the day and the hour. She had arranged to visit some friends, and to stay with them for a short time. She went a day or two after. I had not her address, [i.e., at Gorton, where she lived,] but in a few days obtained it, and sent per post a memorial card. It appears that during the time of her absence upon this visit, this card (of course in an envelope) was delivered. Upon her return it was handed to her. Not thinking anything about it she opened it, read it, let it drop, and swooned. She was, I believe, unconscious for a long time, and a long illness followed We wondered that we never saw or heard from her."

Mr. John Robert Redfern, of 41, Bickley Street, Moss Side, Manchester (a cashier, and foreign and corresponding clerk in a firm of shippers), says:— « June 28th, 1883.

" With reference to the appearance at the time of her death of my mother to her aunt, Nancy Juison, I can state that the account furnished by my father as given by her is a correct one. I have heard the statement from herself, and have not the slightest doubt of her veracity, or as to her convictions on the subject. I knew her intimately all my life up to her death."

Mrs. Hannah Lees, of Clifton Crescent, Rotherham, says: —

"June 5th, 1883.

" The account of my sister's death (Mrs. Redfern) and her appearance to my Aunt Nancy, as given by Mr. J. H. Redfern, is just as narrated by my aunt, and I am satisfied as to the truth of aunt's statement, and her belief in the matter."

[The testimony here is not first-hand. Had the aunt been alive we should, of course, have obtained her account from herself. But since we reckon as on a par with first-hand evidence the testimony of persons who have been made aware of the percipient's experience before the percipient has learnt the event that has befallen the agent (p. 1 48), we may regard as practically on the same level a case where the percipient's experience, though not described to the witnesses before the news was known, produced an effect — her prolonged absence through illness — which they remarked on and wondered at.]

The next case, from Mr. Rouse, of Jarvis Road, Croydon (agent for Cockerells, coal merchants), is another marked instance of deferred recognition (see § 3). As regards the special point of dress, it is inconclusive; as though the aspect of the agent was at the time

566 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

actually as represented in the phantasm, it was also probably an aspect familiar to the percipient. Writing to us on the 11th of June, 1883, Mr. Rouse explains that in the early part of 1873 he had been a member of a circle which met to investigate spiritualistic phenomena. At each of the seances, which were held in a private house, he sat next to the same lady, Mrs. W., between whom and himself a strong sympathy existed. On one occasion Mr. Rouse had to go to Norwich on the day when the sitting was usually held. Late on the evening of that day he went out for a walk in the outskirts of the town.

(215) " It was in the brightest moonlight, about full moon, I should think, with hardly a cloud in the sky; yet there was a thick white haze overhanging the fields. After walking a little distance I found myself on the top of a small hill, which enabled me to see a considerable distance along the road in front of me, the only living object apparently in view being a human form in the middle of the road, yet so far off that I could not tell if it was a woman or a man, and did not take much notice of it. However, in walking on, I soon made it out to be a woman, and concluded it was a country woman walking into Norwich. The next moment I began to fear that, the time and place being so lonely, the woman would be afraid to pass me. I, therefore, under this feeling, got as near as possible to one side of the road, thus giving her all the width on the other side to pass; but, to my astonishment, she also left the middle of the road, and took the same side as myself, as if determined to meet me face to face. I then walked into the middle of the road, thinking I would avoid her, but, to my surprise, the woman did the same, so I then concluded to walk on as we were.

" I had not advanced many more steps, however, before instead of a country woman, as I imagined, with eggs and poultry for next day's market, I could plainly see that the figure before me was a well-dressed lady in evening dress, without bonnet or shawl. I could see some ornament or flower in her hair, gold bracelets on her bare arms, rings on her fingers, and could hear the rustle of her dress. She now seemed to approach me more rapidly, and I noticed that, if I stepped in the least degree out of the direct line between us, she did the same.1 In the next minute I felt certain that I had seen the lady before, and immediately afterwards I recognised her as Mrs. W. I had not the least fear, for she was so real that I thought she had, like myself, unexpectedly and suddenly got to Norwich. I, therefore, met her without the least shake or tremble, delighted to see my friend. We approached within about 5 feet of each other; she gazed at me very intently as I thought; she held out her hand to me, and I could see her face and lips move as if about to speak to me. I was in the act of taking her hand to greet her, but had not touched her, when some iron hurdles which formed the fencing of the cattle market, rang as if they were being struck with an iron bar. This startled me, and unconsciously I turned round to see what made the noise. I could see nothing, and instantly turned again to Mrs. W. but she was gone.

" Now it was that I began to tremble, and for some time I felt that she

1 It is not specially remarkable that a hallucinatory object should persist in appearing in the direct line of vision. See p. 472.

was still near me, although I could not see her. But I soon pulled myself together and walked back to Norwich and my bedroom, but not to sleep, for I could not get rid of the feeling that perhaps my friend had suddenly died or met with some serious accident. I, therefore, wrote to a gentleman in London — a mutual friend — telling him what I had seen and what my fears were, asking him to be very careful, but to make inquiries about Mrs. W., as to her welfare, and what and where she was on that night and time. The next day's post brought me the welcome tidings that Mrs. W. was quite well and in good health, that at the very time I saw her, about 1 1 p.m., she was sitting in her usual place in the circle in London, and that there, for the first time in her life, she had fallen into a trance which frightened the other sitters very much, and they had great difficulty in bringing her back to ordinary life. " John Rouse."

Mrs. W. has read through the above account, and writes to us as follows, in June, 1 883: —

"It is perfectly correct. I quite remember the seances and the particular occasion to which Mr. Rouse refers, when I became unconscious one night, at about 1 1 o'clock, and on recovery had no recollection of anything but that I had gone suddenly out of myself \x My dress at the time of the occurrence is stated quite correctly. I also remember one of our circle calling with Mr. Rouse's letter, to ascertain, at his request, whether I was still in earthly form. Talking over the matter with him, and afterwards with the others, all agreed as to the time of my becoming oblivious. I have never had the same experience before nor since then.

[The evidence here will, of course, suffer in the eyes of many, from the! fact that both agent and percipient were at the time attending seances. It must also be mentioned that on such occasions Mr. Rouse has seen or imagined vague appearances. He has, however, only on one other occasion (when again there were singular points of correspondence with reality) had anything like a distinct hallucination; and he is a sensible and clearheaded man.]

The next case is from Mrs. Peek, of 3, Fairfax Place, Dartmouth.

The fact narrated has remained in the mind of a practical and

unvisionary person, quite free from superstitious fancies, as simply

the oddest thing she ever experienced.

"October, 1884. (216) " On the 25th of April, 1867, at about 11 o'clock at night, I was alone in the lower part of the house, to see if the doors were securely fastened, and the dogs housed and fed. Having satisfied myself upon these points, I had lifted my hand to turn out the gas in the kitchen, when something drew my eyes towards the doorway, and I saw for the space of a few seconds a figure standing there, dressed in lightish coloured clothes, with long boots on, as if for riding; the face was shadowy, yet I thought I could recognise the contour of my brother, who lives in Natal. When it was

1 It occasionally happens at seances — whether owing to the attitude of expectancy or to some other condition — that a sitter falls into an odd unconscious, or semi-conscious state; which would have nothing alarming in it to any one familiar with the phenomena of hypnotism. As to the subjective sense of "going out of oneself " see above, p. 555, note.

568 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

gone, I hurried up the stairs to the dining-room, where others of the household were sitting; they noticed how frightened I seemed, and when I told them about it tried to laugh me out of my fear, but I felt convinced in my own mind as to the reality of my experience, and noted the day of the month.

"About six weeks afterwards, I received a letter from my brother telling me that his wife was taken very ill on the 25th of April, while he was away on a journey, from which he returned that same day, only in time to start at once for his mother-in-law, leaving his wife without anyone to care for her except two Kaffir girls, for their farm was many miles from any other dwelling. He spoke in his letter of the great distress of mind he suffered during his long ride of 30 miles, at the thought of leaving his apparently dying wife, and how often he wished I had been near to help him in his trouble. " Anna W. Peek."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Peek says: —

" I can assure you that the vision you received an account of from me is the only one I have ever witnessed.

" My brother returned late at night from a journey, and started again on a ride of 30 or more miles over a rough road in the Little Tugela district, so he would certainly be on his journey at 2 o'clock a.m. [which, however, would correspond with midnight, not 11 p.m., in England.]

" I will get my husband and another gentleman, who was staying with us, to sign their names in testimony that I spoke of it to them directly I came into the room where they were, after seeing the vision. The day following, I mentioned it to my uncle, who advised me to take a note of the date."

" We hereby bear testimony to the foregoing statement.

" Robert Peek. "G. H. Collins."

In conversation, Mrs. Peek told me that the full gas-light was on the figure; but it seemed tenuous and half transparent.1 The dress was quite distinctly marked, but the face was indistinct. She wrote down the date at her aunt's suggestion, and compared it, when the letter came, with the one there mentioned.

[The coincidence here is not, of course, as striking as in many other cases, as the condition of the agent was not of an extremely abnormal sort; but the special direction of his thought to the percipient, if correctly recorded, may fairly be taken into account.]

Here again the dress seen was not so unusual that one might not conceive it to have been independently supplied by the percipient's brain in the act of projecting the phantasm; but the other hypothesis would at any rate be in place.

The next case is also a doubtful one as regards the dress; since when a man is telepathically impressed to conjure up his father's image, it is undeniably possible for him, out of his own mental 1 See p. 526, first note, and Vol. ii., p. 38, note.

resources, to conjure it up in a night-cap. Still such an aspect was very much out of keeping with the scene in which the phantasm was located. The account is from Mr. Timothy Cooper,1 mentioned above fp. 506), and appeared in Light for January, 1882.

(217) "In the year 1871, 1 was living at Seaview, Seaton Carew, going daily to Stockton-on-Tees to business. It was race week in August, and so a busy time. I was going down into the cellar to fetch butter for a customer, and as I was on the top step, I saw my father standing at the bottom of the cellar steps in his shirt and night-cap, and he seemed to walk into the cellar. I went down and fetched the butter, and looked for my father, who was nowhere to be seen. I went up and said to my employer's wife, ' I must go home now, for my father will not last long, and wants to see me.' So on the last clay of the races I started, and arrived at Amersham, my father's residence, a journey of about 250 miles. On the Saturday afternoon I inquired of my sister how my father was at the time I had seen him at Stockton. She said he lay as if dead for more than half-an-hour; in fact, they held a looking-glass to see if he breathed. He died November 23rd, 1871. "Timothy Cooper."

We have verified the date of death in the Nonconformist.

[The impression in this case seems to have prompted the percipient to take a long journey; but we do not know in what degree previous anxiety may have contributed to it.]

Sufficient illustrations have now been given of the two types of case, where special features of dress and aspect may lead us pretty confidently to refer the detailed form which the hallucination takes to the percipient and to the agent respectively. But the majority of visual telepathic phantasms, as we shall find later, present no such special features; the aspect of the figure is free from striking peculiarities, and the dress little noticed, and such as either of the two persons concerned might readily picture as natural and familiar. In all such cases, and alike whether the agent is or is not so habited at the moment, it seems to me reasonable to refer the details of the appearance to the percipient's mind. As compared with our total ignorance concerning the prior process of transference, our view of the immediate process in the percipient which issues in sensory hallucination may be said to be knowledge; in it we at any rate have the analogy of subjective hallucinations to go by. Inasmuch, then, as a member of a civilised community has been impelled to project a phantasm — for there it stands, projected — it is in accordance with analogy, and we may almost say inevitable, that he should project it in some dress; and it is surely simpler (as I have suggested

1 Mr. Cooper unfortunately went to reside in America before it was possible for us to make his personal acquaintance; but we have had a satisfactory account of him. His father was the Rev. James Cooper, for many years pastor of the Baptist Church at Amersham.

570 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

above, to suppose that he does this wholly from his own resources, which are adequate for the purpose, than to suppose that a detailed image is supplied to him, clean-cut and complete, from indefinite unconscious or sub-conscious strata of the agent's mind. The point becomes clearest when there is a clear choice of familiar dresses. For instance, a son sees the phantasm of his mother " dressed in a peculiar silver-grey dress, which she had originally got for a fancy-ball" (Vol. II., p. 81). That he should so 'project her image, under a sudden telepathic influence received from her (p. 538), no more needs explanation than that any other item of past experience should present itself unsought in memory or dream; but that she should so transmit her image would decidedly need explanation; for even if she was conscious at the time — which she most likely was not — unless her mind was consciously engaged with this particular dress, what disturbance can we assume of the quite impartial state of latency in which her ideas of her various dresses would be? There being no sudden call on her — as there is on her son — to represent her image, there would be no impulse to the selection (whether conscious or casual) of one particular form of representation. And the same argument will apply wherever the phantasmal costume, or any part of it, is such as would not form an almost necessary element in the agent's consciousness at the time. In most cases where costume is noticed at all, it includes particulars the choice of which presents no difficulty if we leave the percipient to make it, among the various familiar aspects of the friend whose image he is ex hypothesi impelled to construct; but any precedence of which over others on the agent's side would imply a detailed activity of construction, occurring not only without consciousness, but apparently without cause; since there is no ground for connecting the construction (least of all the unconscious construction) of highly elaborated visual images with the conditions of spontaneous telepathic agency.1

1 Any hypothesis that the condition of agency in itself {i.e., apart from that reaction of the percipient on the impression to which I have attributed its projection in sensory form) tends to elicit and transmit out of the recesses of the agent's mind some definite image of his own aspect, would seem open to this objection — that there are a large number of telepathic phantasms — notably the auditory class — in which nothing connected with the agent's aspect appears. Apart from literal representations of some conscious thought or sensation of the agent (p. 53G, note), it has seemed an adequate hypothesis that the particular form of sensory development is determined on the percipient's side; and it would be very difficult to combine with this the hypothesis that sometimes the form is compelled to be visual by the preponderating force in the agent's mind of a latent image of his own aspect. For if the image is latent, and has no particular relevance to the circumstances of the moment, such an image has had just the same amount of presence in the agent's mind, and just as much (or little) chance of telepathically asserting itself, in the non-visual cases.

§ 9. Before quitting the subject of the development of telepathic phantasms, I may be allowed to point out its relation to the physiological sketch at the close of the 10th chapter; for it happens to supply substantial confirmation to the views of centrifugal origin there maintained. The whole idea of morbid excitation from the more external parts of the sensory apparatus becomes here irrelevant. All that has been said in this chapter as to the development of the hallucination from the nucleus of a transferred impression marks out the higher part of the brain — the part which is concerned with ideas or general images of persons and things, and not with immediate perception of them — as the place where the abnormal process starts; the hallucination itself being due to the downward promulgation of the disturbance from these higher tracts to the specific sensory centre concerned. Especially must this origin commend itself in respect of the phantasms which are bodied forth in a more or less fanciful form, with elements which are clearly the percipient's own contribution, but which he would never have contributed had not telepathy supplied an idea for him to clothe. But perhaps the cases where the hypothesis is most helpful are those of which Mr. Marchant's (p. 207) is the type, where no obvious rapport exists between the two parties concerned. How — we naturally ask — could the idea of Kelsey be impressed on Mr. Marchant's mind with such force as to embody itself in a visible phantom, when Kelsey 's mind was presumably not occupied either with Mr. Marchant or with himself in relation to him? From a physiological point of view the fact becomes less startling if we suppose the primary change in Mr. Marchant's brain to take place at the part which is the great storehouse of old impressions; at the part, moreover, where an appropriate physical basis may be found not only for distinct and recognisable images, but for sub-conscious ideas and memories, and for the most distant and intangible associations. In the register of the brain it is seldom that a record, once made, is so utterly obliterated that, under suitable conditions, it may not be revived. And if once a relation be established between two persons, and the records of it registered in their two brains, it may be possible for the same harmony occasionally to manifest itself between those records — even though they be longsunk below the level of conscious attention — as between the immediate impressions of the moment; and, this once granted, we have seen how the physiological process may lead on to the projection

572 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

of the visible phantom.1 In psychical terms, I see no reason why sub-conscious ideas and memories which are in no distinct way present to consciousness, such as Kelsey's sense of his old relationship to Mr. Marchant, should not evoke similar blind movements in Mr. Marchant's mind, which, gathering strength, might lead him to body forth the vision of his old acquaintance. A hallucination which is thus initiated by the quickening of long-buried memories, and of dim tracts of emotional association, is the most conspicuous example of the projection of an idea from within outwards; and the tremor to which the sensorium reverberates will presumably start in the inmost penetralia of cerebral process.

§ 10. The parallelism between telepathic and purely subjective hallucinations has now been traced out in the most essential particulars. To the five heads of resemblance enumerated in the last chapter (p. 500), the present chapter has added the various modes of gradual development, and of original or fantastic embodiment; the special point with respect to luminosity (pp. 550-1); and the general but not invariable limitation of the percept to a single human figure (pp.545-6). I may note further the interesting negative characteristic that (with very rare exceptions) neither subjective disturbances nor transferred impressions seem to produce visual hallucinations representing a person who is actually present with the percipient at the time.2 One fails at first sight to see why this should be. If pre-occupation of the percipient's mind with the person seen is to go for anything in the subjective cases, is not the mind often completely pre-occupied with a person who is present? and if rapport is to go for anything in the telepathic cases, is not rapport often at its maximum of strength with a person who is present? I suppose the explanation must be analogous to the reason why the stars are not visible by day; and that vision of friends who are absent depends on a vague sense of remoteness and abstraction in relation to them, the possibility of

1 I have sufficiently emphasised the difficulty of expressing the transmission of telepathic impressions in physical terms (pp. 110-13). And though I here suggest that the difficulty is lessened if we may draw on unconscious parts of the mind, and old records in the brain, my physiological point is independent of this suggestion, and is limited to the percipient's own organism. There certain nervous changes do undoubtedly take place, in correspondence with the psychical fact of the hallucination; and my object is to show that what we observe as to the psychical fact may be best accounted for on a particular view of the physical process.

2 I have encountered only seven instances of the kind, two of which are described later (Vol. ii., p. 24, note, and p. 218). The negative fact is worth pointing out; but positive instances (unless perchance "collective," like case 333), would, of course, be more naturally interpreted as purely subjective, on the analogy of after-images (p. 505), than as telepathic.

which is swamped by their presence. The pos sibility seems, indeed, to be to some extent affected by the presence of any companion — a large majority of hallucinations, alike of purely subjective and of telepathic origin, taking place when the percipient is alone.

