1 Of what exactly this element may consist is another question. Dr. Max Simon (in the Lyon Medical, Vol. xxxv., pp. 435, 48G) has made the suggestion thatwhat is felt is a muscular impulse to form the words, rather than the sound of them — an impulse exhibited in its extreme form in the irrepressible continuous vociferation of mania; and on this account he even refuses to regard the experience as hallucination at all. It is quite possible that the constitution of the phantasmal words may be a complex one, and may include an embryonic sense of muscular impulse. But it seems certain that the patient's sensation is of something other and more than this. Por him the words are not suggested or initiated, but actually and completely impressed. The impression is not recognised as impulse any more than as sound; but it is an impression of objective reality. Here, then, we surely trace the characteristic hallucinatory element. The close connection between the auditory and speech centres is well illustrated in the following case of undoubted hallucination, recorded by Holland {Medical Notes and Reflections, 1840, p. 232). A slight concussion of the brain having produced a temporary inability to find the right words and to speak coherently, the patient was some days later amused by hearing, as it seemed close to his ear, a dialogue in which the phrases exhibited precisely similar defects. (See Dr. A. Pick's'remarks in the Prayer Medicinische Wochenschrift for October 31, 1883.)

2 The most interesting case known to me of the speaking "within the chest " forms another instructive link, since the internal voice is expressly described as audible, and as producing a strong impression of a second person's presence. A Yorkshire vicar, whose name I may mention but not print, writes to me: —

" In the autumn of the year 1858, I was staying at Invercargill, the mbst southern part of New Zealand. There was only one hotel there in those days, kept by a Dane. There was no village of any kind; the place was as wild as could be. When I had been about two days at this inn, I heard myself addressed by name, and found that the speaker was one of the sailors who had worked the vessel in which I had sailed from England to New Zealand. He was a man I knew well, because he was on one occasion put in irons for mutinous language, on our passage, and I had often spoken with him both before and since that event. When the ship reached the Heads, as the entrance to Port Chalmers is

482 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

exactly parallel degrees of visual externalisation. I have received several accounts from persons who profess to see with the " spiritual eye," and whose language betrays the struggle to describe something

called, this man, with five or six others of the crew, deserted, taking the ship's whale-boat in the darkness of the night, and leaving it on the beach.

" In the evening I went into the large kitchen of the hotel, where this man and several others were sitting round the fire, smoking and drinking. The landlord was there, and we were all very friendly together. I found that three or four of the men were also some of the men who had deserted, though I did not remember them at first. They told me they were going in the morning to the Island of Ruapuke, where there was a missionary, as one of the party wished to be married, and there was no minister on the mainland in that neighbourhood. I said I should rather like to see the mission-station, and they said they meant to stay there a day or two before returning, as there were a great many wild boars in the island, and would have some hunting, sleeping in their boat at night. They told me they had plenty of provisions — meat, fish, bread, and so on, besides beer and spirits, and one or two bottles of champagne for the wedding breakfast. They said it would be necessary to start about 4, as it was high water on the bar about 5, and the bar was a very shallow one at the point they desired to cross it. They were all most eager for me to join them, and I had thoroughly entered into the spirit of the thing, and promised to go if they would call me. I remember rising up to go to bed, and saying, ' Well, as I shall have to be up before 4, I won't sit up any longer.' It was then about 11. They said they were all going to ' turn in ' directly, and would rouse me up, never fear; ' Don't you be afraid, we won't go without you,' or words to that effect.

"I left them with the fullest intention of going with them I ever had of doing anything in my life. The thing was settled. That was why I was going to bed, otherwise I should have stayed another hour at least. I had no candle on the way, but usually struck a match whenl reached the bedroom, and lit the candle in the room. When I left the kitchen I walked through a good-sized room, or second kitchen, and into the front part of the inn, and came to the staircase. I had got up about four or five stairs, when someone or something said, ' Don't go with those men.' There was certainly no one on the stairs, and I stood still and said, ' Why not? ' The voice, which seemed as if some other person spoke audibly inside my chest (not to the ear), said in a low tone, but with commanding emphasis, ' You are not to go. ' ' But, ' said I, ' I have promised to go.' The answer came again, or rather I should say the warning, ' You are not to go.' ' How can I help it? ' I expostulated, ' they will call me up.' Then most distinctly and emphatically the same internal voice, which was no part of my own consciousness, said, ' You must bolt your door.' All this time I had stood still on the staircase. I did not even remember there was a bolt to the door, for I recollect just for a moment thinking I must and would go, and then such a strange feeling of mysterious peril that I wondered how I should secure the door in case there was no lock or bolt. On reaching the room I lit the candle, and felt very queer, as if some supernatural presence was very near me. There was a strong common iron bolt to the door, I discovered on examination. As a proof that there had been no mere revulsion of feeling, I may mention that even now I hesitated whether to secure the door or not, so anxious was I to go, and so accustomed in those days (I was only 19 years old) to doing my own will at all hazards. At the very last moment (it was quite a 'toss up ' which it should be) I bolted the door and got into bed. A great calm succeeded the past agitation, and I soon fell asleep.

" The next thing I heard was about 3 in the morning (I suppose) a hammering at the door, as I had expected. I was wide awake, but gave no reply. Then I heard voices, and the door violently shaken and kicked at. I did not speak, for I knew I should have been oyer persuaded if I had called out. I did not mean to go. At last, after a thundering noise, I heard them cursing and swearing, as well as shouting. But I lay still as a mouse. So at last they gave it tip and went away. I lay awake some little time wondering whether, after all, I had not been foolish, and then fell into a sound sleep.

"About 9 o'clock I went down into the breakfast-room, where a military gentleman, a captain or a colonel, was at his breakfast. As I entered the room, he said; ' Have you heard what has happened?' ' No,' said I, ' I am just down.' 'Why,' he said, 'it seems that a party left this hotel this morning for Ruapuke, and their boat has been capsized on the bar, and they are every one of them droivned.' I said, 'Why, I was to have gone with them, and very nearly did.' 'Then,' said he, ' you've had a lucky escape.' I told him I had had a kind of warning not to go, and had bolted my door, &c.; but I did not tell him all the details.

"Two or three of the men's bodies were washed up on the beach that day, and the rest in a few days more. Not one of them was saved, and if I had been with them I must have perished without a doubt."

that is indescribable — seeing that is not seeing, a perception of objects which yet are not perceived as in the external world. And just higher in the scale we have the stage of Blake's visionary experiences. He constantly saw slightly-objectified figures with which he was on such familiar terms as to take their likenesses; but on only one occasion in his life did he see a " ghost " — i.e., have a completely objectified hallucination — which so terrified him that he rushed out of the house.1

In the same connection, it is of interest to observe that below even the lowest stage of sensory hallucination there is a type of delusion which may take a very distinct form, and which looks like 'potential hallucination — namely, the sense of a presence, felt not merely in the general way which probably every one has experienced, but as the presence of a particular person. It is well exemplified in the following account, from Mr. W. de V. Wade, of The Downs, Dunmow: —

" About 4 years ago I awoke about 2 o'clock in the morning, with a curious feeling that a great friend of mine, who is in India, was in my room. I do not think I had been dreaming about him. I felt an irresistible impulse to call out his name, and, although I was wide awake, it took me some moments to realise that he could not be in the room. It was quite dark, and as soon as I had satisfied myself that it was merely a delusion, I went off to sleep again. Some time in 1882, I was thinking about my brother, who is in America, before I went to sleep. In the middle of the night I suddenly woke up, with the feeling that he was in the room and had spoken to me. I actually listened for a second or two, in the anticipation that he would speak again. Hearing nothing, I controlled a great inclination to call out his name, and then, after arguing to myself that it must be all nonsense, I went to sleep."

Another of my correspondents has had a similar impression with respect to a sister. " On one or two occasions the feeling has been so strong that I have got up and left the room." The close connection between a vivid sense of presence and actual hallucination is further shown by examples where the one developes into the other. Thus, Mr. Joseph Kirk, of the Audit Office, Royal Arsenal, Woolwich, informs me that a niece of his had, one night, an overwhelming sense of an unseen visitant, which lasted some time before it culminated in a clear auditory impression, the words, " I must go now — good-night." Another informant — a lady of vigorous practical intelligence — experienced lately a similar subjective conviction of a particular friend's presence (probably due to the fact that she was apprehending

1 For further examples of different degrees of externalisation, see Chap, xiv., § 1.

2 h 2

484 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

news of this friend's death), and then saw her form, " standing in a natural attitude and looking straight at my face. The colour of her dress and cap, and the fashion of both, were absolutely familiar to me." In such a process as this, we seem to see the central origin absolutely laid bare.

§ 7. The general conclusion from the foregoing paragraphs is plain — that hallucinations of the senses may be spontaneously initiated by the brain; that they are often a pure projection of the brain from within outwards. The hypnotic " subject " will smack his lips over the sweetness of sugar when there is nothing in his mouth — will sniff with delight at a piece of wood when told it is a rose. When the brain does for sight and hearing what it there does for taste and smell, we have a percept which differs from an ordinary external percept only in lacking the objective basis which it suggests. And looking back from this point, we can completely account for the fact noticed in the preceding chapter, that hallucinations occur with disproportionate frequency to people who are in bed. For it is only natural that images should assume the unwonted vividness of sensations especially at those moments when the external organs of sense are not occupied with other sensations. We know that the sort of day-dream which comes nearest to hallucinations is favoured by repose of the sense-organs; that when we want to call up the vivid image of a scene, to make it as real — as sensorial — as possible, we close our eyes. One step farther, and we realise the complete continuity of the waking and the sleeping phenomena. Dreams are by far the most familiar instances of the projection by the mind of images that are mistaken for realities: indeed, it is just because they are so familiar, and waking hallucinations comparatively so rare, that there is a danger of overlooking the psychological identity of the two classes. We might call dreams the normal form of hallucination, or waking hallucinations the pathological form of dreaming; and we might present the wakingdreams of haschisch-poisoning and of starvation1 as a sort of intermediate link. The normal dream disappears when sleep departs; having been able to impose its images as realities only because in sleep our sensory faculties are to a great extent benumbed, and

3 See the interesting case of Mr. Everts, in Scribner's Magazine for November, 1871. Dagonet considers that fasting, meditation, and solitude favour hallucinations by " diminishing the impressionability of the senses " to external stimuli. (Op. cit., p. 93.)

images cannot therefore be compared with actual presentations. Thus the normal dream cannot survive the corrective which the contact of the waking-senses with the external world supplies; it fades like a candle at sunrise; and its images, if they survive, survive as images and nothing more, memories of a vanished world. The hallucination, or pathological dream, on the other hand, does not require to be thus guarded from comparison with real presentations; its " images " are able to resist the normal corrective, for they are often as fully charged with sensory quality as the external realities which compete with them.

§ 8. I may now proceed to an altogether different question — namely, at what part or parts of the brain the constructive process takes place, and in what it can be conceived to consist. The distinction that has so long occupied us, between central and peripheral initiation, may henceforth be dismissed; for wherever initiated, hallucinations are assuredly constructed by the brain from its own resources. An initiating stimulus may probably come from any point on the line from the external organ to the central terminus, along which a nervous current passes in our normal perception of objects. But that stimulus will clearly not determine what the imaginary object shall be, or invest it with any of its qualities: it will merely set the constructive machinery in motion; and the same stimulus — the same inflammation of the eye or ear — may set the machinery in motion a hundred times, and each time evoke a different hallucination. Where then, and what, is this constructive machinery? It would be out of place here to attempt any minute account of the various theories, which have for the most part rested on anatomical observation; and the more so, that their details are still sub judice. But in a more general way the problem can be stated, and even I think to some extent determined.

There can be no doubt that certain sensory centres are connected in a special way with hallucinations. This follows, as soon as the full sensory character of the phenomena is recognised; for that character can only be the psychical expression of physical changes at the " sensory centres " — the spots where (in the ordinary crude but convenient language) impressions are transformed into sensations. As to the exact locality of these spots, there is a conflict of views which may be to some extent reconciled if we regard the process as taking place in several stages. Some (Luys, Bitti, Fournie) believe the principal scene of action to be the large mid- way masses called

486 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

the optic thalami; others (Schroder van der Kolk, Meynert, Kahlbaum, Kandinsky) would place it lower down — the centre for vision, for instance, in the corpora quadrigemina; while others again (Hitzig, Ferrier, Tamburini) locate it higher up, in the cortex itself. But the authorities are generally agreed in connecting the several forms of sense with several limited areas, distinct from the larger tracts associated with the most highly developed phenomena of intelligence.

A diagram may make the relation of the parts clearer.

Let A represent the retina of the eye, which in itself has no more power of seeing than a mirror has. Let B represent the group of cells in the brain which constitutes the sensory centre — say the " visualising centre " — and which is excited into activity whenever sight takes place. And let C represent the cortical or exterior substance of the hemispheres of the brain, part of which is excited into activity whenever any of the higher psychical faculties — intelligent perception, imagination, comparison, memory, volition — are called into play. A is connected with B by the fibres of the optic nerve, and B is connected with C by other nerve-fibres. Now any disturbance of the cells at B which reaches a certain intensity will be accompanied by the sensation of sight; and when this disturbance is propagated ^ onwards in the natural course from B to C, this sensation will develop into a complete percept — an object for the mind — which can be reflected on, compared with other objects, and remem- (b) bered. But the indispensable event — the disturbance or T discharge at B — may itself originate in several different ways. It may be excited (1) normally, from A, by the stimulus of ® external rays of light, which makes us see surrounding objects; (2) accidentally, from A, by the stimulus of a blow on the eye, which makes us see sparks; (3) pathologically, or by morbid irritation at A, or on the line of nerve A B; and (4) pathologically or abnormally, but spontaneously, at B itself.

Now for one view of the construction of hallucinations these data are sufficient. We have only to suppose that in cases (3) and (4) the agitation at the sensory centre falls readily into certain lines and combinations, so as not only to produce a large variety of sensations — colours, if it be the visual centre, sounds, if it be the auditory one — but to arrange these elements in various definite groups. Everything will now proceed precisely as if these effects had been due to the presence of a real object. The excitation will pursue its ordinary upward course

to the highest parts of the brain, and will lead to intelligent perception of the sensory group as an object; while, in the most complete or " external" form of hallucinations, it is possible that by a yet further process a refluent current passes downwards to the external organ,1 to which the perception is referred, just as though its object were really acting on the eye or ear from outside. There then is the fullfledged hallucination; and its creative machinery, according to this view, lies wholly in the sensory centre.

But there is another view. I have noted four ways in which the machinery may be set in motion; but there is a fifth possible way. The excitation may come doivnwards from C — from the seats of ideation and memory. And clearly this sort of excitation will have a dominance of its own. It will have its oivn psychical counterpart — an idea or a memory; and when it sets the sensory machinery in motion, that machinery will not now produce or combine a group of sensations determined by its own activity; but will merely embody, or as we might say execute, the idea or memory imposed on it. Here, then, the only machinery which is in any sense constructive is situated in the higher ideational tracts. But as long as the nervous activity is confined to the ideational tracts, though there is construction, there is no hallucination. That word is never used to describe the mere image or memory of an object; and in serving as a basis to such an image or memory, however vivid, the cells at C are merely performing their normal functions. It is only when the activity escapes downwards, with such force as strongly to stimulate the cells at the lower centre, that sensation floods

1 Krafft-Ebing, Op. cit., p. 11; Despine, Etude Scientifique sur le Somnarnibulisrne, p. 328; Tamburini in the Revue Scientifique, 1881, p. 139; Wundt, Op. cit.,Vol. ii., p. 356. This point, however, can hardly be said to be established. The mere subjective fact of the reference to the external organ would not prove (as Tamburini seems to assume) that the organ had been actually excited by a refluent current. Nor (for the reason giveH on p. 465) can a proof be found in the fact that pressure on the side of one eyeball doubles the phantom — a result which must be attributed either to the doubling of some point derepere, or to the association of the sense of lateral pressure with the doubling of real objects. Nor does the fact that "hypnagogic illusions, " hallucinations which consist in the surviving of dream-images into waking moments, and hypnotic hallucinations, can give rise to afterimages (as noted by H. Meyer, Gruithuisen, and MM. Binet and Fere, respectively), imply more than the brief continuance of excitation at the central cells. A stronger case, at first sight, is that described by Dr. Pick, of Prague, where only the upper halves of imaginary figures were seen with the right eye; and where it was ascertained that the field of vision was defective over nearly the whole of the upper half of the right retina, to which, of course, the lower half of the figure would have corresponded, but in which the ophthalmoscope revealed no abnormality. But even this is not conclusive as to a refluent current; for Dr. Pick may be right in supposing that some lesion of the nerve-fibres connected with this portion of the retina had led to functional inactivity of the corresponding part of the centre itself. I may add, for what it is worth, an observation of Sir J. F. W. Herschel on his own hallucinations seen in the dark, that " the forms were not modified by slight pressure [of the eye], but their degree of visibility was much and capriciously varied by that cause. "

488 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

the image, and we get the delusive percept or hallucination. The force of this downward current may exhibit all degrees. It is probable that even for the barest idea or memory of an object there is some slight downward escape, causing a slight reverberation at B; and where, as in rare morbid cases,1 the escape is wholly barred, all power of calling up visual images is lost. With every increase in the force of the escape, there will be a rise of sensory quality, and a nearer approach to absolute hallucination; and every stage will thus be accounted for, from the picture " in the mind's eye " to the phantom completely externalised in space. On this view, the provenance of the phenomenon clearly cannot be assigned to a single locality: the hallucination is constructed at one place, but it only becomes hallucination at another. We do not dispute whether a photograph comes into existence in the camera or in the developing-room.

§ 9. Here, then, are the two possibilities: (1) that hallucinations are produced by an independent activity of the specific sensory cells — the sensations which arise there being perceived as objects when the nervous current passes upwards to the higher parts of the brain; (2) that the part played by the specific sensory cells is only a response to what may be called ideational excitation, propagated downwards from the higher tracts where the image has been formed.

In attempting to decide between these possibilities, not much assistance is to be had from direct pathological and physiological observations. These have been mainly directed to an end rather the converse of mine — to utilising the facts of hallucination for fixing the locality of the centres, by inspection of the brains of persons who have been in life markedly hallucinated; and even so not very successfully; for cerebral pathology, as Ball trenchantly remarks, has a ■ way of lending itself to the demonstration of whatever one wants.2 We are thus thrown back on less direct

1 In the Archives de Neurologie, Vol. vi., p. 352, there is cited "un cas de suppression brusque et isolee de la vision mentale des signes et des objets," where the suppression extended to dreams. "Je reve seulement paroles, tandis que je poss^dais auparavant dans mes re vers la perception visuelle."

2 Lesions rarely confine themselves neatly to specific areas. We find Dr. Luys, the chief advocate of the optic thalami as the primary seat of hallucinations, admitting the constant spread of lesions from the thalami to the cortex [Gazette des Hopitaux, December, 1880, p. 46); and Dr. W. J. Mickle (Journal of Mental Science, October, 1881, p. 382, ) considers — as the result of a number of very careful necropsies — that in cases of hallucination " thalamic disease plays a less important part than cortical." But on the other hand, he did not find that the lesions were definitely associated with the spots on the cortex which Ferrier and the advocates of restricted cortical localisation

arguments, derived from the nature of the hallucinations themselves. And I think the mistake has again been in imagining that one or other of two alternatives must be exclusively adopted — that either the lower or the higher origin of hallucinations is the universal one. All, I think, that can be fairly said is that, while the first mode of origin is a probable one for some cases, the second mode is a certain one for others.

For simple and recurrent forms of hallucination, much may be said in favour of the lower origin. It is in accordance with all that we know or conjecture as to nerve-tissue, that certain cell-modifications and radiations of discharge would be rendered easy by exercise; and thus the changes to which any morbid excitement gives rise might naturally be the same as have often before been brought about by normal stimulation from the retina or the ear. The elements would fall readily, so to speak, into the accustomed pattern. An object which has been frequently or recently before the eyes, a word or phrase that has been perpetually in the ear — these may certainly be held capable of leaving organic traces of their presence, and so of establishing a sort of lower memory; as markedly shown, for instance, in cases where uneducated persons have in delirium recited passages of some strange language, of which the sound but not the sense has at some past time been familiar to them. That this lower memory should act automatically seems natural enough when we remember how large a part even of the higher memory is also automatic: an unsought word, suddenly reverberating in the

mark out as the visual and the auditory centres; while lesions at these spots — the angular gyrus and the first temporo-sphenoidal convolution — seem to be found in cases where no hallucination has been observed. {Journal of Mental Science, October, 1881, p. 381, and January, 1882, p. 29.) This want of correspondence will seem less surprising, if we remember that in the vast number of casual hallucinations nothing that could be called a lesion exists; that for the delusions of sleep, of the delirium of fever, of fasting, of the early stages at any rate of haschish and opium-eating, only the general physiological explanation can be given that they are due to some change in the constitution or distribution of the blood; and also that the more persistent hallucinations of the insane belong, as a rule, to the earlier period of irritation, rather than to the later one when marked lesion has supervened, and dementia is creeping on. Even if we take subsequent cortical lesion as a sign that the weak spot existed from the first in the highest part of the brain, this would be no proof that the specific sensory centre is cortical. If lesions are not bound to be locally restricted, much less are irritations; and there is nothing to refute the supposition above made, that, when the hallucination occurs, a current has passed downwards to the lower centre — the mischief in the cortex having been primarily an excitant of ideational activities only, and the hallucination being due (as Dr. Mickle well expresses it) to " a tumultuous disorderly reaction of disturbed ideational centres upon sensorial." The same may be said of the artificial irritation of the "cortical centres" during life. Terrier regards the movements which result when an electrical stimulus is applied to these areas, as an indication that visual or auditory sensations (i.e., hallucinations) have been evoked. We may quite accept this interpretation, but still suppose that the primary seat of the sensation was not the spot where the stimulus was applied, but a lower centre on the path along which the irritation passed.

490 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

sensorium, is on a par with the images that emerge into consciousness without our being able to connect them with our previous train of ideas. Now it is remarkable how large a number of hallucinations are of this primitive type. I mentioned above that, among the sane, the commonest of all cases is to hear the name called; and even with the insane, the vocabulary of the imaginary voices often consists of only a few words, usually threatening or abusive, but sometimes quite neutral in character.1 So of optical hallucinations. With the sane, a large number consist in the casual vision — an after-image? as we might say — of a near relative or familiar associate. A friend, who has had considerable experience of the persistence of a dream-image into the first few moments of waking, tells me that " sometimes these images return during the day, or continue appearing, always suddenly, for several days after." The Rev. Robertson Wilson, writing from the United Presbyterian Manse, Strath Devon House, Dollar, tells me that at a time when he was in disordered health owing to overwork, he used to take long excursions, and especially interested himself in the inscriptions in country churchyards.

" One day, after having spent a considerable time in inspecting a village churchyard, what was my horror and consternation to find, on leaving it, that wherever my eyes rested I could descry nothing but monumental inscriptions. The dust on the roadside somehow seemed to form itself into letters. The macadamised highway seemed written all over with mourning, lamentation, and woe: and even when I turned my gaze to the stone dykes on either side of the way, it was only to find that, by some subtle chemistry of my brain, the weather-stains and cracks shaped themselves into words which I could plainly decipher, and found to be of the same nature as those which I had recently been reading in the churchyard. Every time that autumn and winter that I paid a visit to a churchyard, the experience recurred; and on more than one occasion also without that exciting cause."

The Rev. G. Lyon Turner, Professor of Philosophy at the Lancashire Independent College, Manchester, tells me that he saw one night suspended from the ceiling of the room, which he knew to be plain,

" A large chandelier with some 10 scroll-shaped branches, and the jets shining brightly through the ground-glass globes at the end of each. I at once recognised the chandelier as a duplicate of the chandelier which hung

1 On this subject see Dr, V. Parant in the Ann. Medico-psych., Gth series, Vol. vii., p. 384; Kahlbaum, Op. cit., p. 5; and Kraepelin's paper, " Ueber Trugwahrnehmungen, " in the Viertdjahrschrift filr Wissenschaftliche Philosophic for 1881, p. 225. These embryonic hallucinations often develop into more complex form; Ball, Op. cit., p. 67.

2 This is a convenient description; but it must not be held to imply any retinal affection, of the sort that Hibbert, Ferrier, and Brewster supposed. See p. 487, note.

in the college chapel connected with the Countess of Huntingdon's college at Cheshunt, where I received my training for the ministry. I moved my head, to see whether the phantom moved too. But no, it remained fixed; and the objects behind and beyond it became more or less completely visible as I moved, exactly as would have been the case had it been a real chandelier." Mr. Turner woke his wife, who naturally saw nothing.

Another correspondent saw a spectral figure enter his room and stand at the foot of his bed. " Of course I put my head under the bed-clothes, and yet I saw it." It seems so unlikely that the imagination would attract its visitor " under the bed-clothes," that one prefers to suppose a mechanical continuance of reverberation at the lower centre; and the more so that the spectre was a sort of after-image, based on the memory of a picture. More persistent cases are still frequently of a single object. I have mentioned the doctor and the black cow, and the headless man at the bottom of the garden; similarly a lady, when in bad health, always saw a cat on the staircase; and among the insane, a single imaginary attendant is tolerably common.1 Wherever such simple cases are not connected with any special delire or any fixed set of ideas, they may, I think, be fairly (though of course not certainly) attributed to an activity following the lines of certain established tracts in the sensorium. We might compare this locality to a kaleidoscope, which when shaken is capable of turning out a certain limited number of combinations.

On the other hand, hallucinations produced at the will of the percipient must first take shape above the sensory centres. For it is indisputable that the idea of the object to be projected — the picture, face, sentence, or whatever it may be — must precede its sensory embodiment as a thing actually seen or heard; and the idea, as well as the volition, is an affair of the higher tracts. And apart from these rare voluntary specimens, the astonishing variety and complexity of more common cases — whether visual appearances or verbal sequences — seem absolutely to drive us to a higher seat of manufacture; for they demand a countless store of elements, and limitless powers of ideal combination. The patient listens to long discourses, or holds conversations with his invisible friends; and what is heard is no echo of former phrases, but is in every way a piece of new experience. So, too, the number and variety of visual hallucinations which may occur to a single person, sometimes even within the space of a few minutes, is astonishing. The physiologist Bostock, who had many hallucinations

1 Blandford, Insanity and its Treatment, p. 155; Kahlbaum, Op. eit., p. 3; Binet in the Revue Philosophique for May, 1884, p. 500.

492 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

at a time when he was suffering from nervous exhaustion, says that he did not in a single instance see any object with which he had been previously acquainted. Nicolai, who was never otherwise than perfectly sane, and who eventually recovered, continually saw troops of phantoms, most of them of an aspect quite new to him; and in insanity such a phenomenon is common enough. So, too, the seers of Faces in the Dark (p. 473), who had in the course of their lives seen many thousands of phantasmal faces, had never seen one that they recognised. Mrs. Macdonald, quoted above, has only occasionally recognised a face; and another of my correspondents, who has been similarly troubled, says, "The faces I have seen have always been unknown faces." Even in the perfectly casual hallucinations of the sane and healthy, what is seen is less commonly a mere revival of an object which the eyes have previously encountered than an unrecognised person.1 A lady of my acquaint-

1 The following case is of special interest; being the most marked instance of a mere revival that I have encountered; while at the same time clearly due to a train of thought and memory involving the highest cerebral tracts. The account is from the Rev. P. H. Newnham.

" One of my parishioners is an old woman, now in her 85th year. Though poor and in receipt of parish relief, her education has been good. She retains her faculties in almost undiminished power. She is always bright and cheerful, and I never saw any very aged person at all her equal for a wholesome common-sense. I am very much attached to her; and for some years past have always sent her a little present on her birthday (January 5th), and have visited her either on the day itself, or as soon after it as possible.

" This year [1885] I visited her on January 6th, and after I had offered the usual congratulations, she said, with a little air of injured innocence, ' It's 2 years since you came to me on my birthday, 'or words to that effect. I felt quite sure she was mistaken, and told her so; but she was confident she was right; and I did not contest the point; but when I said good-bye, added as a last word, 'Mind, I can't believe about those 2 years.' On returning home I referred to my parish books, and found that her birthday in 1884 fell on Saturday, and that being unable to go down and see her myself, I had sent my curate to her, with a message and our little gifts.

"On April 14th, being down in the village where she lives, she called on me in my class-room, and begged me to come and see her, as she had something particular to tell me. On my going to see her, she reminded me of our conversation on January 6th, and of my parting words; and said that she now knew she had 'told me a great story,' and wanted to beg my forgiveness. And how she had found out her mistake was as follows: —

" On the night of March 24th she went to bed early, but could not sleep. This was unusual with her. She lay awake over 3 hours, with no desire to sleep. She could not understand it; but lay very quiet and happy, thinking of nothing particular. All at once my late curate passed into the room, and stood at the foot of her bed. (This gentleman had left me on January 8th, having obtained an appointment as Naval Chaplain.) As she lay in the bed, the curtains shut off the view of the door, so that she cannot say whether he entered the door or not. He stood at the foot of the bed, with a little basket under his arm, and told her that I could not come to see her myself, but would come as soon as I could, and meantime had sent her a present, which he had in the little basket. Having delivered this message, he disappeared.

" And then it flashed upon her memory that this was the exact reproduction of an actual scene which had taken place on January 5th, 1884. Everything was the same: position, manner, words, exactly as it had been on that day. And my poor old friend was almost broken-hearted to think how she had forgotten, and said what was untrue about me.

"I simply give the narrative as she told it to me. I visited her again a week later and made her repeat the story. She did so without the slightest alteration of facts. I crossquestioned her thoroughly as to details, the mode of entry of the figure, the appearance of

ance, who has been occasionally subject to seeing figures on awakening from sleep, and who tells me that the experience has had no perceptible connection with health, says that on no single occasion has the face been a known face, though the faces are often so clearly seen that, if subsequently met, they would be at once recognised. Another informant, who says that she can evoke figures at any time by looking intently before her, adds that she " cannot tell beforehand what kind they will be, though able after a minute or two to describe the features and dress to anyone that is by." Here, then, we have an immense amount of high creative work — of what in psychical terms we should call par excellence the work of the imagination; and this is work which we have good grounds for supposing that the highest cortical tracts, and they alone, are capable of performing. From our experience of the number and mobility of the ideas and images that the mind in a normal state can summon up and combine, we know that the cells of the highest cerebral areas are practically unlimited in their possible groupings and lines of discharge; but we have no right to assume the same inexhaustible possibilities as existing independently in any specific sensory centre — we might almost as well expect a kaleidoscope to present us with an ever-fresh series of elaborate landscapes. The very common implication of two or more senses must also surely be accounted for by supposing a simultaneous excitation of the several centres involved, from a common higher point; for the difficulty, pointed out by Baillarger, of referring the correspondence to simultaneous but independent abnormalities of the external organs applies equally to the specific centres. And over and above all this, there is the connection so frequently observed between the delusions, the conceptions delir antes, of the insane and their sensory hallucinations, which makes it almost impossible not to regard the latter as a

it, &c, &c. She simply said that everything was as natural as life; that she was wide awake; that it was no dream or anything of the kind. I pressed her as to the words spoken; whether they were soundless or internally spoken words; but here again she was perfectly clear; the words were spoken aloiid, just as they were in the actual occurrence. She was perfectly aware all the time that it was a vision; and never for a moment thought it either the real man, or his 'ghost.' She is not in the slightest degree superstitious. "

I may add the following parallel though much less elaborate instance. Mr. Alfred Wedgwood, of 20, Shorncliffe Road, Folkestone, describes how, having been trying unsuccessfully in the course of the day to recall the French for "It does not matter," he saw, just as he was stepping into bed, a sheet of paper a foot broad between him and the sheets, with IflMPORTE in large letters stretching all across it. He could have sworn that the object was really there, and immediately told his wife of the experience, as she testifies. We must, of course, attribute this hallucination to the previous gropings after the word.

494 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

particular effect of the more widely diffused cerebral disturbance; while even with sane persons of low mental development, we maynote in a more general way the prevalence of a particular form of hallucination during the prevalence of a particular superstition — as in the witch-cases above mentioned. The conclusion seems to be that for many hallucinations the mode of origin can be no other than the centrifugal — i.e., a process in the direction from higher to lower centres.1

| 10. I have throughout tried to express what I have called the centrifugal theory in such terms that it might be accepted even by those who locate the sensory centres themselves not below, but in, the cortex. According to these physiologists, the whole double transformation, of physical impressions into visual or auditory sensations, and of these sensations into complete perceptions and mnemonic images, would be practically referred to one place. It must be admitted that this view seems at times connected with the want of a due psychological distinction between sensation and perception. But even supposing a specific centre of sensation to be thus equally the seat of psychic functions higher than sensation, it would still be none the less liable to be stimulated by parts of the cortex external to itself; and the nature of many hallucinations would still indicate that they depend on this stimulation, and not on a mere spontaneous quickening of morbid activity in the centre itself. For instance, a girl is violently distressed by seeing her home in flames, and for days afterwards sees fire wherever she looks.2 One must surely trace the hallucination to the distress, and so to an " escape of current " from the seat of ideas and images other than visual ones. Again, in the conditions described above, where the hallucinations faithfully reflect the changes of the whole moral and intellectual bias, the local excitement in the sensory centre would still be traceable to an abnormally strong irradiation from the regions where the highest co-ordinations take place — these regions being themselves, ex hypothesi, already in a state of pathological activity. The other hypothesis would be that the mere hyper-excitability at the centre

1 The view has been maintained that this process consists merely in the removal of an inhibition normally exercised on the sensory centres from above. (See, e.g., Kandinsky in the Archivfilr Psychiatrie for 1881.) But this seems to ignore the whole of the facts which support the theory of "ideational excitation."

2 Griesinger, Op. cit., p. 99. For an auditory case, see the account, in the Lyon Medical, Vol. xxxv., p. 437, of a young Frenchman who was rendered insane by the German invasion, and who was then haunted by the sound of guns firing.

itself made it impossible for images to arise without getting hurried on, so to speak, into sensations by the violence of the nervous vibrations.1 But then, what should cause images belonging to one particular order of ideas — the order which happens to be diseased — to be picked out for this fate in preference to any others? The hyperexcitable centre in itself, as an arena of images, could have no ground for such a partial selection among the crowd of them which emerge during every hour of waking life. Among the endless and multiform vibrations involved, why should the excessive amplitude that corresponds to sensation be confined to a particular set? A reason must exist. The unique agreement between the sensory hallucinations and the more general moral and intellectual disorder must have its particular physical counterpart; and for this "a strong downward escape of current " is at any rate a sufficiently comprehensible metaphor.

1 This seems to be what Wundt has in view when he speaks of hallucinations as originating, not in an actual irritation, but in a heightened irritability, of the sensory centres {Op. cit., Vol ii., p. 357); and such a state may doubtless contribute to the effect, even where the disturbance is plainly propagated from above. There are even special cases of " ideational excitation " of which an abnormal strain or instability at the lower place seems a more prominent condition than an abnormal pressure at the higher. We might thus explain the echoing hallucinations, where a person finds that what he is reading to himself repeats itself audibly — the occasion for the discharge being here no doubt the slight reverberation which the mere idea of words may be supposed to set up at the auditory centre. (See Kraepelin, Op. cit,, p. 356.) Very comparable are the hallucinations which present themselves only when a certain amount of external stimulation is supplied. For example, a man finds an old hallucination of hearing recur when people are talking in his neighbourhood, though able at the same time to distinguish what they_ are saying (Kahlbaum, Op. cit., pp. 7, 8, 27); another is troubled by insulting voices at night only when the patients in adjoining rooms are audibly speaking or moving (Kbppe, Op. cit., p. 49). And with these may perhaps be classed the hallucinations, primarily due to lesions of the eye, which are found to be greatly favoured by a multiplication of external impressions, as by a visit to a busy city (Voisin, Op. cit., p. 71).

[chap.



Chapter XI. Transient Hallucinations of the Sane : Ambiguous Cases.

§ 1. We have briefly surveyed hallucinations in their more general aspects. But before concentrating our view exclusively on the peculiar telepathic species, we shall do well to pause for a little at an important sub-genus to which that species belongs, but of which it forms numerically only a small part — namely, transient hallucinations of the sane.

These hallucinations, of course, like all others, are the creation of a mind in an abnormal state; but the abnormality may arise in two very different ways. In the large majority of cases it is purely subjective and in some sense pathologic; and the percepts have no objective basis at all outside the perceiving organism. In a comparatively small residue of cases the abnormality is not pathologic or subjective, but consists (it is maintained) in an impression or impulse transferred from another mind. The percepts still conform perfectly to my definition of a sensory hallucination, in lacking the objective basis which they suggest; for that basis would be the actual physical presence of some human body, with its weight, its power of setting the air in vibration by the breath and vocal cords, and all its other attributes. But an objective basis of another sort they have — namely, the exceptional condition of the person whom they recall or represent. Now, having regard to these facts of origin, we might fairly expect that a careful comparison of the purely subjective and the telepathic experiences would reveal a large amount of resemblance, but also a certain amount of difference, between them. And in no way can we better approach the telepathic or " veridical " class than by following out this comparison.

The available material for the task is, unfortunately, far from abundant; for the purely subjective hallucinations of the sane have met with singularly little attention from psychologists. Here and

there a medical man, or a writer of repute, has been led to make some observations by finding a "subject " in himself; a few cases of very marked abnormality, where the phenomena have been recurrent and distressful, have become celebrated — students of the literature get to dread the very names of Nicolai and " Mrs. A."; and the hypnotic cases have an interest of their own, owing to the important place which hypnotism is fast taking in mental science. But no attempt, so far as I know, has been made to obtain wide statistics of perfectly casual cases — of hallucinations in which, if they are still technically pathologic, the abnormality has been of the slightest and most transient kind. The collection which I have formed during the last few years, numbering more than 500 cases, is at any rate large enough to support certain general conclusions.

§ 2. And first, as regards the bodily and mental condition of the percipient. Probably the common view of hallucinations of the sane, so far as they are recognised at all, is that they are in all cases due to disease or morbid excitement, or at the very least to indigestion. Ask the first twenty rational men you meet how they would account for a phantasmal visitant if they themselves saw one: as many as ten perhaps will answer, " I should conclude that I had dined or supped too well." " Lobster-salad" is an explanation which I have personally heard suggested many times. It may be at once noted, then, as a point of interest — one,moreover, in which the casual and the telepathic classes completely agree — that in not a single instance known to me has the hallucinated person, according to his own account, been suffering at the time from indigestion. Lobster-salad is the parent of nightmares, of massive impressions of discomfort and horror; not, however, as a rule, even in dreamland, of the distinct and minute visualisation, and the clear-cut audition, which constitute the more specific hallucinations of sleep; and certainly not of waking hallucinations. Nor is morbid excitement of a more general sort a frequent, though it is an occasional, condition; and the same may be said of the ordinary nervous exhaustion that follows hard work. We have only to recall that the commonest occasions of all for delusions of the waking senses are the moments or minutes that immediately follow a night's rest (p. 392). For the majority of cases, the only rule that can be laid down as to the nature of. the peculiar disturbance involved is a negative one — that it is not observably connected with any morbid state.

2 i

498 TRANSIENT HALLUCINATIONS OF THE SANE: [chap.

Thus the one of my informants who has had perhaps the most interesting experiences of subjective hallucinations, says, " It is when I am at my best physically, and when my mental faculties are keenly interested in something, that the pictures are most frequent and vivid. They are mostly quite the antipodes of my mental occupation." A gentleman who has repeatedly had the hallucination of hearing his name called, tells me that this has always occurred during his holidays, when he was specially well and taking much exercise. And out of 489 visual and auditory cases (waking and " borderland "), I find that only 24 occurred to persons who were in a decidedly abnormal physical state — ill, or fainting, or overtired, or under anaesthetics. Certain exceptional though slight derangement there must undoubtedly be; but the hallucination itself is usually the only symptom of it; and as little in the purely subjective as in the telepathic class can we lay our finger on any special predisposing condition.

The puzzle is the greater in that the phenomenon of waking hallucination in a sane and healthy subject (as the numbers to be presently given will show), is a rare one — rare not merely in the sense of occurring to only a small percentage of the population, but in the sense of occurring to most of these only once or twice in a life-time. One would have expected that any state of the brain which was liable to occur at all without assignable provocation, would be liable to occur repeatedly. We should account it, for instance, a very odd fact if a person had had one or two extremely distinct dreams in his life, and had had no other experience whatever of dreaming. But we can only take the statistics as we find them. And this peculiar rarity of purely subjective hallucinations of the senses at any rate helps to explain a similar peculiarity in the telepathic class. Our telepathic evidence will show that the hallucination which the percipient describes is as a rule the single and unique instance in his experience. Now at first sight this seems strange, inasmuch as many percipients have been in quite as intimate connection with other persons as with the "agent" of their one phantasmal visitation; and some of these persons have died or have passed through a crisis similar to that to which we trace the visitation in the one instance; why then has it never been repeated? The only answer would seem to be that hallucinations, even when telepathic in origin, depend further on some exceptional condition of the percipient himself. And this answer can now be supported by the analogy of the non-telepathic class; where the

conditions, unnoticed and innocuous to health as they so often are, are yet so exceptional that they may occur only once in a life-time.

The same observation will further tend, I think, to remove a certain vague prejudice which the telepathic evidence encounters in the minds of persons who have never met with an instance of hallucination of any sort. Such persons can often hardly bring themselves to conceive that a sane, healthy, waking mind can really get momentarily off the rails, and can feign voices where there is silence, and figures where there is vacancy, though ear and eye are both alert and discharging their normal functions. Even supposing transferred impressions possible, they will say, why under their influence should sound and sober senses exhibit a perfectly isolated piece of eccentricity, and just for a minute, once in a life-time, fall victims to delusions such as we commonly associate with sick-beds and madhouses? This vague a priori objection will disappear when the statistics of transient hallucinations are better known; seeing that the isolated piece of eccentricity does undoubtedly occur — how or why we cannot say — in numbers of instances with which telepathy has nothing whatever to do.1

1 This difficulty in believing that isolated cases of distinct sensory hallucination may occur to persons who are in sound bodily and mental health, was shown in some of the comments which followed Dr. Jessopp's account of his own experience (" An Antiquary's Ghost-story," in the Athenceum for January 10th, 1880); for it seemed to be thought that his narrative, as it stood, was incredible, and that he must have been dreaming. I could parallel that case with scores of others, but select the two following as of special interest. The first is from a distinguished Indian officer.

"I had been taking luncheon with some friends, and after it was over, my host proposed that I and my fellow guest should accompany him to see some alterations he was making in his grounds. After we had been out some little time, looking at these changes a native servant approached me with a message from my hostess, asking me to go into the house to speak to her. I at once left my friends, and accompanied the man back to the house, following him through the verandah into the room where the luncheon had been laid. There he left me, and I waited for my hostess to come, but no one appeared; so after a few minutes, I called her by name, thinking that she might not be aware that I had come in. Receiving no answer, after once again repeating her name, I walked back into the verandah, where, on. entering, I had observed a durzee (or tailor) at work, and asked him where the man was who came in with me. The durzee replied, ' Your Excellency, no one came with you.' 'But,' I said, 'the man lifted the chik ' (the outside verandah blind) ' for me.' 'No, your Excellency, you lifted it yourself, the durzee answered. Much puzzled, I returned to my friends in the grounds, exclaiming, ' Here's a good joke; ' and then, telling them what had happened, and what the durzee had said, I asked them if they had not seen the servant who called for me shortly before. They both said they had seen no one. ' Why, you don't mean to say I have not been in the house? ' I said. ' Oh, yes; you were in the midst of saying something about the alterations, when you suddenly stopped, and walked back to the house; we could not tell why,' they both said. I was in perfect health at the time of the occurrence, and continued to be so after it. "

The next account is from Dr. Charles M. Smith, of Franklin, St. Mary's Parish, Louisiana, He narrates that a lady of his acquaintance, Mrs. P., lost her life at Last Island, in the terrible hurricane of August, 1856. " Nearly two months afterwards, on my way to visit a patient in the country, I met Mr. Weeks, a brother of Mrs. P., and in the buggy with him a lady so wonderfully like Mrs. P. that, but for my knowledge of her death, I would have declared it to be herself. The carriage and horses used by Mr. Weeks were easily distinguished by certain well-marked peculiarities from any other in the parish, and I saw these as distinctly as the occupants themselves." Dr. Smith bowed, and called Mr. Weeks by name, but no notice was taken, and the buggy passed on. Returning home

2 i 2

500 TRANSIENT HALLUCINATIONS OF THE SANE: [chap.

§ 3. These characteristics, then — (1) the general absence of any obvious predisposing cause, of any assignable abnormality of mind or body, in the person affected, (2) the comparatively small number of persons affected, and (3) the very frequent uniqueness of the affection in the respective experiences of these persons — may be reckoned as distinct grounds of resemblance between the purely subjective and the telepathic classes. Another marked characteristic that they have in common is (4) the usually very brief duration of the phantasm: both sorts of affection are emphatically transient hallucinations of the sane — the majority of cases being almost momentary, and very few probably extending to half a minute. And again (5) the disproportionate number of " borderland " experiences in both classes is a fifth important common point. These five heads of resemblance are those which a broad view of the phenomena at once reveals. Our next step would naturally be to see if more detailed resemblances exist between special groups of cases in the two classes; and every common feature that we find will of course go to strengthen the conclusion that the telepathic phantasms are indeed hallucinations, and not (as some have held) quasi-material appearances. At this point, however, we find ourselves confronted by a problem of considerable difficulty as well as interest, which requires to be carefully considered.

The difficulty is this. If the characteristics of the two classes of hallucination are to be discussed and compared, it is obviously assumed that we know on inspection which cases ought to be referred to the one class, and which to the other. Now, though the elements of a telepathic case have been made tolerably plain, and in the main the grounds of distinction may be clear enough, the attempt actually to draw a dividing line will very soon show us that at present no such line can be drawn. With the discovery that one person's senses can be affected by something that is happening to another person at a distance, our point of view is, in fact, altered in relation to the whole subject of transient hallucinations of the sane. Ever since the abandonment of the idea, once widely held, that delusions of the senses were the direct and (in a manner) objective productions of the devil,1 the universal assumption has been that they are all

an hour later, he made particular inquiry, and found that no persons in the least resembling those he had seen had arrived in the village; and he afterwards learnt that Mr. Weeks had been at his home 30 miles away at the time. "The conclusion seemed inevitable, "he adds, "that the whole affair was an optical delusion."

1 See above, p. 179.

purely subjective phenomena — even the belief in "ghosts" having been really no exception to the rule, since the believers have not regarded these as hallucinations at all, but as independent entities. Now when telepathy of the externalised type is admitted, the first effect, of course, is to destroy the generality of the old assumption by driving it quite decisively off a certain part of the field: it is involved in the new doctrine that a certain number of sensory hallucinations — the majority, namely, of those which have markedly corresponded to real and unforeseen events — can no longer possibly be regarded as purely subjective.1 But the effect does not stop short here. The new vera causa, which has decisively occupied one corner of the field, throws, so to speak, a shadow of doubt over the rest; for while we perceive its reality, we have as yet neither probed its conditions nor measured its range. I have already pointed out (p. 97) that the action of telepathy cannot be dogmatically limited to those most conclusive cases on which our evidential proof of it must depend; and if its reality in the world renders the old doctrine of the subjectivity of hallucinations definitely untenable in some cases, we need not be surprised if in others it renders it doubtful, and doubtful, moreover, in various degrees. Thus, between the hallucinations which are clearly subjective and those which are clearly telepathic, there will be a neutral region, where neither explanation can be adopted with certainty. Now, on all accounts it is important that this neutral region should be recognised and defined. It is important theoretically, because in time we may learn more of the conditions of the phenomena, and may be able to assign them with confidence to this class or that; but even more is it important evidentially, because, till the grounds of doubt are understood, there is always a risk that purely subjective cases will be misinterpreted, and will be reckoned into the cumulative proof of telepathy, or in some other way laid to the account of supernormal influences. It seems advisable, therefore, to take a glance along the whole line of transient hallucinations of the sane, up to the point at which the action of telepathy may appear to be clearly assured. I will make my survey as rapid as possible, being loth to detain the reader among these subjective and dubious cases,

1 At this point, the truth of the doctrine is of course not assumed to have been proved; the proof is a long cumulative process, which will be carried on to the end of the book. But it would have been intolerably inconvenient, both to writer and reader, to defer all attempts at logical treatment and analysis until the whole of the cases had been presented en masse. I may take leave therefore, by anticipation, to describe as telepathic the incidents which every reader who, in the end, agrees that telepathy is a true fact in Nature, will agree in regarding as almost certainly true examples of it.

502 TRANSIENT HALLUCINATIONS OF THE SANE: [chap.

while the main body of the telepathic evidence is perforce kept waiting.

§ 4. In the first group, the cause of the phenomena is, by exception, quite clear. The hallucination is an after-image — the direct reproduction of some object or sound with which the senses of the percipient have been particularly occupied; and though we may not always be able to say why the reproduction takes place at such and such a moment, the purely subjective character of the experience is obvious. It is sometimes due to mere fatigue of the retina; it occurs, for instance, after long gazing at objects through a microscope. Some examples due to a more central cause have been given in the preceding chapters; e.g., M. Maury's hypnagogic vision of the beefsteak (p. 390), Mr. Wilson's visions of the tombstones, and Mr. Turner's phantom-chandelier (p. 490), — the latter case being remarkable for the length of time which had elapsed since the real object had been seen. Another type is where the original impression has been of a distressing kind. Thus, Dr. Andral reports x that, having received a shock from the condition of a child's body in the dissecting-room, he was startled next morning, on waking, by a vivid repetition of the spectacle. I have a similar first-hand case from a friend, who in girlhood suffered for several nights from a hallucination caused by the unaccustomed sight of death; and another where a lady had a vivid waking vision of a servant who had startled her some hours before. The transcript is not always quite literal. Thus, a gentleman tells me that the figure of a deceased friend, whom he had just been seeing in his coffin, appeared to him, but in his living aspect and carrying a portfolio; and another informant — the Rev. J. M. Blacker, of 121, St. George's Road, S.W. — who one morning had a vision of the upper parts of three cooks in white caps, and was able to trace the impression unmistakeably to a recently seen placard, but noticed nevertheless that the resemblance was only of a general kind. As good auditory examples, I may mention the hallucination of hearing the bells of the Town Hall at Manchester play " Auld Lang Syne," experienced more than once by a lady when sleeping in a room where she had on former occasions heard the actual performance; and a case where a young lady, who had suffered considerably from the manners of young schoolboy brothers, was afterwards startled, when alone, by such remarks as " Shut up," and " Get out of the way."

1 Kraft-Ebing, Die Sinnesdelirien, p. 16.

Under the same head may fairly be reckoned such cases as Mr. A.Wedgwood's (p. 493, note), where the phantasmal object, though not reproducing anything that had recently been before the eyes, was the immediate and indisputable result of a very special train of thought.

Comparable, again, are representations of an object or a sound which depend on the fact, not that it has been seen or heard, but that it is about to be seen or heard — that the percipient is expecting it; but as in almost all the visual experiences of this sort the object has been a living human form, the cases will fall more conveniently into a later group.

In the next group the object seen, or the sound heard, is non-human in character, but is no longer traceable to any special previous occupation of the mind or the senses. Such cases are common in insanity and in disease, and the hallucination is then often of a grotesque or horrible sort. They also occur, though forming a decided minority, among the waking hallucinations of sane and healthy persons; but seem then to be rarely, if ever, grotesque or horrible. The most grotesque case that I have received is a vision of dwarfish gnomes dancing on the wall; but this was seen by a young child. A star, a firework bursting into stars, a firefly, a crown, land scape- vignettes, a statue, the end of a draped coffin coming in through the door, a bright oval surrounding the words, "Wednesday, October 15, Death" — these are the principal phantasms of inanimate objects in my collection. Another known type, described by Sir J. F. W. Herschel, is a geometrical pattern, which sometimes takes very complicated forms. I have also three cases where the hallucination was of a dog, and another where it was of running cats, indefinite in colour and form (this last, however, occurring only when the brain was exhausted). Out of my 302 visual cases (p. 392), only 20 belong to this non-human type. The non-vocal auditory cases are also comparatively few in number — 41 out of the total of 187. They comprise tappings, tickings, knocks, and crashes;x the sound of footsteps or of a door opening; 7 cases of the ringing of bells, 2 of the striking of clocks, and 7 of music. Such types seem, on the very face of them, to be altogether remote from telepathy; and though we shall find further on that this is not quite universally the case — that there are instances of strong and unique

1 Some of these may possibly have been real noises whose cause was not ascertained. But I have included no case where my informant did not himself hold this explanation to be excluded.

504 TRANSIENT HALLUCINATIONS OF THE SANE: [chap.

hallucinations of light or noise which have too markedly coincided with some external crisis for the hypothesis of telepathic origin to be ignored — the vast majority of these non-human phantasms may be safely pronounced purely subjective affections.

The same may be said of another smaller group of visual hallucinations which represent fragments of human forms. Thus, two of my informants on waking from sleep, and a third when awake and up, have distinctly seen an imaginary hand and arm;x another sometimes sees a little finger in the air; another when recovering from illness, had a vision of decapitated heads; another has suffered at times from an appearance of eyes and part of a face floating by; and with these may be classed, as auditory parallels, cases where what has been heard has been a sound of groaning, or indistinguishable sounds of talking, or short meaningless sentences — a class of which I have some half-dozen specimens.

We must regard as a separate type the cases where faces or forms appear either in rapid succession or in a multitudinous way. Several varieties of this experience were described in the last chapter (pp. 473-4). I have one other example, where crowds of people and animals made their appearance every night for months; but the percipient in this case was in weak health. We have seen that this type is probably connected with the Licht-staub of the retina, and its subjectivity will not be questioned. It scarcely belongs to the family of transient hallucinations at all, since — alone among the waking hallucinations of persons in apparently normal health — these swarming and changing visions are liable to last for a considerable time.

And finally we come to the visual cases representing complete and (more often than not), quite natural-looking human forms, usually alone but occasionally in company, and occasionally also with the addition of some independent object, such as a carriage or a coffin; and to the parallel auditory cases where distinct and intelligible words are heard, which are not (as in the first group) mere echoes of vividly-impressed phrases. These phenomena — which comprise the great majority of the whole number of transient hallucinations of the sane — fall at once into two great classes; that where the figure or voice is recognised, and that where it is unrecognised. Of both these classes, as of the previous ones, it

1 We have had, however, a telepathic example of this type, in case 161, p. 416.

may at once be said that the majority of the instances included in them are in no way available to prove influence from another mind. Where the figure or voice has been recognised, the absent person whose presence was suggested has generally been in a quite normal state at the time; and where the figure or voice has been unrecognised, no crisis affecting any person nearly connected with the percipient has coincided with the hallucination. The recognised phantasms have, moreover, usually represented persons whom the percipient was habitually seeing in real life — often a relative or a servant living in the same house — so that the delusion may still be explained by the analogy of after-images; or else they have represented dead persons whose memory was dear to the percipient, and whose images might readily be evoked by memory.1 Of the unrecognised phantasms we have no reason to suppose that they represented any one at all, even in those cases — the majority of the whole number — where the non -recognition was not due to any indistinctness in the phantasm, but was of the same kind as when in real life we see a face or hear a voice which we perceive at once to be strange to us. But while as a rule so clearly subjective, these human and well-developed forms of hallucination include also nearly the whole of the instances which will be presented in the following chapters as telepathic. It is naturally among them, therefore, that the ambiguous cases to which I have referred are principally to be found.

The main grounds of ambiguity (apart from mere uncertainties as to matters of fact, which are not now in question,) are, I think, four in number, and are summed up in the following types2: —

(1) Coincidentally with a " recognised " hallucination, the person whose presence it suggested has been in a condition more or less unusual; but we may fairly doubt whether it was unusual enough to justify even a provisional supposition that it affected the percipient.

(2) At the time of a " recognised " hallucination, the person whose presence it suggested has been apparently in a perfectly normal condition; but the same hallucination has been repeated, and repeated to different percipients; and the improbability that the independent hallucinations of several persons should by accident

1 See above, p. 490. The term "after-image " in connection with the apparitions of dead people was suggested in a paper privately communicated to me by Mr. J. Jacobs.

2 To be quite complete, this list ought perhaps to include the ambiguity which is involved in the percipient's failure to connect his impression, at the time, with the supposed agent; but this point is sufficiently noticed elsewhere (pp. 221, 452-3, and Chap, xii., §5).

506 TRANSIENT HALLUCINATIONS OF THE SANE: [chap.

represent the same person suggests some special power of influence in the latter.1

(3) The person whose presence the hallucination presented has been in a decidedly abnormal condition at a time sufficiently near the time of the hallucination for the correspondence to be observed; but the correspondence has not been exact; and the doubt is whether the amount of discrepancy is such as to admit, or such as to preclude, the hypothesis of a causal connection. The question here is the one which was early raised, when we were considering the elements of a telepathic case (pp. 138-9), and was then left undecided.

(4) The case is so far suggestive of telepathy that, at or very near the time of the hallucination, some absent person has been in circumstances which might seem to identify him as the agent; but there is also evidence of a condition in the percipient's own mind which might be regarded as the independent cause of his experience.

Let us begin with this last head, and inquire of what nature an independent subjective cause of the phenomena now in question is likely to be.

Though for the most part, as I have said, the predisposing conditions of these rare and transient delusions entirely elude us, just three emotional states can be named which are present often enough to warrant a suspicion that they may be truly efficacious. These are special forms of anxiety; of awe; and of expectancy. We will consider them in order.

§ 5. First, then, as to anxiety. A person who has been brooding over the state of some absent friend or relative suddenly has a hallucination which suggests that person's presence. Now suppose that the crisis which was apprehended — say the death of the person whose serious illness was the cause of the anxiety — turns out afterwards to have occurred at the same time as the hallucination. Let us take a couple of cases — one auditory, the other visual.

The following account is from Mr. Timothy Cooper, late of 21,

Cadogan Terrace, Victoria Park, E.

"January, 1882.

" My father was a Baptist minister at Soham, Cambridgeshire. In the

year 1849, being one of a large family, I went from home to begin the

battle of life. There was great love between my mother and me. When

I had been away about a year, I was sent for in a hurry to see my dear

1 For illustrations of this very rare and isolated type, see Chap. xiv. § 5.

mother, who was thought to be dying. I got leave of absence for a week and went home, and the last day before returning to business, while sitting by my mother's side, I said, ' Mother, if it is possible, when you pass away will you come and tell me? ' She said, ' I will if I possibly can.' On the morning of October 7th, 1850, I awoke and felt like a soft hand touch me, and heard the well-known voice say, 'I am gone,' and something seemed to glide away from my side. I awoke the young man who was sleeping with me, and said, ' My mother is gone. She has just been here and told me so; ' and just as I said it the clock standing on the stairs struck 3. The news came to hand that my mother had died at five minutes to 3. « Timothy Cooper."

We have verified the date of death in the Baptist Reporter.

The next account is from Miss Summerbell, of 140 Kensington Park Road, W., who has had no other hallucination of vision. This one was mentioned at once to the friend with whom she was staying.

" November, 1882.

"I do not know how far the following story will be considered significant, as I was in much anxiety about the gentleman whom it concerns at the time. I have been for many years on terms of close intimacy with the family of a Dutch nobleman [Jonkheer Huydecoper], who reside in Holland. Early in July last, I received a letter from the eldest daughter of the house, saying that her father was seriously ill. From that time I received news of his condition every day. On the 27th July, I received a post-carcl, saying that he was slightly better. I was staying at the time at the Spa, Tunbridge Wells, and suffering much from neuralgia. On the night of the 27th, I was lying unable to sleep from pain; no doubt I dozed now and then, but I firmly believe that I was awake when what I am about to relate occurred. It was beginning to be light, and I distinctly saw every object in the room. I do not know whether it is necessary to say that in Holland, when a person of distinction dies, a ' prieur d'enterrement ' is employed. This man is dressed in black, with dress coat, knee-breeches, and cocked-hat, with bands of crape hanging from the corners. It is his office to go to all the houses where the deceased was known, and announce the death. On the morning of which I speak, I saw the door of my room open, and a ' prieur d'enterrement ' enter. He said nothing, but stood with a long paper in his hand. I remember distinctly wondering whether I had fallen asleep and was dreaming; I looked round and saw the furniture, and the window, with the dim light coming through the closed blind. I looked at my watch; it was nearly 5 o'clock. I looked towards the man, but he was gone. It is nearly 6 years since I lived for any time in Holland, and I had forgotten the custom of announcing deaths; or at least, I had not thought of it for years." Miss Summerbell's friend, as it proved, had died about an hour and a half before her vision.

[We may note here how curiously the idea of death, in working itself out, availed itself of materials that had long been dormant — the slumbering memories which associated Dutch customs with Dutch friends in the percipient's mind.]

508 TRANSIENT HALLUCINATIONS OF THE SANE: [chap.

Supposing these incidents to be correctly reported, which we have no reason to doubt, what is the most probable interpretation of them? Is the state of mind in which the percipients were a sufficient cause for what they respectively heard and saw? If so, the coincidence between the death and the hallucination would be accounted for by the fact that the very conditions which led to the death were also indirectly (through the anxiety connected with them) the cause of the hallucination. But to answer the question,1 we need some independent evidence of the power of simple anxiety about an absent person to produce a distinct delusion of the waking senses. Anxiety is readily enough assumed as a vera causa of such delusions, just as lobster -salad is; but can the assumption be supported? Not very completely, it must be admitted. The cases are nearly all of the same indecisive type; for the condition of an absent person which is sufficiently exceptional to create grave anxiety about him is, as a rule, also sufficiently exceptional to afford a conceivable occasion for telepathic influence, supposing telepathic influences to be facts in Nature; and the hallucination can, therefore, only be assumed to be certainly due to anxiety by rejecting a 'priori the other explanation. Thus, in the collection of hallucinations which I have mentioned, I find none of such a type as this — that a mother, in great anxiety for a sailor son, seems to see his figure in the room, though really the weather at sea has been calm and he has met with no mishap. Still, evidence pointing in this direction does exist. For instance, the records of witchcraft contain many cases, which there is no reason to call in question, of apparitions of the supposed witch to the supposed victim — indeed Bernard 2 mentions this form of hallucination as one of the signs of " possession "; the experience seems, however, to have been invariably connected with a thoroughly morbid and hysterical condition of the percipient.

1 A caution may not be out of place against the common habit of deciding such questions off-hand, from a single instance, by mere bias. Some informants have sent us cases of the sort expressly as subjective experiences; others as proofs that the dying person's thoughts turned to them at the last. But if the proof of telepathy itself requires an accumulated mass of evidence, much more must the decision in these doubtful instances.

2 Guide to Grand Jurymen, 1627. As typical instances I may refer to the History of the Witches of Renfrewshire, pp. 74-5; the report of the Tryal of Witches at Bury St. Edmunds on the Tenth Day of March, 1664 (published in 1682), where some of the victims who saw the form of Amy Duny saw apparitions of cats and mice as well; and the Tryals, Examination, and Condemnation of Four Notorious Witches at a Worcester assizes, where the child who had the hallucination had apparently been previously unhinged by fright, and shortly died. As a rule, it is expressly stated that the apparitions took place during "fits" — i.e., hysteric or epileptic seizures; but this seems not to have been invariable. See Deodat Lawson's Further Account of the Tryals of the New England Witches, (London, 1603,) p. 9.

Again, an unusually absorbing possession of the mind with the person whose form appears, at the very moment when the appearance takes place, may make even an " ambiguous " experience seem almost beyond question subjective. Thus a lady writes to us: —

" Rather more than 10 years ago a person with whom I had had much to do was lying dangerously ill. In the evening of a certain day I was standing in my own room, thinking of her case, and reproaching myself for one or two things in connection with my conduct to her, when I turned suddenly round, and saw her gazing steadily, very steadily, and reproachfully at me. She died that night. She was not a near relative, or an intimate friend."

In the case of auditory hallucinations, the evidence is clearer: some of these, occurring in circumstances of anxiety, bear the conclusive mark of a purely subjective experience. A sister in trouble about her brother, who has had an accident, hears the words, " Your brother is dead." A mother nursing her son in a dangerous crisis hears an imaginary voice say, " You can't save him." In impressions corresponding so closely to the hearer's state of mind, and not corresponding to the actual facts, there can be no question of telepathy. On the whole, then, it seems reasonable to conclude that anxiety has a certain independent tendency to promote hallucinations. Even so, we might fairly enough argue that it is as likely to facilitate telepathic hallucinations as to produce purely subjective ones. But when the question is of admitting cases to the present collection, the assumption ought always to be made against the telepathic hypothesis; and our principle has been to regard anxiety which has reached a certain pitch as distinctly weakening the evidential value of a coincidence, though great perfection in other points — as, for instance, a complete identity of time — might more than outweigh the objection. The fact that the anxiety may not have been actually dominating consciousness at the moment of the hallucination cannot be held to remove the probability (such as it is) that the hallucination was subjectively caused; for it is the rule rather than the exception for hallucinations which can be at all connected with previous experience to be developed from ideas that are quite latent.1

1 The following are instances in point, which we certainly should not feel justified in presenting in the cumulative proof of telepathy.

Miss Emma Schau, of 4, Clifton Road, Camden Square, N.W., writing in April, 1883, records that, at the time of the Danish-German war, she was woke by the sound of a heavy tread slowly approaching her; and then, when completely awake, saw a shadowy form stand by her, and recognised the presence of her favourite brother, who was in the field, and who, as it proved, had been killed on that morning.

"From the last letters that we had received from my brothers, complaining of their

510 TRANSIENT HALLUCINATIONS OF THE SAFE: [chap.

| 6. The next predisposing condition of hallucinations that we have to consider is awe, in that special form which is connected with the near sense of death, and with which elements of grief and regret are often mingled. It is remarkable how large a proportion of phantasms of the recognised sort represent friends or relatives whose recent death is being mourned. Out of 231 cases, I find that 28 are of this type; of which 6 took place on the day or the morrow, 4 within a very few days, and the rest within a very few weeks, of the death.1 Now the reader may ask how an emotional condition due to a death can affect the interpretation of any phantasms that could possibly be regarded as telepathic; for telepathy, as treated in this book, is an action between the minds of living persons. But it must be remembered that we have already assumed the possibility of a certain period of latency in telepathic impressions. That a certain period has followed a death before the occurrence of the hallucination representing the person who has died, is not, therefore, fatal to a telepathic explanation of the case; and the question how far the percipient's own emotional state is to be preferred as an explanation will depend, to some extent, on the length of this intervening period. We are, therefore, led on to the wider question — by how large an interval must two experiences be separated before the possibility that they may be telepathically connected is excluded? This, it will be seen, is the very question involved in No. 3 of the four grounds of ambiguity above set forth.

Putting aside for the moment any special theory, it will be seen that the argument for a causal connection between an event of one class, A, and an event of another class, B, arising from the frequency with which such events approximate to one another in time, is not an

inactivity, I had reason to believe that they would not be in this engagement [the battle of Midsunde], and I went to bed with my mind free from anxiety on their account."

The next narrative was sent to us in German by Fraulein Wilhelmine Ivens, of AlMe 152, Altona, Holstein, who has had no other hallucination. The incident was mentioned to our friend, Miss Porter, almost immediately after its occurrence.

" Aug. 31, 1884.

"In the summer of the year 1873, I was staying for some weeks at my home. My father became ill, and shortly before my return to England he went to the country to recruit. At the beginning of September I returned to London. I was anxious about my father; but a letter which I received in the middle of September reassured me. On September 23rd, while in the house, I heard my mother call me twice; and in the garden I heard my name distinctly called once, in my mother's voice. On the night of September 23-24, my father died. On the 25th I received the news that he had reached home very ill, and the 26th brought me the intelligence of his death."

1 I am excluding some cases where the interval is known to have been as great as 2 months; but including some which are stated to have occurred " soon " or " very soon " after the death, without specification of time.

argument whose force stops suddenly at any predictable point. It is an argument whose force gradually diminishes in proportion as the correspondences of time throughout a series of cases get less and less precise, and only becomes inappreciable when marked gaps begin to occur in the series. Thus the fact that certain psychical phenomena form a cluster, comparatively thick at first and gradually becoming more and more sparse, in the few days that follow deaths, would strongly indicate some common bond of connection between the phenomena and the deaths, even if such a thing as telepathy in connection with living persons had never been observed. But as a matter of fact, we find the cluster of cases as thick just before life has ceased as just after. Hence the presumption of a single common cause for the whole group.

Now not only is telepathy the only common cause which it seems, possible to name; and not only is it the cause which is, so to speak, in possession of the field: it is a cause with which, up to a certain point after death, the theory of an emotional origin cannot even come into competition. For however efficacious grief, or the general awe which death inspires, may be to provoke hallucinations representing the dead person, the grief and awe cannot operate till the fact of his death is known; and for any one at a distance from him, this knowledge must necessarily follow the death at a very appreciable interval. Up to that point, then, we must hold that there is an appreciable chance that the hallucination is telepathic in character, and that an impression, received from the agent before or at death, has lain latent for a while in the percipient's mind. At the same time this theory of latency is one that ought not to be strained. The fact that in the majority of our cases there seems to be no latency at all, and that in another large group the period of latency is short, establishes a sort of presumption that it is not likely ever to be very long; and while admitting that any limitation that we can make is arbitrary, we prefer — for evidential purposes — to draw the line early, and (as explained in Chap. IV.) we have drawn it at 12 hours after death.

The cases, however, where knowledge of the death, and the emotion caused by it, have preceded the hallucination, stand on very different ground. A new element is now introduced, which has seemed to many weighty authorities a full and sufficient explanation of all post-mortem phantasms. I am not aware, indeed, that any crucial instance has ever been forthcoming — that anyone, believing a friend to be dead who was really in a perfectly normal state, has seen

512 TRANSIENT HALLUCINATIONS OF THE SANE: [chap.

his " ghost." Moreover, most of those who have attributed post-mortem phantasms to the percipient's emotional condition have done so under an a priori conviction that with physical death all possibility of affecting others must necessarily cease — a conviction which my colleagues and I do not share.1 At the same time, death is so wholly unique a fact in human experience that it seems reasonable to believe the ideas and emotions connected with it capable of producing very unique effects; and personally I am disposed to regard such ideas and emotions as probably the sufficient cause of any hallucinations that occur while they are present, as long as such hallucinations present no features which the percipient's mind would have been unable to supply. The presumption is at any rate so strong, that no experiences of any sort — even though otherwise admissible, as following within the 12 hours' limit — have been included in our telepathic evidence, if the fact of the death was already known to the percipient, and if his experience was unshared by any one else; and this principle is the easier to justify in that the day immediately succeeding a death seems the most likely of all periods for abnormal subjective impressions connected with the death to occur.

