Stimulated by Mr. Townshend's experiments, the Rev. A. Gilmour, of Greenock, made some experiments on one of his servants. He described the results in a letter to Professor Gregory (quoted in AniTnal Magnetiswi, p. 211), in which the following passage occurs: —

" I could throw her into the mesmeric sleep in 40 seconds. She is able to tell what I taste, such as soda, salt, sugar, milk, water, tfec, though not in the same room with me. When my foot is pricked, or my hair pulled, or any part of my person pinched, she feels it, and describes it unerringly."

Professor Gregory himself says (Ani'nial Magnetism, p. 23): — " I have seen and tested the fact of community of sensation in so many cases that I regard it as firmly established. No one who has had

326 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

opportunities of observing this beautiful phenomenon can long hesitate as to its entire truth — such is the expression of genuine sensation in the face and gesture, besides the distinct statements made by the sleeper."

I need hardly say that a single carefully recorded experiment would be worth more than any number of such general assertions as this.

The following account is given by Dr. Elliotson in the Zoist,

Vol. v., pp. 242-5.

(359) " I requested my butler to enclose, in five difierent packets of blotting-paper, salt, sugar, cinnamon, ginger, and pepper. These were wrapped in one common cover when given to me, and I handed them over to Mr. Scarlett, the eldest son of Lord Abinger, who gave me one packet after another, any that he chose, as each was done with by me. The Archbishop of Dublin and several clergymen and other friends were present.

" When I put each into my mouth, I was ignorant of its contents, and

learnt its nature as the paper became moistened and gave way. The first

was salt, and I stood with it in my mouth at Mrs. Snewing's side, and

rather behind her, saying nothing. Before a minute had elapsed she

moved her lips, made a face, and said, ' Oh, that's nasty enough.' ' What

do you mean? ' ' Why you've put salt into my mouth, you needn't have

done that.' I removed the packet of salt, and took another, which

proved to be cinnamon. Presently she said, ' Well that is odd; I never

heard of such a thing; to put such things together into one's mouth! '

' Why what do you mean? ' ' Why now you've given me something nice

and warm, very pleasant, but you've mixed salt with it.' The impression

of the salt thus still remained. ' What is it? ' 'I don't know the name of

it, but it's very nice; it's what we put into puddings; brown, and in sticks.'

She puzzled a long while and then on my asking if it was cinnamon, ' Yes,

that's it,' she replied, ' How odd that I shouldn't recollect the name.' I

then removed it, and took into my mouth another packet, which proved

to be sugar, and I observed that Mr. Scarlett very properly peeped into it,

before he gave it to me. After a minute or two she began, ' Oh, that's

very sweet; I like that; it's sugar.' I removed it from my mouth and

took another packet, which proved to be ginger. After a minute or two

she exclaimed, ' Well, this is the funniest thing I ever heard of, to mix

salt, and cinnamon, and sugar, and now to give me something else hot.'

' What is it? ' 'I don't know; but this is very hot too. It sets all my

mouth on fire.' In fact I felt my mouth burning hot. After some

difficulty, for she was puzzled between these conflicting impressions, she

said it must be ginger, and went on complaining of the heat of the mouth,

I took a glass of cold water, and she instantly said, smiling, ' That isn't

hot, that's nice and cool, it makes my mouth quite comfortable.' ' What

is it? ' ' Why it's water; what else can it be? ' The last packet was

now put into my mouth, and proved to be pepper. She cried out, ' Why

you're putting hot things again into my mouth. It gets down my throat,

and up my nose; it's burning me,' and she soon declared it was pepper.

I could scarcely endure it, and took a draught of water. She was instantly

relieved, and said, ' How cool and nice that is.' She could not have seen

what I was doing had her eyes been open.

" A gentleman now came beside me and pricked one of my fingers with a pin. She took no notice of it at first, but, after a few minutes, slowly began to rub the fingers of her corresponding hand, and at last rubbed one only, that corresponding with my finger which had been pricked, and complained that someone had pricked it. The back of one of my hands was now pricked. She made no remark but remained in quiet sleep. The pricking was at length repeated at the same spot, and pretty sharply, in silence. Still she made no remark. We gave it up, and my other hand was pricked in silence. After a little time she began to rub her hand, corresponding with that of mine which was the first pricked, and complained of its having been pricked at the very same spot as mine. Gradually she ceased to complain, and was still again. After the lapse of another minute or two, all the party observing silence, she complained that the other hand, corresponding with that of mine last pricked, was pricked, and wondered that any person should do so. This is a most remarkable circumstance; perfectly corresponding to the phenomena of sympathetic movement in the Okeys, which often came out so long after the movement of the operator had been made. Indeed, after he, in despair of any effect, had made another motion for them to imitate, and when he was expecting the latter, the first would take place.^ It shows how easily persons ignorant of the subject and unqualified to make experiments may come to false conclusions, and set themselves up as the discoverers of failures and imposition. In my patients the movement given for sympathy and not productive of apparent efiect has often come out again in a subsequent sleep-waking, the impression remaining unconsciously in the brain. The heat and taste of the pepper still remained in Mrs. Snewing's mouth, and she went on good-naturedly, as always, complaining of it. While she was complaining, I suddenly awoke her, and asked what she tasted and whether her mouth was hot. She looked surprised, and said she ' tasted nothing ' and her ' mouth was not hot '; and she smiled at the question.

" A few weeks afterwards, I repeated these experiments with all the same precautions, in the presence of Mr. H. S. Thompson and Mr. Chandler, who are very accurate observers, Mrs. Thompson and a few other friends. I stood quite behind her large high-backed leather chair. Mr. Chandler gave me the packets at his own pleasure, and, on tasting each, I wrote on a slip of paper what I tasted, and held up the slip at a distance behind her, that all might judge of her accuracy and my truth. These were the same articles as in the former experiments; but, as they were on both occasions taken at random, the order, of course, turned out to be difierent. In addition, Mr. Chandler gave me a piece of dried orange-peel from his pocket; and I tasted water and wine. She named each article with perfect accuracy, and readily; remarking that it was very strange she once could not recollect the name of cinnamon. Indeed, on the first occasion, she described the taste and the external character and uses of the various articles with perfect accuracy, but hesitated in giving the names of the cinnamon and ginger and pepper; a fact showing that the sleepiness extended a little more over the mental powers than one might

1 Compare Vol. i., p. 56. I may once more remind the reader of the interest of such facts, in connection with the " deferred impressions " of spontaneous telepathy.

328 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

imagine. In a note sent me lately by Mr. Thompson are the following remarks: —

" ' The patient's lips moved, and in a very short time after you had detected its nature, she appeared to taste it as well as yourself; and when it was anything disagreeable, begged you would not put the nasty stuff into her mouth in this way. She told, without the slightest mistake, everything you tasted: salt, sugar, cinnamon, pepper, ginger, orange-peel, wine, and some others. Not a word was spoken by any of the party to each other, and the only question that was asked the patient was, what she had in her mouth that she complained of. After the spices, when you drank water, she seemed to enjoy it much, saying it cooled her mouth; but at other times as you drank it very freely, she requested that you would not give her any more water for that so much water was disagreeable to her. There were present, Mr. Chandler, Lord Adare, Baron Osten, a friend of his, whose name I do not know, myself, and my wife. "We were all perfectly satisfied with the entire success of the experiments.'

" I then smelt eau de Cologne, without any noise. She presently said, * How nice; what a nice thing you've given me to smell.' But she could not tell what it was; when I mentioned its name, she recognised it. I did the same with water. She made no remark. I asked her if she smelt anything. She replied, ' No, I don't smell anything; what should I smell?'

" I put snuff to my nostrils; she almost immediately complained of snuff being given to her.

The next account was sent to us by the late Professor J, Smith,

of the University of Sydney.

"September 3rd, 1884.

(360) " The experiments [in the Proceedings of the S. P. R.] on transference of tastes brought to my mind a very interesting case which occurred to me more than 40 years ago, when I was a medical student. I have never seen a similar case in print, and therefore I am tempted to relate it, although possibly it may be quite familiar to you. When my attention was first drawn to mesmerism, I got hold of an errand boy, 12 or 13 years old, who turned out a most sensitive ' subject.' Among many other things that I tried upon him, while in the mesmeric sleep, was the transference of taste. The boy could describe the taste of anything I put into my mouth, although no sound was uttered to guide him, and I myself did not know what the substances were until I put them into my mouth. I stood behind the boy's chair, holding one of his hands in mine, and put my other hand behind me for the different articles, which were supplied to me successively by a druggist, in the back room of whose shop we happened to be.

" One of the things he gave me was a glass of whisky, and a mouthful of this strong spirit taken unexpectedly gave me a choking sensation. The boy writhed on his chair, and gasped for breath. Becoming alarmed I asked my friend to run for a glass of water, intending to give it to the boy. On receiving it, it occurred to me that the best way of relieving the boy would be to drink the water myself. I did so, at the same time watching his throat. Being a medical student, I knew something of the mechanism of deglutition, and was aware that the act of swallowing, shown externally by the rise and fall of the ' pomum Adami,' cannot be

performed without something to swallow, and that a person cannot repeat the act voluntarily more than once, or at the most twice consecutively, unless something is put into the mouth. I therefore watched the boy's throat while I drank the water. His ' pomum Adami ' moved up and down regularly with mine, and he was immediately relieved.^

"J. Smith."

The next extract is from Animal Magnetism, (1866,) by Edwin Lee, M.D., p. 127.

(361) " On one occasion I tested the community of feeling upon the celebrated somnambulist Alexis, who had not been previously subjected to a trial of this kind. His magnetiser, M. Marcillet, being behind, and quite out of sight of Alexis, whose eyes, moreover, were bandaged, I suddenly pricked his left elbow, upon which Alexis put his hand to his left elbow complaining of pain there. I then pinched the magnetiser's right little finger, and Alexis felt his right little finger pinched. There could be no collusion or mistake here, as neither of them knew of my intention, which indeed was unpremeditated on my part, the thought arising in my mind at the time."

The following case is of a different character, but may be inserted in connection with the last, as it concerns the same percipient, and was also observed by Dr. E. Lee. It serves to show how much which has been represented as independent clairvoyance may really be explained by thought-transference.

Miss Curtis writes from 15, Parade Villas, Heme Bay, Kent: —

"November 12th, 1886.

" About the year 1847 or 1848, the Dr. Lee who wrote a book on the German Baths, made an arrangement with Alexis Didier, a clairvoyant at Paris, and M. Marcillet, his mesmeriser, to come to Brighton. There was to be no public exhibition, but only seances at private houses, and about 12 persons to be present, and each to have an opportunity of trying Alexis in the manner he or she wished.

" I was at Brighton at the time, and before going to see Alexis, wrote his name on a piece of paper, and doubled it three or four times, and then put it in a box that had held steel pens, and tied it up. When my turn came, I gave the box to Alexis, and he began reading the letters on the outside. I told him there was a paper inside I wanted him to read, and Dr. Lee asked me to give my hand to Alexis, and think of the words. Alexis then said, ' The first letter is A. the second, L.' I answered ' Yes'; and he turned the box, and wrote Alexis Didier on the back. Before I saw him the second time, I took a small smelling bottle out of its leather case, put two seals inside — one seal was in the form of a basket. I gave the case to Alexis, and asked him how many things were inside, and he said two, and they were seals; he took a pencil and paper and drew them; they were then taken out, and the drawings exactly resembled them. Some one asked if Alexis could read what was on one of the seals; he said he could not, because it was written backwards. Dr. Lee asked me

1 An apparent instance of telepathic imitation of a less abnormal sort is recorded in Townshend's Mesmerism Proved True, p. 65.

330 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

to give my hand; I thought of the word, and Alexis directly said, ' Croyez,' which was correct. [This, however, is no test; as we find on inquiry, that Alexis had taken the seals into his hand, and had had an opportunity of reading the word.] I then asked him two or three questions about the persons who had given me the seals, and he made a mistake, and said the lady who had given me one was in England, whereas she was in Africa. Alexis was unequal, some days telling almost everything, and other days failing in several things. The notes Dr. Lee made were printed, and I had a copy, but gave it away. " Selina Curtis."

[The first of these results is rendered inconclusive by the fact of the contact. Still it is unlikely that Miss Curtis unconsciously drew on Alexis' hand forms sufficiently distinctive to be recognised as A L. The rest of the name may, of course, have been a guess on his part — though (as Miss Curtis reminds me) he was not often called by the double name which she wrote. Dr. Lee mentions this first experiment, without details, in his book, but not the second.]

Corresponding to the cases where the hypnotic " subject " has shown sensibility to the hypnotiser's pain, instances are recorded where the hypnotiser has become sensitive to the " subject's " pain. In Lausanne's book, Des Principes et des Precedes du Magnetisme Animal (Paris, 1819), the following paragraphs occur: —

" Les personnes sensibles et bien en rapport ressentent-elles, comme je I'ai dit, une grande partie des effets que produit le travail de la nature renforcee de son action. C'est ainsi que je ressens interieurement des pesanteurs de tete, des tiraillemens, des douleurs a I'estomac, au foie, a la rate, aux reins, a la tete, et dans toutes les parties de mon corps correspondantes aux parties qui travaillent dans le corps de la personne que je magnetise. Mes sensations ne sont jamais aussi vives que celles du malade, mais quelquefois elles le sont assez pour m'§tre incommodes. II y a des jours oil ma sensibilite est telle, que des mouvemens fugitifs et legers dans la personne malade me deviennent distincts. 11 se presente dans ces sensations quelques phenomenes sur lesquels je vais exposer mes conjectures.

" Lorsque je suis pres et vis-a-vis le malade, je sens la reaction de son travail dans la partie opposee; de sorte qu'une douleur au foie se fait sentir a ma rate ou dans les parties adjacentes, et celle de la rate se fait sentir a mon foie. Une douleur ou un tiraillement a Fepaule ou a la jambe droite m'est sensible a I'epaule ou a la jambe gauche. Les reins font le meme efiet. Observez que je ne parle que de parties opposdes les unes aux autres, comme les tempes, les yeux, les oreilles, &c. Lorsque toute la tete est affectde, la mienne s'en ressent, et I'estomac repond a mon estomac. Les memes efiets ont lieu lorsque je suis proche du malade, et assis a son cot^. J'ai ete quelquefois obligt^ de changer de place a I'orchestre de nos spectacles, parce que je me trouvais incommode d'un mal de tete, de foie, ou de rate d'un de mes voisins. Ces sensations desagrdables se dissipaient par I'eloignement et par la distraction.

"J'ai remarque que je ne recevais de ces impressions distinctes que de la part des personnes dont je m'occupais, soit par la conversation, soit par d'autres rapports. II ne faut pas croire que dans de pareilles circonstances

un mal leger ou une douleur passagere puisse porter des impressions sensibles; elles ne le deviennent que lorsque le mal est considerable. Je ne me suis aperQu de ces effets que depuis que je magnetise, apparemment parceque je suis habitue a porter mon attention sur mes sensations internes.

" II m'est arrive tres-souvent de m'occuper fortement de quelques personnes avec lesquelles j'avais de grands rapports. Ma pensee se dirigeant vers les principales parties de leur corps, leur reaction me faisait sentir trfes-distinctement dans les parties correspondantes du mien, les differentes sensations que ces personnes ^prouveraient dans ce moment. Faits tres-certains pour moi, et pour les personnes a qui je I'ecrivais, en leur detaillant les sensations qu'elles avaient eprouvees, les places et I'heure precise. Ce que je viens de rapporter m'a prouve que la pensee produisait une action tres-vive, dont la reaction portait sur nos sens des impressions tres-distinctes.

" Je ne parle point icide plusieurs personnes que j'ai mises en somnambulisme, ou que j'ai tirees de cet etat a un eloignement assez grand."

Such general descriptions are very far from convincing; ^ and Lausanne gives the details of only one success, which, though certainly striking, may have been accidental. I may add, for comparison, a statement made to me by an amateur hypnotist, Mr. J. H. Fash, in whose good faith I have every confidence, but who has again failed to make the detailed notes without which such observations, in whatever quantity accumulated, will never make a chapter of science. It is possible that the mention of the type here may serve to elicit

further instances.

" 9, Commerce Street, Glasgow.

"July 28th, 1885. " Instead of impressing my ' subjects ' they seem to impress me; and should they chance to have any soreness or pain in any part of the body, I feel it in a corresponding part of mine as soon as I have commenced mesmerising them; and it sometimes remains with me for a considerable time after. In this way I am often able to discern aches or pains in various persons, who have afterwards stated that they felt relieved. Just this moment as I write, I am suffering from a severe soreness in the region of the spleen, and a feeling as of dyspepsia or indigestion at the stomach, and on making remarks to the sensitive a few minutes since that I felt this, he replied, ' I felt that way before you mesmerised me but I am all right now.' "

§ 2. The following examples of the silent power of the will in

producing the hypnotic condition, or in evoking particular actions on

1 The author of Reflexions Impartiales sur le Magnetisme Animal (1784) says that he witnessed similar phenomena several times at Lyons: "Les differentes somnambules qui ont servi aux experiences sont des fiUes du peuple. On leur a pr^sent^, des sujets malades qui leur etaient inconnus. Elles ont indiqu^ avec la plus grande exactitude les maux dont elles Etaient affect^s: je les ai vues ressentir vivement les maux de ceux qu'elles magnetisaient, et les manif ester en portant les mains sur elles aux memes parties." Bertrand remarks on the similarity of Carr^ de Montgeron's account of the St. M^dard " convulsionnaires." But the lack of detail and corroboration must of course prevent such evidence from having any independent weight.

332 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

the part of hypnotised persons, are analogous to those recorded in Vol. I., pp. 88-94. The first account is taken from the Traite du Somnambulisme, (Paris, 1823, pp. 246-7) of Dr. Alexandre Bertrand, a physician of repute, whose works give the impression of having been written in a spirit of rational scepticism.

" J'avais coutume de faire sortir une malade du somnambulisme en lui faisant de legeres frictions sur les bras; et cette manoeuvre, qui ne I'eveillait pas daus le courant de la seance, ne manquait jamais de produire cet effet a la fin, quand j'avais riutention de la faire sortir du sommeil. Un jour je fis, a la fin de la seance, mes frictions accoutumees, en lui disant, ' Aliens, allons, ^veillez-vous ' — et pendant ce temps j'avais la ferme volonte de ne pas I'eveiller. La malade parut d'abord visiblement trouble, puis tout-a-coup son visage rougit beaucoup, ses traits s'altererent, et elle eut quelques mouvements convulsifs, sans sortir pourtant de I'etat de somnambulisme. J'employai alors toute ma volonte a la calmer; et quand je la vis enfin rede venue tranquille, ' Qu'avez vous done,' lui dis-je, ' qui vous a fait avoir des convulsions? ' ' Comment,' me repondit-elle, ' vous me dites de 7n'eveiller, et vous ne voulez pas que je ru'eveille.' "

Bertrand, whose treatment of the subject is thoroughly cautious and sensible, records (p. 280), a more ordinary case of thoughttransference, in which the "subject" and the agent were both known to him, on the authority of the latter, who had his complete confidence; but he declines to commit himself to results which he had witnessed without having an intimate acquaintance with the persons concerned.

The next case was reported by Mr, Charles Richet to the Soci^td de Psychologic Physiologique, and appeared in the Revue Philosophique for February, 1886, p. 199.

(362) M. Richet begins by saying that, in spite of repeated trials, he has only on one occasion obtained satisfactory evidence of the induction of hypnotic trance at a distance. This was in 1873, when he was " interne " at the Beaujon Hospital. The "subject" was a woman whom he had frequently hypnotised.

" D'abord je I'endormais par des passes; puis, plus tard, en lui touchant la main; puis enfin, simplement, en entrant dans la salle.

" Le matin, quand j'entrais dans la salle avec mon chef de service, M. le professeur Le Fort, je la voyais aussitot, dans le fond de la salle ou elle etait, s'endormir. Mais, comme je ne voulais pas qu'elle fut dans cet etat au moment oil M. Le Fort serait a cote d'elle je faisais tout mes efforts pour la reveiller mentalement; et, de fait, elle se reveillait toujours quelques instants avant que M. Le Fort arrivat au lit No. 11.

" S'agissait-il rdellement d'un acte de volonte de ma part, soit pour la reveiller, soit pour I'endormir; ou bien s'endormait-elle et se rdveillaitelle spontan^ment? C'est la un point que je n'ai jamais pu bien etablir. Et si, comme je vais le raconter, I'exp^rience n'avait pas et^ fait d'une autre maniere, ce sommeil et ce reveil ne prouveraient absolument rien.

" Un jour, etant avec mes collegues, a la salle de garde, a dejeuner — notre confrere M. Landouzy, alors interne comme moi a I'hopital Beaujon, ^tait present — j'assurai que je pouvais endorinir cette malade a distance, et que je la ferais venir, a la salle de garde ou nous etions, rien que par un acte de ma volonte. Mais au bout de dix minutes personne n'etant venu, I'experience fut consideree comme ayant echoue.

" En realite Texperience n'avait pas echoue; car quelque temps apres, on vint me prevenir que la malade se promenait dans les couloirs, endormie, cherchant a me parler et ne me trouvant pas; et, en effet, il en etait ainsi, sans que je puisse de sa part obtenir d'autre reponse pour expliquer son sommeil et cette promenade vagabonde, sinon qu'elle desirait me parler.

" Une autre fois, j'ai repete cette experience en la variant de la maniere suivante. Je priai deux de mes collegues de se rendre dans la salle, sous le pretexte d'examiner une malade quelconque; en realite afin d'observer comment se comporterait le No. 11, que j'aurais, a ce moment, I'intention d'endormir. Quelque temps apres ils vinrent me dire que I'experience avait echoue. Oependant, cette fois encore, elle avait reussi. Car on s'etait trompe en designant a la place du No. 11 la malade voisine, qui naturellement etait restee parfaitement eveillee, tandis que le No. 11 s'etait effectivement endormie.

" J'aurais du sans doute repeter et varier avec plus de precision cette experience interessante; mais en pareille matiere on ne fait pas tout ce qu'on desire faire, et ceux-la seuls qui ont expdrimente peuvent savoir quelles difficultes de toute sortes, morales et autres, empechent la poursuite methodique de I'experimentation.

" Quelques semaines apres, la malade retourna dans son pays, a Beziers, je crois, et je n'ai plus entendu parler d'elle. <c Qjj Richet "

The next example, from Professer Beaunis, of Nancy, is published in the same number of the Revue Philosophique, p. 204. The concluding sentences of his account, as the admission of a physiologist of high repute, are of good omen for the future of our subject in France. The experiment was made in conjunction with our friend, Dr. Liebeault.

(363) " Le sujet est un jeune homme, tres bon somnambule, bien portant, un peu timide. II accompagnait chez M. Liebeault sa cousine, tres bonne somnambule aussi, et qui est traitee par I'hypnotisme pour des accidents nerveux.

" M. Liebeault endort le sujet et lui dit pendant son sommeil: ' A votre reveil vous executerez I'acte qui vous sera ordonne mentalement par les personnes presentes.' J'ecris alors au crayon sur un papier ces mots: ' Embrasser sa cousine.' Ces mots ecrits, je montre le papier au Dr. Liebeault et aux quelques personnes pre'sentes, en leur recommandant de le lire des yeux seulement, et sans prononcer meme des levres une seule des paroles qui s'y trouve, et j'ajoute: ' A son reveil, vous penserez fortement a I'acte qu'il doit executer, sans rien dire et sans faire aucun signe qui puisse le mettre sur la voie.' On reveille alors le sujet et nous attendons tous le resultat de I'experience. Peu apres son reveil, nous le voyons rire et se cacher la figure dans ses mains, et ce manege continue quelque temps

334 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

sans autre resultat. Je lui demande alors: ' Qu'avez-vous 1 ' ' Rien.' ' A quoi pensez vous? ' Pas de reponse. 'Vous savez,' lui dis-je, 'que vous devez faire quelque chose a quoi nous pensions. Si vous ne voulez pas le faire, dites-nous au moins a quoi vous pensez.' ' Non.' Alors je lui dis: ' Si vous ne voulez pas le dire tout haut, dites-le-moi bas a I'oreille,' et je m'approche de lui. ' A embrasser ma cousine,' me dit-il. Une fois le premier pas fait, le reste de la suggestion mentale s'accomplit de bonne grace. " Y a-t-il eu simple coincidence? Ce serait bien ^tonnant. A-t-il pu, pendant son sommeil, reconnaltre le sens des paroles que j'dcrivais a la facon dont je les ecrivais sur le papier, ou a-t-il pu les voir'? C'est bien peu supposable. Enfin je suis sur qu'aucune des personnes presentes n'a pu le mettre d'une fagon quelconque sur la voie de Facte qu'il devait accomplir. II y a la evidemment quelque chose qui bouleverse toutes les idees regues sur les fonctions du cerveau, et pour ma part, jusqu' a ces derniers temps, j'etais parfaitement incr^dule sur les faits de ce genre. Aujourd'hui j 'arrive a cette conviction qu'il ne faut pas les repousser, les cas de reussite, quoique rares, etant trop nombreux pour etre un simple effet de hasard. " jj_ Beaunis."

§ 3. To pass now to transferences of ideas unconnected with movement (Vol. I., pp. 94-6), the next two incidents are again reported by a French physician of high standing — not, however, as personal observations, but apparently as attested by another medical man. They occur in Dr. Macario's work, Du Som'meil, des Reves, et du Somnambulisme (Lyons, 1857), pp. 185-6.

(364 and 365) " Un soir le docteur Gromier, apres avoir endormi par la magnetisation une femme hysterique, demanda au mari de cette femme la permission de faire une experience, et voici ce qui se passa. Sans mot dire, il la conduisit en pleine mer, mentalement, bien entendu; la malade fut tranquille tant que le calme dura sur les eaux; mais bientot le magnetiseur souleva dans sa pensee une efFroyable tempete, et la malade se mit aussitot a pousser des cris pergants, et a se cramponner aux objets environnants; sa voix, ses larmes, I'expression de sa physionomie indiquaient une frayeur terrible. Alors il ramena successivement, et toujours par la pensee, les vagues dans les limites raisonnables. EUes cesserent d'agiter le navire, et suivant le progres de leur abaissement, le calme rentra dans I'esprit de la somnambule, quoiqu' elle conservat encore une respiration haletante et un tremblement nerveux dans tons ses membres. ' Ne me ramenez jamais en mer,'s'ecria-t-elle un instant apres, avec transport; 'j'ai trop peur, et ce miserable de capitaine qui ne voulait pas nous laisser monter sur le pont!' 'Cette exclamation nous bouleversa d'autant plus,' dit M. Gromier, ' que je n'avais pas prononc^ une seule parole qui put lui indiquer la nature de I'exp^rience que j 'avals I'intention de faire.'

" Une autre fois, cette meme malade etait en proie a un profond desespoir. Voici ce que son medecin, le docteur Gromier, imagina pour ranimer son courage. Elle dormait d'un sommeil magn^tique. Poux^quoi, lui dit-il mentalement, perdre ainsi I'esperance? Vous etes pieuse, la sainte Vierge viendra a votre secours, et vous guerirez, soyez-en-sure. Puis il decouvrit, par sa pensee, le toit de la maison; dans les angles il groupa des images

portant des cherubins, et au milieu il fit descendre dans un globe de lumiere la sainte Vierge, dans toute la splendeur de sa magnificence. La somnambule tomba aussitot dans le ravissement, dans I'extase, se prosterna a terre, et s'ecria dans le plus grand transport, ' Ah! mon Dieu, depuis si longtemps que je prie la Vierge Marie, voila la premiere fois qu'elle vient a mon secours. ' "

[If correctly reported, these results seem to go beyond what can reasonably be attributed to unconscious physical indications on the experimenter's part.]

Quite parallel to such cases as these is the form of experimental telepathy for which there is perhaps most evidence in the older records — though it is one which we have never personally encountered — that where some place or scene, familiar to someone present, has been accurately described by a hypnotised " subject " who had no previous knowledge of it. The phenomenon has been almost always set down to independent clairvoyance — an explanation for which there has, in most cases, been little or no warrant. A single instance must suffice, and I select one from the late Sergeant Cox's Mechanisrn of Man (Vol II., p. 220).

" One instance, within my personal experience, will suffice to give the reader a clear conception of the character of this very curious psychological phenomenon. The somnambule was a little girl, aged only 1 0 years. She was invited to go (mentally) with me to Somersetshire. She described accurately my father's house there — the verandah and the glass doors opening to the garden. Asked if she could see anything in the room 1 ' Oh, yes! ' she said, ' such a funny chair, it rolls about.' (It was an American rocking-chair.) ' Anything more? ' ' Yes — pictures.' ' Tell me what they are about.' ' One is a house pulled to pieces.' (There was a drawing on the wall of the ruins of an abbey.) 'Any more?' ' Yes; the sky is on fire; horses are jumping about.' (It was a large painting of a storm, and horses struck by lightning.) ' Anything more? ' 'A river runs by the side of the house.' (Right.) I should state that the child had never been out of London.

" A friend who was present accidentally, then asked to be allowed to question her. He was placed en rapport with her simply by my removing my hand and giving her hand to him. Re-establishment of this relationship was essential to the production of the phenomena.^ As I had never seen my friend's house, I cannot vouch for her accuracy with him as with myself; but I had his assurance that it was equally correct. I should state that neither of us gave the child the slightest intimation by word or look; indeed, we did nothing but put questions. My friend's house was at Dover. She described some of the way down — such as the tunnel and the cliffs. ' Now,' she said, ' I see a row of houses, and such a lot of steps to get to them.' ' Go with

1 In such a case as this, contact cannot be held to give an opportunity for information by unconscious physical signs. Whether the effect that it has consists in more tlian symbolising to the "subject" a condition of confidence and rapport, is a doubtful and interesting question.

336. SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

me up the steps of the third house.' ' Yes.' ' Now we go in; what do you see there? ' ' Something like a monkey and some horns.' (Right.) ' Now go into the room on the left.' ' Yes; such a lot of books about; there is a horrid thing on the chimney-piece.' (It was a skull.) ' There's a portrait of a gentleman's head over it.' (It was a portrait.) ' Now we will go upstairs.' What a beautiful room, and oh! what a beautiful lady.' ' What is she doing ] ' ' Oh, no; it's a picture, I mean, with such a beautiful dress, and she has a hat on; how funny.' (It was the full length portrait of a lady in a riding-habit.) She stated much besides, which my friend stated to be correct. Then she added, ' There's a young lady with long yellow curls looking out of window.' He whispered to me, ' She is wrong there. I have a niece with such hair, but she is from home. She reads the picture in my mind.' My friend returned to Dover the next day, and the following post brought me a letter stating that he was surprised to find that his niece had returned unexpectedly, and was in the drawing-room as described, but she believes she was not at the window."

I will now give a case — rather remote in time, but resting on the first-hand testimony of living witnesses — which is remarkable for the long continuance of the telepathic susceptibility. The narrator is Mrs. Pinhey, of 18, Bassett Road, Ladbroke Grove Road, W.; her record, written out for us in 1883, is at any rate given under a strong sense of responsibility.

(366) " I have been asked to write down what I can remember of a very curious experience in mesmeric or animal magnetism, which I undertook and carried on for many months, more than 30 years ago.

" The difficulty of doing this accurately after so great a lapse of time is, I am aware, very great; and unfortunately, the diary which I kept for the greater part of the time is of the most meagre description, and can scarcely be said to do more than record the fact of the seances having been carried on daily with little intermission from the beginning of March, 1850, all through the summer of that year, until the end of October, when I left home for several weeks. On my return they were recommenced, and it was during that winter that the most remarkable thought-reading phenomena occurred; but I seem, meanwhile, to have discontinued my diary altogether, so that, though the main facts are so impressed on my memory that I cannot forget them, I feel the necessity for extreme caution in relating them, having nothing but my memory on which to depend — not even the occasional hints which, in the diary of the previous summer, have helped to bring back some circumstances to my mind, to fix the dates of others, and to show the general rate of progress in the experiments, which I had imagined to be much less gradual than it really was.

[The writer then describes how, having in 1849 heard a lecture on mesmerism as applied to disease, she resolved to try to influence a relative of her own, who was suffering from epilepsy. She failed and was considerably discouraged; but determined to make one more attempt with another " subject."]

" Miss M. N. was a parishioner of my father's. She and her sister lived

l] thought-transference in hypnotic cases. 337

together on very small means, their circumstances having been much reduced at the time of the death of their parents, and M. was dreadfully afflicted with a chronic kind of St. Vitus' dance, besides other ailments. I visited her frequently, and as I looked on at her never-ceasing movement, her mouth and eyes twitching and her whole body jerking up and down from morning till night, to such an extent that she could not even feed herself, it occurred to me that hers was a fitting subject for mesmerism. What a boon would an hour or two of perfect rest be to such a person! At any rate, I would talk to her about it, and make my next attempt on her, if she would consent to my doing so.

" She had become very fond of me during our intercourse, and I had no difficulty in persuading her to allow me to do anything I liked to her • but some of her friends objected at first, having a sort of idea that mesmerism was a ' black art,' and not to be meddled with. My father's opinion, however, as clergyman of the parish, and my own reputation as the clergyman's daughter, prevailed so far that I was allowed to proceed without active opposition.

" At this time I had no expectation of any marvellous results. I did hope that I might succeed in quieting her nerves and muscles, and giving rest, if not sleep, for a few hours every day, and that this rest might have a beneficial efiect upon my patient's health. But though I expected nothing, I was prepared for anything, i.e., I was fully impressed with the necessity of keeping my own nerves quiet and unmoved under any circumstances. I rather dreaded than hoped that things might happen to ' astonish me '; but, if they did, I was prepared to look at them with as much calmness and philosophy as I could command.

" I think it was on the second occasion, that, viz., of March 5th, noted in my journal, that I succeeded in inducing the mesmeric sleep, a state at that time of perfect repose, not unlike natural sleep — except that the muscles remained rigid enough to keep iny patient sitting upright leaning back in the chair. She showed no disposition to lie down. In this condition I left her, at first with directions to her sister not to touch or disturb her until she awoke of herself, which she did in about an hour. As time went on, however, and the mesmeric influence gained greater power over her, I found it better to stay with her for an hour or two, and wake her before I left. Otherwise she seemed never to awake quite perfectly, but remained for some hours in a dreamy state after the actual sleep had left her.

" I cannot recollect, however, exactly the time when this change was made, but it must have been very early in the course of the stances, because on the 13th, after a week in which I had visited her every day, I find, in additit)n to the usual entry, ' Mesmerised M. N.,' the word ' Discoveries,' and that my mother was present, so that I must then have remained with her during the sleep.

"The 'Discoveries' and 'New Discoveries' entered on the 14th, referred to phenomena which, happening to myself in this way, with every possible guarantee for their perfect truth and reality, necessarily made a great impression on all our minds. They were, it is true, only the introduction to a series of much greater wonders, but, being the first, they surprised and startled us almost more than those which came after.

" The first unusual appearance that presented itself was a sort of

VOL. II. z

338 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

magnetic attraction towards myself. I noticed that whenever I moved about the room to fetch a book or my knitting, or perhaps to eat some biscuits or sandwiches (for I often took my luncheon with me to save time), her face turned towards me. I tried, by way of experiment, to get quite behind the chair on which she sat, with her eyes closed and quite still up to this time; but she shuffled about in her seat and made every effort to turn round so as to face me. Presently her arm stretched itself out with a mechanical kind of motion and pointed at me wherever I moved. About this time, too, she began to talk.

" Her voice and manner of speaking when asleep were much more animated and decided than when awake. Instead of a poor, weak, invalid kind of creature, she became quite a clever, animated talker. Instead of the humility and self-depreciation of her waking hours, she appeared quite pleased with herself and confident in her own opinions. It was very curious to watch her, with her eyes always shut, and her forehead rather pressed forward, as if that were the seat and medium of both sight and understanding. Sometimes she nipped her brows and a puzzled look came over her face, and then a bright smile seemed to show that all was clear again. But this is rather anticipating, for at first she spoke little and rather hesitatingly, except in answer to questions which I soon began to put to her.

" ' Why do you point at me, Mary 1 '

" Mary: ' O, I don't know, but I feel as if I wanted — wanted to get near you. It is very funny, such a funny feeling. I can't help it. Now, you are not angry, are you? '

" The last sentence she very often used with a deprecating air and voice.

" Meanwhile the attraction became stronger every day till it caused her to stand upright and walk after me; a thing she could not do when awake, and had not done for many months or even years.

"All this, of course, interested me extremely, and my mother and father occasionally went with me to see the marvels I reported, and satisfy themselves of their reality. I thought, however, that all this walking about and general excitement might not be so good for my patient as a quieter rest would be. Besides, the clinging to me was rather troublesome and difficult to arrange for; so when her attentions in this way became too pressing, I told her rather peremptorily to go back to her chair and sit down, which, with some difficulty and exertion, she at last managed to do — sighing a little and begging me not to be angry with her, as she would do always what I wished if she possibly could, but it was very hard, &c.

" After that I found that she would always obey any command I gave her; and though I never tried her to that extent, I believe she would have hopped on one leg if I had ordered her to do so.

" By degrees, as time went on, I noticed that the attraction became fainter. I cannot now remember how much time elapsed before a new phase of the mesmeric state began to show itself. I notice that on the 30th March my father went with me 'to see the wonders I reported,' and on the 7th April the seance is marked as 'very successful,' but I think that both these entries must refer to the first phase, viz., the attraction already described.

" It was, however, about this time or a little later that, after a few quiet uneventful clays, as I was sitting at work or reading in the same room with her, I observed that any little movement of my hands or feet was being repeated in a mechanical kind of way by my patient. As I worked, her right hand went up and down as if using her needle. If I moved my finger or thumb, hers moved too. If I lifted my hand to my face hers attempted immediately to follow the motion; and she then began also to associate herself with me in her speech — ' This work tires us very much, doesn't it, dear 1 ' — or if I wagged my finger experimentally and well out of her sight (supposing she could see), she would say, ' Well! I don't know why we should make this poor finger work so hard, wag, wag, it is quite laughable.'

" This sort of thing, which I shall call ' sympathy,' went on for some time, increasing in intensity as the ' attraction ' had done, and then slowly dying out as before, till it gave place to new and still more wonderful phenomena. That is to say, the mere outward mechanical expression of sympathy wore out; but all the succeeding phenomena may be classed under the same head. The influence only went deeper and afiected by degrees more important organs, the senses, and finally the brain itself.

" It was some time in that summer that I was sitting or standing near the window of her room, eating the cake or sandwich or whatever my lunch consisted of that day. ' M.' was in the mesmeric sleep, but had been less interesting than usual for some days. I was not watching her particularly, when rather a curious sound attracted my attention. I looked at her, and saw that she was apparently eating something very nice, munching away and enjoying the taste extremely.

" ' What have you got there, Mary 1 ' I said.

'" Oh! Why of course you know. We — we are eating our lunch, and it is very nice. We have got some cake to-day, and it is very good.'

" ' That is right; then we will have some more.' So saying, I went to the little corner cupboard where I always deposited my luncheon and took, not cake this time, but a piece of dry bread.

" ' Well, yes, bread is very good, but it is not so nice as the cake. We must not be discontented; but there is plenty more cake — why don't we eat it 1 Ah, I know,' with a laugh of triumph, ' you think I can't taste it, but that is nonsense. Of course we eat together,' and so on. I tried her in all kinds of ways, tasted salt and then sugar, then pepper, and did my best to puzzle her, but she never hesitated or made a mistake.

" I find in my journal various entries during the summer, showing the names of several persons who witnessed the facts I am relating. Amongst them, on May 21st, is that of Dr. H., a local celebrity, who lived next door to us, and was an intimate friend of my father's. He had formerly, at the request of the latter, seen ' M. N.' more than once, and now, on the 20th, he had been brought by my father to visit her again, and had confessed, though much prejudiced against mesmerism, that her health was certainly improved.

" The next day, however, when he came on purpose to see the wonders my father had described to him, the seance was a failure. The sleep took place as usual, but the patient remained apparently dumb. Whether the fact of his incredulity had, or could have any direct efiect upon the patient, I cannot, with my limited experience, decide; but I am inclined VOL. II. z 2

340 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

to suspect that the failure was clue to my nerves being upset by the knowledge that the doctor had come on purpose to criticise. I know that I was extremely anxious that he should see the things which I saw day after day, and be convinced that at any rate I and my whole family were not the credulous fools he secretly suspected us of being, but that appearances, at any rate, justified our belief. This anxiety, and the nervousness produced by it, were, I believe, the sole cause of failure.

" JSTo one (except perhaps my mother, who went very often) ever saw my patient at her best; the same cause operating, only in a less degree, whenever the seance was in any way made a medium of sight-seeing. And this leads me to remark that when these results are produced by trickery, or mechanism, they can be repeated any number of times with perfect precision and regularity; but when they come to us as the effect of experiments having to do with unknown or unexplained forces, we must expect to be often baffled, not knowing fully the conditions under which those forces act.

" With occasional interruptions, varying from a day or two to a week or two, the seances were continued daily all through the summer, and were witnessed by several persons at different times, besides the members of my own family. I find the names of seven people, many of whom are still living, who were present — some of them more than once — either in that summer or the winter following.

" I cannot now remember whether any real ' thought-reading ' had begun before I left home for several weeks on October 24th. That it did so very shortly after my return is certain, from the following circumstances, which, though of a private nature, must be mentioned in order to make the rest of my story intelligible.

" It was during this absence that I became engaged to be married to a gentleman belonging to the Indian Civil Service. Circumstances made it expedient at the time to keep the matter quiet, and it was known only to my parents and immediate relations. The gentleman had gone to India immediately after our engagement, and I returned home to my usual occupations as if nothing had happened. No one in the town knew anything about it then, or till some weeks afterwards, yet I had no sooner magnetised my patient than she began talking as if all the facts were perfectly familiar to her. ' India is a long way ofi", isn't it, dear? I wish we could be nearer home, but, of course, if he is there we must go too.' In fact for months she could talk of little else when mesmerised, and knew my husband's name, age, and appearance, but was as ignorant as the rest of the world when in her natural state.

" Gradually this knowledge of all that I knew became more and more complete, and, accustomed as I was by this time to such marvels, she sometimes fairly astonished me. One day she suddenly burst out laughing. ' Oh, what a hurry we were in, how we did fly down the stairs! ' I looked up, ' What are you talking about 1 When do you mean "^ ' ' Why, you know, this morning, and dear papa was waiting; he doesn't like us to be late for prayers. But we only just wanted to finish that sentence.' My curiosity was thoroughly aroused now, and I inquired, 'What sentence 1 ' ' Why, the German book — Schiller, wasn't it ■? ' It was perfectly true, though the fact had made but a slight impression iipon me, and I had certainly not thought of it again until thus reminded of it,

that I had been reading German upstairs that morning until the prayer bell rang, and then, lingering for a moment to finish a sentence, I had rushed hastily downstairs to avoid being late.

"This and other phenomena of the same kind puzzled me a great deal; not the fact of her knowing what I knew, for with that idea I was by this time familiar; but the thing which I could not understand was her brain being acted upon by such apparently trifling occurrences. I could perceive that things which had greatly impressed my brain might be repeated in hers, as the deflections of one needle are repeated by another at the opposite pole of the electric current. When I asked her a question, my brain probably gave the answer which hers repeated, but why did she spontaneously drag up little things which I had forgotten? Sometimes she even introduced little conversations between my father and mother which had taken place in my presence. ' Dear mamma was vexed,' she began one day, and then came particulars of some little argument between my father and mother, which I had heard at the time but had never thought of again, and certainly never repeated.^ I have often thought over this difiiculty since, but cannot in the least explain it except upon the supposition that certain things do impress our brains more strongly than others, although we may be unconscious of the fact. It is a line of inquiry which I should think might be worth pursuing in the interests of physical science, if any physician of note could so far shake ofi" all prejudice as to make experiments for himself.

" I have only a few more wonders to relate, and they are all of the same kind. One day, during the winter, I was sitting by the fire opposite to my patient, and, to pass the time, instead of working on this occasion, I had a book. I have forgotten what it was except that it was a novel, one of Dickens' I think. Suddenly she began to laugh. I looked up, and saw her with her eyes shut as usual, but her head mo^ving as if reading with her forehead, and her mouth smiling. ' What are you laughing af?' 'Why at the story, of course.' 'What story?' And she told me what I was reading about, making her comments on the characters, and expressing her amusement at some passages, and her sorrow at anything pathetic which I came to in the course of my reading. ^ I asked her the page and she told me. I asked her whereabouts in the page certain passages were, and she told me that also. I tried her with written letters and figures, and put her power to all kinds of tests, and the result always was that she knew what I knew but nothing beyond. She was never what is popularly known as ' clairvoyante.'

" I mention this particularly, because it was a point which I took great pains to ascertain; and several times when I asked her questions about people and things at a distance, her answers were so decided, and her knowledge apparently so minute and circumstantial that I was very nearly deceived into believing it to be true. But on every occasion of the sort, I found, on inquiry, that truth and fiction were mixed up together. Everything which I knew myself was true. But the particular facts

1 This phenomenon is equally interesting whether it be regarded as an instance of an impression deferred for some time before emerging into the percipient's consciousness, or as an impression derived at the moment from an unconscious or sub-conscious stratum of the agent's mind.

2 Gf. cases 149 and 407.

342 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

■which were happening at the moment, and which she described as if she saw them, were purely imaginary.

" One remarkable instance in illustration of this I will relate. It happened during the summer, or early spring, of 1851. My married sister, with her husband and children, were expected at a vicarage 9 or 10 miles ofij to pay a visit to his father. I knew this, and was, therefore, not surprised when she began to talk about it. Here, I thought, is a good opportunity to test her clairvoyance, so I said, ' Oh, yes, we knew they were to come to-day, but have they arrived 1 Look and tell me % ' After a short pause she began in rather an excited way, ' Yes, yes, I see them all just getting out of the carriage.' ' Whom do you see 1 ' I asked. 'I see

Mr. and Mrs. and the nurse, and so many children. They are

going into the house, into the drawing-room on the left of the hall.' She then described the vicarage, the drive up to it, and many other particulars with what I knew to be perfect accuracy, and her whole story was so likely, so much what I expected to happen, that I was quite prepared to have the whole confirmed on inquiry. But it was not so. In the first place, the train had been late, and the party did not arrive until an hour or two later; and, in the second place, my brother-in-law was detained at his own vicarage, many miles away, and never arrived at all at that time.

" On another occasion, some information she gave me about Mr.,

in India, though very likely and plausible, turned out to be incorrect.

" Her thought-reading was always perfect, but the clairvoyance always failed when accurately tested; and though I know how fallacious an opinion based on one experiment must often be, and also that there is plenty of good evidence for the truth of clairvoyance, I have sometimes speculated whether, if any apparent case of clairvoyance were accurately inquired into, it would not often be found to have its origin in ' thoughtreading.' [See above, pp. 329 and 335.]

" Towards the end of the summer of 1851, I gave up magnetising ' M.' as a regular thing. Her health was much improved, and she lived for many years afterwards, only occasionally troubled with the St. Vitus' dance, at which times my mother or one of my sisters took my place, and generally succeeded in quieting her.

" It was rather a trouble to me that after the first few weeks I scarcely saw ' M. ' in her natural state. She was so sensitive to my presence that before I entered her room she was already half gone, and it was only at the end of each seance, when, with much difficulty, by means of upward passes, fanning, and other expedients I had succeeded in waking her, that I could communicate with her real self. I hoped that my long absence in India, eight years, would have worn out this influence; but when at last I returned home and went to see her, I found her already lapsing into the trance, and had great difiiculty in keeping her out of it during my visit. I believe that a more experienced and skilful operator could have prevented this in the beginning, and throughout the course it was always a subject of regret to me. " M. A. P."

Two other witnesses of this percipient's powers have supplied the following testimony. Mrs. D'Oyly writes on Nov. 24, 1885: —

" 24, Westbourne Terrace, W. " Dear Sir, — My sister, Mrs. Pinhey, has to-day forwarded me a

letter of yours of July SOtli. I had not seen her article [i.e., the account just quoted], nor did I know till to-day that she had written one. It is difficult to know what corroborative evidence is required, but my own personal experience with Mary ISTaylor, my sister's patient, is curious and interesting, and I fancy almost identically the same as my sister's. On Mrs. Pinhey leaving England, I took up the case just where she left it. In every respect the same phenomena occurred with me as a mesmeriser as when my sister operated. My patient knew the contents of my letters, every thought of my mind; she would discuss the theatre, or the ball, or party, or church I might have been at since I had last visited her, and talked it all over as if she had been present; but sometimes, if a third person happened to be present, I would be a little nervous lest something should come out which I did not wish mentioned, but my inward fear would immediately make her cautious, and she would say, ' Oh, we must not talk about such-and-such things to-day, must we?' Sometimes during the seance she would complain of hunger. I would go to the cupboard, turn my back to prevent her seeing, and taste different things; she could always tell what particular thing I was eating, liked and disliked what / liked and disliked, and when I had had enough her appetite was satisfied. Mrs. Pinhey was totally unprepared for everything that happened, and each new phenomenon astonished her quite as much as it did outsiders.

" Her ' clairvoyance ' was limited to this: that she knew any and every thing her mesmeriser knew, but no more. For instance, we would ask her for particulars of an absent sailor brother; her answer would be vague and ' guessing,' and always turned out to be merely the reflections of our own minds.

" As Mrs. Pinhey and I have had no communication on this topic, I hope my observations may be considered ' corroborative evidence.' — Believe me, yours faithfully, " Emma S. D'Oyly."

Mrs. Ogle writes on the same date: —

" Sedgeford Yicarage, King's Lynn.

" Sir, — I have been asked by my cousin, Mrs. Pinhey, if I remember seeing a girl, Mary Naylor (at Bury St. Edmunds), who was very ill of St. Yitus' Dance, and whom she mesmerised daily. As this was more than 30 years ago, I cannot recollect all I saw and heard; but one fact was deeply impressed on my mind, and I have often mentioned it since. Mrs. Pinhey had that morning received a letter from India, and after she had sent M. Naylor ofi" to sleep, she held it up, without unfolding it, and made the girl tell her who and where it came from and certain particulars mentioned in the letter, known only to herself. This M. Naylor did with great reluctance, as she was overpowered with sleep, and begged to be let alone, and it required great firmness on Mrs. Pinhey's part to make the girl answer her questions. Mrs. Pinhey knew that I did not believe in mesmerism, and she was anxious that I should see the power she had over M. Naylor. " I am, Sir, faithfully yours,

" Henrietta A. Ogle."

The following passages, bearing on telepathy, are extracted from some " Notes on Mesmerism," kept at intervals during the last few years, concurrently with the experiments which they record, by

344 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

Captain Battersby, E,.A., F.RA.S., of Ordnance House, Enniskillen. Both he and his mother-in-law, the percipient, Mrs. John Evens, of Old Bank, Enniskillen, have been mentioned before (case 311). The immediate object of the hypnotic treatment was simply the relief of pain. The extracts comprise phenomena of various sorts. To some of them the initials of independent observers were appended — to paragraphs A, B, and C, those of Miss J. A. Evens, Miss M. L. Evens, and Mrs. Battersby, and to paragraph D those of Mrs. Battersby — with the remark: " We certify that we were eye-witnesses of the occurrences to which our initials are appended, and that they are correctly described."

(367) "To a question asked in a foreign language, the patient usually replied in the same, provided that I could myself have done so. Asking her, however, a question in German, the answer to which I could not myself have translated into that language, she (though herself a good German scholar) answered only — ' Your mouth is shut.' Asked the same question when awake, she could answer in the language at once.

(A) " As a rule she would, when asleep, translate short sentences of Greek, Latin, or Irish, all quite unknown tongues to her, provided I knew the translation, but not otherwise. Now and then, however, this experiment failed.

" She could generally tell the time by a watch placed in her hand, the name of a book, the original of a photograph, &c., provided all these were known to me. "

[After describing an unusual trance which he observed in Mrs. Evens at the time of a distant thunder-storm, the narrator goes on: — ]

" The electrical fluid in the air seemed to have excited Mrs. E. to a very high state of thought-reading, as she now began, for the first and only time I observed such a phenomenon, to speak of her own accord, unquestioned, and to follow the course of my thoughts aloud now and then.

(B) " During the trance there was apparently transference of sensation, as a hair tickling my forehead, a handkerchief dipped in eau-de-Cologne and applied to my face, &c., &c., all produced in her the corresponding sensations. She could also taste what I was eating or drinking. On one occasion strong smelling-salts applied to her nose produced no effect, but when applied to mine she started at once.

" On one or two occasions I mesmerised her from a distance, when in my quarters, half-a-mile off. On such occasions she was able to tell what I had been doing, and would generally go to sleep. The sensation she described was that of a hand pressed on her forehead. Though able thus to send her to sleep, I was unable to keep her so, as she would waken again the moment }ny attention wavered. The means used were stretching out my hand towards her house, and bringing my will sharply to bear, just as described in Robert Browning's fine poem on ' Mesmerism.'

(C) "After an absence of about 9 weeks I was curious to see whether

the force still existed unaltered, and accordingly tried the experiment, when Mrs. E. was playing a duet on the piano, with her back towards me, of willing her strongly to sleep. Almost at once she began to play false notes, and soon gave up playing, saying she felt tired and the piece was a sleepy one. I then ceased my influence, as I did not wish her to fall asleep.

(D) " I established the fact that Mrs. E. could be mesmerised by me without her knowledge, and awoke again so that she would have no idea that she had been in the mesmeric sleep, but would merely think that she had dozed for awhile. The incapability of rising by herself, however, which was always present after the sleep, would soon inform her of the truth.

" When partially awakened by the above means [reverse passes], however, the operation could be completed by a mere effort of will on my part, and this whether I was in the same room or no, Mrs. E. being at once conscious of this exertion of will."

In answer to inquiries, Captain Battersby says: —

"January 20th, 1886.

" On various occasions, separated sometimes by months from each other, I tried to mesmerise Mrs. E. from a distance; and in a large percentage of the cases she inquired of me, when she next saw or wrote to me, whether I had not done so at such and such a day or hour. At any time when in the trance, the act of looking at Mrs. E., or willing her to open her eyes, will cause her to do so."

In a later letter he adds: —

" I am sorry that I can give you no corroborative evidence of the mesmerism from a distance, as it was not often tried by me (for fear of causing Mrs. E. annoyance); and I do not think anyone was present with her on the occasions. She certainly was able to tell when I had been attempting to mesmerise her; but beyond that I cannot personally speak."

To these hypnotic cases, I will add a couple of instances of thought-transference where disease seems to have produced an equally abnormal condition in the percipient. The following account is extracted from a very remarkable record in Petetin's ElectriciU Animale (Paris, 1808). Dr. P^tetin had been for some time attending a lady who suffered (among other things) from attacks of catalepsy. He says (pp. 55-7): —

" Je m'annon9ai, comme j'avais coutume de le faire, en lui parlant sur le bout des doigts. Elle me repondit, ' Vous etes paresseux ce matin, M. le Docteur.' ' Cela est vrai, madame; si vous en saviez la cause, vous ne me feriez pas ce reproche.' ' Eh! je la vois; vous avez la migraine depuis quatre heures, elle ne cessera qu'a six, et vous avez raison de ne rien faire pour cette maladie, que toutes les puissances humaines ne peuvent empecher d'avoir son cours.' ' Depuis quand etes- vous devenu medecin? ' ' Depuis que j'ai les yeux d' Argus.' ' Pourriez-vous me dire de quel cot^

346 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

est ma douleur? ' ' Sur I'oeil droit, la tempe et les dents; je vous previens qu'elle passera a I'oeil gauche, que vous souffrirez beaucoup entre trois et quatre heures, et qu'a six vous aurez la tete parfaitement libre.' ' Si vous voulez que je vous croie, il faut que vous me disiez ce que je tiens dans la main.' Je I'appuyai aussitot sur son estomac, et la maladie, sans hesiter, me repondit, ' Je vols a travers votre main une medaille antique.' J'ouvre la main tout interdit; la belle-sceur jeta les yeux sur la mddaille, palit et se trouva mal. Revenue a elle-meme, elle renferma dans une bonbonniere brune et a demi transparente un chiffon de papier, me donna la boite derriere le fauteuil de sa sceur; je I'enveloppai de ma main, et la presentai a I'estomac de la cataleptique, sans lui parler. ' Je vois dans votre main une boite, et dans cette boite une lettre a mon adresse.' La belle-soeur, epouvantee, tremblait sur ses jambes; je me hatai d'ouvrir la boite; j'en tirai une lettre pliee en quatre, a I'adresse de la malade, et timbree de Geneve.

" L'etonnement ou me jeta cette decouverte suspendit quelques instans ma douleur, et m'ota toute reflexion. Je trouvai le tremblement de la belle-soeur tres-naturel; elle aurait pu se trouver plus mal, que je n' aurais pas songe a lui donner le moindre secours, et je restai stupefait plus d'un quart d'heure. En revenant a moi, je demandai a la belle-sceur, comment elle s'etait procure la lettre qu'elle avait renfermee dans la bonbonniere? Elle me repondit que cette lettre s'etait trouvee dans la livre qu'elle lisait, en attendant ma visite; qu'elle I'avait pris dans la bibliotheque de la malade, et qu'en I'ouvrant elle etait tombee a ses pieds; qu'elle I'avait relevee et mise dans sa poche pour la lui rendre, aussitot qu'elle serait eveill^e. Je pris le livre et I'examinai, comme si j'eusse du y trouver I'empreinte de la lettre, tant ce nouveau prodige me paraissait incroyable; mais me convenait-il bien d'en douter, d'apres ma propre experience? Etait-ce un autre qui avait mis dans ma main la mddaille antique dont j'etais muni, avec le dessein de profiter de la premiere occasion pour la placer sur I'estomac de la malade, et voir si elle la signalerait, comme d'autres objets que je lui avals present^s?"

In the evening. Dr. Petetin revisited his patient. He continues (pp. 62-5):-

(368) " Avant de sortir, je plagai, a tout evenement, une petite lettre sur le haut de ma poi trine; je m'enveloppai de mon manteau, et n'arrivai qu' a six heures et demie.

" Au coup de sept heures, la malade, tres-attentive, anim^e par sa gaiety naturelle, eprouva deux secousses dans les bras; et dans ce court espace de temps, ses yeux se fermerent, sa physionomie exprima l'etonnement, ses couleurs disparurent, et la catalepsie la transforma en statue qui ecoute.

" J'avangai mon fauteuil pour etre plus pres de la malade. Sa tete, toujours tournee du meme c6te, ne m'offrait que son profil; je developpai mon manteau, pour mettre le haut de mon corps a decouvert. ' Eh! depuis quand, M. le Docteur, la mode est-elle venue de porter ses lettres sur la poitrine? ' J'alongeai le bras pour atteindre du bout du doigt le creux de I'estomac de ma cataleptique; et en reunissant les doigiis de mon autre main, je lui repondis a voix ordinaire, ' Madame, vous pourriez vous tromper.' ' Non, je suis sure de ce que je vois. Vous avez sur la poitrine

une lettre qui n'est pas plus grande que cela — qu'on Fapplique alamesure.' En proferant ces paroles, elle donna une autre position a sa tete, qu'elle dirigea de mon cot^; elle avan9a les deux bras, alongea I'index de la main gauche, et avec celui de la droite qu'elle posa dessus, determina dans la plus grande precision la place qu'elle devait occuper. Tous les regards tomberent sur moi. J'^cartai me veste, on vit la lettre; I'ami s'en empara pour I'appliquer sur le doigt qui I'attendait; elle ne I'eut pas plutot touclie, que la malade ajouta, ' Si je n^etais pas discrete, je pourrais en dire le Gontenu; mais pour prouver que je Vai hien lue, il n^y a que deux lignes et demie, tres-ininutees.' Apres avoir obtenu la permission de I'ouvrir, chacun vit que le billet ne renfermait que deux lignes et demie, dont les caracteres ^taient menus. L'ami passant tout-a-coup du plus haut degre d'etonnement a celui de la plus grande defiance, tira de sa poclie une bourse, la mit sur ma poitrine, croisa ma veste, et me poussa du cote de la malade. ' M. le Docteur, ne vous genez pas; vous avez, dans ce monient, SUA' la poitrine, lafiloche de M. B.; il y a tant de louis d'un cote et d^ argent hlanc de V autre; mais que personne ne se derange, je vais dire ce que chacun a de j^lus remarquahle dans ses poches.^ " She fulfilled this promise.

Many other incidents are recorded in this case. Pdtdtin himself regards them all as clairvoyant in character; but the hypothesis of thought-transference was never excluded by the conditions (see pp. 329, 335, 342).

The final instance is another extract from the Mechanism of Man (Vol. II., pp. 175-7). This case, like the two last quoted, was observed during a considerable period. Serjeant Cox says: —

(369) " The patient was my sister, a girl of 15, of hysterical temperament and somewhat deficient in intelligence. I was 6 years her senior. I had then no knowledge of the phenomena of somnambulism, beyond the uses made of it by the novelist and the dramatist. I had never even heard of mesmerism. I was, therefore, a perfectly unprejudiced witness.

[The writer then describes cataleptic fits, from which his sister sufiered, and which used to pass ofi", leaving her in a semi-conscious, trancelike state.]

" If, as she lay upon the sofa, her eyes firmly closed, I opened a book having pictures in it, and sat behind her in a position where it was physically impossible that she could see what I was doing, and I looked at one of the pictures, she forthwith exhibited, in pantomimic action, the posture of each person there depicted. It was perfectly manifest that she had the image of the engraving impressed upon her mind, as distinctly as if it had been conveyed to it by the sense of sight. Nor is it to be explained by the suggestion that the engravings were familiar to her, and that she guessed upon which of them I was looking; for it was the same with books and pictures purposely tried which she had never seen. But whether that impression was obtained through my mind, in which the image also was, or that her mind perceived the picture itself directly, although out of the range of vision, is the problem to be solved. If the servant who attended her, obedient to her signalled desire, went to her

348 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

bedroom on the floor above the room in which she was lying entranced, she expressed the most obvious signs of annoyance if the servant above touched the wrong thing, and of satisfaction when she touched the right one, precisely as if the search had been made in the same room and she saw what was going on. The experiment was purposely tried many times, with various tests, so as to leave no doubt of the fact upon any member of the family who witnessed it.

" It should be stated that when a part of the picture was covered, so that I could see but a part, her perceptions were limited to the part seen by me. I was, indeed, unable to trace any power of perception of anything not seen by the person with whom her mind was at the time associated. She perceived behind her so much of the picture as was seen by me and impressed on my mind. She perceived the objects seen and touched by her servant upstairs and so impressed upon her mind.

" These phenomena continued for nearly 2 years, so that there was ample opportunity for observing them. Imposture was out of the question. Delusion was impossible. The occurrence was in a private family, and witnessed by none but themselves and the attendant physician, whose sagacious explanation of it I have narrated." [The explanation referred to was that it was a case of hysteria "and in hysteria people can do anything."]

II.]

CHAPTEE II.

IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES.

§ 1. The present chapter will contain instances parallel to those given in Chapters VI. and VII. of Vol. I., arranged as far as possible in the same order. These accounts, and the dream-cases of the succeeding chapter, belong (as pointed out in Vol. I., p. 234) to the weakest evidential classes; and I should have been glad to present them in a more condensed shape. But I found on making the attempt, that such force as they possess, and — what it is equally a duty to bring out — their evidential defects, were apt to disappear when their form was altered.

I will begin with cases where the transference of an idea seems to have been of a tolerably definite and literal kind.

The first five cases (taken in connection with others)^ form a group which strongly suggests that a fugitive faculty of percipience may be developed by an abnormal condition of mind and body.

(370) From Mrs. Mainwaring, Knowles, Ardingly, Hayward's Heath.

"March 14th, 1885.

" During the Mutiny, I was staying with a friend, dreadfully ill — too ill to be told what was going on. A baby was born, and a day or two after, my friend's wife, sitting on my bed, received a letter. I said, ' You need not read it, I know every word,' and I told her. It was to say she must not drive that afternoon to the Fort as usual, for some men were going to be hanged on the road. 1 had not heard a word of the discovery of the plot, or of the plot, or of what was to be; but I said every word in the letter, and I remember my friend's face of astonishment, as she said, ' Why, how did you know it? ' It didn't seem at all odd to me.

" E. L. Mainwaring."

Subsequently Mrs. Mainwaring wrote: —

"June 18th, 1885.

" In compliance with your request, I wrote to my old friend, but I have not had a line in reply. I do not know what can have become of her, as it would have been very little trouble to say if she recollected the

1 See the list in p. 162, first note, as well as the cases of the preceding chapter.

350 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

facts I told you of. I do not like to write again, and I am sorry, therefore, I cannot add her testipaony."

[In cases belonging to a weak class — •i.e., a class where the experience of the percipient is not of a sujQ&ciently strongly-marked type to make it violently improbable that it would be afterwards imagined or modified in memory — absence of corroboration is of course a doubly important defect. This remark applies to a good many of the examples that follow.]

In the following case, again, the percipient was in a state of serious illness,

(371) From Mr. E. Chapman, (wood-carver) Windsor Hall, Brighton.

"1884.

"My father, when a young man, entered the service of Sir Charles Dymoke; estate, Scrivelsby Hall, Lincolnshire. He rose rapidly to become almost constant companion." Mr. Chapman then describes how his father on one occasion saved the coachman of Sir C. Dymoke from very serious danger and disgrace, for which the coachman said that " he would thank him with his dying breath."

"Many years after this happened, my father was lying very ill; so much so he could not help himself in any way. My mother had just made him as comfortable as possible, (he was perfectly helpless,) and she had gone downstairs to attend to her household affairs, when she heard a loud knocking, and going upstairs, found my father sitting bolt upright in bed. On asking him how he came in that position, he exclaimed, ' O mother,' (they always called each other mother and father), ' what is the time 1 ' (being told), ' What is it to-day 1 ' (Thursday), ' And the day of the month? Now write it all down at once.'

" Being asked why he wished it to be written, he answered ' So-and-so,' naming the aforesaid coachman, ' is dead.' ' How do you know that, father 1 ' ' Don't ask me. You will have a letter in two or three days.' On the third day from that time the letter came announcing the death of the said coachman, somewhere in Norfolk — so that he and my father must have been 50 miles apart at the time. My father, on sinking down to his former helpless condition, exclaimed, ' O how cold it was.' We never could get a further explanation from him, but for a long time after, when anyone offered to shake hands with him in their shirt-sleeves, or had a light coat on, he would shudder and sometimes say, ' How cold.'

" Edward Chapman."

[The last words suggest some sort of sensory impression made on the percipient; but the evidence for this is insufiicient.]

In the next example the percipient was not only ill, but closelyapproaching death.

(372) From the Metnoi/rs of the Rev. Joseph Buckminster, D.D., and of his son, the Rev. J. S. Buckminster, by Eliza Buckminster Lee, Dr. Buckminster's daughter, (Boston, U.S.A., 1851), pp. 464 and 476-7. Both father and son were noted preachers. The "Mrs. Buckminster " mentioned was the father's third wife.

" On Tuesday evening, June 9th, he (the son) expired

When his [Dr. Buckminster's] wife entered his [Dr. Buckminster's]

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR GASES. 351

chamber the next morning he said to her, with perfect composure, ' My son Joseph is dead.' Mrs. Buck minster, supposing that he had slept and dreamed that his son was dead, although no news of his illness had reached him, assured him that it was a dream. ' No,' he replied, ' I have not slept nor dreamed; he is dead! ' This incident is related as received from the lips of her to whom the words were spoken, and there can be no shadow of doubt of their truth."

The particulars of dates, &c., are as follows: —

Dr. Joseph Buckminster was living at Portsmouth, New Hampshire, where he had been for many years pastor of a church. On the 1st or 2nd of June, 1812, he left Portsmouth intending to travel for his health. He reached Peedsborough, a little village, on the 9th of June, and died there the following morning. The Rev. J. S. Buckminster (the son) was living at Boston in delicate health. He was taken suddenly ill on June 3, and died on June 9th, 24 hours before the death of his father. Dr. Buckminster must have been aware of his son's delicate state of health, but no one seems to have expected his death to occur when it did. There is no mention of letters being sent to warn Dr. Buckminster, nor do the family seem to have been aware of the son's illness until after the father's death. Indeed Dr. Buckminster had intended to visit his son and daughter at Boston, on his return from the expedition which was cut short by his own death.

The next example exhibits the faculty in a less fugitive form, and in connection with more chronic disease.

(373) From the Zoist, Vol. V., p. 311.

Dr. EUiotson writes: — "The following particulars were sent to me by a medical gentleman, who has already contributed with his name to the Zoist, but begs his name not to be disclosed on the present occasion, though I am at liberty to mention it to any person privately.

" John Elliotson."

" Dear Sir, — I have some personal analogous experience. It is nearly nine years since I took the immediate charge of a gentleman of deranged intellect, with whom I reside in intimate association as friend. I have often, particularly in the earlier years of my charge, been thoroughly puzzled to account for his knowledge of circumstances, perhaps mere trifles, with which we did not wish him to become acquainted. I did not deem them worthy of note at the time, that is, I did not make any memorandum of them, and would not now like to trust to my memory as to the particulars, nor would they be clearly apprehended without entering into tedious prosy details. Suffice it that long before I read the Zoist, I had expressed to the able medical gentleman who regularly visits us an opinion that ' our friend seemed to know things as if a spiritual intelligence was at his elbow and whispered in his ear '; ' formerly they would have said he had a familiar spirit '; ' know, he certainly does, but how I can't make out '; and such like remarks, showing my impression at the time.

" Our patient's mental condition has greatly improved, and I do not now often observe these curious perceptions, or they are not so singular or

352 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

strongly marked as to preclude the possibility of their being matters of accidental coincidence.

" About three years since, for a few evenings, this perceptive power was wonderfully acute; he was in an argumentative and quarrelsome humour at the time. We sat together by the fireside, while our tea was infusing, seemingly both engaged in thought, when my friend exclaimed, ' I don't think that, sir; I don't think that. 1 don't believe it. I say I

don't believe it.' I replied quietly, ' Don't believe what, Mr.? I

have not spoken; what do you allude to? ' He immediately, without noticing my remark that I had not spoken, referred to the precise subject of which I had just been thinking, and began to contradict me respecting it. Had this occurred but once, it might be said I was ' unconsciously thinking aloud,' but several similar manifestations of perceptive power took place about this time; and, as I was on my guard, I can certainly state, with as firm a conviction of the truth of my averment as any one who confides in his senses and memory can feel, that I did not speak my thoughts, but that there was a clairvoyant perception of them, or perception in some unaccountable manner.

" Another instance is well-marked, and caused us much interest and wonder at the time. Four-and-a-half years since, it became necessary that

M, our house-steward and butler, should be discharged. As he was

an old family servant, and his dismissal might irritate our patient, it was deemed advisable that we should pay a visit to the seaside for a month, and his removal be efiected during our absence. Without tedious explanation I cannot convey the grounds of my conviction, but surely convinced am I that our poor friend neither did nor could know anything of the contemplated change, until the day preceding that of our return home. He was

then informed by letter that M had, for certain reasons, been sent

away, and a very comfortable, respectable elderly person, Mrs. T,

installed in his place.... Next morning we started for home, a distance of 60 miles. Whilst the horses were being changed for the last

stage,... I explained that Mrs. T would take care to make

us comfortable; that she was a very respectable person; that we would not consider her a common servant, but call her our lady housekeeper, &c., &c., in the same strain, trying to impress that she was a very superior person to the one she had succeeded. As I finished, we started. My friend threw himself back in the carriage, and did not speak for 8 or 10 minutes,

and then said, 'I don't see that, Mr. ' (addressing me), ' I don't see

that; I don't believe it. M kept a grocer's shop ' (Mrs. T kept

a grocer's shop before she came) ' before he came; one grocer is as good as another; both shopkeepers; no difierence in respectability, I think.' This was strictly true; and the inquiries which I made to discover how our friend knew it only tended to puzzle me, as the attendants, whose casual remarks might have been overheard, declared that they did not know Mrs.

- T was a grocer until I named it; and other sources of information

there were not."^

1 While this chapter is passmg through the press, I have received, from Mr. W. H. Dayman, of E,edbridge, Southampton, an account of Mrs. Occomore, a bed-ridden old woman in his village, blind and a little deaf, and living a completely isolated life, who seems sometimes to have an abnormal intuition of what is passing in other minds. From among other less distinct instances, I select the two following. I should premise that Mrs. Occomore, her daughter, Mrs. Tutcher, and a grand-daughter, are the only occupants of the house.

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 353

If the following case is accurately reported, the percipient must again have been in a very abnormal condition; as people do not usually commit suicide because their fathers die. It is probable that, though both deaths occurred, the exactitude of the coincidence may have been exaggerated; and the scene on ship-board has very likely become, in recollection and transmission, more picturesque and dramatic than it reall}^ was.

(374) From Mr. Nicholas Heald, Bowdon-by-Altrincham, Cheshire.

"July 7th, 1884.

" The late John Gisborne [the narrator's brother-in-law], who was an officer in the naval service of the old East India Company, often during his life told the following incident: —

" One Saturday evening, when it was the sailors' custom, among other toasts, always to give ' Sweethearts and Wives,' followed by others, and when the ship *was thousands of miles distant from England, one of his brother officers who was silent, gloomy, and depressed, was urged to give his toast, but made no reply. At length, after constant pressure, he stood up and said, looking sternly around on his merry companions, ' Well, fill your glasses,' and followed this up by saying, ' I give you the memory of my dead father.' Shocked at this, his brother officers hesitated, when he again sternly repeated, ' I give you the memory of my dead father.' He then left the table, went upon deck and was seen no more, having, it is supposed, thrown himself overboard.

"On the ship's arrival in the Thames, Gisborne, after reporting himself at the India House, went to the house of the young man's father, some short distance in the suburbs, to communicate to the family his death. He asked to see the father, and on the servant saying he was dead, found, in answer to his inquiries, that he died the very same day that his son drowned himself. " Nicholas Heald."

Mr. Gisborne's daughter (Loventor House, Berry Pomeroy, Totnes) writes: —

" I recollect very well, and have often repeated it to others, what dear papa related, which was that at the mess table the officer suddenly drank to his just deceased father's memory, and immediately left and threw himself overboard, and on arrival in England, papa found the date and hour exactly corresponded with the father's death. I don't know the ship or officer's name."

(1) " On the 22nd March, Mrs. F., who had been some time undecided as to giving notice to leave the house they all live in, vi'hich she rents, finally decided to do so, and sent Mrs. T. [her daughter] to Winchester to give notice to the proper authorities. On that day Mrs. O., who of course knew nothing about it, began declaring that they were all going to leave the house and that she must be packing up her things. So the whole of the day she was busy with her hands fumbling about the bed-clothes, fancying she was packing things. For two days she kept on like this.

(2) " On March 26th, Mrs. F. went out into her yard to clean up some straw which was littered about there. She was called off her work to attend to her mother (Mrs. O. ). Upon getting into her room, Mrs. O. at once began telling her to sweep up the straw which she declared was strewn all over the room, and no assurances to the contrary would convince her that there was no straw there, till finally, to satisfy her, Mrs. F. got the broom and pretended to sweep it up.



Vol. Ii. 2 a

354 • SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

Mr. Grisborne's widow says that she thinks the young officer's name was Hunter.

[Such an incident as the suicide would probably be recorded in the log, and a laborious search has therefore been made at the India Office, in order to ascertain the name of the ship; but without success.]

(375) From Miss Butler, Priestown, Co. Meath.

December 18th, 1885.

Miss Butler begins by describing her unusually strong friendship with a Madame H., head of a finishing establishment for young ladies at F., in Germany, with whom she lived for some time. Mrs. H. having gone to Paris for a few weeks, to engage a French governess. Miss Butler spent this period at her own home, and the greater part of it in bed, as she was still suffering from the effects of an illness. Here she had a vivid sense of accompanying Madame H. on her search through the different convents of Paris. She finally insisted on returning to F., being sure that Madame H. would be back before the appointed time, which proved to be the case.

" I told her how I had followed all her movements; I described the different convents; described the room in the Sacre Cceur, I think it was, in which she saw the young woman she actually engaged; described the Mother Superior; told her the young lady's name, Mdlle. F., which of course I had never heard, and told her the terms on which she had engaged her. She was astonished. There was a kind of superior housekeeper, a Frau M., who was much in Madame's confidence; she was present while I told my tale and Madame said it was all true. I told her I remembered many other things, the particulars of which have escaped my memory, as they had no interest for me save as they concerned my Madame. Amongst others, I described her meeting with a French gentleman who used to visit her at F., and mentioned the subject of conversation. Mademoiselle came over with her; she made me describe to her the room at the convent, the conversation, &c., and the poor girl said she was frightened of me, she was sure 1 was not all right, and I don't think she ever got over the feeling of constraint, shall I call it, to the end of our connection.

"Isabella Butler."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Butler writes: —

" It must have been in the year 1849 or 1850. I have never had any further experience — at least nothing of the same kind that I could detail in as circumstantial a manner." She has long lost sight of Madame H.; and Mdlle. F. and Frau M. are dead.

In the next few cases the percipient was apparently in a perfectly normal state.

(376) The following incident is recorded in All the Year Round for May 6, 1859, by a physician who does not give his name, but who says that it was described to him as a personal experience by Prof. Wilson, of Edinburgh. The physician himself writes sensibly, and much of his paper is devoted to explaining the purely subjective nature of many of the hallucinations which have been marvelled at as " apparitions."

Prof. Wilson (as reported) begins by describing a picnic party, to which he went with some friends in Ireland: —

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 355

"The thick of the dinner being over, we strolled out, or lolled, in that pleasant prolongation of a repast, which is the best part of a thing of that sort; but as we knew that, according to the programme, our time was limited, on account of some other spots which we had yet to visit, I was deputed to see, by a reference to my watch, that we did not overstay the hour. Accordingly, I had placed my watch — a fine old silver warmingpan, the paternal gift — on a low fragment of ruin that was just opposite to me, and in the intervals of conversation I looked at it, though indeed not quite so often as at the face of Mary M. Suddenly — I perfectly remember the hands were pointing to twenty minutes past two in the sunshine — the watch arrested miy gaze, while a remarkable feeling passed over me. I said to myself, but to this hour I know not why, ' At this exact time my brother R. is dying in India.' The sensation came and went with the rapidity of those unaccountable impressions

' Which make the present, while the flash doth last, Seem but the semblance of an unknown past. '

