Yet, so much was I struck with the incident, that taking out my pocketbook, saying nothing, however, to anybody as to why I did so, I noted down the day and hour of this strange visitation of thought. I did not exactly place confidence in the prevision, yet I could not shake off an unpleasant feeling about it. At length the incident became merged in the frequent repetition to myself that it was ' all fudge,' and I might call it forgotten (there was plenty of time for this, for it was not in the days of steam), when a letter from India brought our family the startling intelligence that my brother had actually died there on the very day when I had made the entry in my pocket-book, and at an hour which, by allowance for latitude [no dou,bt a slip of the writer's own], corresponded exactly with that marked by my watch when I had my eyes on it. Our correspondent also informed us that ray brother had, in his last moments, mentioned me."^

1 The following narrative is very similar, and in detail also closely resembles case 72. I do not give it an evidential number, as it is not certain that the witness was cognisant of the percipient's impression before the news of the death arrived. Mrs. Harper, of Gotham, Bristol, narrates: — "1884.

" My father-in-law, Mr. A. Harper, told me that at one time of his life he was in the Spanish wool trade, and that it necessitated one of the partners residing in Spain, and in consequence his cousin, Mr. James B., went to Spain. Before leaving Bristol he became engaged to a Miss B. Some time after his departure, Miss B. was at a large party, seated at the piano, when she suddenly withdrew her hands, sobbing hysterically, saying, ' James B. is dead; James B. is dead. ' She could not explain how she knew it, but had a most convincing consciousness that it was so, and he really had died in Spain at the time of Miss B.'s distress. "S. J. Harper."

Mrs. Hellier, of Headingly College, Leeds, writes on April 7, 1885: —

" My sister-in-law, Mrs. Harper, of Bristol, has forwarded to me your letter of the 4th, asking for further information regarding an incident related to her by my late father, Mr. A. Harper. I am sorry that I cannot inform you on the point you name, viz., my father being present when it occurred. The probability is that he was not, but that he heard it next day from those who were. He was then in the employ of his uncle, Mr. B. (a Spanish wool merchant), and consequently in daily intercourse wdth him and his other sons, all of whom are dead.

" I well remember hearing my father and mother talk of the incident in question, but being a mere child at the time (7 or 8 years of age) did not take much interest in the conversation. "Jane E. Hellier."

I will add a parallel case in which the incidents are so simple that even a third-hand account is of some evidential force.

Mrs. Michael Smith, of 27, Perham Road, S. W., narrates:— " June, 1884.

" My grandfather, Mr. John Syme, of Ryedale, Dumfriesshire, the friend and patron

356 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

(377) From Mrs. Gierke, Clifton Lodge, Farquhar Road, Upper Norwood, S.E., the narrator of case 242. u ]S[ovember 18th, 1885.

"My two boys returned to school on the 18th September. They intended to try the route via Swindon and Andover, on account of the trains being more convenient, instead of going by Paddington.

" They left home about 3 o'clock, and I heard no more about them until the Monday following, but I was very uneasy all the evening, and about 9.30 I remarked to my daughter, 'I am perfectly convinced that those boys have never got to Marlborough; I am quite sure they are walking about the roads this minute.' She said, ' What nonsense! of course they are all right. Gus ' (the youngest), ' is so sensible, he never would make a mistake.' I said, ' I don't know, but I feel quite sure they have missed one train after another, and have never got there.' On the Monday following I heard from them. They had missed the train at Waterloo, had then gone to Paddington, missed the special there, and had gone by a later, which, by a curious combination of circumstances, had landed them at Woodhorough. They got out, mistaking it in the dark for Marlborough, and only found out their mistake too late, and had walked 11 miles on a road unknown to them, and got to their school at 1 o'clock in the morning. They managed to scale the walls, and found a class-room open, where they got what sleep they could — very little, u ^ Clerke."

Miss Clerke corroborates as follows: — "November 30th 1885.

" I remember distinctly, when my brothers returned to school, that my mother remarked several times to me that she felt quite sure that they were walking about the roads somewhere. We found out afterwards that it was just as my mother said, and, at the time she spoke, they actually were walking to Marlborough. a jj_ y. B. Cleeke."

[In describing the incident to me, Mrs. Clerke, who is the reverse of a nervous or fanciful person, especially dwelt on her impression that her sons were wandering on roads. This particular idea seems a far less likely one to have been purely subjectively caused, through maternal apprehension, than that of some calamity, such as a railway accident. It was also a very unlikely thing to occur in reality. At the same time, it may be conceived that the mention of the projected novel route had led to some passing remark — such as, " Don't blunder about your trains, or you'll have to walk," and that the odd impression had its origin in this forgotten suggestion.]

(378) Mr. J. W. Stillman, the well-known American writer, gives the

of Burns, was a remarkable man. Two of his sons were abroad, one in the army in India, one commanding a sliip of his own in the merchant navy, at the West Indies. One day my grandfather entered the room where my aunt, his only daughter, was sitting, and said to her, ' Harriet, your brother John is dead.' Afterwards it was proved that he had died on that day in India. My aunt noted the day, and six months later came the news of his death. Another time he came to his daughter, and, in exactly the same way,^ stood m the doorway, delivered his speech, and went away— ' Harriet, Richard is dead,'— and subsesequently word came that he had died on that day.

"This was told to me by an uncle, since dead. I have no means of corroborating this, though I know it to be literally true, as my grandfather died more than 50 years ago, and was then past 70. I never saw him. He was with Burns, crossing a moor m a thunderstorm, when Burns was inspired by ' Scots wha hae. ' " o • i

The Harriet of the narrative (Mrs. Smith's aunt) is also dead. Mrs. Smith never heard how the warning was given; she believes that her grandfather never told anyone.

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 357

following account of his experiences in connection with two friends. Of the first he says: —

" She had never been subject to visions or hallucinations, had no tendency to hysteria, and was gifted with great common-sense in practical matters. She was the wife of a physician, and mother of several children. But she had a psychological power which is in my experience unique, and between herself and any very intimate friend there was a mental sympathy almost amounting on her part to clairvoyance. Between her and myself there was especially a sympathy so distinct that I could generally, by excluding physical objects of attention, perceive her mental, sometimes physical, condition, and she on her part had generally a presentiment of my visits.

" She passed a great deal of her time at the house of a married daughter in Brooklyn, my residence being in New York. On one occasion, while staying at her daughter's, she was visited by what the Germans call the Doppel-gdnger of myself. Entering the room where she sat sewing at a window, looking out on the street, at an hour in the afternoon when she had no reason to expect a visit, she remarked at once, ' I knew you were coming for I saw you pass the window 10 minutes ago. You were looking just as you now look, and dressed in precisely the same manner. I waited for you to ring the bell, and when after some time no ring came, I said to myself " Stillman is coming." ' I had not previously passed the house, but came straight from the ferry, and when I came in sight, came from the same direction as the Doppel-gdnger, between which and myself, she said, there was no visible difference. [This, however, may have been a case of mistaken identity.]

" If she ever desired to see me urgently, I felt the impression of her mind so strongly that I invariably, when not urgently occupied, went to her at once. Some years after I knew her, she went to California, in the hope of throwing ofi" the pulmonary disease of which she died, and during her absence we corresponded regularly. One day, during the voyage, I had a sudden and vivid impression that she was dying, and noted it in my diary. The impression passed away, however, and was not renewed. On getting the letter which announced her safe arrival I found recorded that, on the day I had noted in my diary, she had been completely overcome by the intense heat, and had it not been for the steamer's fortunate arrival the same day at Acapulco, where ice and lemon were instantly procured from the shore, in her own opinion and that of the surgeon she would probably have died that day.

" One day, while working quietly in my studio at New York, not knowing where she was, nor having had any recent communication from her, I had stiddenly a vivid perception that she wanted the help of Sara [her daughter]. I crossed the ferry at once to Brooklyn, took a carriage and drove to her daughter's house, saying to her that her mother wanted her, saw her in the carriage, and on her way, and then went back to my studio. The next day I learned that [Mrs. M. had been suddenly forced to participate in a most distressing and agitating] scene, during which her daughter arrived, finding her mother completely prostrated and fainting, and carried her off to her own house.

" One of the most intimate mutual friends of Mrs. M. and myself was a Mrs. B., wife of a well-known American sculptor. Between Mrs. B. and

358 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

myself there was a mental sympathy, even stronger than that with Mrs. M., though difi'erent in kind. Like Mrs. M., she was much my senior, and like her, too, was a victim to an over-developed nervous system, though rarely ill — of uncommon intellectual gifts, and the friend of many of the best minds of that day in America. But, like Socrates, she heard a voice which warned, counselled, and answered her at all times, and whose admonitions neither she nor her husband ever hesitated to obey. She had Zschokke's gift ^ of seeing events in the past life of people with whom she was en rapport, and I remember W. C. Bryant saying one day that she had told him of events of the gravest importance in his life, known to no one then living but himself. In her normal condition she read the thoughts of any one with whom she was intimate, and answered mental questions, or described mental conditions with no hesitation, and the greatest fulness and clearness. Her gifts were carefully limited in their manifestation, or as subjects of conversation, to her circle of intimate friends, with occasional admission of one of their friends with a genuine interest in this class of mental phenomena; nor should I now make them the subject of any relation, but that she is dead. There are still many of her circle living who can attest the truth of what I say; but she would never submit to any examination by sceptical inquirers, and never made any attempt to induce belief in her powers, of which, no more, did she attempt explanation. Her ' occult ' powers varied greatly, and sometimes seemed entirely suspended, as well as affected by the influence of people around her. Between her and myself there was always a complete confidence, and I found it quite impossible to think in her presence and keep my thoughts from her; and her feeling for me was that of an elder sister, so that I willingly submitted my mind to her scrutiny; nor did I ever find her perceptions unfounded, although, in some cases, it was several years before I found out the basis of her impressions.

"W. J. Stillman."

(379) From a lady who desires that names may not be mentioned, owing to the painful nature of one of the facts recorded.

"Sept. 1st, 1886.

" In the spring of this year, while my mother was suffering from a serious illness, a gentleman in the neighbourhood committed suicide by shooting himself in the mouth, between 4 and 5 in the morning, dying about three-quarters of an hour afterwards. Early in the morning of the occurrence, [while the narrator was nursing her,] she mentioned him several times, saying he ' kept flitting about her room and did so bother her, she wished he would go.' After this she addressed the supposed intruder, saying, ' Go! I wish you would go. Why do you come here? I don't want you.' He was a man with whom she was on terms of civility, but had never cordially liked, as she considered he had done her an injury. This led her to add, ' I forgive you, I hope God will. Go! '

[This incident alone could have no weight, as in her illness Mrs.

had seemed to see other absent persons in her room.] She did not allude to him again, and was not quite so restless. The doctor called at halfpast 10; and when I went back to her room after he had gone, I found her in a very excited condition. She said, ' Dr. S. has made me feel so

1 For Zschokke's description of his gift, see Eine Selbstschau, (Aarau, 1843) pp. 227-9.

11.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 359

strange — I never had such peculiar sensations before; I wish he had never come.^ My head is so bad, I don't know how it is, perhaps I shall be able to explain it all to you when I am well.'

" She was very restless all the morning. At 1 o'clock my sister came to relieve me, and tried to fan her to sleep. Her efforts were unavailing, and at last my mother seized her hands, saying, ' It is of no use, you cannot send me to sleep while my head is so queer.' ' How queer V 'I don't know, but ever since Dr. S. came and sat by me, I have felt so strange. When he took my hand, there was a shot, a pistol went off, and then all was confusion.^ But I do not see the blood; was there any blood? ' After which she added, ' I dare say I shall be able to tell you more about it when my head is better; I cannot explain how I feel now, I have never been like this before — it is my brain.' Later on in the afternoon, she mentioned a friend, saying, ' Poor T. has to be shot in the back so often before I can be well. I am very sorry; it is a shame to shoot a nice fellow like him, but they say " Shoot him, shoot him." ' And again, complaining of her head, she said, ' What is all this murdering % I have never been amongst shooting and murdering, have I? There is a pistol — it went off first when Dr. S came, and it has been going on through my head ever since, and the bed is covered with them.' She continued in this excited state all the afternoon, and could not be persuaded to sleep. My sister went to the doctor, and he sent something which soothed her a little; but she did not seem to be really herself again until the next morning.

" We heard from the doctor that he had been to the house where the suicide had been committed, before calling to see my mother, and that he had held the pistol in the same hand with which he touched her. She was not told of the gentleman's death until 3 weeks afterwards; but she frequently alluded to Mr. [the deceased] and his family — which appeared

strange, as they were persons with whom she held very little intercourse. She once remarked that they had quite haunted her ever since that day she was so ill and heard the pistols. Her friend T., whom she had imagined to be shot, had heard early of the suicide, and been engaged in communicating the fact to relatives of the deceased gentleman."

Dr. S. confirmed these facts to me, as far as he was concerned. Mrs.

had never had any connection with pistols or shooting. The suicide

was known of in the house before the doctor's visit; but it was clear to

me from Miss 's viva voce description that no remarks on the subject

could have penetrated to Mrs. 's ears; and, moreover, she was quite

enough herself to understand the news, and comment on it, had it come to her knowledge in a normal way.

(380) From the Rev. Mr. Bryce, The Manse, Moffat. To my great disappointment, I am obliged to give a second-hand version of this case.

1 His visits, as I learnt both from himself and from the narrator, had always, except on this occasion, been grateful and soothing to the patient; and he had regarded her as convalescent.

2 An account of this occurrence, which was sent without authority to a London newspaper, affords a good instance of the way in which a story may get rounded off and beautified in transmission. After exclaiming that a gun had gone off, the lady is made to look wildly round, and to cry " Oh, I see Mr. B. floating about the room," — the vision of the deceased being thus brought into connection with the sound of the shot, through the juxtaposition of events which were separated by several hours; and the fact of the other visual hallucinations being of course omitted.

360 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

On Oct. 1, 1886, Mr. Bryce gave me viva voce a detailed account, which I omitted to commit at once to paper, relying on his promise to write it out and send it to me immediately. Not ha-\dng received it (Oct. 12), I am reduced to giving my present recollections, the accuracy of which, however, so far as they go, I think I can guarantee.

Some years ago, when Mr. Bryce was a student at Edinburgh University, he was called away for a time to attend an elder brother who was much attached to him, and who was seriously ill. His brother's health seemed to be improving; and there being no immediate anxiety, Mr. Bryce left him (I think at Lockerbie) in order to take part in an evening debate at Edinburgh. He was delivering the speech which he had prepared, and was completely intent on the matter in hand, when he was suddenly arrested by what, from his description, I should judge to have been an extremely vivid "mind's eye" vision, bordering on hallucination, and representing his brother. The room and everything in it seemed blotted out, and the single image of his brother seemed to absorb his whole consciousness. He says that he has never had such an experience, or anything in the least resembling it, on any other occasion. I do not recollect how far his peculiar condition excited the attention of his companions • but he himself felt at once convinced that his brother had died, noted the time, and, when he returned to his lodgings, mentioned his conviction to the housekeeper, Mrs. Fenton. (He promised to trace out Mrs. Fenton, who, he is certain, would corroborate him on this point.) His brother died, as he learnt next day, at the exact time — he believes to the very minute — of his own experience.

[Mr. Bryce is sure that he was not appreciably anxious about his brother's condition, and he was certainly not thinking of him at the moment. Still, as he had just left him, after being constantly with him for some time, and with a mind influenced perhaps more than he himself knew by his recent cares and duties, it would be difficult to argue that his experience was telepathic, rather than purely subjective, but for the alleged exactitude of the coincidence. And we may fairly suppose, I think, that the coincidence was at any rate a very close one; since Mr. Bryce was not led to consider the time of his experience by learning the fact of the death, but noted the time of his experience under a conviction that the death had at that moment taken place, and was specially interested in finding out, next day, whether his conviction had been justified.]

(381) From Miss Caulfield, 1, Hyde Park Mansions, N.W.

"December 8th, 1883.

" Many years ago, when staying with my father at Beckford House, Bath, I awoke one morning painfully impressed by the idea that something was amiss at my sister's (in Ireland); could not guess what it was — whether illness, danger, or accident. So being exceedingly uneasy, and convinced that something had happened, I wrote at once to inquire whether all were well. A letter from her crossed mine, telling me that she had had a great alarm, and had been in danger on that night; for that a beam of wood — connected with the nursery fireplace and the floor — had become ignited, and unknown to anyone had been smouldering for some hours; and had it proceeded any further unseen, they might not have been able to save the house, nor perhaps even themselves. The house being in the

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 361

country, at a considerable distance from any other dwelling, a fire, at night more especially, would have proved calamitous in the extreme.

" Sophia F. A. Caulpield."

After writing to her sister on the subject. Miss Caulfield adds: —

" My sister remembers the incident, but has only a faint recollection of my letter having crossed hers."

[Asked if this was a unique experience, or whether she had had similar impressions which had not corresponded with reality, Miss C. replied that she had had only one similar experience, and that there her impression was correct. (This other experience was a presentiment, and has no relation to the above.) And though impressions of the sort which are not stamped by a coincidence may easily fade from the memory, it may be assumed that a person who remembers none has not experienced many so strong as to have prompted her to write a letter.]

The following are instances where the impression seems to have been of a decidedly pictorial kind, as in the scene-cases at the close of Chap. yi. in the preceding volume. The account is unfortunately anonymous, but there seems to be no reason to doubt its hona fides. The mental condition of the percipient recalls case 373.

(382 and 383) From the Zoist, Vol. V., p. 30, sent by Mr. Clark, Surgeon, of York Place, Kingsland Road, E., who had received it from a lady of his acquaintance. " July Hth 1846.

"In the years 1841-2, my dear respected father was frequently attacked with mental derangement, originating greatly, I believe, from the knowledge of the unfortunate circumstances in which I, his beloved daughter, was placed, owing to the sudden death of my husband.

" The various scenes of mental delusion I was called to witness are not uncommon to gentlemen of your profession; I therefore pass them over simply to relate his strange knowledge of events.

" My attention was first excited by the following incident. So soon as the meat for dinner was brought from the butcher's, of which he could have no possible knowledge, being confined to his bed, and out of reach of either seeing or hearing, he exclaimed (pointing to the floor underneath, which was the room it was in), ' What a nice rump-steak; I will have some.' Struck with his manner, and also knowing that it was not our intended dinner, I replied, ' No, father, there is no rump-steak; we are going to have mutton-chops '; he went into a great passion, declared that there was rump-steak, that he could see it, and described the dish. I went downstairs, and to my utter astonishment beheld it as he related.

" In the morning, without making known my intention, I took a basket and went into the garden, to cut some cabbages and gather strawberries. The garden being at the side of the house, where there was no window to look into it, it was impossible for him to see me by ordinary vision. However, he turned to my sister, saying, 'That basket into which Betsey is putting the cabbages and strawberries had better be moved out of the sun, or the fruit will be spoiled; tell her she is not gathering strawberries from the best bed, she had better go to the other.' When I was told of it, I was completely puzzled. During the time of my visit, wherever I went, whatever I did or thought of, was open to his view.

362 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" My sister afterwards informed me that his medical attendant lent her some books for her perusal. One morning my father said to her, ' The doctor sends his respects, and will be obliged for the books.' Supposing some message had been sent, my sister replied, ' Very well.' In the course of a short time after, the doctor's boy arrived with his master's respects and request for the books. On inquiry, she found no previous message had been sent, nor inquiry made for them. We have both come to the conclusion that he must mentally have travelled to the doctor's and heard the message; I should think the distance three-quarters of a mile.

" Another time he said to my sister, ' There is a handsome young man and an old woman, coming by the coach this afternoon to see me.' Sure enough, to her surprise, when the coach arrived, it brought my brother and a nurse for my father. No one had any knowledge of my brother's coming, or of his bringing a nurse with him. The distance from whence they came was 1 1 miles. I wish to call your attention to the circumstance that here he did not recognise the parties, though both were wellknown to him; calling my brother a young man and the nurse an old woman, instead of mentioning their names.

"When in his senses, he knew nothing of what had transpired, and had no recollection of my coming to see him. He wasted away to a skeleton and died, midsummer, 1842, in the 64th year of his age. He never, until the time stated, had any mental derangement, though he certainly was for years very nervous. At the time, I knew nothing of phrenology, so cannot give his development. I know he was a talented and very active man, a kind and affectionate father.

" My second case, that of my eldest sister, though in priority of time before my father, is yet not so interesting. She was in a bad state of health some years — I suppose what might be called nervous. The circumstances I am about to relate occurred during a severe illness, in which mental derangement took place. At one time she would take no food, at another eat most voraciously. One day we had ribs of beef for dinner. How it came to her knowledge, I could never ascertain, but so it did, and she insisted on having some for her dinner. I gave her some; she wanted more. Fearing to make her worse I would not give it her; she declared she should have it, but soon after went to sleep. I went quietly downstairs, took the meat out of the kitchen, carried it down through the beer-cellar into the wine-cellar, covered it over with a tub, put a weight on it, went up and found her just as I left her. During the night, through fatigue, I fell asleep, and was awakend by her calling to me. What was my astonishment when I beheld her sitting in bed with a slice of this l3eef cut the whole length of the ribs, devouring it like a savage. I asked her how she obtained it, and she positively declared that she fetched it herself while I slept; that while lying in bed she saw me go down, take the meat, and she described every particular. I believe she never left her bed when I hid it; and had she, there were three doors which I closed after me, and I must have seen her. When she recovered she knew nothing about it, but on a relapse told me all the circumstances again, laughing heartily at the trick she had played on me."

Here, again, it will be seen, the clairvoyance recorded does not pass beyond the telepathic type where what is perceived is within

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 363

the view or knowledge of persons connected with the percipient.^ (Vol. I, pp. 266, 378-9.)

§ 2. The next two examples are parallel to the arrival cases in Chap. VI. (Vol. I., pp. 252-4).

(384) From Mrs. Gibbes, Alverton House, Croydon Road, S.E.

" September, 1884.

" My son was in Mexico and I had no reason to expect his return. He had been absent for four years.

"In December, 1883, an impression came upon me that he would be soon home, and I could not get rid of it. My daughters laughed at me, but my feeling of it grew so strong that I determined to prepare a room for him. I began quietly one evening, and got up early next morning to clean out a study for him myself, not letting the others know that I was doing it. Whilst I was on the step, dusting the birdcases, a telegram arrived to say he would be home in the evening.

"He had had an attack of yellow fever, and had come by sea to New York. His uncle persuaded him not to telegraph from there, but to come as a surprise.

" I have had impressions of misfortunes, and have noted down the dates, but nothing has happened. " Kate Gibbes."

Mr. Gibbes writes: —

" I find the statements correct as far as my memory is concerned.

" W. R. Gibbes (M.R.C.S.E., &c.) "

In conversation, Mrs. Gibbes stated that her son's letters had contained no hint of his return, which would not have occurred but for his attack of yellow fever. Her daughters bore witness to her state of excited expectation.

[Here the impression at any rate produced a definite act of a very unlikely kind. The final sentence in Mrs. Gibbes's account of course detracts somewhat from the force of the coincidence; but, though I am bound to print that sentence, she herself (in August, 1886) doubts its correctness, and cannot recall to what it referred.]

1 The same remark applies to an interesting case in tlie Correspondence de Mme. la Duchesse d'Orleans (Paris, 1857), Vol, i., pp. 112-3, to which our attention was called by M. GuiUaume Guizot. ^ « Versailles, 2 mars, 1709.

"II y a dix ans qu'un gentilhomme frangais, qui a ^t^ page du mar^chal d'Humiferes, et qui a epous^ une de mes dam.es d'atour, amena avec lui un sauvage [du Canada] en France. Un jour qu'on ^tait k table, le sauvage se mit k pleurer et h faire des grimaces. Longueil (ainsi s'appelait le gentilhomme) lui demanda ce qu'il avait, et s'il souffrait. Le sauvage ne iit que pleurer plus amferement. Longueil insistant vivement, le sauvage lui dit: ' Ne me force pas h, le dire, car c'est toi que cela concerne, et non pas moi.' _ Presse plus que jamais, il finit par dire: ' J'ai vu par la fenetre que ton frere ^tait assassin^ en tel endroit du Canada' par telle personne qu'il lui nomma. Longueil se mit k rire, et lui dit: ' Tu es devenu f ou. ' Le sauvage r^pondit: ' Je ne suis point du tout fou; mets par ecrit ce que je t'annonce, et tu verras si je me trompe.' Longueil ecrivit, et six mqis aprfes, quand les navires du Canada arrivferent, il apprit que la mort de son frfere ^tait arrivee au moment exact et h. I'endroit oti le sauvage I'avait vu en I'air psiv la fenetre. C'est une histoire trfes vraie."

We cannot be sure that this incident was told to the Duchess d'Orl^ans by any one who was cognisant of the experience before the news which confirmed it arrived. But supposing the report to be substantially correct, it is to be presumed that the percipient was acquainted with the man whose death he seemed to behold; though it is still probable that the presence with him at the time of that man's brother was to some extent a condition of the percipience, as in cases 242 and 355 above. I have drawn attention (Vol. I., pp. 156-7) to the suspicious exactitude of coincidence which characterises second and third-hand narratives of this type.

364 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

The next narrative, though worth quoting, can hardly receive an evidential number; for its incidents could only be attributed to thought-transference by assuming — what is not proved — that the visits were already intended, at the time that the impressions were felt; and, moreover, in the absence of an accurate written record, every allowance must be made for the liability in such matters to note successes and not failures.

From Mr. Robert Gribson, Mulgrave Cottage, Limerick.

"January 18th, 1884.

" Scores of times, when I would be going down to my office, after breakfast, my wife [who was in delicate health, and is since deceased] would say to me, ' Miss So-and-so or Mrs. So-and-so will be here to-day; don't let them come up to the house; say I am not able to see them '; or ' So-and-so will be here to-day, let them come in.'

"I used to laugh, and say, 'Humbug, how do you know they are coming! ' and she would reply, ' I feel that they are, and be sure you leave word with some of the men if you are going out.'

" With only one exception was she ever wrong, to my memory; that was one Friday. She said, ' The Miss Mercers are coming to-day.' I happened to be in my office the whole day; and they did not come; so at length I laughed, and said, ' Well, my love, you were wrong, the Miss Mercers did not come.' She asked me, ' Are you sure % ' ' Quite,' I replied, ' I never left the place all day.' ' Well,' she said, ' I am positive they were coming.' Of course I laughed at her, and told her it was stupid to be positive about what was not so.

" You may guess my surprise if you can, when on the next Sunday, coming out of church. Miss Mercer came up to me, and said, ' Please tell Mrs. Gibson that Nan ' (her sister) ' and I were coming to see her on Friday, when Nan remembered a book she had promised to take Mrs, Gibson and ran back for it, leaving me walking up and down the street. I waited fully 20 minutes, and then went in and found Miss Nan sitting by the fire, cloakless and hatless, with a book in her hand. She could not find the book she was looking for, and after looking for it for ever so long, thought I had gone on, and that there would be no chance of overtakmg me, so took off her hat and cloak, and sat down to read.' "

To these I may add two more cases in which the chief feature is a sense of someone's proximity, but in which the fact of that proximity was already known to a third person, who may have been the agent.

(385) From a lady, Mrs. W., who prefers that her name should not be published. u 1884.

"In the autumn of 1860, I was staying in London with my husband [since deceased] for a short time, and one Saturday evening was alone in my bedroom dressing to go to the opera, when suddenly something seemed to say to me, ' Shut and lock your door, there is a madman in the house.' So strong was this impression that I searclied all over the room and

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 365

locked the door. I dressed hurriedly, rushed downstairs, and told my husband, who was very much amused, and laughed at me! The next evening (Sunday) we sent the servant on a little errand for us; she was about an hour away. When she came in, she said she was very sorry she had been so long, but she had to wait for the mistress's return, who had been taking her husband back to the lunatic asylum, for when he was not violent she had him home from Saturday until Sunday night.

" My husband was very much startled, and we left the next day."

Mr. Podmore says: —

" In conversation, Mrs. W. explained that she had imagined her landlady to be a widow, and had not had the least suspicion of the true state of the case. She told me that she has on one or two other occasions had strong impressions of this kind, but never so marked as in this instance. She had no recollection of any impression of the kind which had not 'come true.' "

(386) From Mr. James Cowley, who wrote from 32, Langton Street, Cathay, Bristol. "January 8th, 1884.

" Some two years ago, in the Hereford Cathedral, at an eveningservice, I became oppressed with the feeling that a certain person (I must ' withhold the name), whose contact would have been most painful to me, must necessarily have been near me. I had not seen that person for 5 years. More than once I turned my head to take a look round. But there was no sign of him. Next morning I learned that he had been in Hereford on the day before (Saturday), and that a person sitting next to me, in the cathedral, on my left-hand, had been for some hours in his company."

Asked if he mentioned the incident at the time, and if he could refer me to the person who was sitting near him, Mr. Cowley replies that:

" The Hereford Cathedral affair did not (from the nature of the circumstances rendering the sensation so distressing) admit of my referring to it. It was only when asked by a tradesman, brother-in-law of the person whose fancied proximity distressed me, ' Did you see So-and-so on Saturday 1 ' that to him alone I mentioned the occurrence."

§ 3. I will insert next a curious little group of cases in which it is difficult or impossible to assign the impression to the "agency " of any particular person, and which recall the Greek notion of <fn[>-ri — the rumour which spreads from some unknown source, and far outstrips all known means of transport.^ The type is one where the

1 Something of this sort has been occasionally observed in outbreaks of religious hysteria. For example, the Rev. P. Barrow Matthews, rector of San Salvador, writes as follows of a recent case in the Bahamas: —

" When the girls came to [after their fits], they gave very detailed accounts of the visions they had seen. A great deal of these visions was, of course, nonsense, but one thing was remarkable — they spoke of people doing things many miles away from the place. Upon inquiry it was found in some cases that what they had seen corresponded exactly Avith the events. One most remarkable feature in this outbreak was that it was not confined to one spot. Almost simultaneously in every settlement on the island (the island is 42 miles long and 12 broad in places) similar outbreaks occurred. G-irls living at distances of 5 or 10 miles from the scene of the ' shouting meetings, ' as they were called, would be seized. Being seized by a kind of frenzy, they would run, as if by inspiration, to the spot where the rest were assembled, no matter how far. "

366 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

scope of accident is so hard to estimate, and which is so distinct from that of the remainder of our telepathic evidence, that I quote most of the accounts without evidential numbers. They may possibly serve to elicit further instances.

Mr. E.. Stuart Poole writes from the British Museum on Aug. 1, 1884: —

" My recollection of the story of my brother's impression of the Duke of Cambridge's death was this. He was sitting with one or more of his relations one evening, and suddenly took out his watch, and said, ' Note the time, the Duke of Cambridge is dead.' The time proved to be correct. My brother had no acquaintance with the Duke, and no reason for any interest in him. He was a very clear-headed official man, without what is called superstition. " Reginald Stuart Poole."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Poole writes: —

"I do not recollect being present when my brother had the monition, but my recollection is that he told me himself, or that it was told me by someone present. It made a strong impression on me at the time."

We find from the Times that the late Duke of Cambridge died, somewhat suddenly, at 9.40 p.m., on July 9th, 1850; but bulletins as to his health had been published in the last week of June, and on the day before his death.

Though the case is undoubtedly weakened by the fact that the person who died was old, and in failing health, such a coincidence — when backed by others of the same type — seems to claim attention; at any rate till one hears of a good many cases where similarly positive statements have been made by clear-headed practical men, as to similar matters of which they could know nothing by normal means, and have proved incorrect. Yet to suppose a direct telepathic transfer from the dying man to a total stranger would seem extravagant; and hardly less extravagant may seem the only alternative that it is easy to imagine — namely, that the " agency " was of a collective kind, and consisted in a certain shock of interest in the minds of a considerable number of persons who had already heard the news,

I give three more examples — of which two are properly " borderland " cases, but are best presented in this connection. It is a rather quaint accident that the honour of occasioning such psychical storms should (so far as these instances go) seem reserved for persons of ducal or imperial rank.

Mr. Gervase Marson, of Birk Crag, Higher Broughton, Manchester, writes, on Dec. 6, 1883: —

" On the morning of December 6th, 1879, I suddenly awoke, and sat up in the bed, as if startled. To my great surprise I found myself uttering the words, ' Portland, Portland.' The next day I read in the papers

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 367

of the death of the Duke of Portland, which I believe took place about the time when I was involuntarily uttering his name.

" I cannot account for this experience at all. No conversation respecting the Duke of Portland had taken place the evening previously; I did not know he was ill; never saw him in my life; had never been at any of his residences; and, in fact, neither knew nor cared anything about him. 1 was not dreaming just before I awoke, but believe I was sleeping, as is ray wont, quite soundly. " G. Marson."

[The Daily Telegraph of Dec. 8, 1879, states that the late Duke of Portland died at 5 a.ra. on Saturday, Dec. 6.]

Mr. G. W. Waddington, of 26, Bagdale, Whitby, Yorkshire, writes, on Aug. 5, 1884:—

" When a passenger on board the ' Satellite ' in the Pacific, on a voyage from San Francisco to Callao, Peru, I was awoke about 4 a.m. of the 14th of September, 1852, by the noise of one who jumped on deck and called out at the cabin door, 'The Duke of Wellington is dead.' The occurrence was the subject of conversation at breakfast, and being noted, it was inquired if such an event had taken place from the captain of the port, before any communication took place with any other person coming on board. I had seen the Duke but once, and that on the occasion of an inspection of troops before the Horse Guards, on the Queen's anniversary coronation day of June 28th, 1842. " G. W. Waddington."

Mr. Waddington admits that the noise of the jumping may have been a real sound, but says, as regards the voice, " I do not think anyone on board could have invented any such means of trying one's credulity."

[The Duke of Wellington died on September 14th, 1852, at 3.15 p.m. Consequently, if the hour of the experience is correctly remembered, it preceded the death by at least 3 hours, and probably by more.]

Madame NovikofF writes, on Aug. 7, 1884: —

" A friend of mine, whose accuracy seems to me undeniable, gave me the following account: —

" On the night when the late Empress Maria Alexandrovna died, my friend awoke her husband, exclaiming, ' The Empress is dead.' It was not a dream, but a spontaneous impression. She added that she had had several experiences of a similar kind. Her husband disliking this subject I do not wish to apply to her on the matter. " O. K."

[We find from the Times that the Empress died at 8 a.m., on June 3, 1880. She had been known for some months to be in a critical state.]

Comparable with these cases^ are the two following, which, if more

1 The following narrative is too amusing not to be quoted. It is from A Memoir of G. Mayne Young, tvith Extracts from his Son's Journal, by the Rev. Julian C. Young, pp. 337-340. After describing his liability, when over-fatigued, to persistent inward impressions of words, amounting perhaps to a low stage of auditory hallucination, Mr. Young continues: —

' ' On waking on Monday night last, I was possessed, as it were, by four mystic words, each of one syllable, conveying no more idea to my mind than if they were gibberish, and yet delivered with as much solemnity of tone, deliberation of manner, and pertinacity of sequence, as if they were meant to convey to me some momentous intimation. They were all the more exciting that they were unintelligible, and apparently

368 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

than accidental coincidences, can only be accounted for by the fact that the idea was " in the air." The hypothesis is here, perhaps, a little less difficult, as the original impression was of a sort which affected numbers vividly and simultaneously.

(387) From Mr. J. A. Edmonds, 16, Waterloo Road South, Wolverhampton. "1883.

" At a period during the formation of the Thames Tunnel, the date of which I cannot recall without reference to the daily papers, my brother, Cyrus Read Edmonds, was head-master of the Leicestershire Proprietary Grammar School, at Leicester, and lived almost close to the school buildings.

" On one occasion, when he was in bed, his wife was awoke (I think, at somewhere about 5 or 6 ^ in the morning) by a loud exclamation of terror from my brother. She inquired the cause, and he, in a state of horror, said that he had seen the Thames Tunnel break through, that the workmen rushed to the staircases or ladders, the means of exit, but one poor fellow (less active than the others who escaped) was overtaken by the rush of water and perished. My brother was in a state of tremor and distress, such as a humane man might be supposed to sujQfer as a witness of such a scene. He begged his wife not to sleep, but to converse until it should be time to rise. She urged that it was but a dream, and that the effect would pass off if he could get a little sleep. ' A dream,' he said, 'it is no dream. I distinctly saw all that I have described.'

" On the day in the early morning of which this vision occurred, my

could not serve any ostensible purpose. I could not exclude them by putting cotton wool in my ears, for they came from within and not from without. To try to supplant them by encouraging a fresh train of ideas was hopeless: my will and my reason were alike subservient to some irresistible occult force. The words which beset me were 'dowd,' 'swell,' 'pull,' 'court,' and they were separated as I have written them into monosyllables, and' were repeated with an incisive distinctness and monotonous precision which was quite maddening. I sat up in my bed and struck a light to make sure that I was awake and not dreaming. All the while were reiterated, as if in a circle, the same wild words: 'Dowd,' 'swell,' 'pull,' 'court.' I lay down again and put out my candle, 'dowd,' 'swell,' 'pull,' 'court.' I turned on my left side, 'dowd,' 'swell,' 'pull,' 'court.'' I turned on my right, 'dowd,' 'swell,' 'i^ull,' 'court.' I endeavoured as a means' of dispersing these evil spirits— for they began to assume the importance of spirits in my heated brain — to count sheep over a stile, but still 'dowd,' 'swell,' 'pull,' 'court,' rang in my ears and reverberated through my mind."

After many vain efforts, Mr. Young at last fell asleep. He mentioned his experience next day to his father and to some friends, the Misses Smith. On the following Thursday, he says:—

"I walked into Folthorp's Library to read the papers; and, as usual, ran my eye down the births, marriages, and deaths in the Times. As I came to the obituary the following notice caught my sight:—

'"On Tuesday night, November 11th, John E. Dowdswell, of Pull Court, Tewkesbury.' \W& have verified this notice in the Times for November 13th, 1851. The name is Dowdeswell.] So that probably, on the self-same night, at the very time when this gentleman's name and residence were so unaccountably and painfully present to my mind he was actually dying." [This last expression is misleading, as the death did not take place till the following night.]

Mr. Myers says: —

" I have siDoken to the Misses Smith as to this occurrence, which they distinctly remember. They were slightly acquainted with Mr. Dowdeswell, but Mr. Young was a stranger to him entirely."

1 I don't assert this. — J. A. E.

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 369

brother and his wife were engaged to a dinner-party at the house of a gentleman, whose name, I. believe, was Whetstone. Before they left the drawing-room for the dining-room, his host said to my brother, ' Have you heard the sad news from London? ' He said, ' No, what is it? ' He replied, ' The Thames Tunnel has broken in. All the people in the works escaped, except one poor fellow who was overwhelmed.' ^ My brother thought that his wife might have told their host, and that they would rally him out of his depression. But on looking at her, the look of astonishment quite precluded this notion. He asked his host if he were joking, at which he was much surprised, and asked how a joke could possibly be elicited from such an occurrence.

" My brother then said, ' I saw it happen, just as you have related it, so my wife will assure you, and I am yet suffering from the exhaustion and depression produced.' He then told the company what I have related above.

" I heard the whole relation both from him [by letter at the time, and viva voce some weeks afterwards] and his wife [both now dead], and many of our friends were acquainted with the history.

"J. Augustus Edmonds." The construction of the Thames Tunnel lasted from 1825 to 1843. During this period there were five irruptions of the water of more or less importance. The fourth was the only occasion on which one man was drowned. The Times of ISTov. 4th, 1837, records that at a few minutes before 4 o'clock on that morning, a sudden irruption of the river took place and filled the tunnel. J. Francis, engineer on duty at the time of the accident, stated that, on discovering the water was beginning to overflow he " immediately gave the alarm for all hands to run, and from that time the filling of the tunnel occupied less than five minutes. We then ran with all speed to the shaft." The water lulled slightly, and he in company with two other men " went down the archway about 200 feet, and saw the water rolling up the roadway with a terrific appearance. We then ran to the staircase, and finally ascended to the top of the shaft. The water arrived a few seconds after us. I then had all the names called over, and found only one missing. Garland, an old man, a miner."

(388) From a book called Pith (Triibner and Co., 1881), by Newton Crosland, pp. 63-4.

"In October, 1857, about 1 o'clock in the day, I was going from my office to sign an export bond at the Custom House, Lower Thames Street, a distance of about a quarter of a mile. I was in my usual satisfactory state of health; my mind was occupied with merely common-place ideas; the traffic in the streets was going on with ordinary monotonous activity, and nothing was apparent there to wake in me the slightest trepidation, when, just as I was crossing Great Tower Street, I was seized with an unaccountable panic. I conceived a dread that I might be attacked by a tiger, and the idea of this horrible fate so haunted me that I absolutely began running in hot haste, and I did not stop until I found myself safe inside the walls of the Custom House. Anything more contemptibly absurd than this apparently caiiseless fear could scarcely be imagined — a

1 We have ascertained from the Post Office that at that time the London mail-coach would reach Leicester about 6 p.m.; so that the report may easily have arrived before dinner-time.



Vol. Ii. 2 B

370 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

merchant in the streets of London in danger of a wild beast! The possibility of such a disaster seemed to me to be so ridiculous, the moment I thought about it, that I laughed at myself for allowing so foolish and morbid a fancy to take possession of my mind, and I really considered that I must be fast becoming stupidly nervous. The feeling of apprehension soon, however, passed away, and wonder at my own weakness became predominant. The next morning I took up the Times newspaper, when to my utter astonishment, I read that at precisely the same time when I felt the crazy fear, a tiger had actually escaped from its cage while it was being conveyed from the London Docks, seriously injured two children, and had, to the terror of every observer, ferociously misconducted himself in the public street of Wapping — about a mile, as the crow flies, from the spot where I was passing."

The following passage occurs in the Times on Oct. 27, 1857: — " Frightful Occurrence. — Yesterday afternoon, about 1 o'clock, as a cattle van was conveying from London Docks a Bengal tiger, the door gave way and the animal bounded into the road, encountered a little boy, spi'ang upon him, lacerating him in a frightful manner," &c.

A subsequent report, October 30th, states that two boys were injured.

Mr. Crosland writes to us, on June 7, 1884: —

"42, Crutched Friars, London.

" I am afraid I cannot help you much in your attempt to strengthen my evidence respecting ' the tiger story.' When on my way to the Custom House I felt the dread of a tiger in the streets, which impelled me to run to a refuge. I was not so much disturbed as to exhibit any signs of alarm. After I reached the Custom House, I soon recovered my composure, and thought my fear was so causeless and silly that I did not mention the circumstance to anyone. I considered that to do so would be to make myself a,ppear ridiculous. " Newton Crosland."

In another letter he says, " I am quite certain that my sensations were felt at the precise tim,e when the incident occurred at Wapping."

I 4. We come now to a group where the impression, though indefinite in character, recalling the purely emotional cases of Vol. 1., Chap. VII,, had reference to a particular individual known to the percipient, as in case 86.

(389) From a clergyman, who desires that his name may not be published. He writes as follows to his daughter: — a 1882.

"When your brother E. was at Winchester College (about 1856 or 1857), on going to bed one Saturday night, I could not sleep. When your miother came into the room, she found me restless and uneasy. I told her that a strong impression had seized me that something had happened to your brother. The next day, your mother, on writing to E., asked me if I had any message for him, when I replied: ' Tell him I particularly want to know if anything happened to him yesterday.' Your mother laughed, and made the remark that I should be frightened if a letter in Dr. Moberly's handwriting reached us on Monday. I replied, ' I should be afraid to open it.' On the Monday morning a letter did come from Dr.

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 371

Moberly, to tell me that E. had met with an accident, that one of his schoolfellows had thrown a piecs of cheese at him which had struck one of his eyes; and that the medical man, Mr. Wickham, thought I had better come down immediately and take your brother to a London oculist."

In answer to inquiries, the narrator writes to us, on March 13, 1885: —

" The impression, with regard to my son, was on a Saturday. The accident had occurred on the Thursday previously, but Dr. Moberly did not write to inform me of it till Saturday, when the Winchester medical man had ordered that a London oculist should be consulted.

"I cannot call to mind any occasion on which I received a like impression which was not verified. There is one which occurred in former years, which I call to mind. When at school and saying my prayers one evening, I was impressed with the idea that my eldest brother was dying, and this was the case, as I was informed the day following. I did not know at the time that he was ill."

[The first of these cases could hardly have been presented alone, owing to the lack of precision in the coincidence. But its interest is increased by the occurrence of the other more precise experience to the same person.]

(390) From Mrs. Brandon, resident in Canada, who wrote from Farmhill, Donegal, Ireland. "January, 1884.

" The steamship ' Canadian,' in which Mr. Brandon was sailing to England, was shipwrecked in the Atlantic, east of the straits of Belleisle, on the 4th of June, 1861. She foundered in the ice, and 38 lives were lost. In the evening of the same day, Mr. James Patton, a merchant in Montreal (where we were then living), was teaching Mr. Brandon's Tuesday evening class in Great St. James' Street Methodist Church, I being present at the time. Mr. Patton said, ' This day my mind was urgently impressed with the necessity to pray for Mr. Brandon — so much so, particularly at the hour of noon, that I had to leave oflT writing about my business in my ofiice, and retire to a private place, and pour out my soul in prayer to God for Mr. Brandon.' We could not understand at the time the meaning of the mysterious circumstance; but 10 days afterwards we understood it all. At the very hour when Mr. Patton was engaged in prayer for Mr. Brandon, he (Mr. B.) was standing on the wreck of a sinking ship, and was miraculously saved from a watery grave."

[Mr. Brandon has sent us an account of the foundering of the ship, and the loss of 38 men. Mr. Patton is deceased.]

(391) From a letter entitled " Brain Waves — a Theory," written by Mr. James Knowles, which appeared in the Spectator, 30th January, 1869.

" Mr. Woolner, the sculptor, tells me the following story of two young men — one of them a personal friend of his own now living. These two men lived for very long as great friends, but ultimately quarrelled, shortly before the departure of one of them for New Zealand. The emigrant had been absent for many years, and his friend at home (Mr. Woolner's informant) never having kept up correspondence with him, naturally almost lost the habit of thinking of him or his affairs. One day, however, as he sat in his rooms in a street near Oxford Street, the thought of his friend came suddenly upon him, accompanied by a most restless and undefinable discomfort. He could by no means account for it, but, finding the feeling

372 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

grew more and more oppressive, tried to throw it off by change of occupation. Still the discomfort grew, until it amounted to a sort of strange horror. He thought he must be sickening for a bad illness, and at leng-th, being unable to do anything else, went out of doors and walked up and down the busiest streets, hoping by the sight and sound of multitudes of men and ordinary things to dissipate his strange misery. Not, however, until he had wandered to and fro in the most wretched state of feeling for more than two hours, utterly unable to shake off a sort of vague consciousness of his friend, did the impression leave him, and his usual frame of mind return. So greatly was he struck and puzzled by all this, that he wrote down the precise date of the day and hour of the occurrence, fully expecting to have news shortly of or from his friend. And, surely, when the next mail or the next but one arrived, there came the horrible news that at that very day and hour (allowance being made for latitude and longitude) his friend had been made a prisoner by the natives of New Zealand, and put to a slow death with the most frightful tortures."

Mr. Woolner, in writing to us in August, 1883, after making some trifling corrections, says: —

" Mr. Knowles has told the story accurately; and having told him only once, I am surprised that he should have been so faithful in his narrative. I have not seen or heard of the person for many years, and know not the least where to find him. I am very sorry I cannot help you any further."

The name of the man who was killed was Cooke, or Cook. Mr. Woolner has given us the name of his informant, but desires that it may not be published. We have tried to trace him without success. Mr. Woolner says: "I believe he was perfectly sincere when he told me the story in or about 1850 "; and adds that the incident occurred some time between 1842 and 1846.

Of the three hupressions in the following account two were connected at the moment with a particular individual. The three, though each alone might easily have been accidental, are worth presenting as having occurred in the experience of a single person; and they find their most convenient place here, though two of them seem to have been of the " borderland " class. In the second case, the narrator's experience followed the death (she thinks) by perhaps a day or two; nor can she be certain that the coincidence in the first case was closer than this, though it may have been closer.

(392) Miss Loveday, of Arlescote, Banbury, enclosed to us, on February 14, 1884, the following letter from her sister, who desires that her own name should not be published. In conversation she described herself as a matter-of-fact person; and she is certain that she has never on other occasions had impressions at all resembling those described.

" I have had three different intimations of death — ^on Uncle William's death, on Henry H.'s [a brother-in-law's] death, and on B.'s. The two first were more sensations than anything else. It is a thing hardly to be described. It is like nothing else. Not alarming; rather like one's idea of the severance of nerves; of something cut off, that is, and lost to your-

11.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 373

self, of a want, a something gone from you. On the occasion of Henry's death, I did not know who was gone. I was away in Germany; but I awoke with the sensation, and I told my children, ' I have had that feeling that I have had before on the loss of a relation. I do not know who is gone; but someone seems gone; perhaps it is Aunt Edward.' Then in a day or so came the news of Henry's death. [The narrator was warmly attached to both her uncle and her brother-in-law.]

" The last occasion {i.e., of B.'s death) it was the most distinct of all. [Miss Loveday says, " B. was an old servant of our family, who was very dear to us all."] It was in 1880, in the autumn. I was in Germany. I had gone to lie down after the early dinner on Sunday, to rest before the long walk to church; and I fell asleep. I had the most calm and delightful awaking — no actual words, but a happy feeling that B. was passing away to Heaven peacefully, and that I was intended to know it. If I put into words what my impression was, it was this — ' As if some spirit had gently touched me and said, " B. is passing away, rise up and pray." ' I at once rose up and went into the next room, and told my boys ' I have had an intimation that B. is dying; remember it. I shall hear.' I then went back to my bedside to kneel in prayer. The happiness and peace of the few minutes was intense. I had longed to see him once again before he died, and had feared I should not be in England in time, though I was going in a few days, as I knew his end was near; but being led to know the day and hour was to me like a leave-taking and a good-bye from himself, and I felt it was permitted to assure and comfort me. Two or three days later I heard it was that very day he died; and when I got to England and saw his wife. Oath, I found it was the same time, allowing for my being nearly 40 minutes to the eastward on the globe. The two first intimations, though not alarming, were not of the comforting, reassuring, and happy feeling of the last."

We find from the Register of Deaths that B. died on October 10, 1880, The two previous deaths took place on April 2, 1875, and January 21, 1878, respectively.

One of the narrator's sons writes on Jan. 28, 1886: —

"I distinctly remember that one afternoon (I think Wednesday), about two weeks before we came away from Germany, mother was lying down, and suddenly she said to me that she felt as if a friend, someone whom she had known for a very long time, was at that moment dying. She did not think it was a relation, because the feeling was not the same as when Uncle Henry died. She thought it was very probably B., but did not say that she felt as if it was of necessity B. who was dying. I did not feel surprised, because almost exactly the same had happened when Uncle Henry died, and yet I felt equally sure that it was correct.

" About three days afterwards we got a letter to say that B. had died on the very afternoon in question, at about the same time as events above recorded, i.e., at about 3.30 p.m., as nearly as I can recollect."

The other son writes from Cambridge, on Jan. 26, 1886: —

" I shall be happy to testify to the fact of my mother having mentioned to me that she had a presentiment that ' B.' was passing away and that thi-s was anterior to any communication even of an illness."

[The force of the last coincidence is of course greatly diminished by the fact of the percipient's having known that B.'s " end was near." The

374 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

narrator thinks that she was aware of her uncle's being rather seriously ill; but she had no similar knowledge in the case of her brother-in-law, whose death was quite unexpected.]

(393) E. M. Arndt, a well-known writer on political and social questions, in his Schriften fur and an seine Liehen Deutschen (Leipzig, 1845), Yol. III., pp. 523-4, records two telepathic experiences of the emotional sort which befell the same person.

The first occurred when Arndt was under the tuition (apparently) of Dr. Masius, at Barth. One of his fellow-pupils, while at play, had broken an arm. Just as a messenger was starting to convey the news to the boy's mother, who lived at some miles' distance, she herself rushed in, exclaiming, "My son, my son! What accident has befallen him'?" From Arndt's description, it seems certain that he was himself present on the occasion.

The same lady, Arndt continues (but without naming his authority), was one day calling at a neighbour's house, when suddenly she started up and called for her carriage, under an impulse of uncontrollable apprehension, and found, on arriving at her home, that an accident had occurred by which her youngest child had been scalded to death.

§ 5. This last incident leads us on to the next group, where the emotional impression was not connected, when felt, with the person to whom (if telepathic) it was due. The following case exhibits the element of actual physical discomfort on the percipient's part, as in Nos. 22, 70, and 76, and notably in 391 above.

(394) From Mr. Frederick H. Poole, Sneyd Park, Durdham Down, ^ris^ol. "June 10th, 1884.

" Upwards of 40 years ago, when I was about 12 years of age, I was visiting at my uncle's vicarage in Gloucestershire. I had been there for a month previously, and was one afternoon sketching in the neighbourhood, in good health and sjairits, when suddenly I became very depressed and ill, which induced me to return to the house. I told my uncle my symptoms, and expressed my belief that I should die,^ and asked his permission for me to return home that afternoon, for I should like to bid farewell to all at home, especially to my mother, to whom I was very devotedly attached. Nothing he said in reply would pacify me, until he promised I might return on the morrow if I felt no better. After a restless night, I felt worn and weary — as one would naturally feel after unusual excitement — but my intense longing to return home had subsided, and I consented to remain. By that afternoon's post a letter reached my uncle from my home, announcing the death of my mother on the previous afternoon.

" Having given above the unvarnished fact, I am disposed to leave the subject without comment.

" I will only add that I had no knowledge of my mother's illness at the date of aforesaid ' incident.' We heard a few days previously that she was progressing favourably after her recent confinement.

" Frederick H. Poole."

In answer to an inquiry, Mr. Poole says: —

1 Precisely this experience is recorded in cases 22 and 76.

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 375

" I never had, excepting on the occasion named in my last letter, the unaccountable sort of depression mentioned therein."

(395) From Mrs. Herbert Davy, of Burdon Place, Newcastle-on-Tyne, the narrator of the more definite case No. 45. a December 1883

" It was in August, a few years ago — my husband was at the moors. I drove to a nursery garden to procure some flowers. I waited outside the gate under the shelter of some trees, sending the groom in for the flowers.

"It was one of the hottest afternoons I ever experienced. My ponies, usually restive, stood perfectly still. Before I had waited there many minutes, an unaccountable feeling took possession of me as though I foresaw and recognised the shadow of a coming sorrow. I immediately associated it with my husband — that some accident had befallen him. With this miserable apprehension upon me, I got through the rest of the day and evening as best I could, but weighed down by the shadow, though I spoke of it that night to no one.

" ISTothing had happened to my husband. But a little child — a relation, who had lived with us and been almost as our own — had died that day rather suddenly in Kent, where she was then visiting her parents. I had thought a good deal of little Ada, as I sat waiting in the phaeton that summer afternoon — had pictured her reaching out her hands to me; but the great apprehension I felt was for my husband, not for the child."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the child died on Aug. 14, 1875.

A friend who was with Mrs. Davy writes: —

"Newcastle, January 5th, 1884.

" I was driving with Mrs. Davy on the day she had the strange presentiment, while waiting outside the nursery gardens. She spoke of it at the time, and was quite depressed and unlike herself. Mr. Davy being from home, she feared something had happened to him. "Amy Grace."

After an interview with Mrs. Davy on April 15th, 1884, Professor Sidgwick writes: —

" She affirmed unhesitatingly that the feeling was a sudden unique shock of sadness, quite unlike any depression of spirits which she had ever felt at any other time — she had had experiences of such depressions. The girl, Ada, was likely to be thinking of her."

(396) From Mr. S. N. Wilkinson, J.P., Apsley Cottage, Stockport.

" 1884. " I was at Blackpool in the March of 1881, and about tea time I felt a strong conviction of some unknown evil which made me perfectly restless. Next morning, a letter came from the manager of my works in Stockport, reporting that the day before he had to stop the mill in consequence of the breaking down of the main driving wheel. My niece remarked that this was an explanation of my restlessness, but I was not satisfied with the explanation, and said to her, ' That is not it, it is something worse.' On arriving at home, the day following, I found two telegrams, one announcing the death of one of my most intimate friends, the other inviting me to the funeral. He died at Aberdeen. At the time of my uneasiness I was not aware of his illness. I attended his funeral there. This was not the only case in which I had presentiments, but it is the most remarkable that I have experienced. " S. N. Wilkinson."

376 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

We asked Mr. Wilkinson if he would procure for us his niece's corroboration; but he said that he did not feel disposed to take any further trouble in the matter. In conversation he described the impression as quite unique in its strength, preventing him from settling to anything; and he entirely disclaimed any tendency to nervousness or unaccountable fancies.

§ 6. I turn now to the production of motor effects — sometimes of a blind sort, sometimes under a sense of being wanted — which must be understood in the sense explained in Yol. I., p. 292.

(397) From Mr. F. Morgan, of Nugent Hill, Bristol.

" July 11th, 1883.

" On Monday, February 14th, 1853, I was listening to a lecture by the late Geo. Dawson, of Birmingham, in the Broadmead Rooms in Bristol. I frequently spent my evenings at lectures, concerts, &c., and often took a little walk afterwards on my way home. I had lived nearly all my life (27 years) at home with my mother, whom I strongly resemble in face and in many characteristics. We were much attached to each other.

" I was thoroughly interested in the lecture, and had so little intention of leaving before its conclusion, that I remember noticing a friend among the audience, and making up my mind for a walk with him on my way home.

" The lecture must have been more than half through — I was not tired, and had no reason to move — when I noticed, at the side of the platform farthest from the back entrance to the hall, a door which I had never seen before, flush with the panels, and it suddenly became the most natural thing that I should walk half the length of the room, and away from the main entrance, in order to see if this door would open. I turned the handle, passed through, closed the door gently behind me, and found myself in the dark among the wooden supports of the platform.

" I clambered along towards a glimmer of light at the other end, passed round a side passage, crossed the end of the hall to the main entrance, without any thought of the lecture which was still going on, and walked home quietly, without excitement or ' impression ' of any kind, and quite unconscious, till long after, that I had done anything unusual.

" On opening my door with a latch-key, I smelt fire, and found my mother in great alarm. She had also noticed the strong burning smell, had been over the house with her servant, and was longing for my return. On going upstairs, I saw flames issuing from a back window of the next house, immediately gave the alarm, removed my mother to a safe distance, and then had two or three hours' struggle with the flames. The adjoining house was destroyed, but mine only slightly damaged.

" The point which has seemed to me most striking, whenever I have recalled this occurrence, is the entire absence of any presentiment or impression on my mind. I should probably have shaken ofi" anything of the kind had I been aware of it, and refused obedience. Neither was there on my mother's part any intentional exertion of her will upon me, only a strong wish for my presence, which must have begun about the time I left my seat. " Fredk. Morgan."

Mr. Morgan adds, in reply to our regular inquiry, that he has never done anything similar to what is here described on any other occasion.

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 377

He also sends a plan of the lecture-room, which shows that he walked in a dark passage round nearly three sides of the hall. " But going home," he adds, " was not in my thoughts when I moved." He told his mother of his experience next day.

We have confirmed the date of the fire in the B7'istol Times. The account there given states that Mr. Morgan's house, though only slightly damaged, was " in great danger, and only escaped destruction by the intervention of strong party-walls."

(398) The following passage, in the original, is a continuation of that quoted in Vol. I., p. 274, from Der Sogenannte Lehens-Magnetismus oder Hyjynotismus, by Dr. E. L. Fischer, of Wiirzburg, a book the reverse of credulous in its general tone.

" I had accepted an invitation to a jubilee, and went to the place in the afternoon. I had not been.at table more than an hour, when I was seized with a peculiar feeling that I must leave — that someone was waiting for me. I had no more peace; I was expecting every moment to be summoned away. I remained half-an-hour under the continuous pressure of the feeling that someone was most strongly desiring my presence. Then I got up and went home to bed, in the confident expectation of being called ofi" to someone at a distance in the course of the night. It was quite impossible to go to sleep, for every two minutes 1 was raising my head, to listen whether there was not a pull at the housebell. In a quarter of an hour there was really a ring. I sprang out of bed with one bound, and was told that I must come to a sick woman at a village about a couple of miles off. On my arrival I found the patient in a piteous condition. She could neither speak nor move her limbs, though still able to see, hear, and feel. I did all I could, and departed, with the promise to come again later. On the second occasion, I found her much better, and she now told me how earnestly she had been longing for me to come on the previous afternoon and evening. Her husband had not returned home till late in the evening, and had then lost no time in sending for me. So the matter was explained.

" These two incidents \i. e., this and the one already quoted] prove to my satisfaction that there are such things as sympathetic divinations (Ahnungen); and I could supply other instances, though of a less striking character, from my own experience, besides similar experiences which have been reported to me by my friends."

[I have sufficiently expressed dissent from Dr. Fischer's view that telepathy can be demonstrated from a few instances.]

(399) From Mr. William Blakeway (a bricklayer), of New Ross, Rowley Regis, near Dudley. a igg^

" I was in my usual place at chapel on the Sunday afternoon, in May, 1876, when all at once I thought I must go home. Seemingly against my wish, I took my hat. When reaching the chapel gates, I felt an impulse that I must hasten home as quick as possible, and I ran with all my might without stopping to take breath. Meeting a friend, who asked why I hurried so, I passed him almost without notice. When I reached home I found the house full of smoke, and my little boy, 3 years old, all on fire, alone in the house. I at once tore the burning clothes from off him, and was just in time to save his life. It has always been a mystery to me, as

378 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

no person whispered a word to me, and no one knew anything about the fire till after I made the alarm at home, which was more than a quarter of a mile from the chapel. This is a true statement.

" William Blakeway."

Mr. 0. Smith, of 12, Short Street, Black Heath, near Dudley, writes: —

" I beg to say I heard of the incident from Mr. Blakeway himself in a few days after the occurrence, and never forgot it, as I thought it very remarkable. " C. Smith."

Mr. Blakeway went through the account to me viva voce in such a way that I could not doubt the vividness of the experience; he has never had any other at all resembling it. The friend whom he hurried by was one to whom he invariably talked for some minutes when he met him. He tliinks that he probably took about a minute and a half in getting home, and that his first impression may quite have coincided with the accident to the child, who was alone in the house and caught fire in reaching for something.

(400) From Herr Heinrich von Struve, procured through the kindness of Mr. J. B. Johnston, M.A., of 17, Pilrig Street, Edinburgh. The original was in German. u 25, Pilrig Street, Edinburgh.

"July 10th, 1885.

" It was in the night between the 9th and 10th of November, 1835, that I felt a sudden and peculiar yearning, which laid hold of me with great intensity, for my dear mother, who lived in Carlsruhe, in the Grand Duchy of Baden. I myself was living with my elder brother in Poland, and intended to pass the winter with him. This yearning affected me so strongly that I resolved to move to Carlsruhe without delay, which I explained to my brother at breakfast, after I had informed him of my sudden feeling. It was no small and insignificant journey in those days and at that advanced season of the year. Carlsruhe was over 130 German miles from where I was living. I passed [on horseback] through the province of Posen, through Silesia, Saxony, and, after crossing the Erz Mountains and Thuringia in deep snow, through Bavaria. At Jena, where an aunt lived who had always been in the most intimate relations with my mother, I intended to rest for a few days. But as she told me that she had received very sad news from Carlsruhe, according to which her dear friend had been attacked by nervous fever and given up by the doctors, I could not rest, and in the greatest consternation and anxiety recommenced my journey, and reached Carlsruhe on the 4th of December.

" With sinking heart I betook myself first to my brother, who was attached to the Russian Embassy at the Court of Baden, and rushed up the steps, where my brother received me with great astonishment. On my eager inquiry after my mother's health, he told me that the danger had passed oflP, and that she was recovering. Then I hurried swiftly to my mother's house, where my sisters lived with hei', and they confirmed the happy news. As I then learnt from my eldest sister, the chief crisis of the illness occurred on the night between the 9th and 10th of November, when my beloved mother, in her delirium, continually spoke with intense love and care for her youngest son, called me and longed for me.

" H. VON Struve."

In answer to inquiries, Herr von Struve says, " I have never on any

II.] IDEAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MOTOR CASES. 379

other occasion experienced an affection of the same sort, and naturally therefore have never had occasion to take action on one."

[This case is very remote; but the narrator is not likely to be wrong in remembering that he undertook a long and arduous journey in consequence of his impression.]

I will conclude with the only pendant that we have to M. Li^beault's remarkable case at the end of Chap. VII. in the preceding volume. But a second-hand account of so exceptional an occurrence, received from a person who himself only heard of it some years after it took place, cannot of course carry much weight, at any rate as far as details are concerned.

(401) From Mr. S. Jennings, of Westbury House, Denmark Hill, S.E.

" March 24th, 1885.

" In reply to your note, the occurrence [which is narrated below] was related to me by Mr. Nelson himself, since dead. He told me, as nearly as I can remember, in the year 1868, but the event itself must have taken place four or five years before.

" At the time he told me he was frequently in the habit of thus writing under some external influences, some of which he describes as agreeable, and others very much the reverse. He showed me a book in which these writings were made, and I was much surprised at the singular differences in the apparently various handwritings.

" I never had any reason to do otherwise than believe what he said, particularly as he was always very reticent on the subject, which he said concerned nobody but himself. " Samuel Jennings."

The following is from a letter written by Mr. Jennings to Professor Barrett, on September 26th, 1882. After describing Mr. Nelson's automatic writing, and his inability to get rid of the consciousness of some external presence or influence " without providing writing materials," the account continues: —

"On one occasion this feeling seized him in the train when travelling from Raneegunge to Calcutta, and he tore a leaf out of a book, and laid it on the seat of the carriage, his hand grasping a pencil resting upon it. Ordinarily, to write under such conditions would be impossible in a train rushing along; the motion would efiectually prevent it. Nevertheless, a long communication was made purporting to be from his daughter, who was at school in England. It contained a simple account of her illness and death, described the circumstances under which it occurred, and the persons who were present, adding that she wished to say good-bye to her father before leaving. This threw Mr. N. into a state of great excitement, for he did not even know of his daughter's illness. He went home and said he was very uneasy about Bessie in England. Finally, he gave this note to his married daughter, Mrs. R., to keep till they could hear by the ordinary post. The child had in reality died that very day, and under the very circumstances thus mysteriously communicated to Mr. N. I have subsequently received some corroborative evidence regarding this young lady's death from an entire stranger to the family."

[chap.



Chapter III. Dreams.

§ 1. The cases to be now presented are supplementary to those of Vol. I., Chap. VIII.; and will be arranged, as far as possible, in similar groups.

The first group is that of simultaneous dreams which correspond in content.

(402) From Mr. A. A. Watts, 19, Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, S.W.

" 1883. "When I was a young child, about the year 1830, my father had been called out of town by business; and my mother took me into her room to sleep. She awoke in the middle of the night, or early morning, out of a dream in which it had appeared to her that the servant was attempting to murder her with a knife. I had awakened at the same time, and was sobbing in my crib by her bedside. Upon her inquiring what was amiss with me, I replied that I had dreamt that John was murdering her with a knife. She always affirmed that, to the best of her knowledge, I had at that time never heard the word murder. She rang up the servants; and wrote immediately to her husband, who returned to town at once, and discharged the man without more ado. My mother had had no previous antipathy to the man, rather the contrary, for he was a very clever and handy servant, and had been a sailor. We had never heard then nor did we hear subsequently anything to his disadvantage."

[This evidence cannot rank as better than second-hand.]

(403) The following letter appeared in the Nation for November 26th, 1885:—

" Sir, — I have been much interested in the cases of telepathy reported in the Nation, and give the following, which happened here last week. Mrs. P. dreamed her watch was broken, and was greatly afflicted to see it all in pieces, and in her distress awoke. Feeling very ill, she awakened her husband to go for a physician. His first words on awaking were, ' Who broke your watch 1 '

" M. E. W.

"Dover, N. H., November 16th, 1885."

The writer of this letter, Dr. Mary E. "Webb, was applied to for details, and wrote to us as follows: —

" 37, Trowbridge Street, Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A.

"February 3rd, 1886.

" Near midnight, Mrs. Flynn dreamed her watch was broken. She saw the crystal and all the works crushed to fragments. She awoke in some pain, and aroused her husband from a sound sleep, and his first words, according to her report, were, ' Who broke your watch? How did your watch get broken? ' &c. Then she told me she laughed in spite of the pain, and told him that was just what she had dreamed before the pain had awakened her; then they found their dreams coincided exactly as to the manner in which the watch was broken; and that the watch was got and examined, to make sure it was not as they had dreamed.

" This they related to me the same night, as something worth the telling. They thought it singular and interesting. I asked them what they had said about the watch before going to bed, and they said ' Nothing '; that they had not thought of it at all.

" Mary E. Webb."

In the next three cases, the telepathic influence of a distant agent seems to be involved, and may have acted independently on the dreamers (c/. case 127, and see Chap. XII., § 2); or one dreamer, so influenced, may have infected the others.

(404) From the Rev. P. T. Drayton, Undercliff, Portishead.

"January, 1884.

" When a child in the West Indies, there was an old African woman who had great attractions for me. She was full of ghost stories, and, though a Christian, had not, I fear, discarded obeah ideas altogether. Sometimes she would come in to show us how she would look dressed in her grave clothes, which she kept by her, and we would make merry over it. Well! several years afterwards I saw in my dreams her figure by my bedside in full grave-costume; it was very vivid, and I awoke with a determination that I would eat no more late suppers.

" At breakfast, next morning, my sister told us that she had had much the same dream, but as she had never seen the old woman masquerading in her shroud, as I had, it made more impression. Some time afterwards we had a letter from W. I. mentioning the old woman's death on the day on which these dreams occurred.

" This occurred some 45 years ago, and I cannot be responsible for its strict accuracy.

" P. T. Drayton."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Drayton says: —

" Taking your queries seriatim I would reply, first, that my sister has been dead over 30 years. Second, that my sister and self had the dream on the same night, without having been either talking or thinking of the old woman. Third, that to the best of my recollection the tidings of the old woman's death arrived shortly after."

382 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

A lady, a connection of Mr. Drayton's, through whom we procured this narrative, says, " All the family knew of these dreams."

(405) From Fynes Moryson's Itinerary (London, 1617), Part I., Chap. II., p. 19.

" I may la^vfully swear that which my kinsmen have heard witnessed by my brother Henry whilst he lived, that in my youth at Cambridge I had the like dreame of my mother's death, where, my brother Henry lying with me, early in the morning I dreamed that my mother passed by with sad countenance, and told me that she could not come to my commencement; I being within five months to proceed Master of Arts, and she having promised at that time to come to Cambridge: and when I related this dreame to my brother, both of us awaking together in a sweat, he protested to me that he had dreamed the very same, and when he had not the least knowledge of our mother's sicknesse, neither in our youthfull afiections were in any affected by the strangeness of this dreame, yet the next carrier brought us word of our mother's death."

(406) From Mr. Swithinbank, Ormleigh, Mowbray Road, Upper Norwood, S.E.

"May 26th, 1883.

" During the Peninsular War, my father and his two brothers, William and John, were quartered at Dover. They were natives of Bradford, and had there living their father, mother, and the rest of their family. On one special night my father had a dream that his mother was dead; the dream was most vivid, and in his waking moments the dream kept continually recurring to him, and he could not shake ofi" the impression of sadness it brought upon him. The other brothers each slept at different parts of the garrison, and they only met each other on parade. The morning following the dream, and after the parade was over, my father ran hurriedly on to meet his brothers, and as he approached them they each appeared as anxious to meet him as he was to meet them; in a tone of breathless anxiety my father said, ' Oh, William, I have had a queer dream.' ' So have I,' replied his brother, when, to the astonishment of both, the other brother, John, said, ' I have had a queer dream, as well. I dreamt that my mother was dead.' ' So did I,' said each of the other brothers. It was true that each brother dreamt during the same night that their mother was dead; and it is equally true that in the course of a few days (for the posts then were seldom for such long distances) they heard from home that during the night of their dream their mother, who had had no previous illness of which her sons knew anything, had quietly passed away. u George Edwin Swithinbank."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Swithinbank adds: — " I heard it over and over again from my father and the two brothers concerned."

A sister of Mr. Swithinbank's corroborates as follows: —

" Farnley, near Leeds.

" October 20th, 1883. " I fully confirm this statement, as the only surviving daughter of the

younger of the three brothers. The last time I saw my uncle William, shortly before my father's death, he specially named the circumstance to me, and I had heard it from my early infancy repeatedly from the lips of my father and his other brothers.

" R. M. Hudson, {nee Swithinbank)."

§ 2. Next comes a group in which some thought on the part of a waking agent seems to have been represented in the dream.

The following case strongly recalls No, 149, where the percipient seemed to catch the idea of a scene about which the agent was silently reading.

(407) From Miss Julia Wedgwood, 31, Queen Anne Street, W.

"March, 1886.

" My dream was that I was hurrying along the street somehow in company with a little girl of about 10, who was telling me of her life in Florence, where she had been brought up. I was listening to her with great interest, and I remember in my dream being surprised that I could feel interest in the conversation of a child of that age. One odd thing was that she was telling me about building, and that we wandered into some grand new structure, where I had never been before.

" In the morning I took up the novel Marian had been reading before she went to bed, sitting close to me. I will copy the passages which made me feel that her interest in the book must somehow have been transferred to my mind. My building was not a cathedral, and what the child said about building had the absurdity of a dream, so my dream was not exact. The little girl in the novel has been brought up in Florence.

" Julia Wedgwood."

The extracts, from a novel called Clarissa's Tangled Web, are as follows: —

"Thus wandering, she passed to the east end of the north aisle, much secluded from view by the back of the great organ and the pulpit, and so alone had she felt that she started when she saw a little girl seated on a stone step, the first of three leading up to an old oaken door filling a low narrow doorway in the wall.... She noticed too that the little girl looked towards her, and closed her book, and now appeared rather to invite than to deprecate conversation. So she drew nearer, and said in the peculiarly pleasant voice which generally prepossessed strangers, and not seldom drew forth unexpected confidences, ' You enjoy, my dear, being in this cathedral? ' Irene rose. ' Yes, ma'am,' she said, ' I do. I have seen many much finer cathedrals and churches [having been brought up in Florence], but this is a good building in many respects, and I do like being here very much.'

" Mrs. Weatherill felt rather amused by the air of experienced judgment and critical discernment assumed by this very young connoisseur; but she said pleasantly, ' You know the building much more familiarly than I do, I have no doubt.' ' I have read about it, ma'am, and have observed for myself,' Irene said, quite willing to impart information and give her own impressions. ' You see the vaulting of the roof, how it is filled in

384 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

and held up by those arches, so many intersections and changing lines — that is quite a unique arrangement, but / think it is beautiful! And then, ma'am,... you see that the height of the vaulting in the two side aisles and the middle aisle is exactly the same," &c.

In reply to inquiries. Miss Wedgwood says: —

"T n.m nni+,p> snrp. thai-, IVTarian TTno'VifiS rAn.rl r\r\\

