After a visit to the house in September, 1884, Mr. Podmore wrote: — " Major W., on whom I called to-day, is practically satisfied that what he and his family saw was not a real carriage. He showed me the whole scene of its appearance. The spot where the carriage appeared to turn barely leaves sufficient room for the passage of an ordinary carriage, and that a carriage should turn round there seems almost impossible. The carriage went for some distance across the lawn — a mossy and rather damp piece of grass — and stopped in front of the house for more than a minute, the while Major W. spoke to the man, but without receiving any reply. His wife, whom I also saw, was attracted to the window by the sound of the wheels, in the first instance, on the gravel. Major W. made many inquiries among his neighbours, but could not find that anyone had seen the carriage at all. The house is situated on a peninsula stretching between the Cromarty and Moray Firths, and some 3 miles from the neck of the peninsula. The locality is very lonely, there being no villages or hamlets, and but few private residences of any kind; and it is difficult to imagine the errand which could bring a strange carriage into such a country at the dead of night. Major W. has had one other purely subjective hallucination."

In another of the carriage-cases, the hallucination was of a more iDizarre sort, the coachman and footman on the box having black faces, and the four ladies inside being dressed completely in black. The vehicle passed the window without producing any sound on the gravel. In a third case (quoted above, pp. 97-9), one of the percipients was altogether apart from the three others — they seeing the phantasmal carriage pass the window, and she meeting it some way down the road. In a fourth case, our informant — Mr. Paul Bird, of 39, Strand, Calcutta — followed a phantom gharrie for 100 yards, into the very portico of Hastings House at Alipore, while the same vehicle was watched in its approach by his wife from a window. But

196 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

more of a puzzle even than the carriage-cases is a narrative received from two daughters of a well-known clergyman — neither romantic nor superstitious witnesses — who describe a vast swarm of soundless phantasmal shapes, dressed in old-fashioned garments, most of them dwarfish, and two with sparks round their faces, by which they and a maid were once accompanied for about 200 yards in a lane near Oxford. " One might imagine it to be a kind of mirage; only the whole appearance [owing to the dresses] was so unlike what one would have seen in any town at the time we saw it."^ If this must be regarded as illusion, because it occurred in misty moonlight, yet an identity of impression is described which still suggests mental infection: — " If one saw a man, all saw a man; if one saw a woman, all saw a woman; and so on."

I pass by, however, as necessarily inconclusive, the greater number of our instances of collective impression where the appearance was seen out of doors in imperfect light — though there is not one of them which would not be decidedly more remarkable, as a specimen of joint illusion, than any that I have found recorded in print.^ The following daylight example is from the Misses Montgomery, of Beaulieu, Drogheda.

"March 2nd, 1884.

(317) "About the year 1875, 1 and my sister (we were about 13 years old then) were driving home in the tax-cart one summer afternoon about 4

1 This case, which in brief abstract may sound like a frightened girl's story, will not, I think, produce that impression in the complete account, which may be found in the Proceedings of the S.P.E,., Vol. iii., p. 77.

2 The following case, remote but first-hand, is made interesting by the fact that one of the persons present did not share the experience. Mrs. Stone, of Walditch, Bridport, tells us that one beautiful summer evening, after sunset but while it was still quite light, she was driving home with a cousin and a friend — " three more merry girls could hardly be met with " — and a man-servant.

" I saw the figure of a man on the right-hand side, walking, or rather, gliding, at the head of the horse. My first idea was that he meant to stop us, but he made no effort of the kind, but kept on at the same pace as the horse, neither faster nor slower. At first I thought him of great height, but afterwards remarked that he was gliding some distance (at least a foot) above the ground. Mary was sitting by me. I pointed out in a low voice the figure, but she did not see it, and could not at any time during its appearance. Emily was sitting by the man-servant on the front seat; she heard what I said, turned round, and speaking softly, 'I see the man you mention distinctly.' Then the manservant said, in an awful, frightened voice, ' For God's sake, ladies, don't say anything! please keep quiet! ' or words to that effect. I had heard that horses and other animals feel the presence of the supernatural; in this instance there was no starting or bolting, the creature went on at an even pace, almost giving the idea of being controlled by the figure. The face was turned away, but the shape of a man in dark clothing waa clearly defined. My cousin and the man-servant saw it distinctly, but my friend was unable to do so, though the figure stood out plainly against the evening light; she was so placed that she ought to have seen it particularly well. At the entrance of the village of Charminster it vanished, and we saw it no more. I never heard the road was haunted."

This may jjerhaps have been an oj^tical effect due to the horse's breath; but many breathing horses are out on summer evenings, and I should be glad to know of a similar effect in other instances. It is at any rate odd that it should have been interpreted in the same way by several observers.

o'clock, when there suddenly appeared, floating over the hedge, a female (^^i-''>- '. figure moving noiselessly across the road; the figure was in white, and the body in a slanting position, some 10 feet above the ground. The horse suddenly stopped and shook with fright, so much so that we could not get it on. I called out to my sister: ' Did you see that? ' and she said she had, and so did the boy Caffrey, who was in the cart. The figure went over the hedge, on the other side of the road, and passed over a field, till we lost sight of it in a plantation beyond. Altogether, 1 suppose, we watched it for a couple of minutes. It never touched the ground at all, but floated calmly along. On reaching home we told our mother of what we had seen, and we were perfectly certain it was not a mere delusion or illusion, nor an owl, or anything of the kind.

" I have never seen anything like this nor any apparition before or since. We were all in good health at the time, and no one had suggested any grounds for the apparition beforehand; but we afterwards heard that the road was supposed to be haunted, and a figure had been seen by some of the country folks.

"Violet Montgomery. " Sidney Montgomery." Professor Barrett, who knows the witnesses, adds that Mrs. Montgomery remembers the incident well, and the terror her children were in They both agreed as to the reality of the figure. Cafirey has gone to America, and been lost sight of.

No one probably will suppose that the witnesses here have agreed to repeat, for our benefit, a romance which they fabricated for their mother's at the time; and however much allowance be made for childish terror or exaggeration, the community of experience in broad daylight seems to exceed what can be attributed to verbal suggestions, passed from one to another, a propos of a fleece of cloud, or an owl. We have a very similar instance from Mr. W. S. Soutar, solicitor, of Blairgowrie, N.B. — who records that he and his brother, as young boys, at play behind their father's house, in the gloaming ot // a summer "evening, " both saw an apparition in the shape of a female figure, plainly dressed, with a striped apron over the face, and which glided, without any apparent movement of the feet, from the road till about half-way between it and the hedge surrounding a shrubbery near the house, when the figure suddenly disappeared. There was no cover near, behind which the person (if in the body) could hide, the spot where it disappeared being bare and open." This case, however, is remote, and the second witness is dead. A much more striking example (brought to our notice by Mr. A. Farquharson, of North Bradley, Trowbridge, Wilts) is one where the senses of two adults — a gentleman-farmer, described as a hard-headed unromantic businessman and his wife — were similarly deluded in an exposed space and in

198 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

broad daylight; but the timidity of the witnesses precludes me from giving details.

To come, however, to indoor cases, of a less dubious type. As a rule, the figure seen (just as in purely subjective cases occurring to a single percipient) is unrecognised. The following account, though remote, is first-hand, and at any rate deserves quotation. It occurs in Letters of Philip, 2nd Earl of Chesterfield (1829), p. 11. The incident was recorded by Lord Chesterfield in ah MS. volume containing his letters and "notes for my remembrance of things and accidents, as they yearly happen to me."

(318) "A very odd accident this year [1652] befell mee, for being come about a law sute to London.. I, waking in the mornmg about 8 o'clock,... plainly saw, within a yard of my bedside, a thing all white like a stand^ sheet, with a knot atop of it, about 4 or 5 foot high, w^ I considered a good while, and did rayse myself up in my bed to view the better. At last I thrust out both my hands to catch hold of it, but, in a moment, like a shadow, it slid to the feet of the bed, out of

w'^ I, leaps after it, c"^ see it no more Doubting least

something might have happened to my wife, I rid home that day to Petworth in Sussex, where I had left her with her father, the Earl of Northumberland, and as I was going upstairs to her chamber, I met one of my footmen, who told me that he was comming to me with a packet of letters, the w^ I having taken from him went to my wife, who I found in good health, being... with Lady Essex, her sister, and another gentlewoman, one Mrs. Ramsey... They all asked me what made me to come home so much sooner than I intended. Whereupon I told them what had happened to me that morn^; which they all wondering at desired me to open and read the letter that I had taken from the footman, which I immediately did, and read my wife's letter to mee aloud, wherein she desired my speedy return^ as fear^ that some ill w"^ happen to mee, because that morning shee had seen a thing all in white, with a black face, standing by her bedside.... By examining all particulars we found that the same day, the same hour, and (as near as can be computed) the same minute, all that had happened to me had befallen her, being fortie miles asunder. The Lady Essex and Mrs. Ramsey were witnesses to both our relations." ^

1 In another case where a phantasm, again of a very unusual aspect, was simultaneously perceived by two persons at a distance from one another, we have the special reason for supposing it to have been purely subjective in origin, that both percipients were somewhat liable to subjective visual hallucinations; but though it comes to us on good authority, it is third-hand, and cannot receive an evidential number. Dr. T. King Chambers, r.R.C.P., of Shrubs Hill House, Sunningdale, writes: —

" December 26th, 1885.

" My uncle by marriage, Colonel Macdonald, was subject to frequent hallucinations, when sitting up late reading, and working at some improvements in fortification and Semaphore telegraphy, which he thought would be of value. The hallucinations were wholly visual, I understood, not aural; though he used to be heard hailing them, and what he called ' conversing '; yet the conversation was in his usual style of pure monologue. He was always quite sane — as have been all his children and grandchildren. His son, Charles, was a civilian in the E.I.C. Service, and, whilst a student at Haileybury

Here, it will be seen, the two percipients were widely separated, which excludes the idea of joint illusion or of verbal suggestion; and the case forms a parallel, among sensory phantasms, to that given in Yol. I., p. 240, where the common experience was of an ideal and emotional kind.

In the next example the percipients, though near together, were not actually in one another's company. The case is of special interest, inasmuch as the two percepts were slightly different, — the figure being seen by one observer with a hat on, and by the other without, and the difference corresponding with the associations natural to each in their respective positions. A clergyman writing to us from Lincoln, on April 29th, 1885, describes an afternoon call of the preceding January.

(319) "I was ushered into the drawing-room, and was asked to take a low arm-chair in the middle of the room; but I preferred sitting on a couch drawn up at right angles to the side of the fireplace, where I could command a view, through the window, of the garden. Facing me, with her back to this window, sat one lady; to my left, seated not far from the arm-chair mentioned, was another lady, fronting the hearth. While we sat chatting upon the subject of my visit, an old man, of somewhat sad appearance, dressed in a dark blue over-coat — somewhat shabby — and with a flat-topped felt hat, and remarkable for a white beard, passed the window; and immediately after the front door bell rang. The lady of the house was expecting a visit from some lady friend, and remarked ' This

must be.' I said, ' No, it's an old man with a white beard.' At

which both ladies present expressed surprise, and began wondering who it could be. Just then the door of the room opened, and in walked a wellknown local practitioner. As soon as he had shaken hands all round, the lady of the house said, ' But where is the old man with the white beard? ' To which the doctor replied, ' Yes; where is he? '

" Our friend, the doctor, had happened to be passing the gate a short time before, and had, without premeditation as he says, suddenly turned in, struck with the idea of paying an afternoon call. He came up the walk towards the hall door, and, in passing the window mentioned, looked into the

College, was a constant visitor at our house in Keppel Street, and also in Essex. He was the only one of the family who inherited his father's peculiarity, which they both considered to be an hereditary racial disease, or rather mental malformation, of no practical importance for good or harm, when once so understood by the afflicted person.

" Shortly before my cousin went to India [where he was killed in a mutiny] when I was quite a child, he slept a night at my father's in Keppel Street; and while going to bed he saw a man Avith a face he did not recognise, dressed in an old-fashioned Spanish costume. He was not alarmed, or particularly interested; but as a matter of chit-chat, mentioned it in a letter to his father at Exeter, who answered by return of post that, at the same time, he had seen an exactly similar figure, in the same strange dress. I was too young at the time to be safely told ghost-stories; but my father and mother often detailed the circumstances as a singular instance of coincidence. I should explain it by the fact that both my uncle and cousin were at home in Devon, and fond of history. Both would be likely to have a store of half remembered dates relating to the defeat of the Arniada and Spanish affairs, and the day may have suggested the forgotten date, and clothed it in appropriate costume. "T. K. Chambees."

200 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

room where we were sitting, and saw, seated in the low arm-chair, an old man exactly answering to the description of the old man I had seen passing the window (doubtless when the doctor passed), with this exception, that the person he saw had, of course, no hat on. The doctor was surprised not to find the old gentleman in the room; hence his strange reply to the lady's question.

" Now observe: / saw the old man exactly at the time the doctor was passing the window. I did not see the doctor, whom I know well, who is much shorter than the figure I saw, and who wore a brown top-coat, a silk hat, and no beard. And the doctor saw the figure in the room, sitting down and without a hat.

" I am not, as far as I know, subject to similar hallucinations, if the afiair may be rightly so-called."

Dr. Cant writes to us as follows: —

" Silver Street, Lincoln.

"May 7th, 1885.

" I have seen Mr. [the clergyman], and quite agree with all he

said. The old man was sitting down in the room, and I felt certain of his presence, and was greatly astonished not to find him in the room. The reports we have given are absolutely true, without any doubts in either of our minds. u -yy- ip Cant."

Dr. Cant was asked whether he had ever had any other hallucinations; and also whether he would have been certain to see any real person occupying the position where the clergyman saw the figure. He replied: —

" In answer to your questions these phenomena are quite new to me, and I never remember having one of the sort before. It was quite im2J0Ssible

for the figure that Mr. saw to have been there, as I must have seen

it when passing, and he only saw one figure, and did not see me at all."

The next two cases resemble the last, in the point that the two percipients do not seem to have seen exactly the same thing. Surgeon-Major Samuel Smith, of Wyndham House, E^ngsdown Parade, Bristol, sent the following account to the Western Daily Press (Nov. 30, 1881), and has since confirmed it to us.

(320) " I solemnly vouch for the truth of the statement made. I will add that I have been, although not a professed teetotaller, a total abstainer from stimulants for the past 10 years, and that I am not a believer in Spiritualism as it exists in the present day.

" About 20 minutes past 1 1 o'clock on the night of the 20th of April last, I was engaged with my wife's mother in playing a selection from ' La Figlia del Reggimento ' for the flute and piano. We were seated in the drawing-room, which was brilliantly lighted by three large gaslights burning in globes which hung from the centre of the ceiling, the only other occupants of the room being my wife, who had fallen asleep upon the couch, and the baby asleep in the cradle. My wife's brother, who had been with us, left the room at 11 o'clock, and retired to rest. The room itself is spacious, lofty, and parallelogram-shaped, the piano occupying a position immediately opposite to the only door of entrance in

the middle of the corresponding long side, so that in playing we sat with our backs to the door, which was closed.

" I was thoroughly intent upon the music, which was new to me, and difficult to read, so far as the flute was concerned, owing to the small size of the notes; when suddenly, in the midst of the performance, a strange feeling of mingled awe and fear came over me, and I distinctly felt the approach of someone, or rather of something, coming behind me, and this although I was so engrossed with playing; and in my mind I seemed to perceive the shape. As it approached nearer, I turned my head to the right, and distinctly perceived a shade of a greyish colour standing by me upon my right hand, a little in advance of me. I did not see the whole figure, but what I saw was part of a shadowy face, the outline of the forehead, nose, mouth, chin, and a part of the neck being visible. Strange to say, I do not remember seeing the eye, but the figure appeared to have a top hat upon its head. As I gazed upon it, it vanished, and with it the feelings, to a great extent, to which it gave rise. Of the mingled feelings which its presence raised in my mind, I should say that awe predominated.

" I did not cease playing, and subsequently played other pieces by the old masters, sang some songs, and finally went to bed, and slept well. Nor did I mention the matter to my wife's mother that night, either at the time of the occurrence, or before retiring to rest. Now, however, comes the most remarkable part of the matter. At or about 11,30 a.m. on the following day, my wife's mother came into the private room, and suddenly said, ' Did you see something when you turned your head last night, when you were playing? ' I did not immediately reply, but the strange event of the preceding night flashed across my mind instantly. I was, indeed, too greatly surprised to reply at once, for I did not believe at the time that she had noticed the action upon my part; and, as I have already said, I had not mentioned the matter to her, or even hinted at it.

" ' Why do you ask? ' I replied.

" ' Because I thought you did.'

" ' Did you see anything'? ' I asked.

" ' Yes, I believed that someone had come into the room, as I felt that someone had come in.'

" ' Did you think it was a man or a woman 1 '

'"I felt that it was a man, and at first believed it to be James' (my wife's brother), ' who had come down, and I wondered how he could come in without my hearing him.'

" ' Did you see anything? ' I asked.

" ' Yes, I saw the back and shoulders of the form of a man; it passed across like a shadow behind you, stood to your right hand, and then disappeared. I was not alarmed, but surprised.

"So ends the narrative. In no way can I explain the cause, or sequence of events. As they occurred, so I present them."

Surgeon-Major Smith (January 15th, 1886), in sending his mother-inlaw's confirmation, adds: —

" In speaking of the matter to-day she said she felt the presence of the visitor in her mind before she saw it; and this is my experience of it. I felt its presence before I saw it."^

1 See Vol. i., p. 483, and Chap, xii., § 2.

202 COLLECTIVE CASES, [chap.

" Wyndham House, Kingsdown, Bristol,

"January 15th, 1886.

" Agreeably to the request of Mr. Gurney, I write, but have nothing to add to the statement of my experience of the strange visitation described in the Western Daily Press in November, 1881; the facts being as therein stated. " Hannah Robinson."

Mr. Smith has repeated the account to me on the spot; and it then became evident that Mrs. Robinson, turning her head the instant after he did the same, would have seen any flesh-and-blood figure rather miorefullface than he did; instead of which she saw the hack. The extremely distinct and startling character of the experience came out more impressively in conversation than in the written account. Neither percipient can recall having had anything like a hallucination on any other occasion.

The following account is from the Rev. D. W. G. Gwynne, M.D., Neuaddvach, Pontardulais, South Wales. He first describes how he

took up his abode at P House, near Taunton, in 1853, and

how both he and his wife were made uncomfortable by auditory experiences to which they could find no clue. He proceeds: —

fi iiz^ (321)"I now come to the mutual experience of something that is as fresh

^^.-z in its impression as if it were the occurrence of yesterday. During the ^1-.. night I became aware of a draped figure passing across the foot of the bed -«t4 t^ towards the fire-place. I had the impression that the arm was raised, ^Z^'"' "'"pointing with the hand towards the mantel-piece, on which a night-light ^•"■' was burning. Mrs. Gwynne at this moment seized my arm, and the light * \,,w '^<^*^ extingttished. Notwithstanding, I distinctly saw the figure returning

the door locked, as usual, that I was painfully impressed. I need hardly

J say that Mrs. Gwynne was in a very nervous state. She asked me what

^v I had seen, and I told her. She had seen the same figure, but her

. impression was that the figure placed its hand over the night-light and

extinguished it.

" The night-light in question was relit and placed in a toilette basin, and burned naturally. I tried to convince myself that it might have been a gust of wind down the chimney that put the light out; but that will not account for the spectral appearance, which remains a mystery.

" D, W. G. Gwynne." Mrs. Gwynne writes, on April 15, 1884: —

" In addition to my husband's statement, which I read, I can only say that the account he has given you accords with my remembrance of the ' unearthly vision,' but I distinctly saw the hand of the phantom placed over the night-light, which was at once extinguished. I tried to cling to Dr. Gwynne, but he leapt out of bed with a view, as he afterwards said, of intercepting some supposed intruder. The door was locked as usual, and was so when he tried it. He lit a candle at once, and looked under the bed, and into a closet, but saw nothing. The night-light was also relit,

which was placed on the wash-stand, and together with the candle, remained burning all night. I must observe that I had never taken to use night-lights before we lived there, and only did so when I had been so often disturbed and alarmed by sighs and heavy breathing close to my side of the bed. Dr. Gwynne, on the appearance of the phantom, in order to calm my agitated state, tried to reason with me, and to persuade me that it might have been the effects of the moonlight and clouds passing over the openings of the shutter, and possibly that a gust of wind might have extinguished the light, but I knew differently. When we had both been awakened at the same moment apparently, and together saw that unpleasant figure, tall and as it were draped like a nun, deliberately walk up to the mantel-piece and put out the light with the right hand, there could be no mistake about it; and I distinctly heard the rustling sound of garments as the figure turned and left through the door, after my husband's attempt to stop it with his open arms. The moonlight was very clear and the white dimity curtains only partly closed. "Mary Gwynne."

[As telling against the purely subjective origin of this experience, I ought to mention that there was distinct evidence of others' having observed unaccountable phenomena in the house, though this was not known by Dr. and Mrs. Gwynne till after their own observation. They soon afterwards gave up the house.]

In the next case the difference is still more marked, the percept being visual to one person and auditory to the other; while at the same time something of the same idea seems to have been suggested to both. For the purpose in view, the case (in spite of certain discrepancies in the two accounts) is, perhaps, stronger than it looks. For the fact that the visual and the auditory experience were both unshared, is a decided indication that they were neither of them due to a real external cause; and if they were hallucinations, then (since no words passed till after both had been experienced) it seems at any rate very possible that one of them produced the other by thoughttransference. Lady C. writes, on Oct. 13, 1884: —

(322) "In October, 1879, I was staying at Bishopthorpe, near York, with the Archbishop of York. I was sleeping with Miss Z. T., when I suddenly saw a white figure fly through the room from the door to the window. It was only a shadowy form, and passed in a moment. I felt utterly terrified and called out at once, ' Did you see that V and at the same moment Miss Z, T. exclaimed, ' Did you hear that? ' Then I said, instantly, ' I saw an angel fly through the room,' and she said, * I heard an angel singing.'

" We were both very much frightened for a little while, but said nothing about it to any one. " K. C."

Miss T. writes: —

"December 19th, 1884.

" Late one night, about October 17th, 1879, Lady C. (then Lady K. L.).

.Jl/*-^

204 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

•-^ f^" and I were preparing to go to sleep, after talking some time, when I heard

]f/^ > something like very faint music, and seemed to feel what people call ' a

1^.. presence.' I put out my hand and touched Lady C, saying, ' Did you hear

^ o that % ' She said, ' Oh, don't! Just now I saw something going across

the room! ' We were both a good deal frightened, and tried to go to sleep

as soon as we could. But I remember asking Lady C. exactly what she

had seen, and she said, ' A sort of white shadow, like a spirit.' The above

occurred at Bishopthorpe, York. " Z. J. T."

In the next two examples (in which the figure was unrecognised) no difference seems to have been noted in the impressions of the two percipients. Mr. Bettany, of 2, Eckington Villas, Ashbourne Grove, Dulwich, S.E., writes: —

"]Srovember, 1884.

(323) " One night, early this year, I became conscious of a figure in my bedroom. It was a crouching figure of a woman, enveloped in a black cloak and hood. My impression was that the woman was old, but I did not see a face. This figure slowly and stealthily advanced from the bedroom door to a wardrobe on the same side of the room. It then suddenly and entirely disappeared, and, from the sudden shock, I gave a sharp loud cry. I never saw such an appearance before or since. I consider myself unusually unlikely to see apparitions. This figure and cii'cumstance were like no dream, but were to me real and evident, and there appeared to be no transition between waking and sleeping. I was convinced that what I saw was a waking sight. I have no idea whom the figure represented. I had then occupied this house nearly three years, and I know nothing of former occupants.

"No light was carried nor was any light burning in the room. The figure was visible and the wardrobe was visible; but when the figure disappeared darkness was complete. ^ The door was found locked.

" G. T. Bettany."

Mrs. Bettany (the narrator of cases 20 and 309) writes: —

^^^l^iu, " On the night referred to, I woke suddenly, I know not from what x,^^,j^^ • cause. My husband was leaning on his elbow, looking intently at a strange iZt^i woman whom I saw crouching by the wardrobe. I believed it to be a real ^' ^ person. It, however, suddenly disappeared. My husband then gave a cry as he describes. He then told me what he had seen. I tried the door and found it locked.

" The thought has occurred to me that I may have seen this by sympathetic transference from my husband; but, against this, I am much more likely to see something of this kind than he.

" Without having mentioned this apparition to my servants, the nursemaid told me, next day, that Muriel (a child of three years) had woke her in the night, saying, without any fear in her voice, ' Clara, Clara, there is an old woman in the room.' The nurse herself saw nothing. I may add that my cook has on several occasions asked me if I had entered

1 See Vol. i., pp. 550-1.

her room during the night, on occasions when I had certainly not done so. She appeared much mystified on learning this.

" Jeanie Gwynne Bettany."

The narrator of the next experience requests that her name may

not appear.

" February 17th, 1884. s) ^ • *V

(324) " Shortly after my marriage, about the year 1847, 1 went to stay j^.<^/L at my father's house. I had at that time two sisters at home, unmarried. ^,,..; •■-i The elder of the two was nearly two years younger than myself, and would i,,;, therefore be about 22 years of age at the time I speak of. The other sister was much younger than us both, and at this time was about 14 years old. My two sisters slept together in a room adjoining mine.

" One morning, on my going down to breakfast, my elder sister said to me, ' Sarah, such a strange thing happened in the night. I was sleeping outside (the other side of the bed was against the wall), and I was awoke by a feeling of oppression at my chest, as though there was a weight there, and I could not breathe. On opening my eyes I was startled to see a veiled figure bending over me. While I looked, I felt Anna's arm come round me. After what seemed to me a few minutes the form disappeared. Then Anna whispered, 'Oh Lizzie, I thought it was going to take you away.' "

" This was my sister's account. I took an opportunity, when my younger sister and T were alone, to ask her what that was that she and Lizzie had seen. She said she was awoke by a feeling of oppression, as though she could not breathe, and on opening her eyes, in the dim light of the room (the blind was down, but there was a gas lamp in front of the house, which gave some light to the room), she saw a veiled figure bending over Lizzie, and she put her arm round her, as she thought it had come to take her away.

" My father and his family shortly after moved into another house, my sisters still occupying a room together. They assured me that once in this other house they were visited by the same appearance^ but this time it was over Anna. She only lived a short time after, dying at sixteen and a-half.

" On sending this account to my sister, in case I might, through lapse of time, have altered the matter, she assures me that it is substantially cornet, and adds that the form was grey, darker and thicker in the middle; she also adds that the feeling of horror was intense. "L. S. B."

[Unfortunately the sister's letter was destroyed.]

The following case is a very singular one. The phenomenon of mutual hypnotisation (or rather of hypnotisation of one person through the process of hypnotising another) is one of which we have other examples. But I have met with no other instance of genuine transfer of a hallucination between two hypnotised persons; and, if this instance is a genuine one, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that it depended on the peculiar condition established — the two not being " subjects" influenced in common by a third person, but the originator of the hallucination, whichever of the two it was, having exerted an

206 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

active influence on the other, and presumably established the sort of rapport which is so common a feature of hypnotism. It could of course only be by the rarest accident that an operator who had established such a rai^port should then and there become the victim of a sensory hallucination, which would thus have a chance of being transferred; and the accident in this case was the fact that the operator herself fell into an abnormal condition. I do not number the narrative, as it is impossible to be quite certain that some unconscious look or gesture on the part of one percipient did not evoke the image in the other's mind; for though the hypnotic state in itself has no special tendency to promote hallucinations, except such as are suggested and impressed in the plainest manner, in the present instance there seems to have been a certain amount of expectancy, which probably facilitated the affection in both the persons concerned. The case was received from Miss Becket, of Hotel Vendome, Boston, U.S.A., an Associate of the S.P.R., who wrote on January 25, 1886.

Miss Becket begins by describing how on one occasion she attempted to hypnotise a friend who was standing two or three yards from her. She made slow downward passes till her friend " shivered with cold." She then reversed the passes, but soon herself became rigid, with outstretched arms. " Both the lady and myself turned our heads, and seemed to follow with our eyes the movements of some invisible body around the room. We seemed to see the same horrible something in the same part of the room, for our faces had an expression of unutterable horror. Sometimes we looked behind this one object, as at something following its progress round the room, but our eyes instantly returned to the greater attraction, and at last our faces seemed so frozen in an agony of fear that the gentleman sprang towards his wife, and dragged her to a seat, and used oreat physical force before he could rouse her from the terrible spell. I seemed to be in part liberated with her, but it was a long time before we were really free from the strange influence we had fallen under.

" When we could talk, we found that we had each seen the same vision, in every detail alike. I have always had a strong faith in religion. My friends were too philosophical to admit dogmas into their minds. But the one horrible central figure in our visions, it seems, must have originated in my brain, from its resemblance to my idea of a personal devil. At all events, we both saw, suddenly take form out of empty space, the giant fio-ure of a man. His face expressed fiendish cruelty and wickedness, and we felt ourselves in part in his power, and knew that he was exulting in this power. He seemed to be followed by a great many pigmy figures, that danced about the room and made ugly faces at us, but dared not do more in the presence of this master spirit. It was when the supernatural malignancy of this frightful creature had almost overpowered us with fear and horror, that our faces expressed such torture as to cause the gentleman to interfere, and try to rouse us from the spell.

" As I have said, it was entirely out of our plan that / should share in

the vision. I had counted on watching the effects of my passes on my friend; and the shock of this unwelcome surprise put an end to any further experiments in future. a m^m^ j. q, Becket."

The following is an independent and very different description, from Mrs. Frederic D. Williams, the lady who shared in the experience: —

" 35^^^ Rue de Fleurus, Paris.

"March 24th, 1886. She first narrates how Miss Becket and she used to try on each other, standing some distance apart, the effect of " magnetic passes," and how she herself used to feel a hot current of air, and Miss Becket a cool one;^ and continues: — " I cannot remember who [^.e., which of us] acted as magnetiser on the particular occasion to which Miss Becket alludes: the chief feature of it I, however, do recollect. This was seeing a strange something — an appearance of a shadowy, transparent film, or veil, or sheet of thinnest vapour,^ float slowly upward between Miss Becket and myself, but (as it appeared to me) nearer her. Any possible doubt, if not of the object itself, at least of our perception of something unusual, should be disproved by the fact of our exclaiming simultaneously, ' Did you see that! ' — or words to that effect. I hesitate to say anything of the truth of which I am not absolutely sure; but I have an impression amounting to certainty that it was upon the reverse passes being made that the above incident happened. [This detail agrees with Miss Becket's statement.]

On receiving this account, I told Mrs. Williams what Miss Becket's version was, and also asked whether Mr. Williams remembered the incident. She replied that Mr. Williams could corroborate her statement as being the same that she made to him at the time, but does not remember having U been present, though he admits that he may have been. She remembers that her experience differed from Miss Becket's in not being alarming, and that Miss Becket described hers as " infernal." What she saw had the same sort of shape as a veil falling around a human form, and changed like a cloud while being watched. She concludes: — " I had forgotten that Miss Becket became rigid, but now remember the circumstance, and this fact, that I was very much alarmed, not at what I saw (although it is quite true we opened our eyes very wide at that), but at the state into which Miss Becket was thrown, and also at the possibility of having done her some serious harm through my inexperience in such matters; which would seem to decide, at least in my own mind, a point on which Miss Becket and I seem to be at variance, namely, that it was I who was ' magnetising,' and not she. I do not know, however, that this is of any importance."

[Memory is clearly more likely to have erred as to the resemblance than as to the difference of the two visions. But even if we only had Mrs. Williams's account, some germ of thought-transference would be strongly ^ ^ suggested by the sudden and simultaneous occurrence of two such singular experiences.] ^^ ^^ ^

^ From this it would appear that Miss Becket confounded her friend's temperature- '. ^. i^tV* sensations with her own. It seems to be an accident whether such subjective impressions "'''■' take the form of heat or cold. l^C^ >

J This rudimentary sort of appearance, as we have seen, is a well established form of subjective hallucination (see, e.g., p. 73, note).

208 COLLECTIVE CASES. chap.

I now come to cases where the figure was recognised. The

following transitional instance, of semi-recognition, is from Captain

Cecil Norton, late of the 5th Lancers, who tells us that he has had

no other hallucination of the senses.

" 5, Queen's Gate, S.W.

" December 20th, 1885.

(325) " About Christmastime 1875 or 1876, being officer on duty, I was seated at the mess table of the 5th Lancers, in the West Cavalry Barracks, at Aldershot. There were 10 or 12 other officers present, and amongst them Mr. John Atkinson (now of Erchfont Manor, near Devizes, Wilts), the Surgeon-Major of the regiment, who sat on my right, but at the end of the table furthest from me and next to Mr. Russell. [Captain Norton was sitting at the end of the table and directly facing the window.] At about 8,45 p.m. Atkinson suddenly glared at the window to his right, thereby attracting the notice of Russell, who, seizing his arm, said, ' Good gracious. Doctor, what's the matter with you 1 ' This caused me to look in the direction in which I saw Atkinson looking, viz., at the window opposite, and I there saw (for the curtains were looped up, although the room was lighted by a powerful central gas light in the roof and by candles on the table) a young woman, in what appeared a soiled or somewhat worn bridal dress, walk or glide slowly past the window from east to west. She was about at the centre of the window when I observed her, and outside the window. No person could have actually been in the position where she appeared, as the window in question is about 30 feet above the ground.

" The nearest buildings to the window referred to are the Infantry Barracks opposite, about 300 yards distant. Behind where I sat is a conservatory, which was examined by me, as well as the front window, immediately after the occurrence. There was no person in the conservatory. [It was unused in the winter.] The nearest buildings to it are the officers' stables, over which are the staff sergeants' quarters, about 50 yards distant.

" The occurrence made little if any impression upon me, though it impressed others who were in the room. All present had been drinking very little wine; and the dinner had been very quiet.

" It has just occurred to me that I may be wrong as to the time of year and that the occurrence may have taken place about 15th October or about 15th March. u Qg^iL Norton."

Mr. Atkinson writes: —

" Erchfont Manor, Devizes.

"August 31st, 1885.

" The appearance of a woman which I saw pass the mess-room window at Aldershot seemed to be outside, and it passed from east to west. The mess-room is on the first floor, so the woman would have been walking in the air. There has been a very nice story made out of it — like most other ghost-stories, founded on an optical illusion."

[Captain Norton's vivd voce account made it tolerably clear, in my opinion, that the case was one of hallucination, not illusion. He

further mentions that both Mr. Atkinson and he were "satisfied that the face and form of the woman seen were familiar," though they could not at the moment identify the person. Captain Norton afterwards felt sure that the likeness was to a photograph which he was in the habit of seeing in the room of the veterinary surgeon of the regiment, representing the surgeon's deceased wife in bridal dress. Oddly enough, this man was at the time, unknown to his friends, actually dying or within a day or two of death, in the same building. But Mr, Atkinson recalls nothing about the photograph; and the coincidence is not one to which we can attach weight.]

The next instance must be reckoned as " ambiguous " in origin; as, though the person whose form was seen was in an abnormal state, this had been to some extent chronic, and no reason is known why he should have exercised a telepathic agency on the day in question more than on any other. The narrator desires that her name may not be printed.

"October 28th, 1885.

(326) " In the month of November, 1843, myself, my eldest sister, and the man-servant were driving home from a small town to our parsonage in the country. The time might be about half past 4 or 5 p.m. As we came slowly up the hill by the churchyard wall, we saw a gentleman in walkingcostume going into the vestry door. We both exclaimed, ' That's papa,' and the man George said at the same moment, 'Why there's the master.' My father was then ill, and away from home many miles away. He died the following January 23rd, 1844. He wore a particular long cloak which I should have recognised anywhere, and which he had many years, and wore as a loose wrap. [What is meant clearly is that the cloak in which the figure appeared to be dressed exactly resembled that of the narrator's father.] He looked exactly like himself, and was going in by the small vestry door he used to enter the church by when going to take duty. I do not think he looked at us, but seemed intent on entering the church, and disappeared inside. We were all much frightened, and searched round the house and church but could see no one, and no one had been seen about. I recollect the occurrence as if it had been yesterday, and, as I write, see all distinctly in my mind's eye.

" The man-servant is dead; my sister begs to corroborate my account.

"S. R."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. R. says: —

" My sister has always, when I have talked of the vision, said she saw it so likewise, and she reiterated that only last summer, but she is not equal to write about it. I quite see the weak point, if the church was not searched inside. I can't say it tvas, nor can I say it was not. Old George, the man, was most fond of his master, and may have gone into the church; but I can't say. I only know we were all so terribly frightened. The vision was sudden, so true to life, and even to the particular long cloak, all gathered in to a collar clasped at the throat. I ought to have said that the figure seemed in the act of going in by the vestry door: we did not see him enter, as we drove on in great fright to the house. My father was then under medical treatment at Northampton."

Mrs. R. gives details, showing the absolute impossibility that her father



Vol. Ii. P

210 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

could really have " left Northampton, being a dying man, so to speak, when admitted," and come to the spot where he was seen, unknown to all his friends. " Then, again," she adds, " the church was always kept locked, the keys at the parsonage, supposing for a moment that we saw a living figure. I recollect that inquiry was made of the villagers as to any strange gentleman having been seen about, and the answer was ' No.' "

Asked whether she or her sister have ever had a hallucination of the senses on any other occasion, Mrs. R. says, " I can emphatically answer 'No,' for both of us." Her sister was about 19 at the time, and she herself 11 — -"a fresh young child with perfect nerves."

The following account is from Mrs. Moberley, of Tynwald, Hythe.

"May 9th, 1884. Jj.fi*^-^ ' (327) " The case of hallucination shared by myself and a friend was rather odd. We were both convinced we saw one afternoon a friend pass before the window in which we stood, and enter the garden. We both bowed to him, and believed he returned the greeting. He was in sight for some short time; quite long enough to allow of a distinct recognition, and the road along which he passed was near to the window at which we stood. A quiet country road, we knew every passer-by by sight and name, and our friend was a remarkable man in some ways, not one to be easily confounded with other people — a short, brisk, alert, foreign-looking man, with jet black hair and white whiskers, a decidedly un-English overcoat, and a salute peculiar to himself, a wave of the hat and a low bow, with which he never failed to greet us. We waited to hear him announced in vain. On her way home my friend met his son, who was exti-emely perplexed at hearing that his father had been to our house. He had been intending to come, but finding that he should be engaged had sent his son instead. Of course when we all met, the mystery was exhaustively discvissed, and dismissed as a mystery. " Fras. Moberley."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Moberley says that the date was 1863; that she was 1 9, and in good health; and that she has never had any other hallucination. The lady who shared the experience with her declines to answer any questions, saying that "it is a question of principle." Mrs. Moberley adds, " She has not forgotten the circumstance: she would have been only too glad to say so."

Bearing in mind the " arrival " cases of Chap. XIV., § 7, we cannot here assume it as quite certain that the direction of the absent person's thoughts had nothing to do with the appearance; but if to this extent " ambiguous," the case seems at any rate one of collective \M"^ • hallucination. The same remark applies to the next example — from Mrs. Forsyth Hunter, of 2, Victoria Crescent, St. Heliers, Jersey.

"1882. (328) " Another odd appearance ^ was that of my elder daughter, a bright lively girl of fifteen. I had placed her at a finishing school in

1 Some apparently veridical cases from the same informant will be found below— Nos. 408, 553, 554, 650.

Edinburgh, and returned to my cottage, in M. Next morning at breakfast, I suddenly looked out of the window, and saw her quite distinctly coming in at the garden gate, in pork-pie hat, grey dress looped up over a red petticoat, just as she had been the day before. Not a word said I, but M., my second daughter [since deceased], exclaimed joyously and wonderingly, ' There is B! ' For the few seconds the vision lasted, I saw her, as if stooping to undo the latch of the gate. Afterwards she told me how unhappy she had been for the first day in school, and what an intense longing had seized her to return to us. No doubt both her sister and myself were thinking of her, at the same time."

In answer to the question whether she can be quite certain that the figure seen was not that of a stranger bearing some resemblance to her daughter, Mrs. Hunter replies: —

" Your supposition amuses me. The figure melted away, in the act of seemingly stooping to undo the latch of our little gate. It was a bright autumn morning. We were seated at breakfast, the table close to a bowwindow, overlooking a strip of garden, belonging to a cottage at Melrose: the gate being a low wooden gate, and no house near. It was my daughter's face, figure, and dress, just as she had appeared the day before, when I took her to school at Edinburgh. My daughter was distinguished-looking, and no one in that neighbourhood could at all be mistaken for her. Our sight was quite good, and neither short-sighted. In short, there is no doubt that in some mysterious way her longing and our thinking [of her] brought about this appearance. Another explanation might be that our imaginations might at the same moment have called up the figure."

[The facts that the phantasm presented exactly the aspect of the real figure so recently seen, and that Mrs. Hunter's thoughts were much occupied with her absent daughter, and further that she had previously had a subjective " after-image " of this very daughter (Chap. XII., § 4), decidedly favour the supposition that her experience on this occasion was also of that character. And if so, the case seems clearly to be one where h- <^ ■ a purely subjective hallucination has been transferred.] " ■< y^c-Ti

In the next example, the apparition seems more definitely independent of any conscious mental action on the part of the absent person; for it would be hard to attribute a special telepathic influence to some casual image of his usual resort that may have flitted across his mind, at the same time that his form appeared. The two percipients were at the time secretaries to societies of which the ofiices were in the same building. The narrator is Mr. R. Mouat, of 60, Huntingdon Street, Barnsbury, N. His account, which was written down soon after the occurrence, has been slightly condensed.

(329) "On Thursday, the 5th of September, 1867, about the hour of ^^ ^ • 10.45 a.m., on entering my office, I found my clerk in conversation with the porter, and the Rev. Mr. H. standing at the clerk's back. I was just on the point of asking Mr. H. what had brought him in so early (he worked

212 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

in the same room as myself, but was not in the habit of coming till about mid-day) when my clerk began questioning me about a telegram which had missed me. The conversation lasted some minutes, and in the midst of it the porter gave me a letter which explained by whom the telegram had been sent. During this scene Mr. R., from an office upstairs, came in and listened to what was going on. On opening the letter, I immediately made known its purport, and looked Mr. H. full in the face as I spoke. I was much struck by the melancholy look he had, and observed that he was without his neck-tie. At this juncture Mr. E,. and the porter left the room. I spoke to Mr. H., saying, ' Well, what's the matter with you? You look so sour.' He made no answer, but continued looking fixedly at me. I took up an enclosure which had accompanied the letter and read it through, still seeing Mr. H. standing opposite to me at the corner of the table. As I laid the papers down, my clerk said,' Here, sir, is a letter come from Mr. H.' No sooner had he pronounced the name than Mr. H. disappeared in a second. I was for a time quite dumbfounded, which astonished my clerk, who (it now turned out) had not seen Mr. H., and absolutely denied that he had been in the ofiice that morning. The purport of the letter from Mr. H., which my clerk gave me, and which had been written on the previous day, was that, feeling unwell, he should not come to the office that Thursday, but requested me to forward his letters to him at his house. " The next day (Friday), about noon, Mr. H. entered the office; and when I asked him where he was on the Thursday about 10.45, he replied that he had just finished breakfast, was in the company of his wife, and had never left his house during the day. I felt shy of mentioning the subject to Mr. R., but on the Monday following I could not refrain from asking him if he remembered looking in on Thursday morning. ' Perfectly,' he replied; ' you were having a long confab with your clerk about a telegram, which you subsequently discovered came from Mr. C On my asking him if he remembered who were present, he answered, ' The clerk, the porter, you and H.' On my asking him further, he said, 'He was standing at the corner of the table, opposite you. I addressed him, but he made no reply, only took up a book and began reading. I could not help looking at him, as the first thing that struck me was his being at the office so early, and the next his melancholy look, so difierent from his usual manner; but that I attributed to his being annoyed about the discussion going on. I left him standing in the same position when I went out, followed by the porter.' On my making known to Mr. R. that Mr. H. was 14 miles off the whole of that day he grew quite indignant at my doubting the evidence of his eyesight, and insisted on the porter being called up and interrogated. The porter however, like the clerk, had not seen the figure."

Mr. R. has supplied independent and precise corroboration of these facts, so far as he was a party to them — the one insignificant difference being that he says he did not sjoeak to Mr. H., but " gesticulated in fun to him, pointing to Mr. M. and the clerk, who were having an altercation about a telegram; but my fun did not seem at all catching, Mr. H. apparently not being inclined, as he often was, to make fun out of surrounding circumstances." He adds that he has never experienced any other hallucination of the senses; and Mr. Mouat made a similar statement vivd voce to the present writer.

-^;-C-<fc'>^'-

Cases of this type naturally suggest the question whether they may not be parallel to those cases of casual agency (Chap. XIV., § 5), where the same person has on several occasions, unconnected with any crisis, been the source of hallucination, now to one friend now to another. But even supposing such an impression as the above, of an absent person who is in a normal state, to be telepathic and not purely subjective in its inception, no one on reflection will maintain that by pure accident two percipients were casually affected in this extremely rare way at the same 'moment. And if not, then something took place between them; which — if what one saw was not suggested to the other by verbal or physical signs — must be of the nature of thoughttransference.

The next narrative is from Mr. James Cowley, who wrote from 32, Langton Street, Cathay, Bristol, on Jan. 7, 1884: —

(330) " My eldest son is a twin. The night after his dear mother was laid in the grave at the Highgate Cemetery (1845) I had him in bed with me. (I was then residing at 39, Charlotte Terrace, Islington.) Something causing me to start from my sleep, I saw, with all the distinctness possible to visual power, my dearest angel receding, in a bent position, as if she had been blessing one or both of us, with a kiss. At the same instant the child, only two years and five months old, exclaimed, ' There's mother! ' You will hardly wonder that, after the night had passed away, I was perplexed to know whether I had only dreamt it, or whether it was real. But the reference made to the matter by my dear little motherless one, the moment he awoke, removed all possibility of doubt."

The next account is from Mr. Charles A. W. Lett, of the Military

and Royal Naval Club, Albemarle Street, W.

"December 3rd, 1885. ^-A,--'

(331) "On the 5th April, 1873, my wife's father. Captain Towns, /IJUm**^ died at his residence, Cranbrook, Rose Bay, near Sydney, N. S. Wales. 7."i^f r^ /« About 6 weeks after his death, my wife had occasion, one evening about,"/

9 o'clock, to go to one of the bedrooms in the house. She was accompanied /7

by a young lady, Miss Berthon, and as they entered the room— the gas ifU4^r, was burning all the time — they were amazed to see, reflected as it were *'^j^ ^^ on the polished surface of the wardrobe, the image of Captain Towns. It -^

was barely half figure,^ the head, shoulders, and part of the arms only showing — in fact, it was like an ordinary medallion portrait, but life-size. The face appeared wan and pale, as it did before his death; and he wore a kind of grey flannel jacket, in which he had been accustomed to sleep. Surprised and half alarmed at what they saw, their first idea was that a portrait had been hung in the room, and that what they saw was its refiection — but there was no picture of the kind.

" Whilst they were looking and wondering, my wife's sister. Miss Towns, came into the room, and before either of the others had time to speak she exclaimed, ' Good gracious! Do you see papa? '

^ See p. 33. note.

214 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

One of the housemaids happened to be passing down stairs at the moment, and she was called in, and asked if she saw anything, and her reply was, ' Oh, miss! the master.' Graham — Captain Towns' old body servant — was then sent for, and he also immediately exclaimed, ' Oh, Lord save us! Mrs. Lett, it's the Captain! ' The butler was called, and then Mrs. Crane, my wife's nurse, and they both said what they saw. Finally, Mrs. Towns was sent for, and, seeing the apparition, she advanced towards it with her arm extended as if to touch it, and as she passed her hand over the panel of the wardrobe the figure gradually faded away, and never again appeared, though the room was regularly occupied for a long time after.

" These are the simple facts of the case, and they admit of no doubt; no kind of intimation was given to any of the witnesses; the same question was put to each one as they came into the room, and the reply was given without hesitation by each. It was by the merest accident that I did not see the apparition. I was in the house at the time, but did not hear when I was called. " C. A. W. Lett."

" We, the undersigned, having read the above statement, certify that it is strictly accurate, as we both were witnesses of the apparition.

" Sara Lett. " SiBBiE Smyth [nee Towns)."

Mrs. Lett assures me that neither she nor her sister ever experienced a hallucination of the senses on any other occasion. She is positive that the recognition of the appearance on the part of each of the later witnesses was independent, and not due to any suggestion from the persons already in the room.

[We hope in time to receive the corroboration of Miss Berthon, and of Mrs. Crane, Mrs. Lett's nurse,]

These last are cases where the distinction to which I have called attention (pp. 190-2) must be specially borne in mind. My central object being to prove that ideas may be transferred from mind to mind without words or physical signs, I am presenting certain collective sensory experiences which I think may constitute one type of such transference. Now believers in communications with the departed will probably need so little convincing as to the general theory of the far less startling transferences between living persons, that on them I am not concerned to press the evidence of this particular type. But of the rest of my readers I would ask — supposing the above and similar occurrences to be truly described — on what hypothesis, other than that of the transferability of hallucinations as such, they would explain them.

I pass by some other examples of the same kind; as no insistance on my point of view in quoting them would prevent my seeming to some to be explaining away veritable manifestations as subjective delusions, and to others to be introducing " ghosts " by a side-wind. But I give the following as a further interesting case of impressions

which, though probably simultaneous, were not similar. The narrative was originally printed in July, 1883, in an account of the Orphanage where it occurred, entitled The Orphanage and Home, Aberlour, Graigellachie, &c. (pp. 44-5). The narrator throughout is the Rev. C. Jupp, Warden of the Orphanage.

(332) "In 1875, a man died leaving a widow and six orphan children. The 3 eldest were admitted into the Orphanage. Three years afterwards the widow died, and friends succeeded in getting funds to send the rest here, the youngest being about 4 years of age. [Late one evening, about 6 months after the admission of the younger children, some visitors arrived unexpectedly; and] the Warden agreed to take a bed in the little ones' dormitory, which contained 10 beds, 9 occupied.

" In the morning, at breakfast, the Warden made the following statement: — 'As near as I can tell I fell asleep about 11 o'clock, and slept very soundly for some time. I suddenly woke without any apparent reason, and felt an impulse to turn round, my face being towards the wall, from the children. Before turning, I looked up and saw a soft light in the room. The gas was burning low in the hall, and the dormitory door being open, I thought it probable that the light came from that source. It was soon evident, however, that such was not the case. I turned round, and then a wonderful vision met my gaze. Over the second bed from mine, and on the same side of the room, there was floating a small cloud of light, forming a halo of the brightness of the moon on an ordinary moonlight night.

" ' I sat upright in bed, looking at this strange appearance, took up my watch and found the hands pointing to 5 minutes to 1. Everything was quiet, and all the children sleeping soundly. In the bed, over which the light seemed to float, slept the youngest of the 6 children mentioned above.

" ' I asked myself, " Am I dreaming? " No! I was wide awake. I was seized with a strong impulse to rise and touch the substance, or whatever it might be (for it was about 5 feet high), and was getting up when something seemed to hold me back. I am certain I heard nothing, yet I felt and perfectly understood the words — " No, lie down, it won't hurt you." I at once did what I felt I was told to do. I fell asleep shortly afterwards and rose at half -past 5, that being my usual time.

" ' At 6 o'clock I began dressing the children, beginning at the bed furthest from the one in which I slept. Presently I came to the bed over which I had seen the light hovering. I took the little boy out, placed him on my knee, and put on some of his clothes. The child had been talking with the others; suddenly he was silent. And then, looking me hard in the face with an extraordinary expression, he said, "Oh, Mr. Jupp, my mother came to me last night. Did you see her? " For a moment I could not answer the child. I then thought it better to pass it ofi", and said, " Come, we must make haste, or we shall be late for breakfast." '

" The child never afterwards referred to the matter, we are told, nor has it since ever been mentioned to him. The Warden says it is a mystery to him; he simply states the fact and there leaves the matter, being perfectly satisfied that he was mistaken in no one particular."

216 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

In answer to inquiries, the Rev. C. Jupp writes to us: —

" The Orphanage and Convalescent Home, Aberlour, Craigellachie.

"November 13th, 1883.

" I fear anything the little boy might now say would be unreliable, or I would at once question him. Although the matter was fully discussed at the time, it was never mentioned in the hearing of the child; and yet, when at the request of friends, the account was published in our little magazine, and the child read it, his countenance changed, and looking up, he said, ' Mr. Jupp, that is me.' 1 said, 'Yes, that is what we saw.' He said, ' Yes,' and then seemed to fall into deep thought, evidently with pleasant remembrances, for he smiled so sweetly to himself, and seemed to forget I was present.

" I much regret now that I did not learn something from the child at the time. " Chas. Jupp."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Jupp says that he has never had any other hallucination of the senses; and adds, " My wife was the only person of adult age to whom I mentioned the circumstance at the time. Shortly after, I mentioned it to our Bishop and Primus."

Mrs. Jupp writes, from the Orphanage, on June 23, 1886: —

" This is to certify that the account of the light seen by the Warden of this establishment is correct, and was mentioned to me at the time " — i.e., next morning.

It is possible that the child's experience here was a dream; if so, the case might be taken as a link between the two classes of phenomena — collective hallucinations and simultaneous dreams — which I have referred to as so closely related (p. 171).-^

I will give one more " recognised " case, which presents the curious feature that the figure seen was that of one of the per-

1 In the Life and Con-espondence of Charles Matheivs, by Mrs. Mathews, pjp. 94, 95, a case is recorded which again illustrates this relation. One night, when Mr. and the future Mrs. Mathews were intimate acquaintances, but without any intention of marrying, and when they were at a distance from one another, they had a precisely similar vision, which so violently affected both of them that they fell out of their respective beds, and were found on their respective floors; Mr. Mathews was so much affected as to be extremely ill for a day afterwards. The experiences were independently described long before they were compared. The joint vision was one of which the substance might have been easily suggested to either of the parties by a recent incident; it was in fact the apparition of Mr. Mathews' former wife, who, before her death, had tried to make them promise to marry one another; but it is difficult to believe that it was by accident that experiences so unique as those described corrresponded and coincided. If, on the other hand, the incident was telepathic, and one experience was the cause or the condition of the other, it is interesting to remark that the visions in fact much more resembled waking hallucinations than genuine dreams; for Mrs. Mathews especially records that both she and Mr. Mathews had been unable to sleep through restlessness.

The following case is interesting enough to deserve quotation, though not ostensibly "collective, " and possibly no more than a single subjective hallucination. We received it from the Rev. Arthur Bellamy, of Publow Vicarage, Bristol, in February, 1886; but the particulars were first published in 1878.

'•When a girl at school my wife made an agreement with a fellow pupil, Miss W., that the one of them who died first should, if Divinely permitted, appear after her decease to the survivor. In 1874 my wife, who had not seen or heard anything of her former school-friend for some years, casually heard of her death. The news reminded her of her former agreement, and then, becoming nervous, she told me of it. I knew of my wife's compact, but I had never seen a photograph of her friend, or heard any description of her. [Mr. Bellamy told the present writer, in conversation, that his mind had not been in the least dwelling on the compact.]

cipients. I have spoken before (Chap. XII., § 8, first note) of a form of hallucination, as I hold it, which consists in seeming to see oneself as a person outside one; and I have also pointed out (p. 85, note) that one of our informants who has had an experience of the sort is also one of the few persons who have given us evidence of what I have called casual agency, exercised in the midst of quite ordinary life. Now the fact that a person who has, so to speak, casually impressed herself, has at other times casually impressed others, is in itself of great interest; but it leads us on to the following still more interesting case, where the " double " was seen by its original and by others at the same time. The account is from Mrs. Hall, of The Yews, Gretton, near Kettering, and was received in December, 1883. -••

(3.33) "In the autumn of 1863, I was living with my husband and ^"^J^ first baby, a child of 8 months, in a lone house, called Sibberton, near Wansford, Northamptonshire, which in by-gone days had been a church. As the weather became more wintry, a married cousin and her husband

"A night or two afterwards as I was sleeping with my wife, a fire brightly burning in *<-c the room and a candle alight, I suddenly awoke, and saw a lady sitting by the side of the bed where my wife was sleeping soundly. At once I sat up in the bed, and gazed so intently that even now I can recall her form and features. Had I the jDencil and the brush of a Millais, I could transfer to canvas an exact likeness of the ghostly visitant. I remember that I was much struck, as I looked intently at her, with the careful arrangement of her coiffure, every single hair being most carefully brushed down. How long I sat and gazed I cannot say, but directly the apparition ceased to be, I got out of bed to see if any of my wife's garments had by any means optically deluded me. I found nothing in the line of vision but a bare wall. Hallucination on my part I rejected as out of the question, and I doubted not that I had really seen an apparition. Returning to bed, I lay till my wife some hours after awoke and then I gave her an account of her friend's appearance. I described her colour, form, &c., all of which exactly tallied with my wife's recollection of Miss W. Finally I asked, ' But was there any special point to strike one in her appearance?' ' Yes, ' my wife promptly replied; ' we girls used to tease her at school for devoting so much time to the arrangement of her hair.' This was the very thing which I have said so much struck me. Such are the simple facts.

"I will only add that till 1874 I had never seen an apparition, and that I have not seen one since. " Arthur Bellamy."

We have also seen an account written by Mrs. Bellamy in May, 1879, which entirely agrees with the above, except that she " thinks it was a fortnight after the death " that the vision occurred, and that the light was "the dim light of a night-lamp." She says, " The description accorded in all points with my deceased friend." In conversation Mr. Bellamy described the form as seen in a very clear light (see Vol i., pp. 550-1); and this may account for his idea that the room itself was lighted by fire and candle.

This experience, as I have said, may have been purely subjective; and identification of a person's appearance by mere description is generally to be regarded with great doubt. But in view of the circumstances, and especially of the fact that Mr. Bellamy has never had any other hallucination, two alternative hypotheses seem at least worth suggesting. (1) Believers in telepathic phantasms may suspect Mr. Bellamy's experience to have been conditioned by his wife's state of mind — possibly even by a dream, forgotten on waking, in which her friend figured. (2) Believers in the possibility of post-mortem communications, if they believe that this was one of them, might further suppose that Mr. Bellamy's experience depended on a psychical influence exercised in the first instance on Mrs. Bellamy, though acting below the level of her normal consciousness — which would make the case parallel to Nos. 242 and 355. To me, I confess, this appears a more reasonable supposition than that a direct influence (so to speak) missed its mark, and was exercised on Mr. Bellamy by a stranger who cared nothing about him.

I may mention that we have another first-hand case of just the same type, where the percipient was unaware of any compact, and was quite unoccupied with the thought of the dead person. She was, however, a young child at the time, and I therefore do not quote the account.

218 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

came on a visit. One night, when we were having supper, an apparition stood at the end of the sideboard. We four sat at the dining-table; and yet, with great inconsistency, / stood as this ghostly visitor again, in a spotted, light muslin summer dress, and without any terrible peculiarities of air or manner. We all four saw it, my husband having attracted our attention to it, saying, ' It is Sarah,' in a tone of recognition, meaning me. It at once disappeared. None of us felt any fear, it seemed too natural and familiar.

" The apparition seemed utterly apart from myself and my feelings, as a picture or statue. My three relatives, who, with me, saw the apparition, are all dead; they died in about the years 1868-69.

"Sarah Jane Hall."

The dress in which the figure appeared was not like any that Mrs. Hall

had at the time, though she wore one like it nearly two years afterwards.

1 Mrs. Hall has had other visual hallucinations, which were all connected

with ill-health or nervous shock; one which occurred a few months before

that here described had represented herself as if " laid out."

I now pass to auditory cases, I have spoken of the caution which these require; ^ but the following instances must, I think, have been more than mere misinterpretations of real sounds.

The first account is from a lady of unimpeachable veracity; and the account, though written in the third person, is first-hand.

" November, 1884. \j}^ (334) " Some 20 years ago, Miss G. [the narrator] was recovering from

/ a severe illness, and it was of the utmost importance for her to have a

1 Even the sound of the human voice — though ordinarily so distinctive — may be illusory. For example, we should hardly, I think, be justified in regarding the two following cases as other than joint illusions, due to some undiscovered source of sound in the house. Mr. Gascoigne Bevan, of the Bank House, Sudbury, wr-ites, in 1884: —

" Some few years ago and since, I have been living in this house, and manager of the bank. I returned home one evening in the summer time with a friend. On entering by the garden door, we were both greeted with the sounds of children's laughter, peal after peal, all over the house. ' Why, ' says my friend, ' I did not know you had children in the house, or I would not have come.' I don't know why I answered, but I did so: 'Hush, don't say anything; you will frighten Mrs. Springett, my housekeeper.' Iran all over the house, looking in all the rooms, in vain, for an explanation. I knoio there was no one in the house except Mrs. Springett, her old husband and an under servant."

[Mr. Bevan believes that the friend who shared this experience has recently died in Africa.]

Miss Twynam, of 1, Waterloo Place, Southampton, writes, on Nov. 12, 1885: —

"I had myself repeatedly heard the voice calling my name, 'Ellen,' at various intervals, extending over some months, and had mentioned the fact to the different members of the family, but never to my knowledge in the presence of the servants. I have always been laughed at, and told it was only my fancy, and no one then had heard it but myself. On one occasion, I and my sister were in the drawing-room, and my mother and aunt, who were both invalids, were in their respective bedrooms upstairs, on opposite sides of the house;, while my brother was in another sitting-room downstairs, on the other side of the hall: and the servants were both in the kitchen, which was an underground one. I and my sister heard the voice distinctly call ' Ellen, Ellen! ' — a clear, high, refined woman's voice, but with something strange and unusual about it. My sister at once noticed it, turning to me and saying, ' There, I have heard it myself this time. ' I still, however, thought it might really be someone, so went to my mother, asking whether she had called. She said, 'No,' but she had heard someone calling me, and thought it was my aunt. I went to her, and she said exactly the same, only thought it was my mother. I then went to my brother. He said, ' No; ' but had heard someone

good night, in order to wind her up for a journey to Edinburgh next day. '*^^ All the house was sent to bed early, and the utmost quiet enjoined upon everybody. A devoted friend, whose name was Louisa, went to bed with her, in order to be close at hand if anything should be wanted. About an hour after she had lain down she was startled by a loud outcry, ' Louie, Louie! ' as if someone was in urgent want of assistance. Miss G-. thought that probably someone had slipped and was hanging over the banisters; she anxiously turned to her friend trying to rouse her. Her friend made no offer to rise, but said, in a very marked way, ' Did you hear that voice? It was my mother; I hear it constantly.' Next morning every inquiry was made; but no call whatever had been made."

I have already mentioned that the hearing of the name, in the tones of a familiar voice, is one of the commonest and most recurrent forms of subjective hallucination; but whatever view be taken of the origin of the friend's impression, we may reasonably suppose that it was through her that it was communicated to Miss G. ^.U^ aJ(.^'^^'^^ ^ r^f'

The next example was sent to us by Mr. George Saxon, of Parklands, Bruton, Somersetshire, who completely confirms the narrative as far as he was concerned. The following is his wife's account: — -

"February 26th, 1885. (335) "On first coming to this house to reside, in September, 1879, myself and two servants were in the kitchen talking one evening at about 10.30; and we all three distinctly heard a voice coming from the,_ next room, or the passage that leads from the kitchen to this room, n^^^''^ saying three times, ' Are you coming? ' On the first occasion I answered?*'>•<.■«. and said, ' I am coming, dear,' thinking it was my husband calling, whom I supposed to be in the next room. The voice again said the second time, ' Are you coming 1 ' and one of the servants said, ' You had better go; master is calling.' The voice again said the third time, ' Are you

call quite plainly. I then went dowzi to the servants, and asked whether they had heard anyone calling. They said, ' Yes;' they thought it was mistress. But there was nothing about them to lead me to think they were playing any trick, and they had never any idea that I had heard this voice before. The voice sounded to me as though it were above me, and yet very close to me, and it gave me a strange uncomfortable feeling. I do not think it was the servants, as they answered so naturally, as a matter of course, that it was their mistress who had called. Our house stood in a garden near the village, but I am sure it was no one from outside, as the voice was so decidedly in the house, and apparently close to us. " Ellen B. Twtnam."

Miss Twynam's sister says: —

"I perfectly remember the occurrence alluded to by my sister. I distinctly heard the voice calling her name, and noticed at the time that it was very clear, and resembled a woman's voice, but with a strangely unnatural sound which attracted my attention. I remember turning to her and saying, ' I have heard it for myself this time,' as she had mentioned the fact of repeatedly hearing her name called, but I had never heard it, though other people had done so before; but on this occasion everybody in the house heard it at the same time, I have no doubt whatever that the voice came from no one in the house. "Maeia Twynam."

I have carefully questioned these informants, and believe that the account is accurate. But it seems possible to suppose that some peculiar sound in the house was interpreted in the way which Miss E. B. Twynam's description of her own experience had suggested.

It is curious that we have another case w^here an unaccountable sound, heard several times by two persons in the same house, was the call "Ellen, Ellen," which was the name of one of them. Perhaps there is something in the sound which renders it easily simulated.

220 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

coming 1 ' I then went through the passage before mentioned, to the next room, where I thought to find my husband, there being no one else in the house except three children, who were upstairs fast asleep. On going through the passage into the next room, I found no one there, and no light, it being quite dark. I then returned to the kitchen and obtained a light, and went through the said room into the room beyond, where I found my husband, who was busy writing letters, and he had not called or spoken. This room he was in had the door shut. "We all thought it very strange, and went up to see the children, who were all fast asleep. One of the servants before mentioned, I should say, had left my service and had only come down by train (10 miles) for the day, and was to return [arriving home at 8 p.m.] by the last train, which she missed and had to stay the night. She had a daughter-in-law expecting to be confined, to whom she was going back. She was an elderly person, had lost a son not long before, and used to see at times ' ghosts,' or what appeared human beings, but disappeared suddenly and mysteriously.

" Caroline Augusta Saxon."

Mr. Saxon adds: —

" The house is quite an isolated one, standing in gardens away from a road, and about half-a-mile from the town. The doors and windows were closed. The voice was evidently within the house; and could not have come from anyone in the house. Our children's ages were respectively 9 years, 7 years, 5 years and 7 months. We were sure they were all asleep at the time, as we went up at once to see. I asked them the next day; besides, it was not the voice of the children, but seemed a low plaintive voice. Notwithstanding, my wife and the two servants thought it must have been myself calling from the next room, I being the only other being about."

I have examined the localities, and saw how natural it was that Mrs. Saxon should imagine her husband to be calling from the nearer room. She describes the voice as very distinct and startling. She has occasionally had the hallucination of hearing her own name called, when overtired; but never of anything else.

Here, as m the last example, we have to note a slight tendency to subjective hallucination, which in the servant's case may have been intensified by recent trouble; and, without absolutely excluding the hypothesis of telepathic influence from her daughter-in-law,^ I still think it more probable that a purely subjective hallucination on her part, easily referable to her anxiety about her daughter-inlaw's condition, was psychically transferred to her two companions.

The next example is from the Eev. W. Rajrmond, Rector of Ballyheigue, Co. Kerry. I need not repeat with regard to it the comments made on cases 330 and 331. Whatever view be taken as to the origin of the sound, it is impossible to suppose that it was by accident that the two identical impressions so exactly coincided,

1 The repetition of the experience somewhat favours this hypothesis (see p. 105).

" December 18th, 1884.

(336) " About 30 years ago, Miss Mildred Nash, my mother's aunt, died |! in my mother's house, at the advanced age of 82 years. She had been blind for some years, and an orphan cousin of mine had been much in attendance on her. My aunt lived and died in a room on the ground floor in the front of our house, which was situated in a retired street of Tralee. A few days after her death, my cousin and I were sitting, on a summer evening, at the window of the room over the room in which my aunt had died. I heard distinctly the words ' Rosy, Rosy ' (my cousin's name), apparently from the room beneath, and in my aunt's voice; then I heard my cousin answer to the call; she also heard the voice. I, struck with the strangeness of the circumstance, at once threw up the window to see if it were a voice from the street, but there was no one visible, and there could be no one there without being seen. I then searched the house all around, but there was nobody near except ourselves — my cousin and myself. The tale ends there; nothing afterwards happened in connection; — merely the unaccountable fact that two persons did independently hear such a voice as I have mentioned. I heard both the name called and the answer.

" Wm. Raymond."

Writing on January 9th, 1885, Mr. Raymond says: —

" I send you, as soon as I was able to get it, the enclosed statement in corroboration, sent me by my cousin. She mentioned an item that helped to fix the facts in her memory (and which shows the superstition of the people here), that her neighbours all said she should not have answered, but, as she says, no harm came of it. This was my only experience of auditory hallucination."

The enclosed statement was as follows: —

"Tralee, January 8th, 1885.

" My cousin. Rev. William Raymond, has asked me if I remember about the voice we heard at the time of the death of old Miss Nash, his aunt. I do remember that a few days after her death he and I were sitting, one summer evening, in the room over the room where she died, that I heard my name called, apparently from that room and in her voice, and that I answered the call, and that we searched and could find no one about who could have spoken. " Rose Raymond."

In answer to an inquiry. Miss Raymond states that this is her sole experience of an auditory hallucination.

It remains to illustrate the musical type of collective hallucination. The following account is from Mr. and Mrs. Sewell, of Eden Villas, Albert Park, Didsbury. The latter (writing on March 25th, 1885) tells us that in the spring of 1863, a little girl of theirs, called Lilly, was ill. ',^«^■»^♦■

(337) " My husband came home about 3 o'clock, and, to please Lilly,

said he would have his dinner in the bedroom with her. I sat beside the bed ^^. ' with one of Lilly's hands in mine, my husband was eating his dinner, and '^**'^^/ one little boy was talking to Lilly, and all were quietly trying to amuse the patient, when our attention was roused by sounds of the music of an -^olian harp, which pi-oceeded from a corner cupboard in one corner of

222 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

the room. All was hushed, and I said, 'Lilly, do you hear that pretty music 1 ' and she said, ' No,' at which I was much surprised, for she was a great lover of music. The sounds increased until the room was full of melody, when it gradually and slowly seemed to pass down the stairs and ceased. The servant, who was occupied in the kitchen, two stories below, heard the sounds, and our eldest daughter, who was going into the larder, stopped in the passage to listen and wonder where the music came from, and the servant called to her, ' Do you hear that music 1 ' It was then a few moments past 4 o'clock in the afternoon.

" The next day (Sunday) my old nurse and aunt came up to see how Lilly was, and were, with my husband, all in the room with the child. I had gone down into the kitchen to prepare some little dainty milk-food for her, when the same sounds of ^olian music were heard by all three in the room, and I heard the same in the kitchen. Monday passed, but we had no repetition. On Tuesday, at the same hour, we [i.e., Mr. and Mrs. Sewell] once more heard the same wailing ^olian music from the same part of the room; again it increased in volume, until the room was full of wailing melody; and again did the sounds appear to pass through the door, down the stairs, and out at the front door. Now, this music was heard three different days, at the same time each day, and not only by those in the room with the child, but by myself, my daughter, and the servant, two flights of stairs below the room the child was in; and on the second day by my aunt and nurse and the children, who were in the dining-room.

" One circumstance, I think, was very remarkable: the child herself, who had a perfect passion for music, never heard a sound. There cannot be any mistake in the sounds, for no instrument played by human hands can make the same sounds as the wailing ^olian harp. We had lived in the same bouse 6 years, and remained in it 12 years more, and we never heard similar music either before or after. " Sarah A. Sewell."

Mr. Sewell says:- "April, 1885.

" The only confirmation which is now available is that of myself. I can speak with all sincerity. I heard the sweet music identically with my wife. The music was heard on Saturday, 2nd of May, a little before 4 o'clock in the afternoon, also on the next day at about the same time, and also on the following Tuesday at about the same hour. Those who heard the music were my wife, myself, my wife's aunt, the nurse, our son E/ichard, aged 7; our son Thomas, aged 9 (the last four all dead), our eldest daughter, aged 11, and our servant, who shortly left us and went to Ireland to her husband, who was a soldier, and was soon lost sight of. Our eldest daughter is now in New York, and I have no doubt but that she will rem.ember the circumstance. I am quite satisfied that the music heard was not produced by someone at a distance, for our house was then situated in a long garden, some 50 yards distant from the public road, and the adjoining house to ours was unoccupied at the time. The sound was not a muffled sound at all, but the soft, wild notes of an ^olian harp, which rose and fell distinctly, and increased gradually, until the room was full of sound, as loud as the full swell of an organ, and it rolled slowly down the stairs, dying softly on the ear in weird cadences. I am certain it was not produced by human fingers. " Mathew Sewell."

I have copied the following extract from a letter written to Mr. Sewell by his daughter, Mrs. Lee, and dated July 20th, 1885.

" Williams Bridge, New York. " I do distinctly remember hearing the music before Lilly's death, and also remember the impression it made on us children at the time, the feeling of terror and fear we had, at not understanding where the music came from and what kind of music it was."

[A personal interview with Mr. and Mrs. Sewell has made evident to me how uniquely impressive to them this incident was. The music appeared to issue from a particular corner of the room, which was not one formed by external walls; and the nature of the sound makes it hard to explain as an objective efiect, due to air or water; while the fact that one person present, with sensitive ears, did not share the experience seems almost fatal to such an explanation. The sound lasted on each occasion not more than half a minute. The little girl died on the Tuesday evening, j If the hallucination be connected with her abnormal condition, the incident (like case 335 above) would belong to the succeeding section.]

A further example of the musical class, with even more complete attestation, has on account of its length been placed in the Supplement (p. 639): the following shorter specimen may be given here. The late Mrs. Yates, of 54, Columbia Square, E., wrote in 1884: — ■

(338) "In 1870 I lost a dearly loved daughter, 21 years old; she died h*^L^ at noonday, of aneurism. At night, my only other daughter was with me, when all at once we both assumed a listening attitude, and we both heard the sweetest of spiritual music, although it seemed so remote, my ears were hurt listening so intently. Till some hours after, my dear girl and I were afraid to inquire of each other had we heard it, for fear we were deluded, but we found both had been so privileged and blessed."

To our request for Mr. Yates's testimony, Mrs. Yates replied: — ■

" Mr. Yates perfectly well remembers how myself and the daughter who is now living were affected by hearing music that night, such as mortals never sang; but I have to write for him, he being troubled by incapacity of his right hand." (Signed as correct) " George Yates."

The daughter wrote as follows, on Oct. 9, 1884: —

"31, St. John's Street Road, Clerkenwell, E.G.

" I can speak with certainty respecting the beautiful music my dear mother and I heard on the 26th November, 1870. I shall never forget it; we were both afraid to speak, it was so exquisite. " A. Beilby."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Beilby adds: —

