another similar bed at the other end of a long narrow room, the beds being placed so that the feet faced each other, and two white curtains hung down at the sides of the head. This New Year's morning, I was roughlywaked by Lavinia shaking me and exclaiming, ' Oh look there! there's your aunt in bed with Caroline.' Seeing two persons asleep in the bed, I jumped out, and ran to the right side of it. There lay my aunt, a little on her right side, fast asleep, with her mouth a little open. I recognised her worked night-gown and cap. I stood bewildered, with a childish sort of wonder as to when she could have come; it must have been after I went to bed at night. Lavinia's cries awakened Caroline, who as soon as she could understand, caught the curtains on each side and pulled them together over her. I tore them open, but only Caroline lay there, almost fainting from fright. This lady. Miss Cumberland, afterwards became Mrs. Part, wife of a celebrated doctor at Camden Terrace, [and now deceased.]

" I never talked of what had occurred, but one day, after I had long returned home, I said to my mother, ' Do you know, mamma, I saw auntie when I was at school % ' This led to an explanation, but my mother, instead of commenting upon it, went and fetched her mother, saying to her, ' Listen to what this child says.' Young as I was, I saw they were greatly shocked, but they would tell me nothing except that when I was older I should know all. The day came when I learned that my dear aunt suffered dreadfully from the noise of St. Bride's bells, ringing in the New Year. My father tried to get them stopped, but could not. Towards morning she became insensible; my mother and grandmother seated on either side of her, and holding her hands, she awoke and said to my mother, 'Now I shall die happy, Anna, I have seen my dear child.' They were her last words. " D. E. W."

No general register of deaths was kept at the time of the incident here related; and we have exhausted every means to discover a notice of the death, without success. But we have procured a certificate of Mercy Cox's burial, which took place on January 11, 1829. This is quite compatible with the statement that the death was on January 1 (though such an interval, even in winter, is no doubt unusual), as the lady was buried in a family vault, and probably a lead coffin had to be made. January 1 would be, at the very least, a day of very critical illness. As to the date of the apparition, the marked character of New Year's Day decidedly favours the probability that Miss "W.'s memory is correct.

In answer to inquiries. Miss W. says: —

"I was born in 1819. The death of my aunt took place in 1829. Though to my most intimate friends — as Sir Philip Crampton, the late Earl and Countesses (2) of Dunraven,i I have often mentioned the event, (and to Judge Halliburton,) I think I never wrote it fully except for Lord Dunraven and his mother, in 1850, who were very desirous to publish it, but I declined. I think that a great reason I have always had for not talking of it was the awe with which it inspired my mother, and her strict commands that ' I should not mention it to anybody.' Then, too, I went to school and lost sight of Lavinia Cumberland, and I shrank from the comments of strangers."

1 The present Lord Dunraven tells us that he does not remember to have heard his father mention the circumstance.

In conversation Miss W. added that she had never experienced any other hallucination; also that the Cumberland girls had visited her home, and seen her aunt — which accounts for Lavinia's recognition of the figure.

[We learn, through a relative of Miss Lavinia Cumberland (now Mrs. Monarch, of 16, Regent's Park Road, N.W.), that she herself does not recall the incident; but that she remembers several times hearing her sister, Mrs. Part, speak of a " ghost case " in which they had both been somehow concerned.]

a.

This case, depending on the narrator's memoryat 31 of what occurred when she was under 10, is not, of course, a strong one evidentially. But the very fact that the experience recorded is of so striking a kind makes it more probable that it was remembered than that it was unconsciously invented. The very odd detail of Lavinia's being the first to see the figure seems peculiarly unlikely to have been wrongly imagined afterwards; for it is a feature that would have had no natural part in any sentimental idea of the child's about her aunt's visiting her, and could only tend to detract in her mind from the emotional significance of the visit. We have, moreover, the tolerably complete assurance that the incident deeply impressed our informant's mother at the time; for this attitude of a third person, and the injunction of silence to which it led, are even more unlikely f^^ than the original experience to have been the product of the child's fancy. It must, however, be observed that the second hallucination may have been due to Lavinia's verbal suggestion; and that the minute details of the appearance (which could hardly have been so suggested) may have been subsequently imagined. It is possible, therefore, that the case, though telepathic, may not have been truly collective. It cannot with any certainty be reckoned as reciprocal, as there is no evidence that the aunt's " seeing of her dear child " was more than a dream or a subjective impression (see p. 156).

In Dr. Leslie's case (supposing the account to be substantially true);,',.< one of the percipients was presumably a total stranger to the agent. In No. 354, the one of the two persons present who was least intimately connected with the agent was the first to see the phantasm; but equally in this as in the former case, I should regard her experience as dependent on the presence of the more nearly connected person (see § 7 below). In the next example there is a yet further step; and of the two persons present, one of whom was son, and the other a stranger, to the agent, the stranger alone saw the

256 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

phantasm, though both seem to have shared in a singular auditory experience which they connected with it. The incident thus closely resembles that described in case 242, where the phantasm appeared not to the dying man's sister, but to a servant who was with her. The narrative was copied by the present writer from a note-book of the Rev. J. A. Macdonald, formerly of Manchester, and now of Rhyl.

(355) "On August 13tli, 1879, I sailed to Hamburg with Captain 1 Ayre, of the ss. ' Berlin,' of Goole, who related to me that, about 25 years before, he was staying with a friend named Hunt, at a small farmhouse at Arming Grange, about 21 miles from Goole. On a summer evening, about 9 o'clock, Captain Ayre and his companion went to their bedroom, when they both heard a noise at the side of the house, and both went to the window to see what was the matter. The captain distinctly saw a man walking outside, but Hunt could see nothing there, though he had heard the tramp of feet as well as the captain. Being astonished that Hunt could not see the man, Captain Ayre proceeded to describe him. He was a man of short stature, with a stoop, and wore knee breeches, a red-fronted waistcoat with sleeves, and a little black hat. Hunt instantly identified the description as answering exactly to his own father. Captain Ayre assured me he had never seen Hunt's father. After this the men went to bed, and both now heard a noise as if the end of the bedstead had been wrenched, which continued until about midnight, when Hunt's brother arrived on horseback from Gilberdyke with the news of their father's death, which occurred about three hours earlier that evening. The noises then ceased."

Mr. Macdonald adds: —

" This was taken down by me in pencil from Captain Ay re's own lips, and transcribed when I returned from the voyage. The pencil account was read over to Captain Ayre, and pronounced by him to be perfectly correct. I cross-examined him carefully on every point. He specially described the lonely position of the house, and the unlikelihood of any stranger moving about in the vicinity or creating a disturbance in the bedroom. "James Alex. Macdonald."

This account was sent to Captain Ayre, who replied: —

" SS. ' Dresden,' Goole.

"November 4th, 1884. " I have carefully read over the narrative, as given by the Rev. Mr. Macdonald; but it is so accurate in every detail that I fail to be able to add anything thereto. " Chas. Ayre."

[Our efforts to trace Mr. Hunt have been unsuccessful. Captain Ayre has not heard of him for some time.]

In the next case the agent was not dying, but was in a somewhat alarming fainting-fit. We have had several other similar cases {e.g., Nos. 20 and 110); they recall what was said above (p. 26) as to the number of the death-cases where the mode of death has been drowning. The narrator is Mr. H. G. Barwell, of 33, Surrey Street, Norwich.

xviil] collective CASES. 257

"1883.

(356) " During the last week of July, 1882, Mr. and Mrs. "W. and family ' had settled themselves comfortably in a house they had hired at the Lizard, Cornwall; and a few days later Mr. Cox, an amateur artist from Liverpool, joined them. Mr. Barwell arranged to meet Mr. Earle, an artist residing in London (both of whose names are appended), on Monday, 7th August, 1882, dine with him and together take the night mail at Paddington, booking for Penryn, Cornwall, the station from whence conveyances take passengers to Helston, and thence to the Lizard, whither they were going to join Mr. W. and family, as on many former occasions.

" Barwell and Earle therefore started according to arrangement by the 8.10 p.m. mail train from Paddington, on the evening of Bank Holiday, Monday, 7th August, 1882. They travelled all night; the train on arrival at Penryn was a little more than 15 minutes late, reaching there on Tuesday morning, 8th August, 1882, at 7.23 a.m. No other passengers alighted there from that train. They had some difl&culty in getting a porter to convey their luggage to the omnibus standing at the station, the driver of which announced that if they could not come at once, he must start without them. Passengers were nothing to him, he had to take charge of and deliver the mail bags at various villages on his route. They roused up the porter and insisted on his attention; in the meantime their train had departed and another train, from Falmouth to London, ran into the station (due 7.24 a.m.) Their luggage was being placed on the omnibus; Earle had already climbed to his seat next the driver, and Barwell, having now seen all their luggage safely deposited on the vehicle, was climbing up next him, when Earle exclaimed: ' Why, look there! ' And on Barwell looking up, he saw in the train, just leaving the station for London, their friend W. from the Lizard, waving his hand to them while eagerly stretching his head out of the window to ascertain, apparently, if they had arrived. They both cordially returned the salute and the train disappeared round a curve, W. still looking out of the window waving his hand.

" The two friends now made various conjectures as to the why and wherefore of W.'s departure on the very morning of their arrival; they considered it very disappointing that he should thus be obliged to leave, on the day our friendly party was about to be reunited. Earle was greatly depressed about it, and wished to leave all further discussion on the subject until they should ascertain from Mrs. W. the cause for his leaving the Lizard just before their arrival. Amongst the surmises which they made for W. being in the train which came from Falmouth, and not from the Lizard where he was staying, was this; that he had probably received at the Lizard, on Monday, the 7th August, a telegram requiring his immediate attendance in London or elsewhere, and that to prevent a very early start by trap on Tuesday morning from the Lizard to catch the 7.30 a.m. train to London at Penryn, he had made use of a return Bank Holiday excursion steamer from Falmouth to the Lizard; sleeping at Falmouth, and starting by train from there at 7.15 a.m. for London, namely, the train they saw him in.

" They arrived in due course at Helston, had breakfast, and sauntered about the old town tiL the next coach started for the Lizard at 1 1 o'clock a.m. On nearing the Lizard, they were anxiously on the look-out for the

258 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

children of Mrs. W., to receive their usual hearty and sincere welcome on arrival of the coach, and to learn from them where their respective domiciles in the village had been chosen. The coach arrived, but none of the W. family were to be seen.

" The luggage was taken off the coach and left on the village green in front of the hotel, till information could be obtained as to where rooms had been engaged. The two friends strolled away, but soon met W.'stwo boys, who on being asked why their father had gone away, seemed somewhat surprised at the question, and replied that their father was lying ill at his lodgings, and that their mother was also at home and very anxious about him. The boys accompanied Earle and Barwell to their father's house in the village, when Mrs. W. came out and greeted them cordially, telling them briefly that Mr. W. had had a serious fainting fit that morning, and that she was watching him with considerable anxiety.

" Mr. Cox now came in from his morning's work, and after the exchange of salutations with Earle and Barwell, related to them the following details of Mr. W.'s fainting fit: That he, Mr. W., and his two boys started from the Lizard village to Housel Cove to bathe, at 7 o'clock that morning, a distance a little over half a mile. When W. came out of the sea, and was leaning against a rock, in a sitting posture, he fainted quite away. Cox was dreadfully shocked and alarmed, for at one time he could discover no action of the heart, and he feared he might be dead or dying. He used all the means he could think of, and placed W. in a more recumbent position, which seemed a more favourable one, for pulsation was then discernible, and W. partially recovered, but was too weak to move for a long time. Mrs. W was fetched, and then breakfast was taken down to the Cove, and when vitality and strength had sufficiently returned to enable W. to climb the steep ascent with assistance, they started home.

" The fainting of W. occurred at 7.30 a.m. at Housel Cove, the Lizard, at the precise time when Earle and Barwell saw W. waving his hand to them from the train at Penryn.

" The question has been put to Mr. W. whether he thought of or saw Earle or Barwell, either just before or during his seizure, but he remembers nothing of the kind.

r "Charles Eaele, 9, Duke street, Portland Place, ^^ /^.^ IN J London.

\ & ) I " H. G. Barwell, Surrey Street, Norwich.

y " Charles H. Cox, Shrewsbury Road, N., Birkenhead."

In reply to inquiries, Mr. Barwell says, " Both Earle and I have very good sight. My impression is that the person I saw looking from the traiji window wore a soft, flexible, round hat." He can recall no other experience of hallucination, except one which occurred many years ago, at a time when he was not yet fully recovered from a severe fever.

Mr. Cox writes, on January 2nd, 1885: —

" I was at the Lizard, in Cornwall, when my friends, Earle and Barwell, saw (as they believed) the ' double ' of my friend W., whom, at the time, 1 was instrumental in bringing round after his attack of illness. My part in the affair was simply resuscitating Mr. W. from a very serious condition. " C. H. Cox."

[Here, again, mistaken identity must be recognised as a possibility; but there are several points which combine to make it improbable. The fact which the appearance forced on the minds of the two friends — namely, W.'s departure — was so little in accordance with their expectations that it distinctly surprised them; they were thus in a wholly different attitude from that (say) of awaiting a friend's arrival, when the senses are on the alert for anything at all resembling him. Again, the figure seen seems to have given unmistakeable signs of friendly recognition; so that we should not only have to suppose that the percipients mistook someone for their friend, but that they mistook for him someone who was known to them, or at any rate to one of them — clearly a much more unlikely occurrence. It will be observed, moreover, that the difficulties of assuming a mistake as to identity are immensely increased where two persons with good sight would have had to share in it (see p. 244). Still, it is conceivable — though scarcely compatible with the account — that the first sign of recognition was given by Mr. Earle; and that a stranger, seeing this sign, returned it, either in joke, or imagining that the giver of it must be some one that he had known and ought to recognise.]

I will conclude with a case which is probably the best-known specimen of the sort on record, and on that very account may naturally be mistrusted, as having " won its way to the mythical." The following presentation of it is, however, very much more complete than any that has yet been published, and is of a better quality than is often procurable for so remote an incident. It is true that, of the two percipients, we have the evidence of one only at second-hand, and of the other at third-hand; but we have the firsthand evidence of a person who was informed of their experience immediately on its occurrence, and long before the news of the agent's death arrived.

(357) The following memorandum made by General Birch Reynardson, of the account given him by one of the percipients, was sent to us by Mr. Wm. Wynyard, of Northend House, Hursley, Winchester. He believed the original document to be in the library of Mr. Chas. Reynardson, of Holywell Hall, Stamford, who, however, has looked for it without success. A copy^ was made on June 20, 1864, by Mr. Wynyard's father, General E. B. Wynyard (a brother of George Wynyard, the co-percipient,) who says that the writer of the memorandum put it on paper as soon as he had an opportunity after the conversation recorded therein. General E. B. Wynyard has headed the paper: —

" Memorandum of a conversation between the late General Birch Reynardson, and Colonel, afterwards Sir John, Sherbrooke."

" In the month of November, Sir John Sherbrooke and General Wyn-

1 This copy was enclosed in a letter to Colonel F, Clinton, of Clinton Ashley, Lymington, Hants. We have not actually inspected it; but Colonel Clinton's daughter transcribed it for General E. B. Wynyard's son, Mr. W. W. Wynyard, who kindly sent us the book in which he in turn had copied it. It is curious that General E. B. Wynyard seems never to have heard the narrative first-hand from his brother.

VOL. II. s 2

260 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

yard^ were sitting before dinner (between 5 and 6 o'clock) in their barrackroom at Sydney Cove, in America. It was duskish, and a candle placed on the table at a little distance. A figure, dressed in plain clothes and a good round hat ^ on, passed gently between the above people and the fire. While passing. Sir J. Sherbrooke exclaimed, ' God bless my soul, who's that? ' Almost at the same moment Colonel W. said, ' That's my brother, John Wynyard,^ and I am quite certain he is dead.' Colonel W. was much agitated, and cried and sobbed a great deal. Sir John said, ' The fellow has got a devilish good hat, I wish I had it.' * They immediately got up (Sir John was on crutches, having broken his leg), took a candle, and went into the bedroom, into which the figure had entered: they searched the bed and every corner of the room to no effect; the windows were fastened up with mortar. Mr. Stuart, the paymaster of the regiment, noted the circumstance at the time. Sir John told me that Colonel W, for two or three days was a good deal distressed and uneasy, but remained most perfectly convinced of the death of his brother.

" They received no communication from England for about five months, when a letter from Mr. Rush,^ the surgeon, announced the death of John Wynyard at the moment, as near as could be ascertained, when the figure appeared. In addition to this extraordinary circumstance. Sir John told me that two and a-half years afterwards he was walking with Lilly "Wynyard ^ in London, and seeing somebody on the other side of the way, he recognised, he thought, the person who had appeared to him and Colonel Wynyard in America. Lilly Wynyard said that the person he pointed out was a Mr. Eyre;'^ that he had always been considered so like John Wynyard that they were frequently mistaken for each other; and that money had actually been paid to this Mr. Eyre in mistake."

The following account appeared in Notes and Queries for July 2nd, 1859, in a letter signed "Eric."

"On the 23rd of October, 1823, a party of distinguished hig-wigs were dining with the late Chief Justice Sewell, at his house on the esplanade in Quebec, when the story in question became a subject of conversation. Among the guests was Sir John Harvey, Adjutant-General of the forces in Canada, who stated that there was then in the garrison an officer who knew all the circumstances, and who, probably, would not object to answer a few queries about them. Sir John immediately wrote five queries, leaving a space opposite to each one for an answer, and sent them to Colonel Gore, who, if my memory serves me rightly, was at the head of

1 Note by Mr. W. Wynyard. " Colonel W. and Colonel S., then serving in the 23rd [? 33rd] Regiment as Captains. (?) Oct. 15th, 1785." We learn from General Edward Wynyard, another son of General E. B. Wynyard, that George Wynyard died in 1809, as Lieut-Colonel.

2 I cannot help thinking that this article of apparel may be the progenitor of the very suspicious hat of the Warren Hastings legend, criticised in Vol. i., p. 152. The two narratives have been probably often told in juxtaposition.

3 General Edward Wynyard tells us that John Wynyard was a subaltern in the 3rd Guards.

^ Note by the Rev. J. Birch Reynardson, son of the writer of the memorandum, and brother-in-law of Mr. W. Wynyard. " He told my father that he made this remark, as hats were not to begot there, and theirs were worn out."

^ Note by Mr. W. Wynyard. " Surgeon of the Coldstream Guards."

8 Note by Mr. W. Wynyard. " L. W. was brother of Colonel W., and died in the West Indies, Adjutant of the 20th Regiment."

T Note by Mr. W. Wynyard. "(?) Hay."

xviil] collective CASES. 261

either the Ordnance or the Royal Engineer department. The following is a copy of both the queries and the answers, which were returned to Sir John before he and the other guests had left the Chief Justice's house: —

'"My dear Gore,

" ' Do me the favour to answer the following: —

' Queries.

" ' 1. Was you with the 33rd Regiment when Captains Wynyard and Sherbrooke believed that they saw the apparition of the brother of the former officer pass through the room in which they were sitting?

" ' 2. Was you not one of the first persons who entered the room, and assisted in the search for the ghost 1

'"3. Was you not the person who made a memorandum in writing of the circumstances, by which the singular fact of the death of Wynyard's brother, at or about the time when the apparition was seen, was established 1

" ' 4. With the exception of Sir J. Sherbrooke, do you not consider yourself almost the only surviving evidence of this extraordinary occurrence?

" ' 5. When, where, and in what kind of building did it take place?

,,, rri 1 • ' (Signed) J. Harvey.

" ' ihursday morning, ^ ° '

" ' 23rd October, 1823.'

' Answers.

" ' 1. Yes, I was. It occurred at Sydney, in the Island of Cape Breton, in the latter end of 1785 or 6, between 8 and 9 in the evening. We were then blocked up by the ice, and had no communication with any other part of the world. ' R.G.

" ' 2. Yes. The ghost passed them as they were sitting before the fire at cofiee, and went into G. Wynyard's bed-closet, the window of which was putted (sic) down.^ ' R.G.

" ' 3. I did not make the memorandum in writing myself, but I suggested it the next day to Sherbrooke, and he made the memorandum. I remembered the date, and on the 6th June our first letters from England brought the account of John Wynyard's death on the very night they saw his apparition. ' R.G.

" ' 4. I believe all are dead, except Colonel Yorke, who then commanded the regiment, and is Deputy-Lieutenant of the Tower, — and I believe Jones Pan ton, then an ensign in the regiment. ' R.G.

" ' 5. It was in the new barracks at Sydney, built the preceding summer, one of the first erections in the settlement.

' (Signed) Ralph Gore.

" ' Sherbrooke had never seen John Wynyard alive; but soon after returning to England, the following year, when walking in Bond Street with Wm. Wynyard, late D. A. General, and just after telling him the story of the ghost, [he] exclaimed "My God/" and pointed out a person — a gentleman — as [being] exactly like the apparition in person and dress. This gentleman was so like J. Wynyard as often to be spoken to for him, and afiected to dress like him. I think his name was Hayman.

" ' I have heard Wm. Wynyard mention the above circumstance, and declare that he then believed the story of the ghost. ' (Signed) R.G.'

" The above is taken from a copy made from the original queries and

1 " Query, puttied down, to exclude the cold? "

262 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

answers, and given to me, only a few weeks after the date affixed to the queries; and to it is added, in the handwriting of the copyist, the following: —

" ' A true copy from the original. The queries are written in black ink in the handwriting of Sir John Harvey, Deputy Adjutant-General of British America, and signed by him; the answers are in red ink, written and signed by Colonel Gore. The original paper belongs to Chief Justice Sewell. Sir J. Sherbrooke was lately Governor-General of Lower Canada.^ It is said that Sir John Sherbrooke could not bear to hear the subject spoken of.'

"The copyist was a near relative of the Chief Justice, and died in 1832. He was one of my most intimate friends."

[There is a discrepancy between Colonel Gore's and Sir J. Sherbrooke's accounts, as to which of the Wynyard brothers accompanied Sir J. Sherbrooke in Bond Street. The detail as to the Bond Street incident following immediately on a narration of the story looks like an unfortunate addition, the only effect of which is to inspire distrust, probably quite undeserved, of the rest of the statement.]

It is much to be regretted that the gentleman who sent this account to Notes and Queries did not sign his name. It is, however, highly improbable that Colonel Gore's statements are forgeries; and we are justified, I think, in regarding them as genuine by the following account, received from a niece of his. Miss Langmead, of Belmont, Torre, Torquay.

" September 3rd, 1883.

" Colonel Gore, of the 33rd, married my mother's sister, and he narrated the story to my mother and to my elder sister himself, most emphatically. I have heard it from them both, over and over again, and my sister wrote the account some years ago. She heard Colonel Gore tell it more than once, and always with strong feeling, which impressed every word on her memory. I have not got her paper now, but I knew it perfectly by heart. I have often heard my sister say that no one who heard Colonel Gore tell the story could doubt the powerful impression made on him at any rate.

" There were other little particulars, such as the impossibility of hiding in the barrack rooms, which were two above and two below, and so slightly built that every sound was heard, but I have not enlarged more than I could help. The story has been printed with variations in many books of collected ghost^stories, but not always correctly. It is usually said that it was a twin brother who was met in Bond Street, but that was not the case.

" It was in the time of the American war, and some of our troops were in winter quarters at Cape Breton. The weather was very severe and the harbour frozen over. The ships expected from England had not arrived, and the supplies had run short, especially the allowance of wine. Four officers, afterwards entitled General [mistake for Colonel] Wynyard, Sir John Sherbrooke, Sir Hildebrand Oakes, and Colonel Gore, of the 23rd [? 33rd] Regiment, were in barracks at the top of a steep ascent, guarded by a sentry below. They had dined together and then separated, two of them being engaged upstairs in looking over maps and plans of the seat

1 " From July, 1816, to July, 1818."

of war. The other two, General Wynyard and Sir J. Sherbrooke, remained in the inner room.

" Suddenly an exclamation from General Wynyard startled the two above, who ran downstairs, expecting that the ice had broken and the looked-for ships arrived. They found Sir J. Sherbrooke alone, standing amazed, and in answer to their eager inquiry as to what had happened, he said that a gentleman, a stranger to him, had come in at the door, looked fixedly at General W., and passed into the inner room. General W. exclaimd aloud, ' Good God, my brother Jack! ' and followed him into the bedroom, from which there was no outlet. He presently returned, much agitated, having found no one. Colonel Gore took out his watch and marked the time, while another of the party ran down to the sentinel, who declared no person had passed. Sir J. Sherbrooke described the figure as dressed in a hunting costume, such as he had never seen, with a huntingwhip in his hand. Days went on, the ice broke up, news came from England to General W. of his brother's death, who was killed in the hunting-field at the very time in which the figure appeared in the barrackroom. Papers also came out, containing the fashions, one being the hunting suit with a particularly shaped boot, such as the figure had worn. After the peace, and the troops had returned to England, Sir John Sherbrooke was walking through Bond Street with Colonel Gore, when he stopped and said, pointing to a man who was coming towards him, ' There is the figure I saw at Cape Breton.' Colonel Gore replied, ' That man was called Jack Wynyard's double, he was so very like him.'

" Before Sir J. Sherbrooke's death, long afterwards, he was asked by a friend what he then thought of the apparition at Cape Breton. He replied that he could not explain it, but that every detail was true.

[Here the hunting-dress, and the corresponding detail about the hunting-field, may almost certainly be referred to a transformative process in Colonel Gore's mind. The peculiar boot may probably be a degenerate representative of the spruce hat in Sir J. Sherbrooke's account. It would further be a very natural mistake on the part of Colonel Gore's niece to imagine that he was Sherbrooke's companion in the walk in Bond Street.]

Next come two items of evidence, for which George Wynyard, the copercipient, was the original authority.

General Edward Wynyard, of 5, Portman Street, W., writing to us on April 7, 1885, tells us that the incident was narrated to him by his aunt, Mrs. Wright, who " had often heard the story " from her brother, George Wynyard. He observes that her narrative corresponded in nearly every particular with the account given in Chamnbers' Book of Days, Vol. II., p. 448. The said account (the authority for which is not given, save in so far that a relative of George Wynyard had pronounced it substantially true,) agrees in the essential points with Colonel Gore's -^ but differs in stating that the subsequent recognition took place when Sherbrooke was

1 Miss Browne wrote to us on Jan. 18, 1884, from Farnham Castle, Surrey, to the effect that she too had heard the incident described by Mrs. Wright, and also by " General Sir George Nugent, who was in the garrison at the time "; and that the details were very similar to those in Miss Langmead's account.

264. COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

■walking with two gentlemen, in Piccadilly, and that he actually accosted the gentleman, who told him that he was Wynyard's twin-hr other. These are precisely the sort of inaccuracies most likely to creep into a story in its passage from mouth to mouth.

The Rev. O. H. Gary, of Tresham Vicarage, Chudleigh, wrote to our friend, the Rev. A. T. Fryer, on April 3, 1882:—

" The story, as my mother, who heard it from Wynyard himself, used to tell it, was as follows: — General Sherbrooke and Mr. (or General) Wynyard were sitting together in a hut in Canada (or Nova Scotia or elsewhere in North America) when a figure entered the tent and passed through into an inner apartment, whence there was no means of exit except where they were sitting. Wynyard recognised the figure as that of his brother, but thought someone was playing practical jokes, as he knew his brother to be in England at the time. On searching the inner room the figure was found to have disappeared.

" They had both seen the figure. The brother died at that time. Some years afterwards, the same two officers were walking together in London, when Sherbrooke saw a man on the opposite side of the street, and said, ' Look, there is the man that we saw in the tent.' Wynyard replied, ' No, that is not my brother, but he is so like him that my brother was once arrested for debt in mistake for him.' "

[Here again we have characteristic illustrations of the way in which narratives become modified in transmission. "The same two ofiicers"is of course neater and easier to remember than " one of the same officers and a brother of the other "; and the " arrest for debt " seems to be an oddly inverted reminiscence of the detail mentioned by Sir J. Sherbrooke, that " money had been paid to one in mistake " for the other.]

In conclusion, the following letter appeared in the Daily Telegraph of October 20, 1881:—

" Sir, — In reference to the circumstances related as occurring in Sir John Sherbrooke's tent, in North America, permit me to add that I heard an exactly similar account of it in Dublin about the year 1837, by General D'Aguilar, then on the stafi", and who, I think, had been one of the occupants of the tent.^ Colonel ' Wynyard's ' name, who was on the Dublin stafi" at the time, was also mentioned. — Yours truly,

" G. Ceichton, M.D."

I 7. The cases of the preceding section, and of § 2, though not evidentially among the strongest in our collection, are sufficient, I think, to establish a strong presumption for the genuineness of this collective type of telepathic hallucination. But the establishment of facts, in " psychical " as in other departments of Nature, may far outstrip our power of satisfactorily accounting for them; and such account as I can render of these phenomena is here put forward rather as a suggestion or adumbration than as a final view.

1 This does not appear in any other account. Complete information as to various details could only be obtained by a search in the archives of the War Office. It is hoped that in course of time this search may be authorised.

To begin with, it would, I think, be irrational not to recognise a special significance in the fact that in all the cases of § 6, and most of those of § 5, the several percipients were together: to that extent, at all events, conditions of place seem to enter vitally into the phenomena. But there is nothing in this that need drive us for a moment off idealistic or " psychical " ground. I have spoken often, throughout the book, of a rapport between the parties concerned in a psychical transference— meaning by the word simply some pre-existing psychical approximation which conditions the transference. The rapport has usually been that of kinship or affection. But I regard these collective cases as strongly indicative of a rapport of a different sort — consisting not in old-established sympathy, but in similarity of immediate mental occupation. I suspect that such a rapport might be induced by a common environment — by partnership in that particular piece of the " life of relation " within which the hallucination happens to fall. That is to say, I should regard the fact that B's hallucination spreads to C, when B and C are in the same place, as possibly largely due to the fact that a very important part of the contents of B's and C's minds is — and has been for some hours, minutes, or moments preceding — identical. The local condition would be, not any physical presence or centre of influence in the circle of space outside them, but the community of scene, and of other objective impressions, in the two parallel currents of ideas which are their real two existences.^ It must be remembered that we have no d priori means of knowing what the mental conditions that favour telepathy are likely to be. And I venture to think that if, by some process of psychical chemistry, the elements and affinities of different minds at particular moments could be analysed and estimated, mere community of scene and of immediate sensory impression might count for more — might prove, that is, to involve a larger amount of real correspondence or identity — than the external and accidental character of such passing experience might have led us to expect.

But this idea, if tenable, seems capable of being extended. If community of environment opens a channel of supersensuous communication between B and C, we come to conceive a greater fluidity (so to speak) in the directions of telepathic transference than the

1 A similar explanation may be suggested for the fact that thought-transference experiments rarely succeed when agent and percipient are so far withdrawn from^ one another as to have quite different environments. This fact would otherwise seem explicable only by some hypothesis of " brain- waves " diminishing in strength with the increase of the distance between the parties — a hypothesis which has the disadvantage of being quite inapplicable to many of the facts of spontaneous telepathy (Vol. i., p. 112).

266 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

more usual cases of a distant agent and a single percipient could reveal. And this brings me to what I suspect to be a more correct account of the collective telepathic cases that have been passed in review.

In the earlier part of this chapter, I consulted clearness by keeping separate the hypothesis (1) of joint and independent affection of B and C by A, and the hypothesis (2) of C's affection by B who alone is directly affected by A. Now looking back at these hypotheses in the light of the evidence, the objections (see § 2) to the assumption of independent psychical affection of B and C by A come back on us with only increased force. As long as telepathic hallucinations are rare, and lead by their rarity to the conclusion that they generally require not only an abnormal condition of the agent, but specific susceptibility in the percipient, nothing can make it seem otherwise than astonishing that two closely similar specimens of them, in connection with the same agent, should independently concern two percipients at the same moment. One might admit such an astonishing coincidence once or twice — I have suggested its application to a few cases in § 2 above; ^ but it seems impossible to lay it down as a principle of explanation, by which any number of collective hallucinations may be accounted for. No view which shrinks from assuming a local and physical presence of A, and at the same time rejects every sort of direct transference between B and C, can avoid this difficulty; and the consideration seems to me of such weight as to exclude hypothesis (1) in the form stated. I feel absolutely driven to suppose that where C's experience resembles B's, it is in some direct way connected with B's; this is the only alternative that I can see to admitting a physical basis to the percept. But this does not necessarily imply the adoption of hypothesis (2) in its crudest and most obvious form; the " direct way " need not, I conceive, be a transfer between B and C wholly unconnected with A — a transfer, that is to say, which must have equally taken place had B's hallucination been purely subjective. Though the evidence in § 5 above inclines me strongly to the opinion that sensory hallucinations, as such, are transferable things, I do not believe this to be the complete explanation of the later telepathic cases. And I now venture to suggest that with slight modification the two hypotheses — of joint affection by A, and of direct transference between B and C

1 In all of these, however, where the two percipients were near together and had been sharing the same life, I think it probable that the experiences were not truly independent.

xviil] collective CASES. 267

— may be amalgamated; and that the amalgamation is really more probable than either hypothesis in its isolated form.

Where A, the distant agent, is in rapport both with B and C, it is possible to suppose that B and C are jointly and independently impressed by A, though the particular form — the hallucination — in which they simultaneously embody their impression is still an effect of B's mind on C's, or of C's on B's. The joint impression from A may be conceived as having in itself a tendency to facilitate this farther effect — that is to say, psychical communication between B and C may find a readier and wider channel at the exceptional moments when they are attuned by a common telepathic influence than, e.g., when one of them is staring at a card and the other is endeavouring to guess it. But even for these cases, I think it so dangerous, in view of the apparent rarity of " psychical " affections, to assume any sort of independent psychical affection of different minds at the same moment, that I should prefer to regard A's influence on C as derived through B. And this certainly commends itself as the process where C is a stranger to A, or not a person whom it would have seemed natural that A's vicissitudes should in any way affect.^ In such cases I conceive that, while C's experience depends on B's presence or existence, and even probably on the form of B's experience when the two are similar, yet A's influence may really and truly extend to C; that in fact there is a rapport between A and C, established ad hoc by the rapport of both of them with B. B would be thus not the instigator, or not solely the instigator, but the channel, of C's percipience — the assumption being that a mind in which B holds a prominent place, such as C's, may be abnormally susceptible to an influence which abnormally impresses B. Especially would this conception relieve the difiiculty of such extreme cases as Nos. 242 and 355, above; where B's part in the occurrence was to all appearance suppressed, and C, a stranger to A, was the sole percipient.^ We can scarcely doubt that the presence of B, the near relative of the supposed agent, was a condition of C's percipience; while at the same time it seems absurd to suppose that B infects C with a sensory hallucination which he himself does not experience. We seem driven, then, to regard B as a mere channel of influence; and that is a part which there is no absurdity in supposing to be played unconsciously. For

1 E.g., cases 169, 264, 279, 339, 348, 350, 353, 354, 357.

2 See also case 307, where A's bond, such as it was, was with B and not with O; and compare case 311.

268 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

the better established facts of telepathy have familiarised us with both unconscious reception and unconscious propagation of telepathic impulses; and however unexpected, it is at least quite conceivable that the two events should take place as part of a single process — which is all that the transmission of an impulse from A to C through the unwitting B implies.

The above view, of rapport through community of mental occupation, may likewise afford some explanation of the otherwise puzzling cases where the telepathic influence exercised by A seems itself to have depended rather on local than on personal reasons; as in case 29 in Chap. Y., where the agent's form was seen by a person only slightly connected with her, in a spot in which she was known to have been considerably interested; ^ or in cases where the actual percipient had little or no connection with the agent, but was situated in a place where the agent might naturally conceive some other and nearly-connected person to be; ^ or in cases where a dying person's form is alleged to have been seen by strangers in that person's old homef or in a converse case in Chap. III. of the Supplement, § 3 — Miss G.'s veridical dream of the death of a comparative stranger in her own old home. It is not necessary that two persons should know one another, for certain daily scenes and local impressions to be deeply stamped in common on their two minds; and in this way locality might constitute an ideal bond between A and B who are apart, as we conceived that it might do between B and C who are together.

An even further extension could be given to this idea, if we admit the supposition that A's own susceptibility may be quickened, in the way that was so strongly suggested by some of the reciprocal cases in the preceding chapter. I there pointed out (pp. 161-2 and 164) the indications afforded of a special sort of clairvoyance; telepathic, in the sense that it depends on B's living presence in the scene which A perceives; but independent in the sense that B and his surroundings are perceived while B's own state is not critical but normal — the abnormality of state being confined to A, whose extension of faculty in trance or at death makes him percipient of B, as well as the agent of B's percipience. A view akin to this has been developed by Mr. Myers, in the Note that follows a few pages further on; and the

1 It is probable that a local explanation would apply to cases 239, 248, 313, 343, 350, 589.

2 E.g., Nos. 192, 225, 660, as well as No. 242 just mentioned; and compare No. 307. * E.g., case 666.

temptation to apply it to the collective cases is considerable, since it enables us to conceive the scene, and the sense of being present there, as common to the minds of A, B, and C alike; and so far as such community is a favourable condition for telepathic affection, it would explain A's power to affect the other two.^ To some joint hallucinations, however, {e.g., cases 327, 328, 329, and perhaps 348, where A, the original of the phantasm, has been in a normal waking state at the time, such an explanation seems quite irrelevant; and its admissibility elsewhere must, I think, depend on our obtaining more proof than we yet have of A's reciprocal percipience, in collective cases which are clearly due to his agency. The reciprocal type having seemed, on the evidence, to be a rare if not a doubtful one, we ought to be doubly cautious of making it the ground of explanation for further and more perplexing phenomena.

1 I do not think — herein differing from Mr. Myers — that the mere fact of A's clairvoyant perception of the scene, even if established, would account for the similarity and simultaneity of the two resulting affections, so as to enable us to dispense with the hypothesis of a direct dependence of one of them on the other. Strong evidence seems needed, before we can assume the particular mental events involved in A's clairvoyant perception to be more calculated than any other abnormal events of his experience — such as simply dying in his bed at home — to impose a particular hallucination on several minds at once. However much his clairvoyant perception of B and C and their surroundings may be supposed to facilitate his impressing them, why should the two independent impressions, which according to telepathic analogy might take many different forms, be projected by B and C in the same form?

While therefore I can accept, for certain cases at any rate, Mr. Myers' description of the appearance of A to B as proximately dependent on A's "perception of his own presence" in, or his "psychical translation" to, the scene where his phantasm is observed — for this is practically identical with the suggestion made above (p. 162) that an "extension of A's susceptibility in a certain direction has involved the power to act abnormally in the same direction " — I cannot go on to admit that it is " a subsidiary question," depending on varying degrees of susceptibility to telepathic impressions, whether the phantasm is seen by B only, or by a whole group of persons. To do this would seem to me to be transferring to the terms "perception of presence " and " psychical translation " some of the connotation of physical presence and translation.

Mr. Myers would obviate this objection by the further supposition that the aspect of A which B and C perceive is derived in detail from his mind and not theirs — which would no doubt be a convenient way of accounting for the similarity of their hallucinations. But in the first place, I fail to see any ground for connecting this suijjjosition (as Mr. Myers connects it) with the previous hypothesis of A's clairvoyant presence at the place where B and C are. The supposed derivation would clearly have to be from an unconscious or sub-conscious iiart of A's mind; for there is no more reason for supposing his conscious thoughts to be concentrated on his own aspect when he is clairvoyantly perceiving a scene, than when he is consciously lying in bed and perceiving his normal surroundings in a normal way. And so far as any conscious occupation of the mind may be supposed to throw into abeyance any assumed mental activities of a more latent kind, one would expect that A's interest in the friend or friends whom he is psychically visiting would be specially calculated to thrust into the background his sub-conscious sense of his own aspect; so that the difficulties (Chap, iii., § 9, and Chap, xii., § 8) which in any case are involved in the hypothesis that A's mind transfers to B the detailed image of his aspect, are rather increased than relieved by supposing him clairvoyant at the time.

And, in the second place, this hypothesis of detailed derivation from the agent's mind, as applied to collective cases, seems to me in itself open to grave doubt. We have encountered, no doubt, an important group of cases (Chap, xii., § 8) in which certain details of a phantasmal appearance did seem to be literally derived from the agent's mind, and not simply projected by the percipient from his own resources. But those who admit the psychological continuity of dreams and hallucinations on which I have laid so much stress, and who have marked at every stage the ways in which the

270 COLLECTIVE CASES.

And indeed any conjectural explanations of these more outlying telepathic phenomena have, I am well aware, an air of rashness and unsoundness. This may very likely be due to their being really rash and unsound; but it may also possibly be due to the fact that our view of the field before us is still very partial and dim. The duty of caution in all evidential matters does not exclude the duty of keeping the mind open to new conceptions on this threshold of new knowledge, and not allowing any h3rpothesis that has provisionally commended itself to become a rigid barrier, within which further facts must be forced or else disallowed. And if our central thesis stands — if " psychical " transferences from mind to mind be admitted as in rerum naturd — the rashness, I think, would be in attempting to set a limit to the possible implications of this admission. Its tendency, at any rate, is to give a tangible meaning to that solidarity of life which Idealism proclaims; to lead us to regard individual minds, not as isolated units, but as all in potential unity — as entering into a scheme whose relation to the telergic influence somewhat resembles that of the physical world to electricity. And in such a scheme we need not be surprised if the manifestations of action and affinity between the parts are as sudden and shifting, and to the superficial view as isolated, as in the physical world those of electrical relations between different pieces of matter. But a far larger basis of well-attested cases is, no doubt, needed before reflections of this sort can be profitably pursued; ^nd I will not further run the risk of inverting the relation of speculation to evidence which it has been throughout my endeavour to maintain.

percipient's mind seems independently to react upon and develop the telepathic impression, may incline to regard these literal representations as the exception rather than the rule; and may hesitate to extend the hypothesis of visual images transferred (so to speak) in a full-fledged condition, to cases where the percept included nothing that the percipient's memory or imagination might not well have supplied. Moreover, in some of the collective cases themselves, the evidence of dissimilarity in the percepts seem sufficient to show that the percipient minds were no mere tabulce rasoe for a foreign image. But a much more important observation with respect to the " collective " evidence here presented is this — that (putting aside the second-hand record, No. 670, where the description of details cannot be safely relied on) in not a single case have any such special features of dress or aspect as must perforce be derived from the mind of the distant A been simiiltaneously perceived by B and G. It is only in case 653, and in the dubious narrative quoted on p. 252, that such features are alleged to have been perceived even by B; and there is no proof whatever that C on those occasions was aware of them. This, in my view, is just what was to be expected. For if it is indicated, as the general result of the telepathic evidence, that the most dominant form of agency and the most definite and detailed form of transfer are extreme rather than normal forms, it would scarcely be conceivable that in case after case a double exhibition of them should occur, and A's sub-conscious sense of his own aspect, by two independent manifestations, be reflected in a faithful picture of him before the eyes of two persons at once.

CONCLUSION.

§ 1. In bringing to a close the principal division of this work — the presentation of the case for spontaneous telepathy as supported by a considerable body of first-hand records — it will scarcely, I think, be necessary to attempt anything like a summary of the foregoing chapters. It is indeed impossible effectively to summarise facts the whole force of which lies in their cumulation. One point only I would once again emphasise — the one with which I started — to wit, that radical connection between experimental and spontaneous telepathy, the importance of which in my own view I may best express by saying that I am unable even to guess what effect the body of testimony to the latter class of cases would have on me, were I not convinced of the reality of the former. This being understood, so far as the evidential position of the subject admits of a brief connected statement, I have endeavoured to state it in the closing pages of the fourth chapter. Neither there nor subsequently have I extenuated the evidential shortcomings of many of the spontaneous cases; but for the evidence taken as a whole, it may be claimed that it resembles not so much a shifting shadow, which may be left to individual taste or temperament to interpret, as a solid mass seen in twilight, which it may be easy indeed to avoid stumbling over, but only by resolutely walking away from it. The temptation to walk away from it — to dismiss it with a hasty glance— will be very strong. The matter presented is from a literary point of view monotonously dull, from a scientific point of view confusingly inexact: the study of it in detail is hard work, while at the same time it is work which affords none of the stimulus of high intellectual activity. Yet it is only by detailed study that my colleagues and I have arrived at our own view; and so far are we from putting ourselves into antagonism to the sceptical attitude of Science, that we should regard any conclusion formed without such study as premature. On this still dubious territory, a

272 CONCLUSION,

number of direct and independent attestations, which would be utterlysuperfluous elsewhere, will be — or ought to be — demanded; and others will need, as we have done, to have the true nature and amount of the evidence far more distinctly brought home to them than is necessary in realms already mastered by specialists to whose dicta they may defer.

But in point of fact, the dulness of the work in detail scarcely needs apology; for it would never be specially remarked except in connection with that totally unscientific view on which I commented at the very opening of the treatise. The whole subject of psychical influences has been mixed up in the public mind with ideas of the supernatural or uncanny— with nervous thrills and spurious excitements. When such associations are carefully excluded, the details of the inquiry cannot be expected to have more, and may perhaps have not much less, attraction than those of the recognised physical sciences. And so far as the unexciting character of the present collection — poor in thrills, but tolerably rich in verified dates — tends to make this sober view prevail, it will be a direct advantage. For, exactly like the physical sciences, the research has to go on, methodically, not sensationally; and it has only just begun to be methodised. The present instalment of facts, though probably solid enough to surfeit those who are not troubled by d priori difficulties, and to repel the mere seeker after marvels, cannot be expected to convince every reasonable searcher after truth; and no one (as I have remarked before) can fix the precise amount of testimony which a candid mind is bound to regard as adequate. And we accept this view of the position rather as an incentive than as a discouragement. For we are fortified by the belief that it is not so much the necessary material, as the combined effort to render it available, that has hitherto been lacking. Even the record now presented, as I have pointed out, is drawn from the comparatively small number of persons who have heard of our existence, and much of it from the limited circle of our own acquaintance. We are justified, therefore, in regarding the area hitherto explored as but a comer of a very much larger field, which may be gradually swept; and the very flaws in the present collection will have had their use, if they direct attention to the true standard of evidential requirements, and if through them future telepathic incidents stand a better chance of being caught at the critical moment, while the opportunities for investigation are complete.

conclusion: 273

§ 2, The commoner difficulties which hamper progress may, moreover, be expected largely to disappear, as time goes on. As the idea of Telepathy becomes understood, the difference will be more and more realised between facts which make for it and facts which do not; aid towards the establishment of some strong item of proof will not so often be refused on the ground that no proof is needed — that everybody has had presentiments fulfilled, or has occasionally guessed what his friend was thinking of; and efforts will be more profitably directed through the mere existence of a scheme into which the results may fall. And further, a rational public spirit in the matter may be trusted to develop. The reluctance to give any prominence to what are often legitimately regarded as very private experiences will gradually give way, when it is recognised that the significance of each item of evidence, even as matter for private contemplation, depends on the combination of many items; and among those who take this wider view, fewer will shrink from the direct attestation which alone can ensure the result that they profess to desire, and which they would readily give to any other sort of fact in heaven or earth that they truly believed in. As for the merely negative difficulties — the general grounds of objection to our work — we see them already diminishing from the mere spirit of the age. The set of that spirit is very observably towards a wider tolerance — a distrust of finalities and restrictions, by whatever party imposed, and a faith in free inquiry, wherever it may lead. Men are already ceasing to argue that the alleged facts did not happen because they could not happen; or that telepathy is perhaps not true, and, therefore, if true, is not important; or that the recognised paths of labour, along which steady progress is being made and may still be made to an unpredictable extent, are so various and abundant that it is mere trifling to desert them for a dubious track, where progress, even could it be supposed possible, would still be a useless anachronism.

§ 3. But though "psychical research" is certain in time to surmount ridicule and prejudice, and to clear for itself a firm path between easy credulity on the one side and easy incredulity on the other, the rate of its advance must depend on the amount of sym.pathy and support that it can command from the general mass of educated men and women. In no department should the democratic spirit of modern science find so free a scope: it is for the public here to be, not — as in anthropological researches — the passive material of investigation, but the active partici-



Vol. Ii. T

274 CONCLUSION.

pators in it. We acknowledge with warm gratitude the amount of patient assistance that we have received — how patient and forbearing in many instances, none can judge who have not tried, as private individuals, to conduct a system of strict cross-examination on a wide scale. But unless this assistance is largely supplemented, our undertaking can scarcely hold its ground. Its interest must not for a moment be supposed to be of the merely curious sort, sufficiently illustrated in a loose batch of more or less surprising facts; indeed, so far as the facts excite surprise, it is a proof that the work is only beginning. If the natural system includes telepathy. Nature has certainly not exhausted herself in our few hundreds of instances: that these facts should be genuine would be almost inconceivable if she had not plenty more like them in reserve. And here is the practically interesting point; for, till the general fact is universally admitted, the several items of proof must ever tend to lose their effect as they recede further into the past. This peculiarity of the subject cannot be gainsaid, and must be boldly faced. For aught I can tell, the hundreds of instances may have to be made thousands. If the phenomena cannot be commanded at will, the stricter must be the search for them: if they are exceptionally transient and elusive, all the greater is the importance of strong contemporary evidence. The experimental work needs to be, and easily might be, enormously extended: for many a year to come the spontaneous phenomena must be as diligently watched for and recorded as if each case stood alone in its generation. And whatever the defects of the present attempt, so far as it supplies an impulse or lends an aid in either of these directions, it will not have failed in its object.

jf I should be glad to extend my statistics of sensory hallucinations in general, by canvassing another known number of persons taken at random. (See Chap. XIII.) Readers who may feel disposed to help me in this matter, and who will write to 14, Dean's Yard, S.W., will receive the necessary forms and instructions. But apart from a special census, I should be grateful for accounts of such phenomena from any persons who have themselves had experience of them. The assurance that they are not things to be troubled about, and are compatible with perfect bodily and mental health, may perhaps remove any disinclination that might be felt to recording instances. The names of informants will, of course, be held private.

NOTE, BY MR. MYERS, ON A SUGGESTED MODE OF PSYCHICAL INTERACTION.

§ 1. It is with some hesitation that I lay before the public the speculations contained in the following essay. They may seem, I fear, both over-bold and over-complex; and even the reader who follows them with a provisional adhesion will find that if he gains in width, he will lose in clearness of vision; while the conception of telepathy as a relativelysimple mode of colligating certain obscure phenomena will give place to a view in which the old problems loom larger than ever, though, perhaps, with some inter-relations made manifest which have not hitherto been observed.

But in reply to the objection of rashness I must ask my readers to distinguish between results unanimously arrived at, on the strength of definite experiment and explicit testimony, by a group of painstaking persons, and the speculations of one of their number, to which the rest stand uncommitted, and which he ofiers tentatively, as the mere preliminaries of what may in time become a surer view. And to the objection of complexity I answer that my hypothesis is free at least from the one unpardonable sin of hypotheses: it is not certainly unverifiable, — at least it may prompt experiment and direct observation.

I shall assume in the following pages that the reader has already mastered the general drift and purport of these volumes. And, perhaps, I can best introduce my own view by dwelling first on a difficulty in our recorded evidence which drove my own mind to seek for some wider solution.

§ 2. The reader, then, is aware that veridical phantasms— sounds or sights, that is to say, coincident with some death or crisis — hcve been treated in this work on the analogy of experimental thought-transference, as probably being in efiect the externalisation of a telepathic impression, — the hallucinatory forms in which a feeling or idea transferred from the mind of a distant person embodies itself to the percipient's senses. In dealing with the simpler forms of phantasmal sight, sound, or other impression, this analogy seemed to hold good; and we found, moreover, enough of

parallelism between telepathic hallucinations and the apparently casual and meaningless hallucinations of sane persons to suggest that telepathic phantasms were at least shaped by the percipient's mind, in the same manner as those delusive phantasms which the mind not only shapes, but presumably originates altogether.

All this, however, referred to phantasms perceived by one person only. On such a theory one would hardly expect that a phantasm would ever be perceptible to several persons at once; but rather that strangers in the company of the percipient would neither hear nor see anything, — would not be involved, at any rate, by mere local proximity in that message between according minds.

It was plain, however, that this question could not be answered d, priori. It needed what had not hitherto been forthcoming, namely, a collection of observed instances large enough to allow of a tolerably wide induction. And the collection offered in these volumes — though it might with advantage be tenfold larger — does in fact offer some interesting statistical results which bear on this problem.

In the first place, it is noticeable that the great majority of phantasms occur to a percipient who is alone. And this fact accords well with our view that the subsidence of ordinary stimuli facilitates the development of the telepathic impression.

But when we come to the small residue of cases where several persons have been together when the phantasm occurred, we find a result equally unexpected and perplexing. For it will be found that in nearly two cases out of three the phantasm is perceived by all or most of the persons so situated that they would have perceived it had it been an objective reality. In about one case out of three it is perceived by one only of the persons present. And, as a further complication, when perceived by more persons than one, it is sometimes perceived more fully by some than by others; — both heard and seen, perhaps, by one, and only heard by another.

§3. Now this result seems at first sight equally inconsistent with the theory of the telepathic impulse as generating these hallucinations, and with the crude popular credence which attributes to " ghosts " some sort of tenuous materiality. For in the one case we might expect that the phantasm would rarely be perceptible to more than one person; in the other case that it would always be perceptible to all the persons present. The popular view — to take that first — lies so far outside the pale of any recognised scientific conceptions that strong evidence indeed would be needed to reconcile us to it. We are sometimes asked to believe that this body of ours — with its digestive system, &c., and all its traces of physical evolution — is interpenetrated with a " meta-

organism " of identical shape and structure, and capable sometimes of detaching itself from the solid flesh and producing measurable efiects on the material world. Now that material eifects should be produced by something which (like our own will), is only cognisable by us on its psychical side is not in itself an absurd supposition, though we have little evidence which goes to support it. But this hypothesis of a connate molecular " meta-organism " is at once grotesque and entirely insufficient. For it is precisely against this form of the ghost-hypothesis that the difficulty as to the ghosts of clothes has overwhelming weight. The apparition that stands before us, on this theory, is an objective thing; it has grown with our friend's growth, it is organic with his deathless vitality. Are, then, his dead habiliments alive also in the spirit 1 or how has the meta-organism accreted to itself a meta-coat and meta-trousers?

§ 4. But if we thus rule out of court the crudest explanation of a collectively-witnessed apparition, our next attempt must plainly be to explain it on the lines of telepathy, by extending in some way our hypothesis of a phantasmogenetic impulse conveyed directly from mind to mind. Now if A's phantom is witnessed by B and 0 together — and witnessed, as we are assuming throughout, without intimation thereof from one to the other by look or word — then it might seem simplest to assume that a separate telepathic impression passed from A to B, and from A to C, and was externalised by each of the percipients as a phantom of his own shaping. It has been shown, however, in Chap. XVIII., that the recorded cases will not always admit of this hypothesis. C is sometimes a stranger to A, and it is almost impossible to suppose that, had it not been for B's presence, he would have witnessed the phantom at all. In this difficulty, Mr. Gurney inclines to the view that in such a case the telepathic impression is primarily communicated from A to B, and gives rise to a hallucination in B's mind; and that this hallucination is then telepathically communicated from B to the other person or persons present. And this explanation, if we can accept it, seems to have the advantage of introducing as little as possible of fresh hypothesis into the psychic field.

§ 5. I do not, however, think that the evidence warrants us in pushing our theory quite so far in this direction. I do not feel justified in assuming that a mere hallucination — telepathically originated in the mind of B, the primary percipient — will be thus readily communicable, by a fresh telepathic transfer, to the minds of other persons in local proximity. Hallucinations, however caused, are in themselves a tolerably distinct class of phenomena; and, since we know of several kinds that are not telepathic

in origin, we shall do well to inquire whether these have shown themselves communicable from the hallucine to his neighbours, without speech or suggestion of any kind. And it so happens that a good deal of competent observation has already been directed to this point. Folie a deux — -the communicability of insane delusions ^ — has been for the last quarter of a century a favourite topic of medical discussion.^ Now in order that folie a deux should present a true parallel to the suggested infectiousness of telepathic hallucinations, which we are here discussing, it would be necessary to find cases where some vision or voice had been propagated from one mind to another without any verbal suggestion whatever. No such case, so far as I can find, is anywhere recorded; and no such case is reported to me by medical friends. ^ The nearest case is that of the Lochin family (see the first note below), but there the attack of hallucinations was plainly of toxic origin, and though it ran much the same course with each of the poisoned persons, there is even here no proof that any one of them caught a definite hallucination from his neighbour's mind.

§ 6. It may, however, be suggested that medical writers, not being alive to the possibility of an unsuggested, or telepathic, infection, may have neglected to observe it, and that therefore some part of the infection for which they assume speech as of course the medium may in reality have taken place without speech, by telepathic transfer. To meet this point, let us consider what are the habitual conditions of the contagion du delire,^ as the French somewhat loosely term it.

According to Lasegue and Falret (with whom the other authorities virtually concur), the person thus infected (if not already a lunatic) must be inferior in intelligence to the original lunatic, must generally be a woman or a child, and must live long with the lunatic, apart from external influences. Moreover, the character of the delusion must itself be more or

1 Besides some references given by Mr. Gurney, Vol. i., p. 458, see Brunet (Ann. Med.-Psych., 1875, Vol. xiv., pp. 337-357), and the specially interesting case of the Lochin family (Ann. Med.-Psych., 1882, Vol. ii.), reported by Dr. Reverchon; " Les uns voient des fantomes, des chats noirs et blancs, des serpents; Us les montrent aux autrcs effares." See also Dr. Savage's " Cases of Contagiousness of Delusions " (Journal of Mental Science, 1880-1, Vol. xxvi., p. 563), and Dr. Kiernam (Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, October, 1880), for the communication of ideas of grandeur in asylums. I omit many minor references. In Dr. Jaccoud's Diet, encycl. des sciences mSdioales the reader is significantly referred from Folie a deux to Persecutions — the character of the great majority of these cases being thus indicated. On the v^hole, Lasfegue and Falret's essay (CEuvres de Lasegue, Vol. i., p. 732) summarises the subject very completely. The latest work, Chpolianski's Analogies entre la folie a deux et la suicide a deux, (Paris, 1885,) accords vi'ith what has been here said.

2 Dr. Lockhart Robertson has kindly made inquiry for me from some specialist friends; and neither he nor they are cognisant of any such case. Nor are the authorities at Bethlem; as, indeed. Dr. Savage's essay^ above referred to, plainly indicates.

3 The word contagion reminds us of the old stories of second-sight, communicable by the touch of the seer (see p. 189, note).

less reasonable; it must rest on real facts in the past, or intelligible fears or hopes for the future. The idea that a legacy has accrued, the idea that neighbours are malignant, is gradually instilled into a sane mind by the constant repetition of an untrue, but not conspicuously-absurd assertion. But even where this delusion includes some sensory elements, I can find, as I have already said, no evidence that any hallucinatory sight or sound has ever been described independently by two persons as occurring at the same moment. If, then, with all the predisposition that close relationship can give, with all the dominance of the hallucination in the affected mind, not even one other person seems ever to be telepathically impressed thereby, we may hesitate to assume that a veridical hallucination should be capable of telepathic transference to several bystanders.

Neither in duration nor in apparent intensity can the veridical hallucination claim to equal some of the morbid varieties. There are instances where the same illusory figure has persisted for months or years. Take, for instance, "Mr. G-abbage "—the persistent visionary tyrant of an unhappy American gentleman, who was, at any rate at first, in a state of undoubted sanity. ^ Constantly though he appeared, distinctly though he spoke, " Mr. Gabbage " was never seen or heard by anyone save the original sufferer.

Again, it is probable that no other hallucinations can rival in sheer intensity those which sometimes accompany the onset of an epileptiform attack. When the patient rushes furious through the room, which he sees full of flames, striking at the imaginary demons who bar his passage, then surely, if ever, the phantasies of the tumultuous brain might be expected to imprint themselves on the bystander. But although the shock of witnessing an epileptic fit will sometimes bring on a similar fit in patients thereto disposed, there is, I believe, no evidence whatever that the specific hallucination of the first sufierer ever communicates itself either to stable or to unstable brains.

Once more; there is a species of hallucination somewhat akin to telepathic hallucinations — nay, which is itself sometimes induced telepathically. I mean the hallucinations generated by the mesmeriser in the mind of his subject. Popular credence, as Mr. Gurney and I have elsewhere shown, 2 has much exaggerated the mesmerist's power of influencing his subject without verbal suggestion. But in a few cases — Mr. H. S. Thompson's and Dr. Pierre Janet's,^ for instance — an eff'ect seems to have

1 Sec M. Ribot's comments on this case of M. Ball's, Maladies de la Personnalite, p. 111.

2 Proceedings of the S.P.E,., Vol. iii., p. 416.

3 See the Additional Chapter at the end of this volume. In the strange and remote case of Councillor Wesermann (Vol. i., p. 102) it is not clear whether the distant "wilier" was thinking at the time of both the persons to whom the phantasm of his creating appeared.

been produced on a subject at a distance without previous suggestion; an action prompted or a hallucination provoked. Now, in no one instance does it appear that the effect thus telepathically produced has extended itself from the immediate subject to any other person.

§ 7. The analogies of morbid and of mesmeric hallucination are, then, as it seems, decidedly against its communicability. But these analogies are not in themselves conclusive. Apart from the distinctively morbid hallucinations of madness or epilepsy — on which physicians have almost exclusively dwelt — there are occasional cases of isolated hallucinations occurring in the experience of sane and healthy persons. It may be said that these afford a closer parallel to our telepathic hallucinations. If it can be shown that these are communicable, there will be some presumption that our veridical phantoms may be propagated by psychical infection too.

Now, Mr. Gurney has made a collection, far larger than had been previously attempted, of these casual hallucinations of the sane. His collection of nearly 600 cases of this kind (exclusive, of course, of the telepathic evidence in this book), when analysed with care, affords a basis of induction on which a few broad conclusions, at least, may safely be founded. All, however, that I mean to do here is to take one obvious empirical division. Some of these casual hallucinations resemble veridical hallucinations and some do not. In this latter class are included a number of purely fantastic or truncated visions of human or animal forms or faces, and visions of inanimate objects, patterns, &c. In the former class come visions of persons known or unknown, voices, lights, &c.

Now it appears that the great majority of these casual hallucinations are witnessed by one person only, other persons, if present, perceiving nothing. But there are cases in which several persons have shared the impression, and some of these cases Mr. Gurney has set forth in Chap. XVIII. What lessons do they teach?

The most important characteristic that I see in them is this. They all of them belong to that class of casual hallucinations which at any rate resemble the telepathic cases. There are no collective hallucinations of truncated forms, of definite inanimate objects, or of patterns. They all represent persons known or unknown, lights, or voices.

I will defer for the moment the consideration of some of these figures or voices which are referred to dead persons. Taking those only which are conceivably, though not provably, referable to persons living or in the act of death, it seems to me that we have here just that kind of fringe of ambiguous cases which we should expect to find surrounding the cases where some distant agency is more clearly proved.

For if such a phenomenon as telepathy, such a cause or agency as

telergy, exists at all, we may surely suppose that it exists in many forms, and manifests itself in many operations, of which we have not at present any inkling whatever. While we may be able to reach a substantial agreement as to what phenomena may be regarded as almost certainly due to telepathy, we have no means at present of deciding positively what phenomena are not so due.

This, therefore, is a case where the evidential and the theoretical treatment of our subject cannot be made precisely to coincide. Mr. Gurney's primary object has been, and rightly, to treat the evidential case for telepathy with scrupulous fairness, to allow to chance-coincidence or to mere subjective hallucination every incident which cannot establish a strong claim to a supernormal character. So long as we are arguing the question whether telepathy exists or no, this rigid method is plainly needful. We must rest our argument on instances for which, taken cumulatively, any explanation except telepathy is conspicuously improbable.

But supposing the evidential point established, and that it is now not the mere existence, but the nature and limits, of telepathy which we are seeking to determine, we shall need to scrutinize our narratives in a somewhat different way. We shall have to consider not only whether there is overwhelmivg probability that any given case is telepathic, but also whether there is sufficient probability to oblige us to keep that explanation in view, and to refrain from using the case in support of other theories. Thus (to make my meaning clearer by an analogy) if it were our business to prove the existence of volcanic islets, we should not be entitled to base that proof on such doubtful instances as the much-debated islets of St. Paul. But, the existence of volcanic islets once established, we must not hastily exclude this dubious case from our category, or we may find that we are committing ourselves to a far more questionable theory^ — that of a lost Atlantis. ISTow the cases cited by Mr. Gurney as probably mere subjective hallucinations shared by several persons are assuredly not cases from which any argument for the operation of distant agency could be drawn. But if such agency be once admitted as a vera causa, it seems to me to be safer to ascribe these cases to its untraced and, so to say, casual operation, than to support by them a theory of collective hallucination which may easily be — and in other hands has been — pushed to a point at which it comes into real collision with ordinary experience, and needlessly confuses the canons of testimony.

We must remember that these phantasms do not occur to please us, or to satisfy our expectations, but rather (so far as we can tell) in accordance with some law affecting the psychical energies of the dying person. We need not, therefore, assume that our phantasmal visitors will always be

familiar or interesting figures. It is quite conceivable that persons may appear to us whom we have wholly forgotten; and in fact in some of the cases in this book the identification of the figure has only followed upon subsequent information and reflection. Again, if, as certain cases seem to indicate, locality goes for a great deal in attracting or manifesting the phantasm, then figures may appear to us which we have, never seen, but which represent some dying person who is attached to the house in which we live. And suggestions such as these, though at present merely speculative, seem to me to form an explanation of Mr. Gurney's cases less violent than that which calls on us to suppose that a mere casual subjective hallucination has a self-propagating power which hallucinations of an intenser and more lasting order do not appear to possess.

§ 8. Another class of cases which Mr. Gurney has advanced as illustrating the transferability of hallucinations consists of the occurrence to two or more persons of phantasms ostensibly connecting themselves with some person who is actually dead. I do not wish here to give any positive opinion as to the origin of such appearances. The question of phantasms of the dead introduces a whole series of evidential and metaphysical difiiculties with which I am not here prepared to deal. But since we have expressly excluded such problems from the scope of this work, have expressly stated that our evidence is at present insufiicient to guide us to a distinct opinion thereon, I cannot admit that any selection from these narratives can at present add force to the contention that purely illusory hallucinations, corresponding in no way to any reality outside the primary percipient, are readily communicable to the other persons present.

Since, then, an inquiry so widely-reaching as Mr. Gurney's collection of hallucinations has failed, in my view, to produce any clear cases of the communicability of illusory (or falsidical ) hallucinations with which to supply the absence of any evidence thereof in previous records, I am driven to doubt whether such communicability can be safely assumed as a probable explanation of our cases where a veridical phantasm has been seen or heard by several persons at the same time.

§ 9. And having thus criticised my colleague's suggestions, I feel bound to produce a theory of my own, which, though confessedly unproven, may have the advantage of directing attention towards what seems to me the nodus of our present inquiry, and of suggesting experiments which may help us to a truer solution. I begin by following a clue which suggests itself at a very early stage of the experimental investigation.

Take the simplest possible case of thought-transference. A thinks of the word " cat " and B divines it. Now, here our habit is to call A the

agent and B the percipient; terras which are practically the simplest, but which may have seemed to imply that all the activity involved in the phenomenon lay in A's tension of thought in keeping " cat " before his mind, and that B's role was a mere passive waiting for the telepathic impulse which carries the word or idea from A's mind into his own. And as we extend our series from the trivial experimental instances to the massive spontaneous instances of telepathy, we find the exhibition of energy on the agent's part — the receptive tranquillity on the percipient's part — becoming more and more conspicuous. When A, for example, is dying in battle, and B is asleep and dreams that he sees A dying, the psychical activity of the one, the psychical passivity of the other, seem to reach their maximum.

Let us try, however, to look a little deeper beneath the surface. When A thinks of cat and B guesses the word " out of A's mind," without the help of speech or gesture, then B, whether passive or not, is at any rate playing the part which requires the rarer qualifications. In a sense, no doubt, he is merely perceiving, but I need not say that perception itself is a form of activity. If we perceive more things than an oyster perceives, it is not because we are more passive than the oyster, but more active; because activities of our ancestors' and our own have developed in us eyes which now discern distant objects with an efibrt so slight that we are scarcely aware of it. Similarly with the telepathic experiment. When B discerns the word cat, which most of us, with only his opportunities, could not discern by any amount of waiting and passivity, we must surely conclude that B is exercising some kind of capacity which we cannot exercise. This power, plainly, is not of what we term a voluntary kind; it is not guided by B's normal or primary stream of consciousness. But (as I have tried elsewhere to show) there is reason to suppose that our normal consciousness represents no more than a slice of our whole being. We all know that there exist sztft-conscious and unconscious operations of many kinds; both organic, as secretion, circulation, &c., which are in a sense below the operations to which our minds attend; and also mental, as the recall of names, the development of ideas, &c., which are on much the same level as the operations to which our minds attend, but which for various reasons remain in the background of our mental prospect. Well, besides these sub-conscious and unconscious operations, I believe that super-conscious operations also are going on within us; operations, that is to say, which transcend the limitations of ordinary faculties of cognition, and which yet remain — not below the threshold — but rather above the upper horizon of consciousness, and illumine our normal experience only in transient and clouded gleams.

This is not the place to marshal the arguments which support this

thesis. But the thesis itself seems almost implied in the very conception of thought-transference. For in thought-transference we have two psychical phenomena, connected by an unknown chain of causation, which is certainly supernormal in character, and which contains at least some unconscious links.

§ 10. Let us, then, pursue this notion of some supernormal activity on the percipient's part. Let us treat it in the same way as we have treated the notion of the supernormal activity of the agent. We have credited the agent. A, in the " cat " experiment, with a certain power of impressing his thought on other minds. And we have proceeded to inquire how far — in voluntary experiment or in spontaneous emergence — this power can be found to go, — how complex the transmitted image may be. So far as voluntary experiment went, the answer has been somewhat doubtful, for self-transmissive projections of a hallucinatory image of oneself — such as those recorded in Vol. I., Chap. III. — have always, as it would seem, taken place during the agent's trance or slumber. The spontaneous cases, on the other hand, have been very numerous; cases, that is to say, where A, undergoing some shock or crisis, acts psychically in such a manner as to impress his presence on the minds of distant men.

Let us, then, ask similar questions with regard to the supernormal activity of the percipient. We have seen him thus far divining a word on which the agent's thought was concentrated, guessing a card on which the agent's eyes were fixed. Are there cases, experimental or spontaneous, where we find him doing more than this 1 sharing not a single idea only but a whole complex of ideas and perceptions in another man's mind 1 or supernormally recognising an object on which no " agent's " eyes are lookincf? The answer to these questions would involve the whole evidence for induced or spontaneous clairvoyance. For the word clairvoyance may be used to indicate many forms of supersensory perception; of which one is what we may call telepathic clairvoyance, where the clairvoyant seems to be seeing with the eyes, perceiving with the senses, recalling with the memory, of another person; and another is what we may call independent clairvoyance, where the clairvoyant seems to visit scenes, or to discern objects, without needing that those scenes or objects should form part of the perception or memory of any known mind.

The topic of clairvoyance, though unavoidable in the present discussion, is open to serious objections from which telepathy, in our view, is free. For we have not ourselves succeeded in making any experiments which corroborate that induction of clairvoyance in sensitive subjects which many writers have alleged. And the light which our new knowledge

of telepathy throws on that testimony must doubtless modify it greatly — ■ must reduce the scattered testimony which exists for independent clairvoyance to a bulk much smaller than its advocates have claimed. But, nevertheless, speaking not for my colleagues but for myself, I do consider the evidence for clairvoyance, both telepathic and independent, both induced and spontaneous, to be adequate to justify belief; ^ and, holding this view, I feel bound to take clairvoyance into account in any theoretic discussion of supernormal phenomena.

§ 11. And if we thus take into account the evidence for clairvoyance, we find a stream of new light let in on our conception of the modus operandi of telepathic perception. For it is a characteristic of the clairvoyant power that it is generally exercised when the normal powers of sensory percipience are in abeyance, during natural somnambulism, during morbid conditions of trance, or during the sleep- waking state induced by mesmeric passes. It seems as though this supersensory faculty assumed activity in an inverse ratio to the activities of common life.

Nor is this the only instructive analogy which the records of clairvoyance suggest. The mesmeric process, which appears to be the most effective way of inducing the clairvoyant state, does not consist of a mere inhibition of ordinary psychical activities. Whatever may be its true nature, it involves, at any rate, a rapport between the operator and the subject, a specialised relation between two minds, which sometimes seems to serve as the starting-point for a supernormal percipience on the part of the mesmerised subject which presently transcends the scope or content of the interrogator's mind altogether.

Let us return, then, to the consideration of our veridical hallucinations, bearing in mind these two peculiarities of clairvoyant perception; its exercise in apparently inverse ratio to the activity of normal faculties, and its capacity for being stimulated or evoked by some kind of psychical influence directed towards the clairvoyant subject from another mind.

