" My mother confidently affirms that she saw the vision at that hour, 5 p.m., and, as far as she can remember, the letter from the captain of the vessel several days afterwards confirmed her statement as to the time, and the being called from his berth. We cannot find the captain's letter.

" My mother has not, when completely awake, had any other apparition or hallucination, except the one furnished you." [The words " when completely awake " simply reproduce the form in which the question was asked.] u (Signed as correct) Jane Stephenson."

(582) From Mrs. Ricardo, 8, Chesham Street, S.W.

"April 6th, 1885.

" I can only recollect the story rather imperfectly, though I have often heard my father, the late Colonel Campbell, of Skipness, tell it.

" On a fine summer's evening, between 8 and 9 o'clock (still quite light in the Highlands), about 40 years ago or more, my father was walking to the old ruined castle of Skipness, which was a short distance from the more modern house. He had fitted up a turning lathe and workshop in one of the old rooms, and was going to fetch some tool which he had forgotten in the day. As he approached the gate of the courtyard he saw two of the fishermen (brothers), Walter and John Cook, leaning against the wall rather stiffly. Being in a hurry he merely nodded, said something about its being a fine evening and went on. He was surprised that they did not answer him, which was very unlike their usual custom, but being in a hurry did not think much of it, and when he returned, they were gone. That night a sudden gale sprang up in the middle of the night. Next

morning, when my father went out to see what damage had been done, he met some fishermen carrying up a dead body from the beach. He inquired, ' Who is it? ' They said, ' Walter Cook, and they are just bringing his brother John's body too. Their boat capsized when they were out with the herring fleet last night, and they were both drowned.' My father said, ' It can't be, they never went to the fishing, for I saw them and spoke to them between 8 and 9 last night. ' ' Impossible, laird! for they both sailed with the rest of the fleet between 3 and 4 in the afternoon, and never returned.' My father never believed in second-sight or wraiths, but said this completely puzzled him. It must have been second-sight, as the men were not yet dead when he saw them,i though it was absolutely impossible that they could have been on land at the time. This, as far as I can remember, is the story, but I cannot be quite exact as to date and hours, "Annette Ricardo."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Ricardo writes; —

1. " Colonel Campbell never had any other experiences of the kind, and always laughed at any superstitions or fancies of the kind.

2. " His sight was remarkably keen and long; a splendid shot, &c. [He was known as a spirited writer on Indian field sports.]

3. " He was always quite certain that the men were the Cooks, and recognised and spoke to them by name.

4. " It was well known that the Cooks went with the rest between 3 and 4 o'clock; every boat is seen and recognised as it leaves the bay, and they could not possibly return without its being also known.

5. " The place was not a usual one for the fishermen to lounge, being the walls of our old castle, in the grounds, and the men's attitude was so stifi" that Colonel Campbell imagined they had been drinking.

" I have just been talking to an elder relation of the family, who had heard my father tell the story, and he corroborates these facts, only not

1 If the men were in a perfectly normal state when the phantasms were seen, the incident could not be properly included among the telepathic cases in this book (Vol. i., p. 140). But the evidence is quite uncertain as to hours; and there seems at any rate an appreciable probability that the deaths coincided with or preceded Colonel Campbell's experience.

This suggests a more general remark. In Vol. i., p. 122, when contrasting telepathy with various beliefs which have been, or still are, popular superstitions, I included among these the belief in the prophetic gift of "second-sight." But a careful study of the recorded cases will show that the p)rophetic character which popularly attached to them was not infrequently a pure assumption. The time of the occurrence of distant events was apt to be confused with the time of hearing of them; and visions and impressions are described as having preceded, and been fulfilled by, events which, for aught that appears, they may have coincided with or shortly followed. (See, e.g., the narratives given in Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of Scotland, by Walter G-regor, p. 205; in Howells' Cambrian Svperstitions, p. 57; and in the Treatise on Second Sight, by Theophilus Insulanus (1763), p. 60; and see also p. 59.) In days when no distinct conception of psychical transference had been formed, and when supersensuous influences were regarded as necessarily supernatural, it is not surprising that effects p)roduced backivards, so to speak, by events still to come, should have been as readily accepted as the coincidental impressions of what we should now call spontaneous telepathy: _ if the prophetic idea seemed the more marvellous, that would only be an inducement to give it the most extensive application. Not that I would attempt to save the credit of these cases by representing any of them as conclusively telepathic; as a rule, the reports on which they rest have had too many chances of being distorted and exaggerated to serve any evidential purpose whatever. But it is of interest to note here (as before in some of the alleged incidents connected with witchcraft, Vol. i., p. 119) that the residue of fact which might remain, after exaggeration, baseless assumption, and wrong inference had been allowed for, is such as the telepathic explanation would go far to cover.

536 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

quite sure whether the fleet went at 3 or 4, and thinks the apparition was seen about 9 in the evening.

" My brother-in-law (Captain Macneal, of Ugadale, Losset Park, Campbeltown, Argyllshire) encloses his statement. There are many others who have heard the story from Colonel Campbell. I do not know if the accident was seen to happen, or if only the boat and dead bodies were found. I have always believed that the accident occurred between 1 2 and 1, or 1 and 2 in the morning."

Captain Macneal writes, on April 18, 1885: —

" I have heard Colonel Campbell frequently relate the story regarding the Channel fishermen, just as his daughter has related it to you.

"H. Macneal."

[We have received two other independent accounts of this occurrence from persons who had heard Colonel Campbell narrate it. These agree with the above in the fundamental point of the apparition of the fishermen occurring at or near the time of their death; but one of them difiers in a good many details, and adds an incident which, from the fact that we have never met with it in first-hand narratives, we should judge to be improbable — namely, that the apparition was seen again at the same spot after a considerable interval — when Colonel Campbell was returning home. If this really occurred, it would suggest that either the real men were seen, (which however is impossible, if the hours are correctly stated by Mrs. Ricardo,) or that a real object was mistaken for them. The phantasmal representation of several dying persons is unexampled in our first-hand evidence; but see case 536. As might be expected, it is a feature that is met with in the more legendary records; see, e.g., Sacheverell's Account of the Isle of Man, (1702), p. 14.]

(583) From Dr. Frank Comer, 79, Queen's Gate, South Kensington,

^•W- "October 5th, 1885.

"In the year 1820 or 1821, my grandfather, Geo. Miller, M.D., who was a physician practising in Newry, Ireland, emigrated with his family to Canada and settled in the town of Niagara, Upper Canada. On their way to Niagara from Quebec, having reached the town of Prescott, which is above all the rapids of the St. Lawrence River, they then embarked on a sailing vessel commanded by a Captain Patterson. As the voyage from Prescott to Niagara in those days would probably occupy about a week, the passengers would undoubtedly become pretty well acquainted with the captain of the little vessel. About 6 or 8 weeks after the arrival of my grandfather and his family in Niagara, my grandmother (who, by the way, was a lady of more than ordinary sound practical common-sense, and not at all visionary) was walking in an orchard at the back of her house, about 3 o'clock in the afternoon, when Captain Patterson passed close by her and looked straight in her face. At first she was dumbfounded, not having heard his footsteps, but recovering from her surprise she extended her hand to shake hands with him; but he merely smiled and passed out of sight behind a small out-building.

" Upon my grandfather's return home, my grandmother told him of the occurrence, but he smiled and said she must have been dreaming, as Captain Patterson and his vessel were then at the other end of the Lake (Ontario); but she insisted that she was wide awake, that it was a clear

bright afternoon, and that she certainly had seen him or his apparition. A few days later the vessel arrived in Niagara, and the mate who was in charge reported that the Captain (Patterson) had been washed overboard during a gale at the lower end of the Lake. Upon inquiry it turned out that it was the same day, and (as nearly as could be judged) the very same hour, that grandmother Miller had seen his apparition in the garden. My mother, Mrs. J. F. R. Comer, was a girl of 10 or 11 years at the time, and remembers her mother and others talking about the occurrence at the time and afterwards, and she herself still remembers Captain Patterson. She is now in her 76th year, and is again living in Niagara, Ontario, Canada. "Frank Comer."

Dr. Comer sent us the original of the following extract from a letter written by his mother: —

" In one of my letters I gave Frank an account of the drowning of Captain Patterson, on his second voyage up from Prescott, in a storm, and of my mother seeing him pass near the black cherry-tree. It was written on a separate sheet of paper. Did you not get it? I mean the second voyage after he brought my father's family from Prescott to Niagara."

(584) From Mr. T. L. Moore, 6, Downshire Hill, Hampstead.

" September, 1884.

" My father, Major-General George Frederick Moore, whose death took place on the 8th of this month, has frequently related to me and to others the following incident. When in India, in the year 1848, very shortly before the siege of Mooltan, he occupied a bungalow at some place in that neighbourhood (the name of which I cannot give with certainty), and had a household consisting of the usual number of native servants. Among these was a woman who was a laundress, and part of whose weekly duty was to bring my father's clean linen to the bungalow, and deposit it in his bedroom for use.

" This woman met with an accident, which ended in tetanus. One day, it being fully light, my father was lying on a sofa in his sittingroom, the woman being somewhere in the compound, and in extremis, as he knew, from lockjaw. The door was open, and, as he lay on the sofa, he could see down a passage, which ended in another door (also open), leading to the compound. This latter was the main entrance to the bungalow, and anyone coming up the passage would go either into the sitting-room, or, turning at right angles, down another passage which led to the bedroom and adjoining bathroom. While lying on the sofa, in full view of the entrance-passage, my father was astonished to see his laundress enter from the compound, pass up the passage, carrying, as was her custom, his clean linen. ^ Upon reaching the sitting-room door she turned down the corridor, leading, as before explained, to the bedroom. He immediately rose and followed her, knowing that she must be in either the bed or the bath room, from which there was no exit save by the way she had come, but no one was to be seen. Much perplexed, he repaired to the compound and found her lying dead, having at that moment expired. My father described her appearance as perfectly definite in every way, wearing the same clothes and bangle ornaments which she used to do when alive; and

1 As to the projection of the hallucinatory figure with familiar dress or appurtenances, see Vol. i., pp. 539-40.

538 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

her apparition was so palpable that it was the knowledge of her impending death which caused him to follow her into the bedroom and bathroom.

" That this appearance was not that of any living person is proved by the fact of there being no exit from these two rooms save by the passage down which the apparition walked. " Temple L. Mooke."

Mr. Arthur G. Hill, of 47, Belsize Avenue, Hampstead, writes: —

" September, 1884.

" The late General Moore narrated the above account to me in the presence of his son a few weeks ago, very shortly before his death, and had no doubt whatever of the reality of the ' wraith.' He had intended to dictate an account, at my request, specially for the S.P.R. He was the most unimaginative and strong-minded man imaginable."

[Mr. Hill mentions that this was not General Moore's solitary experience of hallucination, as he had once seen the figure of his brother, two days after his brother's death.]

(585) From Mr. H., a journalist, who desires that names may not be published. The account has been submitted to the first-hand witness, who is perfectly willing that it should appear, and may be taken to admit its correctness. u November 1 2th, 1 883.

" Many years ago, my father had an intimate and dear friend, a doctor, who had to pass every winter in Madeira. One night my father was going to his rooms, in the Strand, when, on the stairs, coming down, he met, as he thought, poor Dr. G. So vivid was the illusion, that he held out his hand, and, I believe, spoke. Of that I am not certain. The ghost, or whatever it might have been, looked at my father, and passed down the stairs. Some little time afterwards, my father received news of his friend's death. It happened, I believe, on the very day my father met with his little adventure. This is the story as I have heard my parent tell it.

" Visitations or warnings of this kind are common enough, and I remember perfectly well that the afiair, hallucination or not, impressed my father very much — not that he is by any means a superstitious man."

[The percipient cannot remember the precise date of the occurrence, which took place more than 30 years ago.]

(586) From Colonel Y., who writes, in a letter dated March 11, 1886, " The account was written by me from a statement made to me by my father, the late Capt. J. H. Y., in 1864. The words are my father's, and I wrote them as he related them to me." Names were given in confidence.

" One of my [-i.e., Colonel Y.'s, not his father's] grand-aunts was Mrs. F., married to an ofiicer, Major or Colonel F., of the Dragoons, serving in George III.'s time in America. He was killed at the battle of Saratoga. My aunt lived at the time in Portland Place, W., and was entertaining a large party one evening. Suddenly they remarked she seemed to be in great pain and agony, exclaiming quite aloud to her guests, ' Oh, do go home. I have seen a most fearful sight, and am compelled to break up the party.' Some of her most intimate friends asked her what she had seen. She replied that she was certain ' her husband F. had been killed in a battle, and that she most distinctly saw his body being carried to the rear by his soldiers.' She remained in great anxiety for weeks, when the sad news confirming her vision arrived from America, and that at the hour she made the exclamation to her guests, her husband, F., of the Dragoons

(allowing for clifFerence of longitude), was killed in an attack made on the enemy at the battle of Saratoga."

Colonel Y. adds, "An aunt now deceased, told me she was, when a girl, present at the time when [her aunt] Mrs. F. called out ' that F. had been shot, and that she saw his body being carried off the field of battle.' "

We find from Burgoyne's Campaign, by Charles ISTeilson (Albany, 1844), that Brigadier-General F. was wounded at the battle of Saratoga, at 2 p.m. on Oct. 7, 1777, but did not die till 8 a.m. on Oct. 8. From Letters and Memoirs relating to the American War of Independence, by Madame Riedesel (Translation, New York, 1827), we learn that he was carried to Madame Riedesel's hut at about 3 p.m., which would correspond with about 8 p.m. in London; and that during the afternoon, while he was lying mortally wounded, he frequently uttered his wife's name.^

[We have no means of judging whether the vision of the soldiers carrying the body was of the clairvoyant type, or whether the scene was merely a setting supjDlied by the percipient's own mind. Nor can we judge how far the experience was an externahsed hallucination. (See Yol. I., p. 545, note.)]

(587) From Mrs. Hackett, 10, Steele's Road, Haverstock Hill, N.W.

"September 26th, 1883.

" The incident which I have often heard my father [James Dawson] speak about was that one of the men on board my grandfather's ship was ill, and could not be induced to eat anything. He said if he could have a piece of game-pie, he thought he could eat that. When grandfather got home (the ship was then in dock in London), he found a hamper had arrived from Yorkshire and in it was a game-pie. My father at once begged to take a piece to the man. He had it tied up in a cloth, to be able to hold it more securely in going up the side of the ship. When nearly at the top of the ladder, he said he distinctly saw his sister dressed in white. It so unnerved him that he dropped the pie into the water. His sister was living in Yorkshire, near Flamborough Head. As soon as a letter could be had in those days, they heard this sister [Jane Foster] died at that time, and he was the person she spoke of last. I never heard my father say he had seen anything of the kind before or afterwards.

"C. J. Hackett."

1 1 append the following version of the same incident (received from a lady of sense and great practical ability), as illustrating what I have before emphasised (Vol. i., p. 149) — the difference in evidential value between a record given by a person nearly connected with the original witness, and having command of the circumstances, and a story casually picked up from an acquaintance. The essential point of a telepathic vision remains; but almost every detail is altered; and, as so frequently happens in such cases, the chain of evidence is shortened, and the narrator's informant is represented as the person to whom the experience occurred. She was really the " aunt now deceased " of Colonel V.

" March 14, 1884. _

" Mrs. v., whose husband was in the Artillery in India, told me the following occurred to herself. The story is well known in her family. She has been dead some years, and it occurred when she was comparatively a young woman. I heard it from her 23 years ago last Christmas, at Southampton. One evening, sitting in her drawing-room, she saw distinctly a military funeral procession pass at the further end of the room. The coffin borne on a gun-carriage; the men with arms reversed. Directly it passed away, she noted the circumstance, writing it down, and passed some months in the greatest anxiety. It was before the days of overland route. She heard of her husband's death, which had occurred that day, and allowing for the difference of time, the funeral had taken place at the moment she had seen the vision, death and burial following each other within a few hours in India." The "arms reversed," the "overland route," and the remark about " death and burial," show that a report is not more likely to be accurate for being circumstantial.

540 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

[No one, perhaps, will imagine that a fictitious narrative would take such a form as this — the apparition coming in as a mere episode in the pie's history. But the incident is remote, having occurred, Mrs. Hackett thinks, before 1830. She last heard the account from her father about 1850. She told Mr. Podmore on April 18, 1886, that a surviving aunt of hers remembers hearing the account from Mr. Dawson, but is too old to be applied to for dates, &c.]

(588) From Mr. J. H. Redfern, 20, Great Ancoats Street, Manchester, the narrator of case 214. ^^, 009

" The following narrative I give you as I have had it often from the lips of my wife. The circumstance took place a number of years ago. She repeated it often. I have ridiculed it, made fun of it, &c. It had no efiect upon her. She was a quiet, thoughtful, upright woman; and so far as the thing appeared to her, all who knew her would be satisfied as to the accuracy of the statement as given by her. She was a native of Worksop, Notts. A Mr. Drobble, an old friend of her father's, residing not far away, was fond of her even as a child, and as she grew up, petted and made much of her; this continued, and she always regarded him as an intimate and dear friend. In winter, or at any time going from home, he wore an old-fashioned great-coat of drab cloth. I mention this as it was of peculiar make, and the only one of the kind about that part of the country. [She left home, and was staying at Stockport.] In that town, in a street called Underbank, is an old-fashioned mansion with a large courtyard in the front. It was (and is now) a branch of the Manchester and Liverpool District Bank. Being one day about noon there, and chancing to look through a window into the street, she saw on the footpath opposite the bank, and looking up at the building, Mr. Drobble. He had on his drab overcoat, and appeared as if he was upon the point of coming through the gateway into the courtyard. She saw him (she said) face to face. She instantly stepped out of the bank, across the courtyard — expecting to meet him — into the street. He had disappeared. On each side of the bank were shops. She fancied that he must have gone into some of them. She followed, as she thought, but could see nothing of him. She felt much disappointed; but gradually the thing was in a great measure forgotten.

" Fifteen or eighteen months after, she went home to Worksop. After some days, incidentally she asked her mother how Mr. Drobble was. Her mother stared at her at first, and then asked her what ever she was talking about % Mr. Drobble had been dead for more than 1 2 months. My wife, in her turn, protested that she saw him, face to face, in broad daylight; that it was impossible that she could be mistaken in the matter; and to this she adhered to her dying day.

" Upon further inquiry it appeared that Mr. Drobble had died at about the time of the day when she believed that she saw him, and so near as they could get at it, on the same day; and that he had been confined to bed for something like 9 or 10 months previous to his death.

" It appeared also that they had never sent word of his death, and she had never learned it until in the way, and at the time, here told."

Mrs, Hannah Lees, of Clifton Crescent, Rotherham, writes to us: —

"I can confirm the truth o£ Mr. Drobble's death when sister Redfern was away. I was with her at home, when, as described by Mr. Redfern, she asked about him, and only then learned of his death. Nothing could shake her belief in the fact of her having seen him at the time, and in the manner described."

[Mr. Redfern assures us that he had not exchanged a word on the subject with Mrs. Lees for years, and that her testimony has been given without his having in any way refreshed her memory. But the degree of closeness in the coincidence is uncertain; and the case may possibly have been one of mistaken identity.]

The next case is perhaps an example of the rare type where the operative idea in the agent's mind was of the place in which (rather than of the person by whom) the phantasm is seen. (Vol. I., p. 268.)

(589) From the Rev. W. S. Grignon, The Grove, Pluckley, Kent.

" 24th October, 1882.

" The date was between 1820 and 1830. My father made a journey from Montego Bay to Spanish Town, to attend the session of the ' House of Assembly ' of Jamaica, of which he was a member, and passed a night en route at the house of a friend whose name I cannot now remember. The family consisted of his friend, his friend's wife, and the wife's sister, a Miss R. (we will call her so; I know the name but have perhaps no right to give it). This young lady was out of health, and in a very depressed state. After dinner the ladies left the room, and my father shortly after strolled out of doors in the very brief twilight of a tropical day. To his surprise he saw Miss R. going along a path from the house towards a clump of trees not far from it; he was not very near her, but called out to her. She proceeded on her way without taking any notice of him; supposing that she wished to be alone, he turned off in another direction, and shortly after returned to the house. On entering the drawing-room he found his friend and his wife there, and Miss R. also there, reclining on a sofa. When he came in she rose and left the room. He said to his friend's wife, ' Do you think it safe for your sister to go out of doors so late, with a heavy dew falling? I met her outside a few minutes ago.' ' You must be mistaken; she came in here with me from the dining-room, lay down on the sofa, and I am quite certain, did not leave it till just now on your entrance. I have been here the whole time.' They were all puzzled by his certainty that he had seen Miss R., and some time having passed without her returning to the room, she was looked for and not found in the house. On further search outside, she was found dead, having hanged herself on one of the trees in the clump towards which my father had seen her, or the appearance of her, moving.

" It must be remembered that the servants about the place were all negroes or brown people. Had such a thing happened in England it might be thought that some female servant, sufliciently like Miss R. in figure to be taken for her at a little distance, had been seen. There this could not have been. Probably the poor girl was, while reclining on the sofa.

542 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

thinking, with an intentness which the sane mind cannot easily conceive, of her purpose of suicide and the place she had chosen for it. Could this have had the eifect of visibly projecting the appearance of her form towards the place?

"W. S. Grignon."

[In spite of the special reason suggested for rejecting the hypothesis of mistaken identity, we can scarcely feel, in so remote a case, that we realise the circumstances with sufficient completeness to justify confidence on that point. If the vision was not flesh and blood, it is certainly difficult to resist the conclusion that it was of telepathic origin.]

(590) From a teacher in the Gymnasium of Tver, Russia, whose name we are asked not to print. The first-hand account was sent by Mr. Yladislavlefi", of Tver, to Mr. Bruhns, who translated it for us.

" 1883.

The narrator begins by saying that about 1856, when a boy of 12, he was a collegian of the first Moscow Gymnasium, and that his parents lived about 250 miles from Moscow. " One morning in the beginning of April, I went as usual to the Arkhangelsk Cathedral in the Kremlin. The liturgy had already commenced. The church was, as usual, full of worshippers. At the beginning of the liturgy I accidentally turned my head, and to my greatest surprise saw in the crowd of worshippers my mother, praying, and with her eyes directed to the holy images, like other worshippers round her. She was dressed in her usual dress. My astonishment was very great, for I knew very well that my parents were then at home. I spent the whole liturgy in looking at her, and in thinking of the incident. Meanwhile the liturgy had come to an end, and the worshippers began to kiss the cross. Among others, my mother approached the priest. Fearing to lose sight of her, I went through the crowd of worshippers which surrounded the priest with the cross, and when she, after having kissed the cross, went to the door, I went after her. She went out of the door, advanced some feet, and then stopped at the corner, formed by the wall of the cathedral itself and the wall of the altar, and in such a manner that her face turned towards the crowd which was passing by her. Going after the worshippers, I approached her. I saw her looking at me and weeping, her tears flowing down her cheeks. I stopped momentarily, but the crowd continued to pass by us, and I all at once understood that I saw before me something extraordinary — something that was visible to me alone. An inexpressible terror seized me, and I cannot remember how I reached our lodging. But I told nobody of the incident.

" The summer came. We went home to our parents. When we arrived, we heard of our mother's death: she died precisely at the beginning of April. Our father did not inform us about this death fearing the sorrowful news might disturb our May examinations in the University and in the Gymnasium."

[If this report is accurate, the case does not look like one of mistaken identity. But the extraordinarily prolonged character of the apparition suggests exaggeration (compare case 300); and the more so when the youth of the percipient is remembered.]

§ 4. The cases in this section are narrated by persons not closely related to the respective percipients.

(591) From Dr. de Wolf, Providence, R.I., — a letter to Professor Barrett. "August 28th, 1884.

" I have been for many years a practitioner of medicine in this city; my birthplace was the town of Bristol, some 15 miles distant, where I resided for more than 30 years, and for the greater part of that time was a next-door neighbour of Right Rev. A. Y. Eriswold, Bishop of the Eastern Diocese of the Protestant Episcopal Church, and who died some 40 years ago. He was, as all Churchmen in this country know, greatly esteemed for his talents and piety.

" For what follows the Bishop himself was my informant. He told it to others, and I heard it frequently spoken of by different members of the family.

" One afternoon, while standing at his desk writing in his study, a door opened^ from an adjoining room, and Mr. Collins, his son-in-law, entered, and passed slowly through the room and out of another door; the Bishop said he had not been thinking or talking of Mr. Collins, and had not heard from him for some time. He knew that he could not be within a thousand miles of him, and yet he had distinctly seen him pass through the room. This of itself was a very remarkable occurrence, but what follows renders it still more so.

" When the mail from Charleston arrived some 3 or 4 days after (there were no telegraphs or railroads at that time), a letter was received announcing the death of Mr. Collins, on the very day and hour when the Bishop saw him apparently pass through his study.

" The good Bishop (who was no believer in ghosts, necromancy, or anything of the sort) said it was a most remarkable and singular circumstance, the coincidence rendering it still more remarkable, and he could not account for it, but supposed it must be some sort of a hallucination; for, as he was standing at a high desk, he could hardly have been dreaming. "John J. de Wolf, M.D."

Dr. de Wolf has kindly inspected the tombstone of Mr. Collins, which shows that he died on July 4th, 1807. Dr. de Wolf has also endeavoured to find some other person who has heard the account direct from the Bishop; but in this he has failed. The Bishop's grandchildren have all heard of the occurrence, but not at first hand. One of them told Dr. de Wolf that the Bishop himself was disposed to say very little about it.

(592) Copy of part of a letter from Miss M. A. Ewart, of 3, Morpeth Terrace, Victoria Street, S.W., to Mrs. Sidgwick, dated April 4, 1886.

" I waited to write until I had seen Mr. Henry Clarke, who was brother-in-law to Mr. Guthrie, Vicar of Calne, in Wilts, who told me at dinner at Bo wood, about 1860, of the apparition of Lord Kerry, as I described it to you. Mr. Clarke had no recollection of having heard Mr. Guthrie tell the story, and did not know it; but he said that Mr. Guthrie was greatly attached to Lord Kerry, who was his pupil, and that Lady

1 Compare cases 530 and 537. This form of hallucination is met with also in purely subjective cases.

544 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

Lansdowne was always very grateful to Mr. Guthrie for the influence he had over her son. Lord Kerry died in 1836. Mr. Clarke could not say that he died at Bowood.

" It was in the beech avenue, approaching the house at Bowood, that Mr. Guthrie told me he met Lord Kerry, when he was going to the house to see him, knowing him to be unwell and shut up. When he reached the house, the servant told him that Lord Kerry had died a few minutes before, and, as Mr. Guthrie believed, at the moment he had met him, walking briskly, and surprising him so much that he did not attempt to stop him. Lord and Lady Kerry lived in a house I know well, close to Bowood (where Mr. Clarke's sister, Mrs. Warren, now lives), but Mr. Clarke says that they may have been at Bowood at the time of his death. Mr. Clarke was then in China. I am sorry that I cannot tell you more.



« M. a. Ewart."

[This narrative belongs, no doubt, to a type which as a rule is untrustworthy— having been told to our informant by an acquaintance, not a relative or intimate friend, and on one occasion only. But the facts, it will be seen, are of the very simplest kind, and are presented without any attempt at ornament or detail; and Miss Ewart's acquaintance with the locality would naturally tend to fix the simple lines of the picture in her mind.]

(593) From Mr. P. H. Berthon, F.R.G.S., 20, Margaret Street, W. The narrative was sent to Professor Barrett in 1875.

" Some years ago, when residing at Walthamstow, in Essex, my wife and self became intimate with a lady and gentleman who had become temporarily our near neighbours. On one occasion, when they were dining with us quite ew/amiZ^e, my friend and I, on repairing to the drawingroom, not long after the ladies had left us, were surprised to find that his wife had been suddenly taken with a kind of fainting fit, and had been obliged to return home accompanied by one of our female servants. My wife, as a matter of course, went the next day to inquire after her friend, who then told her that the cause of her sudden indisposition had been the appearance, as if in her actual person standing before her, of one of her two sisters, who were then residing with their mother at Beyrout, in Syria, which had greatly alarmed her. Communication by telegraph had not then been established, and by post it was much slower than at present. Many days had therefore elapsed before the lady received letters from Beyrout, but on their arrival they conveyed the intelligence that her sister had died on the day and, allowing for the difierence in the time, at about the hour of her appearance to our friend."

In conversation, Mr. Berthon told the present writer that the lady, Mrs. de Salom^, was playing the piano when she saw her sister's figure at her side. Mr. Berthon did not hear of the incident from Mrs. de Salome herself, but was at once told of it by his wife, and was also told at once of the arrival oi the news. He frequently saw Mrs. de Salom^ during the interval. He says also that his daughter, who was 12- at the time, distinctly remembers hearing of the circumstances at the time. Mrs. de Salome died soon after the occurrence, which took place in the autumn of 1853. Mrs. Berthon is also deceased.

(594) From Dr. H. T. Berry, 29, Pembridge Crescent, Bayswater.

" December 29th, 1884.

" Although living now at Bayswater, I have been in practice in the North of London for nearly 40 years. The following account I can vouch for in every particular, but remember I draw no inference from it.

" Some five or six years since, I was attending Mrs. A., in the neighbourhood of Gray's Inn Road. The lady became so ill that she sent for her mother, residing nearly one hundred miles from town, to nurse her. Some eight or ten days after, I made my usual morning call, and found Mrs. A. improving, and her mother quite well. About 3 o'clock in the afternoon of the same day, I was hastily summoned to Mrs. A.'s house. When I arrived, Mrs. A. was no worse, but her mother had suddenly dropped down dead in a fit. I telegraphed to the husband [Mrs. A.'s father] to come to town directly, not telling him of his wife's death, fearing to alarm him too suddenly. When the husband came up (he was a very intelligent man, about 70) he told me he was not surprised to find his wife dead when he arrived in town. For, about the time of her death, he was returning to his home, through a field, when he distinctly saw his wife cross the field a few yards from him. As he went home he called at a friend's house, and said, ' I am sure my wife is dead. When I reached home I found the telegram asking me to come up directly; but I felt certain my poor wife was dead.' As I said in my note, I make no theory to explain the above. The facts I know of my own personal knowledge.

" H. T. Berey."

In a subsequent letter. Dr. Berry says, " The old man told me himself, within 24 hours of the vision. I don't think he is living now." He adds that the incident occurred in the summer of 1880; and that he attended the inquest.

He has given us, in confidence, the name and address of his patient, but does not allow us to apply to her. As he does not remember her mother's name, we have had some diificulty in obtaining confirmation of his account. We applied to the coroner of the district, who found no inquest recorded in his books; but he kindly inquired of a grandson of the deceased lady, from whom he learnt that she had died in the summer of 1880, and that there was no formal inquest. No doubt (as the coroner suggests) Dr. Berry used the word " inquest " for the informal consultation at which he assigned the cause of death.

(595) From Miss Eliza Mortlock, Tivoli Lodge, Clevedon, who does not remember when it was that the account was written.

" At Wiesbaden we were acquainted with a clever good man. Professor Ebenau, whose old sister kept his house, &c. He told us he had a friend residing 40 or 50 miles off" — likewise a professor — who was very poor, and had a large family. On hearing that the wife was dying, Mr. E. went to see them, and brought back their eldest boy, for whom a little bed was put up in Mr. E.'s room.

" One morning, about 10 days after, Mr. E. called and asked me, ' Do you believe that at the moment of death, you may appear to one whom you love? ' I replied, ' Yes, I do.' ' Well,' he said, ' we shall see. I have noted the day and the hour; for last night after I went up to bed, the



Vol. Ii. 2 N

546 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

child said sweetly (in German), " Yes, dear mamma, I see you." To which I replied, " No, dear boy, it is I, I am come to bed." " No, he said, " it is dear mamma, she is standing there smiling at me," pointing to the side of the bed.' On his next visit, Mr. Ebenau told us that he had received a letter saying that at that time, and on that evening, the wife had breathed

^^^ l^s*- " Eliza Moetlock."

[This event happened in the spring of 1854, and Miss Mortlock has lost sight of Professor Ebenau; but it will be seen that she herself was informed of the vision before the death was known. The boy seems to have been sufficiently awake at any rate to understand and reply to Professor Ebenau's remark, and Miss Mortlock is sure that the Professor believed him to have been awake. But he may have been in a state favourable to subjective hallucination, from knowledge of his mother's critical condition.]

(596) From Mr. Wicks (a Temperance Missionary), 87, Southfields, Leicester.

"July, 1884.

" In Devonport, in the year 1884, I was acquainted with a Mrs. Flaherty, an Irish widow, who occupied two rooms in a house which accommodated several poor families. She had three sons, the eldest of whom. Garland, a lad of about 17, who was steward on board one of Her Majesty's ships, was her main support. This lad had been ashore on leave, and had bade his mother farewell to return to his duty. She, soon after parting with him, set about cleaning the doorway of the house. Looking up from this occupation, she saw him returning up the street, and she exclaimed, ' Why, goodness! he has lost the boat. Whatever will he do? ' She rose up and surveyed him as he approached her, identifying his face, hair, figure, gait, dress, and even the bundle of clothes he had carried away. She called out to him, but he made no answer, walked past her into the house, and went up into her rooms. She followed, but finding nobody there, she called out chidingly, ' Garland, don't play with me. Tell me, why haven't you gone aboard? ' Her excitement brought in her neighbours, who asked what was the matter; to which inquiry she responded, ' Indeed, I don't know. By the Holy Mother, I never saw Garland in my life if I didn't see him just now come in at the door and go upstairs before me.' ' Are you sure, now, he is not hiding in some of your rooms 1 ' They soon satisfied themselves by search that this was not the case, and told Mrs. Flaherty she must have been mistaken. To this she answered positively, ' Don't I know my own boy — my own Garland? bless him! and didn't I see him come up the street, and come into this house ■? Yes, and up over the stairs: and didn't he pass me without speaking? the likes of which he never did before at all, at all. Something must be the matter with him.'

" In this she was right. It turned out that in trying to get from the boat on to the ladder lying over the ship's side he missed his foothold, fell into the sea, and was drowned. This happened at the very time his mother saw his apparition.

" I had this story, as it is here given, from Mrs. Flaherty's own lips, and have frequently since heard it from her second son, John Garland Flaherty, who was my companion for over 10 years.

" William Wicks."

(597) From the late Miss Elizabeth Jacob, who wrote clown the account, some years ago, for Mrs. Saxby, of Mount Elton, Clevedon. The elate of the incident is now irrecoverable; Mrs. Saxby, writing on March 11, 1886, says that she thinks it "must have occurred full 20 years ago."

The narrative begins by describing how one John Miller, an old blind man whom Miss Jacob and her sister, Mrs. E-ussell, used to visit in London, died unexpectedly at a time when his son-in-law was seeking employment in the country. " The second night after the death, Mrs. Miller and her daughter had gone to bed, but they were unable to sleep for thinking of him, when, to use her own words, ' I heard something strike against the window, ma'am, and I started up and found that it was someone throwing up stones against it. So I jumps up, throws my flannel petticoat over my shoulders, and opens the window. " Who's there '?" says I. "It is I, mother," says Jem, "come home." "Oh, Jem," says I, "father's dead." Says he, " I knowed it, and that's why I come home." So, ma'am I was struck all of a heap, as you may guess, and I whipped on my clothes and let Jem in, and then he told us all how it was.' He had been in Buckinghamshire, towards Oxford, and he was walking by a ploughed field in a country place, when, looking up, he saw his father [in-law] coming towards him. He was quite sure it was his father [in-law]. He felt startled, but was just going up to speak to him when he passed away over the ploughed field without turning, or speaking, or looking at him. Jem felt so awe struck that he could neither move nor do anything, but he thought directly that it was a sign that something was wrong, so he turned and walked back to London as soon as he could, and very footsore and tired he was when he arrived."

Mrs. Saxby tells us that Miss Jacob heard old Mrs. Miller relate this incident a few days after Jem's return; and adds, " They found that it was exactly at the same hour that the old man died, that his son-in-law saw him glide past him in the ploughed field."

[This case depends on the evidence of respectable, though uneducated, witnesses; and the fact of the son-in-law's return, and the reason he alleged for it, are not matters on which memory would become untrustworthy in a few days. At the same time, the exactitude of the coincidence may easily have been exaggerated. As Mrs. Miller was cognisant of Jem's unexpected return before he heard of the death, and must have heard of the vision that caused his return in almost the same breath as he heard of the death, her evidence may perhaps be reckoned as on a par with first-hand (Vol. I., p. 148).]

(598) The late General Campbell, of Gwalior House, Southgate, informed us that a relative of his. Major Hasell, had seen the apparition of a brother at the time of the latter's death, and that the only authority whom he was at liberty to quote was a common relative of his own and of Major Hasell's — General Orchard. At our request he wrote to General Orchard, who replied as follows: —

" Woodville Gardens, Barnes, S.W., Surrey.

"May 17th, 1884. ^ "The event took place during June, 1849 (the precise date I cannot say); it took place on his voyage home, on medical leave. Hasell (48th

548 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

Ben. IST.I.) told me it was in the Red Sea that his brother died, on the way to Suez. Hasell further stated that on seeing his brother's apparition he looked at his watch, and noted down the date and time his brother appeared to him, and by his calculations it was exactly the time intimated as to his demise, which he afterwards received. The name of the ship I do not know; however, that can be easily ascertained from the India Office, as well as the actual date and where he died. The particulars that I have not been able to give have quite escaped my memory, although at the time they must have been mentioned to me.

" Hasell was in India with his regiment, and his brother going to England on medical leave at that time. u j -yy^ Orchard."

General Orchard writes to us on May 24, 1884: —

" I cannot bring to mind when Major Hasell told me of the occurrence.

" The apparition appeared in the afternoon, but the hour has escaped my memory. It showed itself to Major Hasell, and he told me it was visible for a second or two, and then faded away. He made the calculation as to the time, which agreed with that of his brother's death."

General Campbell says that Major Hasell struck him " as being a very straightforward, practical sort of man."

We learn from the India Office that Captain William Lowther Hasell, attached to the 44th Bengal Native Infantry, died at Cairo, on his way home, on the 13th June, 1849. The vessel in which he embarked from India was the P. and O. steamship " Oriental," Captain Powell.

(599) The following narrative, received from an intimate friend of Mr. Myers and the present writer, is third-hand, and is admitted only by special exception (see Vol. I., p. 158, note).

" 1883.

" My grandfather. Sir J. Y., was drowned by the upsetting of a boat in the Solent, in or about the year 1830.

" On the day of his death Miss Manningham, a great friend and connection of his, was at one of the Ancient Concerts in Hanover Square-Rooms. During the performance she fainted away, and when she came to,, declared that she had seen a corpse lying at her feet, and though the face was turned away, she knew the figure to be that of my grandfather. Communication in those days was not of course as easy as now, and her fears were not verified till some days after the event. ^ Such is the family story, which I heard often from my father, and had verified by my mother when last I saw her."

In answer to an inquiry, the narrator adds, " I have always understood that my father heard it from Miss Manningham; my mother heard it from my father."

The following account of the same incident occurs in A Portion of the Journcd ke-pt hy T. Raikes, Esq., from 1831 to 1847, Vol. I., p. 131: —

"Wednesday, 26th, December, 1832.^ — Captain recounted a curious

anecdote that happened in his own family. He told it in the following words: — It is now about 15 months ago that Miss M., a connection of

1 The journey from Southampton to London only took one day at that time; but Miss Manningham may not have been immediately informed of the news.

my family, went with a party of friends to a concert at the Argyll Rooms. She appeared there to be suddenly seized with indisposition, and though she persisted for some time to struggle against what seemed a violent nervous affection, it became at last so oppressive that they were obliged to send for their carriage and conduct her home. She was for a long while unwilling to say what was the cause of her indisposition; but on being more earnestly questioned, she at length confessed that she had, immediately on arriving at the concert-room, been terrified by a horrible vision which unceasingly presented itself to her sight. It seemed to her as though a naked corpse was lying on the floor at her feet; the features of the face were partly covered by a cloth mantle, but enough was apparent to convince her that the body was that of Sir J. Y. Every effort was made by her friends at the time to tranquillise her mind by representing the folly of allowing such delusions to prey upon her spirits, and she thus retired to bed; but on the following day the family received the tidings of Sir J. Y. having been drowned in Southampton River that very night by the oversetting of his boat, and the body was afterwards found entangled in a hoat-cloak. Here is an authentic case of second-sight, and of very recent date."

We find fi-om the Hampshire Telegraph that the fatal accident occurred at about 4 p.m., on May 5, 1831.

It will be seen that the accounts present a discrepancy in the name of the building where the vision was seen — the " Argyll Rooms," according to the older version, the " Hanover Square Rooms " according to the later. We find from the advertisements of the Morning Post that " the celebrated Russian Band " was that week giving daily concerts, at 3 p.m., at the Argyll Rooms; and from Crickley's Picture of London (1831), p. 93, we learn that "the Argyll Rooms, Regent Street, burnt down in the early part of last year, have been again restored to their former splendour. They are devoted to concerts, balls, and exhibitions, and are much frequented by persons of rank and fashion." It is therefore probable that Miss Manningham was present at the afternoon concert at these Rooms. The Hanover Square Rooms were also used for concerts at that time; and as the title " Argyll Rooms " has long ceased to suggest a high-class concert-hall, one easily sees how it may have been unconsciously replaced in the mind of our friend's parents by the more apparently suitable appellation.

The newspaper-account shows that the bodies of Sir J. Y., and of two friends who were drowned with him, were " completely enveloped in their cloaks and greatcoats "; and therefore the detail of the boat-cloak in the vision, if correct, is interesting; but as we do not know at what hand the older account is given, it is impossible to rely on such a point.

(600) From Mr. James Cox, (mentioned above, p. 235).

" Admiralty House, Queenstown.

"March 18th, 1884. "When I was serving in China in 1860, during the war, a military officer, who was serving there at the same time, while crossing Talienwhau Bay, was capsized and drowned. One of his brother officers informed me that at the time of the accident he distinctly saw his apparition while riding across the country.

550 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" I cannot now remember the names of these officers, as this happened more than 20 years ago. " James Cox."

In reply to the question whether he heard of the event immediately after its occurrence, Mr. Cox says: — "March 25th 1884.

" The fact of the officer in question having been capsized and drowned was known to us all, I think, on the day the sad event happened; as the fleet was anchored in the Bay of Talienwhau, and the troops were encamped on the shores of the Bay, so that the army and navy were in constant communication. But the next day, I believe, while I was returning from the camp, where I had been on a visit, the military officer who had seen the apparition spoke to me of it."

We find from Mr. R. Swinhoe's A Narrative of the North China Campaign in 1860, that the officer who was drowned, as described, was Lieutenant H. L. G. Gordon, of the Madras Engineers. His death took place on July 11th, 1860.

Sir Peter Lumsden, K.C.B., who was in the boat with Gordon, and Colonel W. H. Edgcome, R.E., who was in the Madras Engineers in China at the time, tell us that they never heard of the apparition.

[Mr. Cox is a careful informant; and the fact that he was on the spot, and heard of the incident immediately on its occurrence, seems to justify an exception to the rule of not admitting accounts from persons who had only a slight acquaintance with the original witness.]

(601) Mr. F. L. Brine, Finsbury Distillery, E.C., sent us a letter from his sister, Mrs. F., containing the following passage: —

"February 29th, 1884. " I remember, as if it were only yesterday, staying at the Miltons. It was Mr. Milton's custom to go into the cellar, to turn the gas off at the meter. When he came up he was looking unusually pale, and he said, ' Where is the scoundrel? ' Of course it frightened us, as we thought he meant a burglar; and he would not believe, for some time, that his son, Harry, was not having a game with him; as he saw him quite plainly in the cellar. A few weeks after, they had a letter from the captain of the ship, to say he died in Hobart Town Hospital, on the very night he appeared to his father. " g. f."

[Mrs. F. dislikes the subject, and we can obtain no further details from her. We have written to Hobart Town, to obtain a certificate of the death, but have not received it in time for insertion here.]

(602) From an article in Church Bells for March 20th, 1885, by the Rev. J. Foxley, Yicar of Market Weighton, Yorkshire.

" There is now living in the parish where we write — she was at church last Sunday — a widow now in her 78th year, but in full possession of all her faculties, who has more than once told us, with all the fulness of detail, and subject to all the cross-questioning which we could devise, how she was at service some miles from home during her father's last illness, and that one Thursday she felt unable to go on with her work, and after a while, about 1 o'clock, saw a vision of her father; that it turned out afterwards that her father died at that very time, and that just before his death he had been speaking of her; that a letter sent to inform her of his being worse failed to reach her; and that though she knew he was

ill, she was not aware that he was in immediate danger; but that she was so impressed with her vision that she set off home the Saturday following, and learnt^ on the way that her father was dead, and that his funeral was to take place that very day, so that she arrived only just in time. We have verified one subordinate part of the above narrative; for by reference to the parish register we find that the burial took place on the 31st of May, 1823; and as the Sunday letter for that year was E, which is the letter for the 1st of June, the burial turns out to have been, as stated, on a Saturday. Our informant was then, as shown by the register of her baptism, 25 years old."

In sending the above, Mr. Foxley writes, October 24th, 1884: — " The enclosed cutting from Clnirch Bells has the advantage of having been read over to Mrs. Pollard, and accepted by her as a faithful statement of what occurred to her. She was buried here, February 14th, 1884. She could read well. The ' 1 o'clock ' mentioned was in the day-trme. I recollect her mentioning dinner-tune. The place was some out-building, I think a summer-house, but of that I am not certain. She always told the story under the impression that she was wide awake."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Foxley adds: —

" I cannot recollect whether she said she mentioned the apparition to anyone before the news of the death arrived. But she told me that the apparition was one cause, if not the cause, of her asking leave to go home to see her father. I cannot say in whose service she was.

" All I can add is, that I cross-questioned Mrs. Pollard repeatedly, in every way I could think of, and that I could not shake her story. But then she may have told it so many times that it had become truth to her, like George the Fourth's presence at the battle of Waterloo."

[Here the impression seems!o have been so vivid as to prompt a very decided line of action. But on the other hand, the percipient was probably in anxiety as to her father's condition, which diminishes the improbability that her hallucination was purely subjective.]

(603) From Mr. Norris, (Barrister), Dalkey, Ireland. The account was written down before 1868: we received it in 1882.

"In or about 1850, and for some years previous and subsequent, there lived at Hampton Court, near Douglas, Isle of Man, a gentleman named Abbott with a family, consisting of Mrs. Abbott, five daughters, and one son. Mr. Abbott being fond of the sea, kept a small yacht, but particularly desired his son never to go out in it without his permission. About the time above mentioned, while he was himself absent in Dublin, his son obtained his mother's permission, and with two young companions crossed the Channel to Kirkcudbright on the opposite Scottisla shore. On Mr. Abbott's return, he was annoyed to find the boys had gone out without taking a sailor with them, and this annoyance was not lessened by the receipt of a letter saying they could not return until they received a remittance. Mr. Abbott at once went into Douglas, a distance of four or five miles, and posted a letter to his son with the necessary enclosure. He had scarcely done so when, turning round, he saw his son at the opposite side of the

1 At a wayside inn, now a cottage, at Arras, on the Beverley-road, about three miles from Market Weighton, but in the parish. — J. F.

552 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

narrow street, looking at him with a very sorrowful expression. Just at that moment he was too much annoyed to speak to him, so he went home and told Mrs. Abbott that he had had all his trouble for nothing as John was in Douglas. He added that he was too much annoyed to take any notice of him, but he supposed he would be in for dinner. In vain they waited. At the very time, his father (from whose lips I had the story) saw him in Douglas he was drowned in Kirkcudbright Bay by the upsetting of his boat. This was about noon or a little earlier. I know not whether Mr. Abbott be now alive, nor can I give the address of any of his family; but he told me the story as I have stated it, with his own lips.

"Thomas J. Norms."

Mrs. Tandy, a daughter of Mr. Norris, writes to us from 1, Tempe Terrace, Dalkey, Ireland, that she was 14 at the time of this occurrence, and perfectly remembers hearing Mr. Abbott's account of it. She then narrates it just as it is given above.

[We have failed to find any newspaper-account of this accident; and the death was not registered — registration in those days not being compulsory. But we learn from the collector of H.M. Customs at Douglas, and from the sexton at Kirkcudbright, that several residents at these places remember the event.]

(604) From the Rev. R. L. Loughborough, Pirton Vicarage, Hitchin.

"January 25th, 1884.

" I was visiting a poor woman, Mrs. Abbiss, far gone in consumption, and wishing to draw her thoughts to the certainty of approaching death, I asked her certain questions about her relations and her mother. I had no sooner named her mother than she exclaimed, ' Ah, sir, there was a strange thing happened at the time of mother's death; but I'm thinking you would hardly believe me if I were to tell it ye.' 'I do not know,' I said, ' I hear of too many strange things to be much surprised at what you could tell me, or to doubt the truth of what you may say.' 'Well, sir, the truth of it was this. I was but a girl at the time, and mother being very ill, suffering from the same complaint as mine, we had a woman to help me. Mother kept her bed. And one morning when we had made her comfortable and given her her breakfast, we thought she seemed a little better, and came down stairs to have our breakfast; but, sir, we hadn't sat very long before the door opened, and in came father looking all skeered like, and sat himself down in that very chair where you are now sitting. " Oh, father," I said, " how jom fritted me, what's the matter?" "How's mother?" he said. "Why, we gave her her breakfast, and she seemed quite comfortable like when we left her not many minutes since." " Then run and see how she is now." I went up, and would you believe it, sir, we found mother was dead 1 When I asked father what made him come up in that frightened way, he said, " Why, I

was hoeing in Mr. W.'s field, and just as S clock was striking 9, I

see your mother standing at the end of my hoe. I was struck all of a heap like, and threw down my hoe, and ran home as fast as I could." '

" The father's name was John Wilson. You may place the fullest reliance on the narrative, as my impression is still most vivid as to the whole circumstance of the relation. The poor woman was well known to me from my frequent visits. She was too simple-minded to romance upon

the matter, and there was a sort of dramatic earnestness in her manner as she told me, which convinced me that she realised again the strange look of her father when he returned to inquire about his wife.

" R. Lindsay Loughborough."

Mr. Loughborough has ascertained from the Register that Mrs. Wilson died in January, 1850, aged 41; her husband in January, 1853, aged 48; and Mrs. Abbiss in September, 1856, aged 32. He thinks it most probable that Mrs. Abbiss gave him the account in the early summer of 1856. She must have been at least 25 (though she says " but a girl ") at the time of the incident.

[The evidence is of the same class as in case 597, Mrs. Abbiss having been a witness of the unusual demeanour of her father, due to the vision — though she did not actually hear the vision described — before the fact of the death was known to him.]

(605) From Mrs. Laurie, Fiesole, Bathwick Hill, Bath. We owe this case, in the first instance, to Mr. G. J. Romanes, F.R.S., who sent us a letter containing an account which Mrs. Laurie had dictated in June, 1883; but the following account, dictated in 1885 to Mr. L. G. Fry, of Goldney House, Clifton, is a little fuller.

" General Kennett was travelling home to his wife, who was staying in some part of India, from Bombay, and was intending to break the journey for a week at my husband's (Mr. Laurie) house at Baroda. He declined to sleep in the house, saying that he would have his tent pitched near, and preferred it, as cooler. Next morning, however, he came in in a very agitated state, saying that he hoped we would excuse him, and that he had ordered his tent to be struck, as he intended to resume his journey immediately When we asked what was the matter, he replied that his wife had appeared to him, saying that if he did not return home immediately he would never see her alive. I suggested that it was a dream, but he said ' No,' he had really seen her. My husband said ' Well, General, I am sorry you're going, I hope you'll find her quite well.' General Kennett started immediately, and on arriving home he wrote to us stating that she was dead, and that he found her in the dress in which he had seen her in his tent She died a few minutes before his arrival, and therefore four or five days after the vision — as he had a long distance to travel. When he had left his wife, she appeared in good health, and he had no message to say she was ill. The fact that he found her dressed would seem to suggest that she died very suddenly.

" Caroline Emma Laurie."

General Kennett and Mr. Laurie are both deceased.

[This is, of course, a very inconclusive case; for the dress may probably have been a familiar one; and if the death was so sudden that no premonitory symptoms had been felt four or five days before, there would be no strong reason for regarding the vision as telepathic rather than as a purely subjective hallucination. But the death was not by an accident— it at any rate took place from some morbid physical cause; and it' must not be forgotten that the approach of death from such a cause may conceivably be discerned in a way which is out of the range of consciousness as we understand it. (See Vol. I., p. 231.) ]

554 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

(606) The following letter was published in the Banner of Light of January, 1878. We wrote to make inquiries of the writer, Mr. Alwis, but have since been informed by the Colonial Office that he died in 1878.

"Colombo, Ceylon. "It was a fine, clear evening, many years ago, a day after I had gone to Negombo, to act for Mr. John Selby as District Judge of that place, that I joined that gentleman at a game of cricket. We finished our game, and were, in the dusk of the evening, coming to the Government House, where we all lived, when Mr. Selby, who was behind us, came rushing past us, and beckoned me to come fast. He was rather excited, and desired me to be good enough to consult my watch and tell him the time. I did so. He then sat down at my writing-table, took a sheet of note-paper, and wrote down, 'My wife died IS minutes to 6 o'clock ' (month, (fee, which I forget). This slip of paper he put into an envelope, sealed it, and got me and another gentleman then present to put our signatures to the fact therein stated. We did so. And he then explained to us that his wife, who had been long ill in England, had appeared to him at the time above indicated, under the shadow of the big banian, and that he had not the slightest doubt that she had died at that hour, and that it was her spirit ^ which he had seen. In consequence of this persuasion, Mr. Selby, who was to leave Ceylon in a few days for England, postponed his trip for a short time. And when the mail had arrived, a month or more after the date above given, he showed me his private letters, and they fully confirmed the prediction of his wife's death, within a few hours, as I remember, of the time he stated he had seen his wife under the tree. u j^j^j^s Alwis."

Mr. S. C. Obeyesekere writes to us from Colombo, on July 18, 1885: —

" You are correctly informed as to my being a son-in-law of the late Hon. James Alwis. On inquiry from Mrs. Alwis and several of his friends, I learn that the extract from the report appearing in the Banner of Light forwarded to me is substantially correct, and accords with their recollection of Mr. Alwis' account to them of the incident referred to in it.

" Both Mr. John Selby and his brother, Henry Collingwood, who was Queen's Advocate of Ceylon, are dead, and I do not know whether there are any relations of theirs in the Island, except a son-in-law of Thos. H. C. Selby — Mr. Frank Byrde, of Avissawelle. Mrs. Selby [i.e., Mrs. H. C. Selby]. I believe, is still alive at Bath, in England, and you might get some information from her about what you refer to. The other gentleman who, with Mr. Alwis, witnessed Mr. Selby's memoranda, I am informed, was a Mr. Macartney, of the Police, who is also dead.

" Mr. Alwis acted for Mr. Selby as District Judge of Negombo from 13th April to 24th May, 1863. [We have received confirmation of this fact from the Colonial Office.]

" I have not succeeded in tracing out any written memoranda of the event at the time of Mr. Alwis; if I do succeed in tracing them out, I shall with pleasure forward you their copy. << g q Obeyesekbee."

^ As regards this word, which occurs again in the introductory paragraph to the following case, see p. 48, note.

Mrs. H. C. Selby writes to us, from 2, Yale Yiew, London Road, Bath, on May 28, 1886:—

" We have heard of the circumstances to which you refer, with regard to Mr. John Selby; but not having seen him when he was in England, after the death of his wife, we are unable to give you any information."

Mr. Frank Byrde has kindly written to us, saying that the account given " substantially agrees " with what he had heard before, but that he has no written record of the incident. He has also given us the means of tracing-Mrs. John Selby's death, which took place, as the Register shows, on May 14, 1864. The month, it will be seen, agrees with the above evidence; but the year there given is 1863. The mistake, if it be one, probably occurs in some record to which Mr. Obeyesekere and the officials of the Colonial Office both had access; but possibly Mr. Alwis acted as substitute for Mr. J. Selby more than once.

(607) The following case was reported by the late Serjeant Cox to the Psychological Society, in February, 1879, on the authority of Surgeon Harris, of the Royal Artillery; who, with two of his daughters (one of whom became Serjeant Cox's wife), was a witness of the occurrence. The narrative has been already published in a book called Spirits before our Eyes, by W. H. Harrison, pp. 64-5.

" A party of children, sons and daughters of the officers of Artillery stationed at Woolwich, were playing in the garden. Suddenly a little girl screamed, and stood staring with an aspect of terror at a willow tree there. Her companions gathered round, asking what ailed her. ' Oh! ' she said, ' there — there. Don't you see. There's papa lying on the ground, and the blood running from a big wound.' All assured her that they could see nothing of the kind. But she persisted, describing the wound and the position of the body, still expressing her surprise that they did not see what she saw so plainly. Two of her companions were daughters of my informant (one of the surgeons of the regiment), whose house adjoined the garden. They called their father, who at once came to the spot. He found the child in a state of extreme terror and agony, took her into his house, assuring her that it was only a ' fancy,' and having given her restoratives, sent her home. The incident was treated by all as what the doctor had called it, and no more was thought of it. News from India, where the child's father was stationed, was in those days slow in coming. But the arrival of the mail in due course brought the information that the father of the child had been killed by a shot, and died under a tree. Making allowance for difference in the counting of time, it was found to have been about the moment when the daughter had the vision at Woolwich."

[If here, as in so many other of the second-hand cases, the details and the alleged accuracy of the coincidence must be doubted, the main fact of a striking coincidence of the sort alleged may still be reasonably accepted as probable.]

I have more than once spoken of nautical evidence as likely to be coloured by superstition, or modified and exaggerated in the way natural to oft-repeated " yarns." But it may be reasonably supposed that the first-hand witnesses in the two following cases really had

556 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

some such experience as is described, and that the coincidence was not a pure invention.

(608 and 609) From Mr. William Dunlop, Engineer, care of Messrs. Windsor, Redlock, and Co., Bangkok, Siam.

"Feb. 17th, 1883.

" A relation of mine, named Richard Jones, was apprentice pilot in the Mersey. One day he boarded an inward bound vessel, and took charge. The captain of the vessel was sick, and the mate had command; he seemed to be very low-spirited, and would hardly answer my cousin when he spoke to him. They walked the deck in silence for a long time, when at last the mate suddenly asked my cousin what sort of weather they had had about the coast for the last month or so. My cousin said the weather had been very bad. The mate then asked if my cousin knew anything about a certain brig; he answered that he did, but that he wished to know why the question was put. The mate then said: ' My brother was captain of that vessel, and I'm uneasy about him, because, as we were coming down the Mediterranean this trip, I saw my brother aboard of this craft. At 8 bells (noon) I went below to dinner; when I came on deck again I took a look up to windward to see what the weather was like, and, standing close against the bulwarks I saw my brother. I went over to him, but as I got close to him he disappeared. I turned round and saw him on the other side of the deck; I went towards him with my arms stretched out; when I got near him I made a sudden clasp at him, but he disappeared again.' My cousin asked the mate to give him the date of this appearance; the mate did so, and my cousin answered, ' On that day, and as near as I can judge, at the same hour, your brother's brig was lost with all hands.' "

[We discovered a recent address of Mr. (now Captain) Richard Jones; but he had left, and we have been unable to trace him.]

"From the 7th of October, 1867, till the 14th April, 1871, I was shipmate with Mr. F. L. Murphy, aboard the ss. ' Riga,' of Leith, of which vessel he was second oificer. Mr. Murphy, in spite of his name, was an Englishman; he belonged to the middle class, was very well educated, but very superstitious. Never mind that, he was as truthful as man could be, hated lies and liars, and no man could be braver. His death showed what manner of man he was, for when the ss. ' Hong Kong ' was lost in the Red Sea about 8 years ago, he gave his place in the boat to another man and stayed on the wreck, well knowing that it was death to do so. The other man had a family. Murphy had none, so he sacrificed himself.

"I think it was somewhere about the year 1863, that Murphy was before the mast on board the ' Sultana ' of South Shields, on the run home from Bombay to England. Ofi' the Cape of Good Hope they were running with dirty weather, and towards nightfall it looked very nasty, so the captain determined to heave to. At 8 bells it was all hands to close reef the main topsail. Now when a man is bearing a hand to reef a main topsail, with something like a gale of wind blowing, he has not much chance to fall a-dreaming. If you have been to sea you know what it is; if you have not, just fancy yourself some 70 or 80 feet up in the air, swung from port to starboard, from starboard to port like a stone in a sling, with

the great sail slatting and thundering below you. Well, Murphy was aloft fisting the sail, when he happened to look forward, and saw someone on the fore topsail yard. He shouted to the man next him, ' Who's that on the fore topsail yard % ' His mate gave a look forward and answered, ' Why, there's no one there, we're all on the yard here.' Murphy looked along the main topsail yard and counted the hands; sure enough they were all there. He looked forward again, and saw that the man on the fore topsail yard was his cousin Stevens, who was in England at the time. When the ship was brought to the wind. Murphy, before turning in, entered in his private log the date and hour of the apparition.

" On arriving in England he found that his cousin had died on the same day he appeared aboard the ' Sultana,' but between the hour of his death and the hour of the apparition, there was a difference for which the longitude did not account."

[The last sentence may be taken as in some measure an indication of accuracy in the narrative.]

(610) From Mr. Francis Dart Fenton, formerly in the native department of the Government, Auckland, New Zealand. He gave the account in writing to his friend. Captain J. H. Crosse, of Monkstown, Cork, from whom we received it. In 1852, when the incident occurred, Mr. Fenton was " engaged in forming a settlement on the banks of the Waikato."

"March 25th, 1860.

" Two sawyers, Frank Philps and Jack Mulholland, were engaged cutting timber for the Rev. R. Maunsell, at the mouth of the Awaroa creek, a very lonely place, a vast swamp, no people within miles of them. As usual they had a Maori with them to assist in felling trees. He came from Tihorewam, a village on the other side of the river about 6 miles off. As Frank and the native were cross-cutting a tree, the native stopped suddenly and said, ' What are you come for % ' looking in the direction of Frank. Frank replied, ' What do you mean *? ' He said, ' I am not speaking to you 5 I am speaking to my brother.' Frank said, ' Where is he? ' The native replied, ' Behind you. What do you want 1 ' (to the other Maori). Frank looked round and saw nobody; the native no longer saw anyone, but laid down the saw and said, ' I shall go across the river; my brother is dead.' Frank laughed at him and reminded him that he had left him quite well on Sunday (five days before), and there had been no communication since. The Maori spoke no more, but got into his canoe and pulled across. When he arrived at the landing-place, he met people coming to fetch him. His brother had just died; I knew him well."

In answer to inquiries as to his authority for this narrative, Mr. Fenton writes to us:

"December 18th, 1883. " I knew all the parties concerned well, and it is quite true, valeat quantum, as the lawyers say. Incidents of this sort are not infrequent among the Maoris.

"F. D. Fenton,

" Late Chief Judge, Native Law Court of New Zealand." This case, if" faithfully reported, is an interesting example,

558 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

vouched for by an educated European, of telepathy occurring among an uncivilised people.

§ 5. I will conclude this chapter with three cases, which are respectively one, two, and three centuries old, but of which the first and second, at any rate, may fairly receive an evidential number.

(611) From the Life of Mrs. Mary Fletcher, by Henry Moore (1818), Vol. I., pp. 208-209 — an extract from Mrs. Fletcher's diary.

" October, 1784. — As I was retired this morning at my 10 o'clock hour, I was called down to Mary G. She gave me a strange account which I shall insert as she related it: — A short time ago, she said, she was one day going out to work in the fields, but thought she would first go upstairs to prayer. While on her knees, praising God for the care He had taken of her children, she was amazed to see her eldest son, about 21 years of age, standing before her! She started up — but thought, ' Maybe it is the enemy to affright me from prayer.' Casting her eyes up again to the same spot, she still saw him there; on which she ran down into the kitchen, calling on the name of the Lord. Still, wherever she looked, she saw him standing before her, pale, and as if covered with dirt. Concluding from this that he was killed, she ran to her mother, who, on hearing the account, went directly to the pit, determined to have him home if alive. On her drawing near the pit, she heard a great tumult; for the earth had fallen in on him and two other men, and the people were striving to dig them out. At length he was got up alive and well, and came home to his mother pale and dirty, just as she had seen him! She then fell on her knees, and began praising that God who hears and answers prayer."

(612) From The World of Spirits, by R. Baxter (1691), pp. 147-151. Abridgment of a letter to Baxter from Mr. Thomas Tilson, Minister of Ay les worth, in Kent.^

"July 6th, 1691.

" Mary, the wife of John Goffe, of Rochester, being afflicted with a long illness, removed to her father's house at West Mulling, which was about 9 miles distant from her own; there she died, June 4th, 1691.

" The day before her departure she grew impatiently desirous to see her two children, whom she had left at home, to the care of a nurse. She prayed her husband to hire a horse, for she must go home to die with her children.

" Between 1 and 2 o'clock in the morning she fell into a trance. One widow Turner, who watched with her that night, says that her eyes were open and fixed, and her jaw fallen; she put her hand on her mouth and nostrils, but coukl perceive no breath; she thought her to be in a fit, and doubted whether she was alive or dead. The next day this dying woman told her mother that she had been at home with her children. ' That is

' -:^ This letter, which must be presumed to be correctly quoted, cannot be impugned on the ground of Baxter's own credulity and prejudice in respect of many of the matters dealt with in his book; as to which see Hutchinson's excellent remarks, historical Essay concerning Witchcraft (London, 1720), pp. 79-101.

impossible,' said the mother, ' for you have been here in bed all the while.' ' Yes,' replied the other, ' but I was with them last night while I was asleep.'

" The nurse at Rochester, widow Alexander by name, affirms and says she will take her oath of it, before a magistrate, and receive the sacrament upon it, that a little before 2 o'clock that morning she saw the likeness of the said Mary Goffe come out of the next chamber (where the elder child lay in a bed by itself, the door being left open), and stood by her bedside for about a quarter of an hour; the younger child was there lying by her; her eyes moved, and her mouth went, but she said nothing. The nurse, moreover, says that she was perfectly awake; it was then daylight, being one of the longest days in the year. She sat up in her bed, and looked steadfastly upon the apparition; at that time she heard the bridge clock strike 2, and a while after said, ' In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, what art thou? ' Thereupon the appearance removed and went away; she slipped on her clothes and followed, but what became of it she cannot tell. Then, and not before, she began to be grievously affrighted, and went out of doors, and walked upon the wharf (the house is just by the river-side) for some hours, only going in now and then to look at the children. At 5 o'clock she went to a neighbour's and knocked at the door, but they would not rise; at 6 she went again, then they rose and let her in. She related to them all that had passed; they would persuade her she was mistaken, or dreamt; but she confidently affirmed, ' If ever I saw her in all my life, I saw her this night.'

" One of those to whom she made the relation (Mary, the wife of J. Sweet) had a messenger who came from Mulling that forenoon, to let her know her neighbour Goffe was dying, and desired to speak with her; she went over the same day, and found her just departing. The mother, amongst other discourses, related to her how much her daughter had longed to see her children, and said she had seen them. This brought to Mrs. Sweet's mind what the nurse had told her that morning; for, till then, she had not thought fit to mention it, but disguised it rather, as the woman's disturbed imagination.

" The substance of this I had related to me by John Carpenter, the father of the deceased, the next day after the burial — July 2. I fully discoursed the matter with the nurse and two neighbours, to whose house she went that morning.

" Two days after, I had it from the mother, the minister that was with her in the evening, and the woman who sat up with her last that night. They all agree in the same story, and every one helps to strengthen the other's testimony.

" They all appear to be sober, intelligent persons, far enough off from designing to impose a cheat upon the world, or to manage a lie; and what temptation they should lie under for so doing I cannot conceive.

"Thomas Tilson."

[This case may possibly have been reciprocal; but proof is lacking that the dying woman's sense of having seen her children was anything but purely subjective.^ See p. 1 56.]

1 Mr. Tilson's case finds a curiously close parallel in the following narrative, abridged from the words of the late Mrs. Charles Fox, of Trebah, Falmouth, (a lady well known to Mr. Myers,) who had heard the account from one of the percipients. The Fox family

560 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

Theodore A. D'Aubigne, in his Histoire Universelle (1616-20), Vol. II., p. 143, relates the following incident, as told to him privately by the King of Navarre.

" Le Roi estant en Avignon, le 23 Decembre, 1574, y mourut Charles, Cardinal de Lorraine.... J'afferme sur la parole du Roi le second prodige [the first was a violent storm].... c'est que la Roine [Catherine di Medici] s'estait mise au lit de meilleure heure que de coustume, aiant a son coucher entr' autres personnes de marque le Roi de Navarre, I'Archevesque de Lyon, les Dames de Rets, de Lignerolles et de Saunes, deux desquelles ont confirm^ ce discours; comme elle estait pressee de donner le bon soir, elle se jetta d'un tressaut sur son chenet, met les mains audevant de son visage, et avec un cri violent appella a son secours ceux qui I'assistoient, leur voulant monstrer au pied du lit le Cardinal, qui lui tendoit la main, elle s'escriant plusieurs fois, ' Monsieur le Cardinal, je n'ai que faire avec vous '; le Roi de Navarre envoie au mesme temps un de ses gentils hommes au logis du Cardinal, qui rapporta comment il avoit expir^ au mesme point."

[The Queen was probably aware that the Cardinal's death, of which she had been very desirous, was imminent.]

was one in which such a tradition as this would be likely to be soberly preserved; but the youth of the original witness, and the loss of the contemporary records, make it impossible to reckon the case as evidence.

" In 1739 Mrs. Birkbeck, wife of William Birkbeck, banker, of Settle, and a member of the Society of Friends, was taken ill and died at Cockermouth, while returning from a journey to Scotland, which she had undertaken alone — her husband and three children, aged seven, five, and four years respectively, remaining at Settle. The friends at whose house the death occurred made notes of every circumstance attending Mrs. Birkbeck's last hours, so that the accuracy of the several statements as to time as well as place was beyond the doubtfulness of man's memory, or of any even unconscious attempt to bring them into agreement with each other.

" One morning, between 7 and 8 o'clock, the relation to whom the care of the children of Settle had been entrusted, and who kept a minute journal of all that concerned them, went into their bedroom as usual, and found them all sitting up in their beds in great excitement and delight. ' Mamma has been here! ' they cried, and the little one said, ' She called, " Come Esther! " ' Nothing could make them doubt the fact, and it was carefully noted down, to entertain the mother on her return home. That same morning, as their mother lay on her dying bed at Cockermouth, she said, ' I should be ready to go if I could but see my children.' She then closed her eyes, to reopen them, as they thought, no more. But after 10 minutes of perfect stillness she looked up brightly and said, ' I am ready now; I have been with my children '; and then at once peacefully passed away. When the notes taken at the two places were compared, the day, hour, and minutes were the same.

" One of the three children was my grandmother, nee Sarah Birkbeck, afterwards the wife of Dr. Fell, of Ulverston. From her lips I heard the above almost literally as I have repeated it. The eldest was Morris Birkbeck, afterwards of Guildford. Both these lived to old age, and retained to the last so solemn and reverential a remembrance of the circumstance that they rarely would speak of it. Esther, the youngest, died soon after. Her brother and sister heard the child say that her mother called her, but could not speak with any certainty of having themselves heard the words, nor were sensible of more than their mother's standing there and looking on them."

VI.]



Chapter VI. Auditoky and Tactile Cases.

§ 1. Most of the following cases are on jfirst-hand testimony; but some of them are remote in date; in some a certain amount of anxiety may have predisposed the percipient to hallucination; and in others the degree of exactitude in the coincidence is not certainly established. I will give first a group where the impression was of distinct words.

(613) From Mr. M. P. Stephenson, 8, Southfield Road, Gotham, Bristol.

"January 31st, 1884.

" On or about the 11th November, 1882, I was awakened by two or three knocks at my bedroom door,i and a voice called, ' Pa! pa! ' I called out, ' Who's there 1 ' but no answer came. (I was sleeping alone, as my wife was ill, and slept in an adjoining room with a daughter.) At breakfast I inquired if either of them had called me; they had not done so. ' Then,' said I ' someone else did, and I fear we shall have bad news from New Zealand,' where our two sons were living.

" I awaited anxiously the arrival of the next mail, which came in the middle of December, and then we had what I believed to be the solving of the mystery. Our eldest son, on the 21st October, 1882, was going to see his son at Pahnerston, a town some 60 or 70 miles from Dunedin, and midway the train got off the line; some carriages were smashed. He was severely shaken, but felt nothing seriously the matter until two days after the mishap, on his return home. He was taken with cold shivering, and the doctors said they were afraid of erysipelas and blood-poisoning setting in. Such was the account of the case in our first letter. We looked with great concern for the next mail which was due on the 2nd January, 1883, although in my own mind I seemed sure he was dead; and on Christmas Day I said to a friend, who dined with us, that I believed he had been in his grave six weeks, which was the fact. The news came that our son died on the 11th of November and was buried on the 14th.

" M. P. Stephenson."

1 Where the rousing from sleep is as sudden as this, an impression which follows it may perhaps fairly be reckoned a waking experience.

VOL. II. 2 o

562 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

"We find from the obituary of the Bristol Mercury and Daily Post that Mr. Stephenson's son died in New Zealand on November 11, 1882.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Stephenson adds: —

" I have been very sorry that I did not make a note of the exact time of the voice and raps at my bedroom door. I have been trying to calculate it exactly, but my experience of memory is that in old age we can recollect things that occurred 50 or 60 years ago more distinctly than events which happened two or three months back. My firm impression is that what I heard was about 6 o'clock in the morning of the 11th November, and his death took place at 11 or 12 o'clock on the 11th, New Zealand time. I have searched for the letter which stated the time, but have not been able to find it."

[If Mr. Stephen-son is right as to the day of his experience, and as to the hour of the death, the sounds followed the death by 5 or 6 hours. In an interview with Mr. Podmore, he stated that both his wife and daughter clearly remember the incident; but on religious grounds they decline to give written testimony.]

(614) From Mr. and Mrs. Roberts, of New Berlin, Chenango Co., New York. " March, 1884.

" During the Civil War in America a young man of the name of George Roberts enlisted on the Union side. He was with those troops when Port Hudson, Louisiana, was attacked, and in an assault made upon that place on Sunday, June 14th, 1863, he was killed. He fell about 10 o'clock that morning.

" His parents, living in Chenango Co., State of New York, knew that he was in the neighbourhood of Port Hudson, and that there might be a battle some time, but nothing more.

" On Sunday, June 14th, 1863, Mrs. Roberts was getting ready for church, and the first bell that rings a quarter before 10 had just ceased, when Mrs. R. heard George's voice calling to her, ' Mother! Mother! ' It was perfectly distinct and clear, as though in the room. The fright and conviction of her son's death afiected her so much that she became ill.

" Shortly after this, came the news of the death of George before Port Hudson, at the very hour that his mother heard his voice in her room calling her.

"These statements are correct, as they occurred, June 14th, 1863.

"Jonathan Roberts. " Martha Roberts."

The Rev. R. Whittingham, of Pikesville, Maryland, a Corresponding Member of the S.P.R., who procured this narrative for us, vouches for Mr. and Mrs. Roberts as " extremely respectable, worthy, well-to-do people "; and says: —

" I know Mr. Roberts said that his son was shot just at 10 o'clock; for he spoke to me of his having a strange feeling of someone being behind hira in the church tower as he was ringing the first bell at, or for, 10 o'clock, and he said that was the hour that George was shot. This being

only a feeling, or impression, on his part, I did not think it worth mentioning, as it could be easily imagined afterward; but it fixed the time of George's death on my memory. That was the solitary instance of hallucination that they have ever experienced. They are by no means imaginative or credulous in temperament or habit."

[If the coincidence here was as close as is alleged, the case is of some weight, even though the mother's mind may have been to some extent preoccupied with the thought of her son.]

(615) Extract from a paragraph in the Times of Sept. 11, 1876, which recorded the funeral, at Aleppo, of Mr. George Smith, the eminent Assyriologist.

" A most striking coincidence may here be mentioned without comment. A young German Assyriologist of the highest promise. Dr. Friedrich Delitzsch, is now, for the second time, in this country, having been sent, as on his former visit, by the King of Saxony to study the arrow-headed inscriptions in the British Museum. During his former stay here last year, which was noticed at the time in our columns, Dr. Delitzsch and Mr. George Smith naturally became fast friends, and the Leipzig savant and his brother Hermann were chosen by Mr. Smith to introduce to German readers his Chaldean Account of Genesis, which has accordingly just been published at Leipzig under their joint editorship.

