Mr. Conquest has antedated his experience by some months, as we find from the Register of Births that his friend's daughter was born on July 9, 1870. In conversation he informed me that he had had no idea of the impending event; and also that he does not dream much. Mrs. Daniel described to me the place where she and her brother were standing when he told her of the dream, and the arrival of the post immediately afterwards.

(482) From Mrs. Paramore, 43, Shaftesbury Road, W.

"March, 1884.

" On the night of the 21st March, 1871, I woke from some distressing dream, sobbing. My husband [since deceased] inquired what was the matter. I told him I had had such a dreadful dream, something about my Aunt Baker, but I could not remember any particulars. Towards morning, I think about 5 o'clock, I woke up again in great distress from a similar, though more vivid, dream — -something still connected with my Aunt Baker; but I told my husband I had received two letters, blackbordered. When I got up, I felt unusually depressed, and kept saying to my husband I could not shake ofi" a dreadful feeling of wretchedness; as I was nearly always in excellent spirits, he was surprised, but our astonishment was inexpressible when the post brought me two black-edged letters, both in the handwriting of my Uncle Hubert Hutchings, my Aunt Baker's brother. The envelopes were numbered 1 and 2 — the latter I have found with the letters amongst my papers. No. 1 contained the intelligence of my aunt's illness, of which until then I was unaware. The other one, written shortly after, told me of her death. My husband and myself were greatly impressed with this extraordinary circumstance — for I never attached the slightest importance to dreams; but this was undeniably a mysterious coincidence."

Mrs. Paramore sent the two letters — ^concerning respectively the illness and death — for our inspection. Both were dated the same day, 21st March, 1871, and the black-edged cover in which one of them was enclosed bore a dated stamp-impression of that day.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Paramore writes on March 23, 1884: — " I do not at this distant date actually remember as to whether the two letters were black-bordered or not, but I distinctly dreamt they had reference to my aunt, whose illness and death were announced the following morning in the two letters I sent you. Whilst dressing, I frequently remarked (before the post came in) to my husband how wretched I felt about my dream, and that it was something about my Aunt Baker. I do

446 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

not remember any other very distressing dreams that have or have not come true. "Leonoea E. Paramoee."

In conversation Mrs. Paramore dwelt on the quite unique feeling of distress which followed the dream. As to the particular feature of repetition, see Vol. I., pp. 357-8, and below pp. 700-1.

(483) From Mr. E. W. Phibbs, 84, Pembroke Road, Clifton, Bristol.

"February 10th, 1885.

" In 1856, living in Manchester, where I carried on the business of silk and cotton manufacturer, I dreamed one night I saw a sheet of paper with a written order upon it, unimportant in itself, from a house which was in the daily habit of sending me orders— A. and S. Henry and Co. As I saw it, it looked like a sheet of wet paper without any surroundings, covered with writing. When I got to my place of business, about halfpast 9, my partner, who was always there before me, remarked that he had a curious (from its insignificance) order from A. and S. Henry and Co. I said, ' Before showing it me, give me a sheet of paper,' on which I wrote out a part of the order — the upper portion — and remarked, ' I can't repeat what is below, because it is smeared in the copying-press.' He looked at me very much surprised, and produced the original, showing that it was identical with my description.

" Thinking over the matter for some weeks, a difficulty presented itself in the thought that, at the moment when I dreamed I saw it, the order would be folded in an envelope, and not be an open sheet. Also, why should the sheet appear wet? At last I questioned the writer of the order, without giving him any reasons, and on asking him to describe the daily procedure of the business of writing such orders out, he answered that, when he had written a number of such orders the last thing at night, he gave them to the copying clerk, who was in the unusual practice of leaving all these orders in the copying-book in the press all night. The first thing the following morning, these would be put in envelopes and distributed through the town. This at once explains the open and damp sheet of my dream.

" The order began in the ordinary form — ' Order for (500) pieces,' &c. The words written down (before seeing the actual order) contained all that was extraordinary in it. The smeared portion only contained further particulars. " E. W. Phibbs."

Mr. Phibbs' partner is dead. But Mr. Phibbs has forwarded to us a letter, written to him on Feb. 18, 1886, by Mr. Fitzgerald, of 34, Marble Street, Manchester, who heard of the occurrence at the time, completely confirming the above account; and Mr. J. Lang writes, from the Manchester Examiner and Times office, to the same efiect.

In August, 1883, Mr. Phibbs had another curious dream, of seeing his dog, who was not with him where he was staying, dying under a wall; and Mrs. Phibbs confirms the fact that this dream was narrated to her immediately. It turned out that the event had taken place, and that the dog was buried, by persons who were in some degree responsible for the accident that led to its death, at (apparently) the hour of the dream. But the dog was fond of climbing, and the case can hardly be numbered as evidential.

I may conclude, in this connection, with the following complicated

case, the value of which it is difficult to estimate, but which at least has a decided suggestion of genuine telepathy for anyone who believes in the reality of that influence.

(484) From a lady who thinks that to allow the publication of her name would involve a breach of confidence. She is a scrupulously conscientious witness..^^.

"1884.

"I make the following story as short as possible, suppressing many details, and, of course, entirely changing the names of those concerned. Miss Black, with whom I have been most intimate for many years, became much interested in a Mrs. Gray. Although Miss Black and I are so in sympathy that I may call our interests mutual, I, from the first, took an unaccountable dislike to this particular friendship; so much so that, although I was always told when the friends met, no personal details were ever told me. I never heard Mrs. Gray or her husband described; I

never saw her writing. I believed her name to be, which is that of

her daughter.

"At the end of nearly three years I received an anonymous letter, written in a hand evidently meant to be disguised, asking me to give the writer some particulars of the disposal of Miss Black's property. The reply was to be addressed to certain initials at a Post-office. I did not reply. A short time a^fter, I dreamt that I stood looking over the

shoulder of a lady writing a letter, and that she signed herself '

Gray.' The room door opened and a tall old man came in, and the writer hastily put the letter away. Two days after, I received a second anonymous letter of the same purport, which I did not answer. I dreamt the same thing again. Soon after (I forget how many days), a third letter reached me, begging that I would never let Miss Black know what had passed. I then wrote, saying the letters were destroyed, and that from me Miss B. would never hear of the matter. A month or two after this, while staying at my home, Miss B. and I were at church. An old man sat near us who struck me as extremely like the figure I had seen in my dreams. Miss B. whispered, ' That is so like Major Gray.' This impressed me very much, and I afterwards found out that Mrs. Gray's name is

, not, as I had supposed; also that she has a great quantity

of almost white hair, which I have omitted to say was the only thing I very distinctly saw about my dream-lady, as her face was hidden from me.

" In the course of her visit. Miss Black said, ' It seems to me your dislike to Mrs. Gray has taken a more definite form; you know something about her.' I denied the knowledge, all being surmise, and I being most anxious that Miss B. should not be wounded by the feeling that anyone was speculating on what would happen in the event of her death, specially as she is in delicate health. The subject was then dropped between us; but when, on a visit to her, we had been sitting alone and silent for some time, her hand being on my shoulder, she exclaimed, suddenly, ' It is something about my will that makes you dislike Mrs. G. so much.' In point of fact, I had at the time been thinking over the whole matter. I then told her all, and it is now a matter of great regret I did not at once send Miss B. the letters, as things then might have been cleared up. It has been a cause of distress to Miss B. and myself, as it has made a breach

448 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

in her friendship with Mrs. Gray, who denies all knowledge of the letters, but refuses to meet me and discuss the affair. I need trouble you no further, nothing more of interest, from a psychological point, having occurred."

Referring to the above account, " Miss Black " writes, on October 5, 1886: — " I can corroborate the facts therein contained."

In answer to inquiries, the narrator says: —

1. "After receiving the first anonymous letter I did suspect its author to be Mrs. Gray. Before this I never had the least suspicion that her interest in Miss Black was a mercenary one, and I have been at a loss to account for feeling so assured she was the writer, without there being any evidence to favour the idea.

2. " I am quite sure I recognised the old man in church as being like the man in my dream before Miss B. spoke of the resemblance to Major Gray.

3. " I am quite sure I never saw Major G., and I have not the shghtest remembrance of having heard any description of him.

4. "Previous to Miss Black 'reading' what certainly were my thoughts about Mrs. Gray, we had made some very small experiments in thoughttransference, with, however, too slight results to submit to the S.P.R. In these experiments I was the percipient; my ' willing ' had no effect whatever on Miss Black. We discontinued our experimenting as I found it exhausting. I think it is clear that a 'sympathetic rapport' exists between us, as once it was ' borne in upon me ' with inexpressible power that she was in some distress. The impression seized me suddenly at a certain hour, and no effort would dispel it. The news reached me next day that Miss B.'s sister had been taken worse at the time, and was dying. She had been ill, but not seriously so, and the last account I had received was very good. When we are together we have often answered unexpressed thoughts.

5. "I am very sorry I made no notes whatever of the incident, never having been in the habit of keeping a diary, and I cannot be at all accurate as to dates. [The narrator has however told us privately what were the months in which the various incidents occurred. The first was less than 4 years ago.]

6. "I do not remember ever having dreamt more than once \i.e., having had repeated i] a dream in which any one besides myself has appeared.

" Not having any idea that Mrs. Gray's name is, in fact being

impressed with the idea that it was, does it not strike you as a very

curious coincidence that I should have dreamt that I saw the true signature? The real name [communicated in confidence] is a rather uncommon one. I have never known more than one person bearing the same.

" I quite forgot to say that Miss Black writes that she does not remember her hand being on my shoulder, but that I was sitting so near as to touch her; my own impression still is that it was so."

In conversation the narrator told Mr. Podmore that, when she told the whole story to Miss Black, the latter brought down a bundle containing many letters from various persons, and that she (the narrator) without difficulty picked out a letter of Mrs. Gray's, from the resemblance of the writing to that seen in the dream.

1 See p. 418, note.

IV,]



Chapter IV. " Borderland " Cases.

I 1, The most convenient mode of arranging the cases in the present chapter will be, not by the character of the experience narrated — visual, auditory, and so on — for it happens that a large majority are visual; ^ but by the character of the evidence — first-hand or secondhand, recent or remote.

I will begin with some cases, first-hand or on a par with first-hand (Vol. I,, p. 148), to which the chief objection, from an evidential point of view, is their remoteness of date.

(485) From the late Mr. Robert Henry Dix, 63, Lanark Villas, Maida Vale, London, W. u February 2nd, 1884.

"In 1836, when a very young man, I had become engaged to a young lady; but I decided to leave England and try my fortune elsewhere, and wait until I should be able to establish myself, and could then send for my intended and be united. Of course we were to keep up a regular correspondence.

"I left England and went to St. Petersburg, where I had some friends, and very soon after my arrival there I got an appointment on an estate in the South of Russia, belonging to a rich and influential nobleman. In the course of a year I succeeded in obtaining a very good position, and could fairly hope to be enabled to marry in the course of the next spring. In the meantime, the correspondence with my intended continued very regularly. All at once it ceased, and for some time I had received no letters from her. I wrote to one of her family, and was informed that my intended was taken seriously ill, and had gone to Jersey to some friends there, hoping that the sea air and change of climate might be beneficial to her. This naturally unsettled me very much, and I became depressed and low-spirited in consequence. One day I remember I was particularly so. I had been very much occupied during the day, and towards the evening threw myself on the sofa in my sittingroom, and dropped ofi" to sleep. It might have been an hour or so that I had been asleep, when, suddenly awaking, I observed at the foot of the

1 The cases which were exclusively auditory are Nos. 496, 497, 506, 507 538; and an auditory impression was a prominent element in cases 489, 495, 498, 508, 509, 513, 519, 520, 522, 526, 527, 528, 539, 540, 547.



Vol. Ii. 2 G

450 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

couch a sort of bluish vapour,^ which seemed to fill up the end of the room, and what seemed to me a shadowy form appeared to come out of it, which gradually took the form of a female; the features bore the exact likeness of my intended. I was now fully awake. I raised myself on the sofa, and exclaimed, ' Louisa, is that really you? What has happened 1 ' I received no answer, and in a few seconds the apparition was gone, and seemed to melt away into the vapour, which also disappeared. I still supposed that I had been dreaming, but I could not shake off the impression this apparition had made upon me.

" I wrote to my friends in England, saying that I feared my intended was dying or dead. I received in answer that my fears were too well founded, and that the poor girl had died of inflammation of the brain, on the same day, and about the same time, as I mentioned having seen the apparition. " R- H. D."

In conversation, Mr. Dix explained to Mr. Podmore that he could not give the precise date of the apparition; it occurred some time in the autumn of 1837, between 6 and 7 p.m., when it was dusk, but not yet fully dark. He made no written memorandum of the occurrence, but told one or two friends in Russia on the following day. When he received the letter announcing the death, he noted that it took place on the same day as the vision, but he never learned whether the hour exactly corresponded, only that the death took place in the afternoon.

All those who could give corroborative evidence in this case are either dead or dispersed, so that they cannot be traced. ISTone of the letters are preserved, and no one is Living of Mr. Dix's own relations who could attest the receipt of his letters.

Mr. Dix was certain that he had never had any other experience of hallucination. At the same time, it must be noted that he was at the time in a state of distinct anxiety respecting his fiancee.

We have more to rely on here than the mere recollection of the experience; this receives, so to speak, a -point d'appiii in the recollection that a letter was written in consequence. Similarly, in the next two cases, and in others that follow, we have the recollection that the phantasm was immediately described and commented on. In respect of many of these borderland visions, I may remind the reader that the percipient's certainty of having been completely awake at the time, though not conclusive as to the fact, is in itself quite sufficient to distinguish the experience from an ordinary dream.

(486) From the late Mrs. Lever, of Culcheth Hall, Bowdon, wife of Mr. Ellis Lever, well known in Manchester.

"May 14th, 1884.

" When at Ashton-under-Lyne, in my father's house, and being about 14 years of age, I was lying awake in bed, and my sister, Anne, sleeping by my side. It was nearing the dawn at morning, when I saw my cousin, Mary Tinker, come to my bedside, and she laid one hand on the pillow

1 Compare cases 193 and 194, and see Vol. i., p. 526, note.

near my sister's head, while her eyes were uplifted, as if in prayer. (My cousin Mary was particularly attached to my sister Anne.) She was in her nightdress, which was frilled down the front, and a nightcap, also frilled; and I saw her dark-brown eyes as distinctly as possible. I was so afraid that I shrank under the clothes; but then, reflecting that I had done nothing to grieve her, and no reason to be afraid, I resolved to speak to her. But on removing the clothes, she was gone, and not knowing where she could have gone to, I concluded that it must have been her spirit.^ At breakfast, the same morning, I mentioned what I had seen to my father and brothers, and to my sister Anne. They said I must have been dreaming, but I was quite awake, and assured them that this was the case.

" The next day a letter came stating that my cousin Mary had died, and it was ascertained that her death occurred at the very time at which I had seen her apparition. This coincidence convinced the members of my family that I had seen my cousin, as I assured them I had.

" Catherine Lever."

Mrs. Lever's daughter writes, from Cambridge House, Monmouth: —

"June 4th, 1884.

" I am staying with my mother's sister [Anne], who distinctly remembers about her cousin Mary. "Ada Lever."

Mrs. Lever, herself, however, says, " My sister only just remembers my mentioning Cousin Mary, and she cannot give me the date."

(487) From a lady, Mrs, H., who prefers that her name should not be published. u ig83

" When I was a child of 11 years of age, a very singular thing happened to me, which is well-known to my family, and impressed itself so vividly on my memory that I can still, though now a grandmother, recall every circumstance.

" One night I awoke in a great state of fright, thinking someone had touched me. I saw distinctly, standing by my bedside, my brother, but I was terrified to see that he looked very terribly strange and altered, as it struck me, like a dead person, though at that time I had never seen anyone dead. I was also very astonished at seeing that he seemed dripping wet, his clothes wet and stained, his hair dripping, and he stood with his eyes fixed on me. In my terror I called out ' Alick! ' (his name), when the figure immediately vanished.^ I jumped out of bed, running through the door, which was always left open, into the next room, my governess's, telling her of what I had seen, and in my alarm, getting into her bed, where I remained that night. She tried to laugh away my fears, saying I must have eaten something that had disagreed with me, and that what had passed was a nightmare, and forbidding me to mention it to my grandmother, under whose care I was living, she being an old Scotch lady, and superstitious, and that it might upset her. Nothing, therefore, regarding the circumstance was in any way placed on record.

" About three months afterwards, as I was reading aloud to my governess in the same sitting-room with my grandmother, the Indian post arrived. She made the remark, ' How singular! No letters, only a news-

1 See p. 48, note.

2 As to the sudden disappearance on speech, compare case 540, and see p. 91, note.

VOL. II, 2 G 2

452 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

paper,' which she began reading. After a little while she dropped the paper with the exclamation, ' Oh, my God! ' My governess ran to her, and presently read my brother's death by drowning in a quicksand in the River Sone, near Sonepore, in Bengal. He was marching with his regiment; they were encamped on one side of the river bank, another regiment on the opposite side. This regiment, in which my brother had a young friend, had asked him to early breakfast, about 5 or 6 o'clock in the morning; and the native who was showing him the way across afterwards deposed he heard a struggling all of a sudden, looked back, and saw my brother and his pony floundering in the quicksand, with which the river is full, and of which it is supposed the coolie had forgotten to warn him. Instead of throwing my brother a rope or stick to catch hold of, the man, in a great state of fright, ran back to the camp to give the news; but by the time help arrived it was too late, and my brother was quite dead when the body was recovered.^ This happened March 21st, 1845. In Bengal by that month the sun is well risen by 5 o'clock, or at all events quite broad light, and being in advance of us some six hours, the time at which he was drowned would tally with my seeing him during the night at home.

From the only public notice of the death that we have been able to discover — a letter quoted by Allen's Indian Mail ivovn th.Q Bengal Hurkaru of March 4, 1845 — it appears that Mrs. H.'s brother was drowned in the Sone when returning one morning to his regiment, having spent the night with another regiment on the other side of the river, and that he was buried on Feb. 23. It is thus likely enough that the accident occurred on Feb. 21. The March 21, in Mrs. H.'s account, cannot be correct.

Mrs. H. adds the following incident, which is perhaps worth giving in connection with the former one; but it is possible that the daughter who was in the same room with her called out in her sleep.

" My eldest daughter had come out to us to Calcutta, and she happened for the time to be sleeping in my bedroom. Early one morning, December, 1870, a few days after her arrival, I woke suddenly, hearing her, as I thought, calling out, ' Mamma, mamma,' in a very strained sort of voice, but, to my surprise, found she was sound asleep. About 24 days afterwards, we got the news that my second daughter, a girl just 14, then at Dover w;ith a relative, had scarlet fever very badly, and in the delirium attending kept only calling out, ' Mamma, mamma.' She recovered; so this shows, as so many cases of the same kind do, that it is not only at the moment of the spirit's departure these manifestations occur; but I think they only do so in cases where either very strong attachment exists, or to people whose temperament is of the rather nervously sensitive breed, and I am so in many ways; for instance, I have the most extraordinarily keen hearing."

The narrator states that she has never experienced any hallucination of a purely subjective kind.

(488) From Mr. William Garlick, F.R.C.S., 33, Great James Street, Bloomsbury, W.C.

"Between 6 and 7 in the morning of August 29, 1832, when lying in

1 This chapter and the next contain a good many cases where the death of the agent was by drowning. See p. 26.

bed, half asleep and half awake, I was suddenly startled by perceiving the form of my brother George, then absent from home, standing beside me. The room was quite light, and my recognition of the figure was complete and clear. He looked at me, and then seemed to fade slowly away.^ My brother, who had a specially warm affection for me, was at that time a sailor on board the merchant ship, ' Eliza,' bound for the East Indies. I had no reason to suppose anything was wrong with him, nor was he specially in my thoughts. The vision, for I felt certain that I was awake and not dreaming, made a very strong and painful impression upon me, so much so that the family where I was staying asked the cause of my troubled looks. I told them what I had seen, and at my hostess's (afterwards my mother-in-law) request made a note of the occurrence.

" Months afterwards we received the intelligence that my brother had died at Baroda, of dysentery. The date and hour ^ of his death, as nearly as could be calculated, coincided exactly with that of his appearance to me at Stroud (Gloucester). I am of a calm and unimaginative temperament, and have never had any similar experience before or since. The coincidence was well-known to various members of my family, but I do not now remember that I mentioned the matter to anyone else at the time. " Wm. Garlick."

Mrs. Garlick writes, on Nov. 18, 1884: —

" I was present at the breakfast table on the 29th August, 1832, when my mother, Mrs. Humpage, questioned Mr. Garlick on the cause of his unusual gloom and quietness. He then told us that he had seen his brother — who was at that time at sea — in his bedroom an hour or two before. My mother answered, ' You will be sure to hear something, so note the date.'

" Some months afterwards I remember that a letter came for Mr. Garlick, forwarded from his mother, announcing the death of this brother on that day, the 29th August. I heard of this, of course, as soon as the letter was received. " L. Garlick."

Mr. Garlick has never had any other hallucination. In conversation, he explained to Mr. Podmore that the figure remained in his sight, apparently, for about 10 minutes; but the length of time, in such circumstances, is apt to be greatly exaggerated. He has a very vivid recollection of the features, but cannot recall the dress. He infers from this that the dress was that which his brother usually wore, as he would certainly have noticed and remembered any unusual detail in the costume. He was about 18 years old at the time. The " note " referred to was a mental note only, but he is confident of the accuracy of his memory. He showed Mr. Podmore the entry of the death, with the date, in his family Bible.

We have not been able to verify the date of death, as it has been impossible to trace the " Eliza."

(489) From Mrs. Nind, Midleton House, Westcombe Park, Blackheath.

"May 14th, 1883. " On a Good Friday morning, many years ago, I had been awake early,

1 See p. 97, first note.

2 This word, as Mr. Garlick has subsequently explained, is a slip. The hour of death was not mentioned in the letter which conveyed the news; so that no calculation could establish a precise coincidence.

454 SUPPLEMENT.. [chap.

and finding it too soon to get up, was lying in bed, not asleep, when a figure stood by my bedside, in fact, my father-in-law, an old captain in the Royal Navy; he spoke to me a few words ^ and disappeared. I was so startled that I called my husband (since dead), who was asleep, and told him what was said. I immediately got up and told my mother and sister [since deceased], who chanced to be staying with us. Now, what makes this story seem strange was that my father-in-law had died the night before, suddenly. We did not get the news before the afternoon of Good Friday, as he was residing at Bridgnorth, in Shropshire, 16 miles from a railway. I saw him in the early morning, I count about 8 hours after his death. The case was no dream; and the fact of my having mentioned it before I heard of the death of my dear father-in-law made a strong impression on all the family."

Asked if this was her sole experience of a hallucination of the senses, Mrs. Nind replied in the afiirmative.

We find from the Register of Deaths that Commander Philip Nind died of heart disease on March 25, 1853 — which was Good Friday, not the day before it. Probably the death took place in the early morning, and the coincidence was closer than Mrs. Nind supposed.

(490) From Mr. Harold Lafone, Hanworth Park, Middlesex, a cousin

of the percipient. Lady C g, who endorses the account.

" 1884.

" About the year 1849, an apparition was seen by Lady C g,

then Miss Gale, under the following circumstances: —

" She was living at the time in her father's house at Grately, in Hampshire. One night, on awaking suddenly from sleep, she saw the figure of a young man, apparently attired in his night shirt, standing at the foot of her bed. She was naturally much surprised, and inquired who he was, and what he wanted? He replied that he was the ghost of John

Dowling, and Lady C g states that, as he spoke, she distinctly saw the

initials J. D. marked on the edge of his nightgown. At this distance of time she will not venture to give the exact words of the conversation between them, nor to describe the exact appearance of the figure or its manner of departure. It disappeared, however, immediately after revealing its name.

" She mentioned the circumstance to her family at breakfast the next morning, but was inclined to regard it merely as a strange and very vivid dream, until, on driving the same afternoon to the neighbouring town of Andover, she heard there for the first time that Mr. John Dowling, a young solicitor of the town, had died on the previous night, as far as she could judge about the time when the apparition was seen by herself.

Lady C g knew Mr. John Dowling by name and sight, and had

recognised the likeness of the apparition to him, but she had never met or exchanged a word with him, nor had she the faintest idea that he was ill."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death took place some years earlier than Lady C g supposed, on Nov. 3, 1845.

1 The words were, " Aggy, there will be a child in the family before this day 12 months." This event actually happened, rather unexpectedly; but the idea of it may probably have been latent in the mind either of Mrs, Nind herself or of her father-in-law.

[I have seen a letter, dated Dec. 19th, 1873, from Lady C. to Mr. H. Lafone, in which she says that her husband objects to her signing the account. She says, "It is all true as far as I can remember at this remote period," but adds that she has a certain dread and dislike of the subject.]

(491) The following two letters were written by the late Mrs. Clarke, wife of the late Mr. Thomas Clarke, of Bishopton Close, Ripon, to her stepson, Mr. William Fowler Stephenson. He gave them to his cousin, the Rev. J. T. Fowler, of Bishop Hatfield's Hall, Durham, who handed them on to us. u October 1 7th, 1 872.

" On the morning of my father's death, between 4 and 5 o'clock, I saw a sort of shadowy light at the foot of my bed, and half arose to look at it. I distinctly saw my father's face, smiling at me.^ I drew the curtains apart, and still saw him looking fijsedly at me. I awoke the girl who was sleeping with me, and asked her to draw up the window blind. I then asked her if she saw anything. She said, ' Nothing. It is too dark.' I fancy I saw the vision for fully five minutes, and then all was dark again. ^ The face was bound under the chin, as usual in death, and the cloth seemed stained, but not so deep as iron-mould quite. On looking at my father's corpse, after returning to Hull, I told an old friend, who was with me, that it was just so he looked at me, except that the cloth was discoloured. She at once said: ' Then he did come to you, that's certain, for the cloth was stained, and I changed it after daylight.' It was within a few minutes of his death that I saw him, and he was asking God to bless me. He was asking for me continually. " M. C."

In reply to a request of Mr. Stephenson's for more particular information on certain points, Mrs. Clarke wrote: —

"October 19th, 1872.

" I had been in Harrogate for some weeks, and was confined to my room from a feverish cold ^ which caused restless nights. It was thought necessary for one of the maids to sleep with me, so I asked her to draw up the blinds. This was a little after 4 o'clock in the morning of the 11th of November, 1846. On that same day, about 9 o'clock, by post, I received the enclosed letter, being the first intimation I had of my father's illness. He was taken ill on the Sunday; they wrote to me on the Monday, and he died on Tuesday morning. I was then 23 years of age. My sister, Christiana, and a woman-servant attended to my father. A faithful old friend, Mrs. Dible, came as soon as possible to do what was necessary on such occasions, and it was to her that I mentioned what I had seen. She explained that, in the excitement of the moment, they had used what had been the bottom of an old blind, which, as soon as it was daylight, she saw was stained, and changed it herself. I can never explain what I felt on that day, if it can be called feeling. They said I was like marble to look at, and like ice to touch."

The letter referred to by Mrs. Clarke, announcing the illness of her father, was enclosed. Two persons had written to her on the same sheet —

1 Cf. case 315, where an appearance of bright vapour preceded the more definite impression. The expression " shadowy light " recalls the " bright shadow " of case 251.

2 See p. 459, note.

3 See p. 162, first note.

456 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

Mr. Jubb, a friend of the family, and her brother, Mr. J. Rollit, a solicitor in Hull. Mr. Jubb's letter runs: —

" Hull, November 10th, 1846.

" My Dear Matilda, — If you wish to see your dear father alive, you must come immediately you receive this; he is not likely to survive long. — Yours truly, " Wm. Jubb."

We find from the Hull Advertiser that the death took place on Nov. 11, 1846, as Mrs. Clarke asserts. She made a mistake (of no importance) as to the days of the week. The 11th was a Wednesday, and the letter to her was written on Tuesday.

(492) From Mrs. George G-rant Gordon, Milton of Kikaroch, Nairn,

^•^-^ " April 17, 1886.

" I am most happy to accede to your request, and send you an account of what I experienced at the time of my father's [Colonel Sibbald's] death.

I remember it as clearly as if it happened only yesterday. It was early on the morning of the 31st May, 1857, while I was lying perfectly awake in bed, that I saw my father suddenly standing at the foot of my bed. I recognised him immediately from his likenesses. [He had been for years in India.] He was dressed in regimentals, stanching a wound in his breast with a pocket-handkerchief. Two other of&cers in regimentals were beside him, whom I did not recognise.^ I did not reveal this vision, or whatever it can be called, for some time to the friends who had charge of me [Dr. and Mrs. McBeth], for fear of being laughed at [for] what they always termed my ' fancies '; but when they did hear of it, they noted it down.

" For 3 months we received no news from India, owing to the disturbed state of the country; but when the letters did arrive, the news tallied exactly with what I had seen. It was on that very day my father had been shot twice, on his way to the parade-ground. On being missed, two officers went in search for him, and found him lying wounded.

" E. T. Gordon."

Colonel and Brigadier Hugh Sibbald, C.B., was almost the first victim of the Indian Mutiny; and at the date of his death there had been not the slightest anxiety on his account in England. We find from Allen's Indian Mail that the rising at Bareilly, where he was in command, took place at

II a.m. on May 31, 1857, and that he was shot in the chest by one of his orderlies, while riding to the parade-ground, and shortly afterwards dropped dead from his horse. Allowing for longitude, it will be seen that the coincidence was probably extremely close.

In answer to the question whether she has ever had a hallucination of the senses on any other occasion, and to other inquiries, Mrs. Gordon writes: —

" I cannot remember having actually seen anything else, though I have always had strange presentiments. The friends who had charge of me in those days are both dead, and they are about the only persons I

1 This case was procured through the kindness of Mr. Andrew Lang, who gave a fairly correct, though fourth-hand, version of it in his article on "Apparitions," in the Encycloxxedia Brittanica.

^ As to the appearance of more than one figure, see Vol. i., pp. 545-6.

can remember who could have known of the vision before the sad news arrived. I was perfectly clear as to the date; as the previoios day I had been to a pic-nic; and that date they all remembered being the 30th of May [a Saturday]. It was the following morning I saw my father. The first news of the Mutiny that reached us must have been much later. I had no reason whatever to feel the least anxious about my father."

We have received an account which substantially agrees with the above (but omits the detail of the two other officers), from Miss Lang, of Hughenden Cottage, High Wycombe, Bucks, to whom the occurrence was described in 1868, by an aunt of Mrs. Gordon and sister of Colonel Sibbald.

We cannot assume here that the experience was in any degree a clairvoyant vision of the scene, or that the two strangers who appeared were anything more than a subjective addition of the percipient's. For there is nothing in the contemporary account to suggest that Colonel Sibbald was not riding alone; and if he dropped from his horse, as described, he must have been lying dead, not merely wounded, when others approached.

(493) From Mrs. Fitzgerald, 14, Windsor Terrace, Kingstown, Ireland.

"January 22nd, 1884.

" More than 25 years have elapsed since the memorable event occurred, which stands out as a landmark in my memory. My husband, David Fitzgerald, and myself were later than usual in retiring to rest on the night in question. After leaving my dressing-room, in getting into bed, I found my husband firm asleep, so crept in quietly. It was then near 12 o'clock. I did not sleep for some time. Between that and 3 o'clock my husband awoke me, saying, ' Sarah, stop Fred, don't let him go.' I immediately got up, went round to the door of the dressing-room to close it, as I firmly believed there was someone in the room, but found it closed. On lighting the candles, my husband was sitting up in the bed greatly disturbed, saying, ' Did you not see Fred 1 ' In order to make light of the matter I said ' It was only a dream.' He looked at me, not as if he were convinced with what I said. Next day I drove to town, to know what time Fred last wrote to his brother, never saying a word of what had occurred the night before. Time passed; on the arrival of the news of the death of poor Fred I was so thrown off my usual discretion that I exclaimed to his brother William, ' Oh, I know when he died, for he was with his father that night.' "S. M. Fitzgerald."

Mrs. McKern, of 53, George Street, Limerick, writes as follows: —

"January, 1884.

" About 25 years ago, David Fitzgerald, Land Agent, of Limerick (my grandfather), at that time between 65 and 70 years of age, was residing at Richmond, his private dwelling, about half-a-mile outside the city. The other occupants of the house were his second wife, Sarah Fitzgerald, and his step daughter, Mary Hunt.^ He had, besides, many sons and

1 Since married to a Mr. French, R.M.; but we learn from Mr. McKern that she was away at school at the time.

458 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

daughters, the youngest of the former having gone to Australia. One night (hour not known to narrator) he was awakened from sleep by the howling in front of the house of a favourite dog — spaniel or retriever — of the absent son, Frederick. (Note, in Ireland, the howling of a dog is looked upon as a sure sign of death in the immediate locality.) He awoke his sleeping partner, and said, ' I am sure there is something wrong with Freddy; do you not hear the way the dog is howling? ' She endeavoured to soothe the old man, and went to sleep again, when she was again awoke by him in a sudden, not to say violent, manner. He was in a highly excited state, exclaiming, ' I saw Freddy! I saw Freddy! He stood at the bottom of the bed, with the curtains drawn aside, and looked at me.' The next morning a note was made of the occurrence, and the following mail from Australia brought news of the lad's death, which the narrator believes to have corresponded with the father's vision.

"S. E. McKeen." In answer to inquiries, Mrs. McKern adds: —

" I could not possibly recollect from whom I first heard of the occurrence, as I was very young at the time; but I have often heard it spoken of by different members of the family. I do not remember having had any conversation on the subject with Mrs. Fitzgerald."

[The incident of the dog's howling seems not unlikely to have been imported into the story; and it will be observed that neither it, nor the dramatic repetition of the experience, occurs in the more authentic account. We do not know that the coincidence of day was anything more than a conjecture.]

(494) From Mr. H. Atkins, Office-keeper at the Royal Marine Office, 40, Spring Gardens, S.W. (originally published, with a nom de plume, in the Daily Telegraph, for October 20, 1881).

" In the year 1849, I was serving in H.M.S. ' Geyser,' on the east coast of Africa, and in company with H.M.S. ' Brilliant,' anchored in Tamatave Roads, Madagascar. The following facts I can vouch for. Some of our officers were dining on board the ' Brilliant.' A boat's crew were ordered to be ready at six bells (11 p.m.) to fetch them on board. The lights were out on the lower deck, and everything quiet. A messmate (T. Parker) and I, belonging to the boat, were sitting in the mess, abreast of the cook's galley, and opposite each other, he with his arms on the table, and face resting on them, and, as I thought, fast asleep — when all at once he jumped to his feet, declaring that he saw his mother cross the deck in front of the galley, and was very much excited. I pointed out to him that it was quite impossible, as his face was towards the table, at the same time laughing heartily at him for being so foolish. Our schoolmaster, Mr. T. Salsbury, was lying awake in his hammock close by, and in the morning he made a note of the circumstances, putting down time and date. On our arrival at the Isle of France, some time after, Parker received a letter from home, stating that his mother died that very night. I am no believer in ghosts, but think this a very remarkable coincidence."

Mr. Atkins, from whom we first heard on February 12th, 1884, has added the following additional information: —

"It is quite possible that Parker may have raised his head from the

table, in which case he would have a clear view of the spot over which the apparition was said to walk. It was very dark, and a real person walking in the same place would have been unrecognisable. ^ There was not the slightest doubt, apparently, in Parker's mind; for he did not examine the figure, but called instantly that he saw his mother, and then commenced sobbing and crying. These sounds drew the attention of Mr. Salsbury, the schoolmaster, and caused him to note the time of the circumstance. For the three or four months that elapsed before the Isle of France was reached, Parker ' moped about,' and would not be cheered. In comparing the date of the death with that of the apparition, allowance was made for the difference in time, and the two events were found to exactly correspond by the schoolmaster."

[It would be a quite impossible task, Mr. Atkins says, to hunt up any of his old shipmates, but if he should meet with anyone who can corroborate his account, he has promised to communicate with us. The schoolmaster and Parker are dead.]

(495) From Mr. George Waddington, of 26, Bagdale, Whitby, mentioned above (p. 366).

"Passing the night at an inn in Nevada City, California, I dreamt, or awoke, by the door of room where I was sleeping being opened, and the figure of my great-aunt, Mrs. Beaumont, of Wetherby, Yorkshire, observed standing in what was her usual dress, as worn in 1842, and heard to say, ' George, George.' A note was made at the time, the date being the 28th July, 1851. She died early that morning.

" She had the night before been the subject of my thought, on travelling late in the dense darkness of the forest. " G. W. Waddington."

We find the date of death confirmed by the Leeds Mercury.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Waddington says that he had last seen his aunt in February, 1842; and that the dress of the apparition was "outdoor walking costume, the bonnet being a prominent part of it." He adds: — " The note was made on the back of a letter, and used for reference when the news arrived; but this was not kept."

The letter announcing the death is missing; but at our request Mr. Waddington applied to his mother, and she informed him that she arrived at Wetherby, in response to a summons, at 2 p.m. on July 28th, and found that Mrs. Beaumont had died at noon, which would be 4 a.m. in California. Mr. Waddington's experience took place, he tells us, " about dawn "; and the coincidence was thus probably very close, though he himself, through not allowing for longitude, had imagined that there was an interval of about 8 hours. He adds that the hallucination is unique in his experience.

[This is a case in which it seems probable that the percipient projected the image in the dress which had remained associated in his mind with the original. See Yol. I., p. 546.]

(496) From the late Mr, G. Wadsworth, Aston, Birmingham.

"October 21st, 1882.

" About 30 years since, I became acquainted with a young lady residing

1 1 have mentioned (Vol. i., p. 551) that visual phantasms of both the subjective and the telepathic class are often more clearly seen than a real figure could have been in the same circumstances. Compare case 250, and the note thereon (p. 72).

460 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

at Shrewsbury. This friendship continued for many years, although for a long time we saw each other but rarely, her health gradually failing. One morning early I was startled by hearing the stairfoot door open, and Maria called me distinctly twice, ' George, George! ' So plain was this that I at once answered, ' Yes, Maria, what is it? ' and went down to the sitting-room to her, only to find the whole a dream or an illusion. Next day I received a letter informing me of her death that morning.

" G. Wadsworth." [Mr. Wadsworth's death, which took place soon after this account was written, has prevented us from obtaining further information.]

(497) From Mrs. Fagan, Bovey Tracey, Newton Abbot. «< 1882 "Early in the year 1857 — I think in the month of April — I was

awakened one morning by my sister (whom I supposed to be some hundreds of miles away) sorrowfully saying, ' Oh, Sally, Sally! ' Thinking she must have arrived unexpectedly by dak, and had met with some great trouble on her journey, I turned and spoke to her, but she was gone. Rousing my husband, I asked him to go and see what was the matter, but she was nowhere to be found. That morning, at that hour, my sister received the news of the sudden death of her eldest boy at school, and she wrote and told me that her first words were, ' Oh! Sally, Sally, wishing you were here! ' I have no recollection of ever having heard the voice of any other one, not actually present — certainly never before this.

"Sarah H. Fagan." We find from a notice in Allen's Indian Mail that the death occurred on April 18, 1857. The sister's letter is unfortunately lost; and she cannot trust her memory sufiiciently to corroborate the account.

The next case is an interesting example of death-imagery, occurring in what is represented as a waking experience (Vol. I., pp. 539, 547; and compare case 404).

(498) From Mrs. Chermside, Regia House, Teignmouth.

" August, 1884.

" E. B. was engaged to be married to H. A. D. He was a surgeon in the army. Want of means on both sides delayed the marriage, and he suddenly came to her one day to say ' good-bye,' as he was ordered to take troops to Canada. He sailed, and she heard of his safe arrival. He spoke of his return in the following spring. One night, being 28th December, she saw him enter her room about midnight. A light seemed to shine about him;i but he was clothed completely in grave clothes. She sat up in bed and said, 'Oh! H., why are you so strangely dressed? ' He said, 'Do not laugh; this is my new uniform.' ^ He then departed as he came.

" She lay trembling all night, and weeping sadly. Next morning she refrained from telling her family, as they were opposed to her marriage; she, however, unburdened herself to me. I tried to persuade her it was only a silly dream; however, the idea that her lover was dead was most firmly fixed in her mind. A month after, she received the news of his

1 See Vol. i., pp. 550-1.

2 Compare cases 547, 568, 639, 654. The complex form of hallucination in which there is an interchange of remarks with the phantasmal figure occurs equally in purely subjective cases. See Vol. i., p. 476, and compare p. 588 below.

death on that very night, and that the last word he uttered was her name. The whole thing took such possession of her that she slowly faded away, and died about two years afterwards."

The following addition is from the notes taken by Professor Sidgwick during two interviews with Mrs. Chermside in September, 1884: —

The occurrence was in the winter of 1845. It was on the next morning that E. B. told Mrs. Chermside of the appearance. She (E. B.) was quite sure that it was not a dream; and had no doubt that her fiance was dead. She heard the details of his death within a month or so — as soon as letters then came from Canada — from one of his brother officers, and also from his sisters; and then wrote to tell Mrs. Chermside that he had died the night that she saw the apparition.

[We have exhausted every means open to us to discover an official or newspaper record of the death in this case. We do not know how to explain this failure; as Mrs. Chermside is certain that she has given us Mr. D.'s name correctly, and she can hardly have been mistaken as to his profession. Possibly he had not an official connection with the army.]

§ 2. The next group of cases are more recent; but some of them lack corroboration; and some are weakened, as evidence for telepathy, by the fact that the percipient was in more or less anxiety as to the condition of the absent person, or by an absence of definiteness in the coincidence.

(499) From the Rev. W. B. Lindesay, LL.D., The Abbey, Tipperary.

" August 30th, 1884.

"In 1877 I was living in Dublin, and very anxious about my father, who was dangerously ill with congested lungs, in Wales.

" Awaking suddenly one night I distinctly saw him sitting on a chair near me, with his face covered by his hands. When I jumped out of bed he vanished. So startled was I that, next day, I crossed to Wales, and found that he had been delirious for two days.

" When I entered his room he at once said he had gone the day before to tell me where he had left a top-coat that I knew he had lost some time previous to his illness. I went to the house he named in Dublin, and found the coat there. " W. B. Lindesay."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Lindesay says: —

" So far as I can remember, my father was still delii'ious at the time he said he had gone to see me.

" I told no one of the experience at the time, for I was living by myself. I have never, that I can recollect, had any other experience of the kind, and am not subject to any ' hallucination of the senses.'

" I am bound in fairness to tell you that I am an entire disbeliever in the supernaturalness of such experiences. This infidelity may be due to my never having heard of any such experiences which could not be explained on the coincidence principle."

[Mr. Lindesay is of course right in his disbelief of the " supernaturalness" of such phenomena; but it has not struck him that the

462 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

alternative to supposing them supernatural is not necessarily to suppose them accidental. His concluding comment reproduces the remarks of Lord Brougham, as to which see Vol. I., pp. 396-7. I need hardly point out again that every isolated case of coincidence might be accidental, and that the argument for telepathy is essentially cumulative. This case may perhaps have been reciprocal; but we clearly have no proof that the father's experience was anything more than a purely subjective impression or dream.]

(500) From a lady occupying a responsible position, which obliges her, out of regard to others, to withhold her name from publication. Her viva voce account, given to me in the room where the experience occurred, made it almost certain that she was in a state of normal wakefulness at the time; still, as she had been in bed for some little time, I have placed the case in this chapter rather than the next. '< ]yfay 2nd, 1886.

"On the night of the 18th December, 1872, I had retired to bed about 11 o'clock. The bed, I may mention, is so placed that any person entering the room, must pass quite round it before reaching the side on which I lay. I had perhaps been in bed 20 minutes, and had been thinking over the events of the evening, a pupils' concert, when suddenly I saw my husband by the door; he moved swiftly round the bed till he came close to me, when he as suddenly disappeared. So astonished was T, that involuntarily I called him by name. The gas was alight, as usual, in the room; and as I knew that I had not been asleep, and had not heard a sound to alarm me, I had not a doubt, any more than I have at this moment, that the vision was that of my absent husband. On the 30th December of the same year, I received a letter by the Australian mail, from a gentleman, telling me that my husband had met with a serious accident, and on the 4th of March in the following year, I had a letter from the same friend, informing me of his death, and stating that it took place on the 18th December, 1872.

" I had spoken of the incident of the night of the 18th to my children as a dream, but to two ladies I related the fact as it occurred; it was then a week afterwards, ^ and when they knew that my husband was dead, each lady, though neither knew the other, reminded me of the incident, and told me the relation of it had strangely impressed her."

We have confirmed the date of death in the obituary of the Daily Telegraph.

In conversation, the narrator informed me that she has never had any other visual hallucination. She described her experience to her children, at breakfast next morning, as a dream, in order not to alarm them. She herself felt no alarm or apprehension whatever. Of the two friends whom she mentions, one has recently died, and she has lost sight of the other. Her husband had been an invalid for years, and as far as she knew was as well as usual.

The narrator's daughter writes, on May 13, 1886: —

" I have searched everywhere I can think of, but without success, in finding the programme of the Pupils' Concert; but my sister and self both agreed as to being.swre the day was Dec. 18, 1872, and we believe it fell on a Wednesday. [Dec. 18 was a Wednesday.] We also remember perfectly

1 This refers to the mention of the matter to the second friend; to the other the experience was described (the narrator informs me) on the day following its occurrence.

our mother relating the next day what she called a strange dream she had had the night previously; and have frequently since heard her speak of the same as a vision."

[The Australian letter, which the narrator has preserved, states that the hour of the death was about 4.30 p.m., which would correspond with about 6.30 a.m. in England. If, therefore, the vision occurred on the night of that day, it followed the death by more than 12 hours. But the narrator (without my having suggested this point) wrote, on May 14, 1886, to say that a daughter, who slept with her on the night of the vision, reminds her that on concert nights they always sat up late, and that probably they did not go upstairs till nearly 2. Now this fact would very probably be in the percipient's memory at the time that the news of the death arrived, and its connection with the vision was surmised; and as she is very positive that the dates coincided, it seems at any rate possible that the concert was, after all, on the 17th, and that her vision took place at 2.30 a.m. on the 18th. As against this hypothesis, however, I should mention a recollection which she has that, when talking over the matter with one of the friends mentioned, she remarked on an apparent discrepancy of hours, and the friend (she believes) pointed out that, longitude being allowed for, the hours agreed; which is just what would seem to be the case if the vision was at 2.30 a.m. on the 19th, and the 10 hours' difference of time was reckoned (as so often happens) the wrong way. It is worth noting that even supposing our arbitrary 1 2 hours' limit to have been exceeded, the vision still fell at what was probably the first season of silence and recueillement that had presented itself since the hour when the death occurred. See Yol. I., pp. 201, 329.]

(501) From the Rev. H. N. B. and his sister-in-law. Miss Fagg. The percipient, Mrs. B., is out of health, and must not be troubled for an account. The following is a letter from Mr. B. to his daughter: —

"December 5th, 1883.

" I was at Langtoft, but E. (i.e., Mrs. B.) and Miss Fagg had returned with Ernie to Deal, as he was ordered to go to the sea. There were two rooms at Deal intercommunicating, the inner being only approached through the first room. In the inner room the nurse (Alice) and the baby were sleeping; in the outer one, E.j Miss Fagg was sleeping downstairs. The bed was curtained. In the night E. was awoke by, as she thought, the nurse standing by her bed. Half asleep, without moving, she said, ' What is it, Alice 1 ' but there was no answer. She said again, ' What is it 1 is there anything the matter with baby *? ' Still there was no answer. She then roused herself, and saying sharply, ' Why do you not speak, Alice? ' she put back the' curtain, and saw your aunt standing there. She was so terrified that she jumped out of bed and ran straight down, as she was, to Nelly [Miss Fagg]. The next day I, at Langtoft, had a letter saying your aunt had died very unexpectedly, at Broxbourne. We did not know she was seriously ill, as she had gone to Broxbourne on a visit. I could not identify the time; but, as far as I could make out, the (supposed) appearance took place some hours after your aunt's death."

Miss Fagg writes, from Ripple Rectory, Deal, on Aug. 28, 1884: —

" One night, about 2 o'clock, I believe, my sister, Mrs. B., came into my room saying she had seen Miss Grace B., and she was sure something

464 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

had happened. She told me she saw someone in her room, and thought it was the nurse come about the baby. The figure was turned towards the window where the food was kept; and had on a grey waterproof like the nurse. My sister spoke to the figure, and said, ' Why are you getting the food so soon 1 ' My sister was not then frightened, as she quite thought it was the nurse. But the figure then turned round, and it was the face of Miss Grace B., looking full at my sister, but a dead face, with a something white round the head, but curls just like Miss Grace B. used to wear. My sister after that came down to me, and I went into her room, but nothing more was seen. After that we heard that Miss Grace B. was dead. "Ellen E. Fagg."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Fagg adds: —

"The date of Miss Grace B.'s death was August 3rd, 1868; the time, I think, between 5 to 6 o'clock in the afternoon. 1 fancy she must have, as it seemed, appeared to my sister the same night after she was dead. We knew Miss Grace B. was ailing; she was, in fact, on a visit at the time of her death; but there was no thought of her dying. My sister had had no communication with her previously. I am nearly sure that Miss B. must have appeared to my sister the same night that she died.

" My sister always has seemed to know things difierent to other people. She seems to know when any one has died in any room. She seems either to feel, hear, or see the people. On one occasion we lived in an old house in Eastry, near here, and she saw, as it seemed, an old woman looking at her. The next morning when she described it to our cook who had been taking care of the house before we went into it, she said, ' Yes, that old woman once lived here.' " [This, of course, may have been a purely subjective hallucination.]

P.S. by the Bev. H. N. B. — "There is no doubt that the appearance (so-called) took place on the night of the day on the afternoon of which Miss G. B. died."

We have confirmed the date of the death by the Register of Deaths.

[This is apparently a case of delayed recognition, similar to those given in Chap. XII., § 3.]

The next account belongs to the interesting class which suggests a peculiar susceptibility in certain persons to spontaneous telepathic impressions. (See p. 77, and cases 513, 514, 515, below.) One of the three experiences recorded was a dream, but I give it here in order not to break up the series.

(502) From Mrs. W., who prefers that her name should not be published.

"Oxford, 1884.

(A) "In 1874 I was in England, ill in bed; and I distinctly saw my dear mother, who was at that time at Nice, come up to the foot of my bed, and look earnestly and sorrowfully at me; it was broad daylight, and I noticed the shawl she wore, one I had not seen her wear for many years.i I started up, and she was gone.^ I then knew that her last illness must have come, though I was kept in ignorance of it, as I was so dangerously

1 See Vol. i., p. 540.

2 See p. 91, second note.

ill myself. I wrote to her, and her answer told me what I dreaded was true. I was allowed to recover sufficiently to go out to Nice, and be with her to the end. Also, I ought to say, that the morning her dear image appeared to me, a doctor arrived from London whom she had sent to me by telegraphing to him from Nice, and this doctor was the means of saving my life, as I was at that time so ill that he said I could not have lived more than four hours longer.

(B) "When I was in the South of France, in 1878, I had a dream that a sister, who is especially dear to me, was in a carriage accident, and in my dream I saw her killed, but on reaching her I found her unhurt and as she smiled at me I dreamed I was dying of the agony of mind I had gone through. I never can forget the dream, the suffering was so intense. I awoke with pain in my heart and faintness, and woke my husband and told him. (I think my cries in my sleep awoke him.) I wrote to my sister, and when her answer arrived she gave me in it the account of the danger she had passed through.

(C) " One night I was awakened out of my sound sleep by a voice close to my ear, saying, ' Rise, you have no time to lose,' and words to the effect that the child ^ of this very dear sister was dying, and that she needed my prayers. I cannot remember the exact words, but I felt it was conveyed to me that / had to help her with all the earnestness I could, and there was an awe about it I cannot describe. Afterwards I found that at this very time on that night her most beloved child had passed through the crisis in diphtheria.

" Nothing of importance ever happened to any one very dear to me without my feeling it, though I may be far from them. " C. M. W."

Replying to our inquiries, Mrs. W.'s daughter, Miss E. M. W., writes (on Jan. 23, 1885), in reference to (A), that her mother " does not know anything about the shawl forming part of my grandmother's dress at the time she saw the apparition." She has had no other hallucinations; and she had no reason to suspect her mother's illness. Miss W.'s own testimony is as follows: —

"I clearly remember, in 1874, my mother in her dangerous illness seeing my dear grandmother come up to the foot of the bed. My mother has often told me since that her mother was wearing a certain crimson shawl she was very fond of, that her spectacles had dropped, and she looked over them at my mother, with sad inquiring eyes. My mother gazed at her for a minute, and then cried out when the apparition vanished; and when the nurse came in, having heard her cry, my mother insisted on being told the truth about her mother; for she said she knew that she had come to tell her she was dying, which was indeed the fact, though she lived long enough to enable my mother to see her before she died."

In reference to (B) and (C), Mrs. W.'s sister writes: —

" On one occasion I received an anxious letter from my sister inquiring if anything had happened to me, as she had dreamed of a serious carriage-accident in which I was in danger. This letter was received by me before I had informed her of the danger in which I had been placed,

1 This slightly differs from the version given at the top of the next page, where there is no mention of the special person who was in need.



Vol. Ii. 2 H

466 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

and the serious consequences which }nercifully were averted by the presence of mind of my coachman.

" On another occasion my sister was awakened by a voice which said distinctly, ' Rise at once. You have no time to lose. One you love is in sore need.' She did rise from her bed to pray for me, and afterwards knew that my child had passed through the crisis of diphtheria at that very time, and that her life was in imminent danger. " Bessie S."

Miss E. M. W. writes:—

" I perfectly remember both these dreams of my mother's, as she related them to me before receiving the answers to her letters to my aunt."

In answer to inquiries, she adds: —

"January 23rd, 1885.

"Mother is not in the habit of dreaming of accidents, and as far as she can remember it was the only time she has ever dreamt of an accident. The carriage did not upset. The facts are as follows: — My aunt has a very light cab built by my uncle especially for her, and on one occasion my aunt was driving along a narrow road, when her coachman whipped up the horses, and began driving at a furious pace. My aunt, alarmed, looked through the little window at the back of the carriage, and saw a great dray with a runaway horse tearing after the carriage. Just as it must have run into it and smashed it, the coachman turned the cab into an opening in the road. It was the only place in the road where the cab could have stopped, and it was the coachman's only hope to reach it, and the dray rushed by, leaving the cab unharmed. It did a great deal of damage, and the driver was killed. You see mother did not dream exactly the facts of the case, but only that my aunt was nearly killed by a carriage accident.

" As to the ' other intimations of danger,' &c., they are this, that whenever anything happens to those dear to her she always knows there is something happening. For instance, I was laid up with a very bad cough and cold when away from her last year, and she wrote me an anxious letter, saying, she knew I was ill, for she had an idea I had inflammation of the lungs. Last month I was suffering dreadfully from toothache, and determined I would go and have two teeth out without saying anything to mother, for fear of worrying her; she thought I was going for a walk, but all the time I was gone she was so unhappy about me, and S. told me when I had come back that mother had cried and been wretched all the time. You see the things are not big enough to attract much attention, but we in the house know them to be true."

[It is not quite clear how far the vision (A) coincided with a sudden and marked change in the state of the agent. Also it is possible that the doctor's visit, or the expectation of it, may have called up her mother's image to Mrs. W.'s mind, and that her illness may have rendered her specially liable to hallucination. It would remain noteworthy (unless there was special reason to fear the attack of fatal illness) that the apparition produced a true conviction in Mrs. W.'s mind as to what was occurring to her mother.

As to (B), we have no evidence that the dream took place on the night of the day on which the accident occurred; but to anyone who accepts the general fact of telepathic communication, it will at

least seem reasonable to surmise that the coincidence was not a merely accidental one. The impression of the child's illness (C) is, however, more important, both because it was more than a dream, and because the time-coincidence seems in tliis case to have been ascertained to be exact.

With regard to the less definite impressions it would be difficult to assign them an evidential value without constant and careful notes, because of the double indefiniteness — the difficulty (1) of deciding what events are of sufficient importance to affiard a prima facie presumption that the coincident experiences are telepathically connected with them, and (2) of distinguishing clearly a peculiar feeling that something is happening from vague anxiety about absent friends. ^ If persons who show signs of this susceptibility would continuously, for some little time make a note in writing, with as much detail as possible, whenever a feeling of this kind occurred, and afterwards record the confirmation or absence of confirmation, interesting light might be thrown on the subject.]

(503) Obtained through the kindness of Miss 0. D. Garnett, of Furze Hill Lodge, Brighton, from a cousin, Mrs. D., who prefers that her own name should not be printed. Miss Garnett says: —

" I may safely say she never before or since had such a vision. She is thoroughly practical and unimaginative, not in the least excitable, and I remember well how puzzled slie was for a long time after. When she came to me some time after, she was full of it, and described it to me most graphically. She is almost like a sister to us, and I think discussed this affair more with us than with her own people. Her sister thought she was dreaming, but her father was rather astonished when she told him of the "vision the next morning."

"September 15th, 1885.

" Some few years ago the occurrence took place which I am about to relate. I was lying awake one night, my thoughts fixed on no particular subject, when before me seemed to rise the vision of the interior of a cathedral; the details which marked it from an ordinary church being clearly defined. In the open space before the chancel lay a coffin enveloped in its heavy black pall. After a few moments (as it seemed to me) it faded gradually away.^ I sat up and roused ' myself, as the whole scene was so real and strange, and I was convinced I had not been asleep. I had not lain down long before the same scene again repeated itself upon my brain, in every detail exactly as I had seen it before.^ The repetition of the vision (for such I firmly believed it was) filled me with presentiments of trouble, and rousing my sister, who was sleeping in the same room, I told her what I had seen; but as was natural, she concluded I had been dreaming. Next morning at breakfast I related what had occurred, and it was remarked that we knew no one in England whose funeral service would be likely to take place in a cathedral. Shortly after, we received news by telegram of the sudden death of my brother in the West Indies, and the day coincided with that on which I had seen the vision as related. When the letters

1 See Vol. i., pp. 270, 505; and above, pp. 26-7.

2 See p. 97, first note.

3 See p. 237, note.

468 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

containing all details arrived, we learnt that he was buried the same day that he died, in the evening, the funeral service taking place in the Colonial Cathedral. Allowing for the difference in time, it appears to have been as near as possible the same time as I in England saw the whole scene represented, the remembrance of which has remained indelibly printed on

my memory.

J. D.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. D. says: —

" The date of my brother's death was February 21st, and as far as I can remember I had the dream that evening, but it is so long since that as regards dates I do not like to be too certain. As regards the leng-th of time between the death and funeral, it was, I believe, only a few hours, certainly less than 12. The news of his death reached us by telegram on February 28th, about a week later. I have never had anything in the way of a vision either before or since. I enclose the few lines from my sister on the subject, after having told her that I had written you an account." The sister's words are: —

"I corroborate the statement of my sister's dream of February, 1879, which she narrated to me the morning after it occurred. a g_ q."

We find from the Times obituary that the death took place at George Town, Demerara, on February 21st, 1879.

[Without more details as to the supposed resemblance between the place seen in the vision and the real place of the funeral, no stress ought, I think, to be laid on this point; which is one, it will be seen, that telepathy could not satisfactorily account for.]

(504) Received on Oct. 28, 1884, from a gentleman occupying a high public position, who does not wish to give his name or to procure other attestations. He writes, it will be seen, in the third person. French is not his native language.

The account begins with an experience which M. had during

his father's last illness, while taking a brief sleep, after long nursing.

"Pendant le plus fort de son sommeil, M. se sentit comme tres

fortement secoue et appele par son nom. II se rdveilla en sursaut, tout efi'raye, sauta de son lit, se dirigeant vers la porte, ayant devant lui comme une ombre, qui disparu des qu'il fut dans I'entree. II traversa le grand salon, et tout I'appartement attenant. Arrive a la chambre de son pere, il trouva la garde-malade debout sur le seuil de la porte, lui barrant le passage. Son pere venait d'expirer au moment meme.

" L'impression de ce re veil est reste tellement vive dans I'esprit de

M. qu'il n'en a jamais parle sans aj outer, ' Ce n'etait certainement

pas la rdaHt^, mais pour sur c'etait plus qu'un reve.' "

This case alone could not have found a place in our evidence, as

M. was aware of his father's critical condition, and was in a highly

anxious and overstrained state. But he continues: —

" Quatre ans plus tard, en Tannine 1849, M. habitait Constantinople; il etait proscrit et I'entree de son pays lui etait interdite. Sa mere, qui ^tait a Bucarest, s' etait decidee d'aller s'etablir auprfes de lui; elle n'attendait plus que I'ouverture de la navigation du Danube, qui a lieu gdndralement vers le mois de Mars. Elle avait deja annonc^ a son fils le

nom du bateau de la Compagnie du Loyd Autrichien ser lequel elle devait s'embarquer a Galatz, et le 8 Avril elle devait arriver a Constantinople. Ces bateaux arrivaient toujours dans la Corne-d'or les mardis, vers les six heures du matin.

" Le 7 Avril M. passa la soiree avec deux de ses amis et parents,

et Ton decida que le lendemain les deux amis viendraient le chercher pour aller tous les trois recevoir la dame a bord. Les deux amis arriverent

le matin a I'heure convenue chez M.. Grand fut leur ^tonnement

lorsque celui-ci leur dit qu'il etait inutile d'aller au bateau, parceque sa mere venait de mourir. Ses amis crurent d'abord qu'il avait regu des nouvelles, mais ayant reflechi qu'il n'y avait pas pu avoir eu des lettres depuis une semaine, car il n'y avait eu depuis aucun arrivage — a cette ^poque le tdlegraphe etait chose completement inconnue dans ces parages — ils furent inquiets sur I'etat de I'esprit de leur ami, qui persistait a leur dire avec la plus grande assurance que sa mere etait morte dans la nuit

meme. M. venait d'avoir, apres s'etre endormi, le meme reveil,

precisement avec les memes circonstances, que dans la nuit du 26 au 27 Novembre, 1844, lors de la mort de son pere.

" Le bateau suivant, arrivd le 15 Avril, apportait des lettres annon9ant

que la mere de M. avait succomb^ dans la nuit du 7 au 8 Avril a la

suite d'un acc^s de fievre bilieuse, apres une courte maladie de deux jours."

The narrator stated in conversation that he had never had any subjective experience of the sort.

[The particular form of the second experience may perhaps have been due to the effect of the former one on M. 's mind.]

(505) From Miss Henrietta Wilkinson, Enniscorthy, Ireland.

"January, 1884.

" I live in Ireland, my nephew in London. At the end of October or beginning of November, 1881, when he was 8 years old, he went one day with his mother and sister to Kensington Gardens. While playing there he had a severe fall on his back; his mother had to call a cab and take him home, then send for the doctor. He was very ill for three or four days, lying in a dark room and kept perfectly quiet. The accident happened on a Saturday, I think. On the Sunday his mother wrote to tell me of it, which letter I received on Tu, sday. On the Monday night I was in bed, dropping off to sleep, when I opened my eyes with a start, and saw, quite distinctly, a London street, leading from Kensington Gardens to my nephew's home. All the people, cabs, and horses were running very fast in one direction, towards my sister's house. Amongst them were my sister and her two children, also running. They stopped a cab, got in, and arrived at their own house. I saw no more but exclaimed ' Maurice is hurt! ' why, I do not know, as my nephew looked all right in the street. It all seemed to come from outside myself. I thought it very strange, and told it to my family next morning, before my sister's letter arrived. I am not perfectly sure of the day of the week, but know it was the day after the accident my sister wrote, and that it was the night of the day after she wrote that I saw what I tell you.

" I think it was my nephew's thoughts of me that gave me the vision, I being the person he would think of, next to his father and mother.

" Henrietta Wilkinson."

470 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

Asked whether she had ever, on any other occasion, had a dream of death or accident which had impressed her, she says: — " No, I remember none. It was quite unique. But why call it a dream when I was wide awake 1 Had it been a dream I don't think it would have made the same impression on me."

Miss Wilkinson's sister writes on Jan. 8, 1884, from Castle Hill, Enniscorthy: —

" I distinctly remember my sister relating to us (myself and another sister) her vision or dream before she got any letter. It made a great impression on her, and she told us with surprise and a little alarm. She told us on Tuesday morning, and the letter telling of the accident arrived soon after. " Martha Wilkinson."

The interval between the accident and Miss Wilkinson's experience is too long for the case to be treated as one of deferred development (see Vol. I., p. 511); but the vision, which seems clearly to have been of a very unusual kind, may conceivably have been due to a half delirious recrudescence of the agitated scene in the mind of the little invalid. The confused and inaccurate character of the vision might be sufficiently accounted for in this way; but might also be construed as the transforming and dream-like investiture which telepathic percipients have so often seemed to supply.

The next case is a singular one, as, supposing it to have been telepathic, there was no personal bond between the agent and percipient. In this respect it recalls cases 459 and 490; but in the present case there was local proximity between the parties.

(506) From a lady whose family object to the publication of her name.

"May 24th, 1884.

" Somewhere about three years ago, to the best of my remembrance, I was suddenly awoke in the night by hearing what seemed to me a voice saying, ' You had better get up, someone is dying.' I went to my father's door, but finding all right, returned to bed, but could not sleep again all the rest of the night. The next day one of my servants told me the gentleman next door had died in the night. I was not aware he was likely to die, indeed I knew nothing of him, and he never entered my thoughts. He had been delicate or an invalid ever since we had lived here. I did not mention this dream at the time, not supposing it would interest my father. I have always been a great dreamer."

We fijad from the Register of Deaths that the death took place on March 19th, 1881, at the house next Miss L.'s.

In answer to inquiries. Miss L. writes on June 28, 1884: — " I have heard, or seem to have heard, voices at other times, both by day and night, and I think they have invariably had some meaning, except in cases where I have accounted for them in consequence of my sufiering from overstrained nerves or illness. I do not remember ever being awoke by a voice in this way at any other time, though I have some-

times awoke suddenly thinking someone called me by name. This is the only case I have experienced of being awakened by a remarhr

[In an interview with Miss L., Mr. Podmore learnt that she had fixed the time of her impression by hearing the clock strike 3 soon afterwards. The servant, from whom Miss L. heard of the death next morning, thinks she was told by a servant next door that it took place at 4 a.m., and is certain it was " in the morning." After hearing of the death. Miss L. wrote and told her sister of her experience; the sister confirmed this. The wall between the two houses is too thick to permit the sound of conversation to pass.]

(507) From Mr. Francis A. Suttaby, 2, Amen Corner, E.G., and 48, Redclifi'e Square, S.W. u March 3rd, 1884.

'•'■En route home, in July last, when about in mid- Atlantic, on a certain evening I retired in due course to rest, and in my sleep was suddenly disturbed by a voice (impetuous) calling aloud, ' Frank! Frank! ' (I was alone, as I had a berth entirely to myself.) So suddenly did I spring up out of my heavy sleep, that I nearly knocked my head against the berth that was over mine. I replied, ' Yes, yes, what? ' No answer coming, I spoke again, hastily, ' I am here — what's the matter % — who called % ' No answer being vouchsafed, and supposing there was some mistake on my part, as poor little disturbed Samuel might have done, I addressed myself aloud, 'Francis Arthur, go to sleep — some mistake.' Of course, the next morning, at the breakfast table — the captain had invited me to his table — I made much amusement for him and the ladies and a certain Major Jones, of Kingston, Ontario. I must admit Major Jones seemed more concerned than I allowed myself to be. In fact, I tried to put away the thought, and made light of it. Within an hour of my reaching my dear old uncle's house at Putney (my wife and family being then in France), my aunt informed me of the sudden death of my cousin Nora [Mrs. R.], which was most touching to me; and when I ascertained the day the poor soul died, ' Why,' I said, ' that's the very morning I was disturbed in my sleep,' telling her what I have already described to you. Subsequently, I gathered the hour my cousin died, and that the strange cry of ' Frank, Frank,' as for help, which startled me out of my sleep, was at the very hour when Nora was really, but apparently unconsciously, passing from this lower world; for the difference in time between here and where I was would bring the hour of her flight and evident call to one and the same.

" Perhaps the most extraordinary feature connected with the voice is, that not till I saw her brother Ernest, in Torquay, did anyone think to ask me, as he did, ' But whose voice do you suppose it was 1 ' Immediately it dawned on me, ' Why, your sister's — Nora's, without a doubt.' Then he asked. Why 1 thought it was her voice 1 ' Because I can now distinguish it as her voice. It was hastily spoken, impetuous, as you know she could be.' "Eras. A. Suttaby."

Mr. Suttaby fixed the date of the voice by its occurring in the night (or very early morning), after the onli/ storm which they had on the voyage, this storm being noted in his diary. He kindly sent us an extract from the diary, which showed that the weather from July 4, when the " Bothnia " left New York, to July 8 was fine. The extracts for the next 3 days are as follow: —

472 SUPPLEMENT.. [chap.

" 9th. — Fine, but rough. Ended with a storm, and retired early, whilst I could stand.

" 10th. — Fine and bright all day, but very stormy. Remained in bed all day.

" 11th. — In my seat at breakfast. Pleasant day, and played 'shuiB.es.'"

Mr. Suttaby continues: —

"The memorial-card of my cousin states that she died suddenly July 10th. I cannot now be certain as to when I heard my name called — whether on morning of 10th or 11th. All I know is that when informed of the death of my cousin, each day then being fresh in my memory, I fixed it as an unquestionable fact, not supposing I should ever be questioned again as to details, and having no reasons, no motives whatsoever, for fixing the cry of ' Frank, Frank ' to the day of my cousin's death.

" What I stated did occur, and no one's voice but that of Nora resembled the twice-repeated impetuous cry."

We find from the obituary of the Scotsman that Mrs. R. died suddenly on July 10, 1883. She had no relatives with her when she died. In conversation with the present writer, Mr. Suttaby mentioned that he was the person who, from circumstances, had had most to do with her and her afiairs of late years, and he thus regards it as natural that her thoughts should have turned specially to him. Her death was very sudden.

Mr. Suttaby tells us that he has on one other occasion experienced a hallucination, which again consisted in hearing his name called; but as this took place at a large railway station, it was possibly a real call. With regard to the present case he says: — -

" I do not admit what I heard was hallucination. I was fast asleep in my bed, and I was suddenly awaked; I sat up quickly, and said, ' Yes, yes! I am here. What '? — Who called? ' — or words to that eft'ect. I never lost the firm conviction that I was really called — that a real voice, as if needing my protection and assistance, called to me."

We have ascertained from Capt. McKay that he does not (in April, 1886) recall Mr. Suttaby's mention of the incident. Major Jones writes, on April 6, 1886, from the Army and Navy Club, S.W.: —

" I cannot tell you more than the fact that one day Mr. Suttaby stated he had awoke in the night hearing a child call, and that he thought it must be a niece (I think) who had died." This last detail cannot weigh against Mr. Suttaby's distinct recollection that the voice at the time was not distinctly associated with his cousin.

[Whether the experience was on the 10th or 11th, it is possible, though not certain, that it fell within 12 hours of the death.]

(508) From Mrs. Hancock, Penarth Lodge, Stoke Bishop, Bristol, a member of the Society of Friends.

"April 14th, 1884.

" In my Northern-Irish home,, I received a letter on the 7th November, 1865, from my brother in Warwickshire, saying that my mother was ill, and he wished I would go and see her. I started the same evening by Belfast and Fleetwood. I had been several hours in my berth, on the Irish Channel, and was half asleep, when I was startled by feeling a hand grasp my shoulder and a voice say, in a loud whisper, ' Come quickly.' I

rose up and sat looking round the cabin, but could see no one. I called to the stewardess, but she was fast asleep, and so were all the other ladies. I again lay down, but not to sleep, and in a very short time, not 20 minutes afterwards, the same pressure was put on my shoulder and the same words were distinctly uttered close to my ear, ' Come quickly.' ^ I again called loudly to the stewardess and told her to light the lamp, for I was sure some one must have been standing by me. She declared that no one had been in the cabin, and all around was so still and quiet. I reached the station at half -past 12 at noon, when my brother met me. He said, 'All is over, my mother passed away at 4 this morning.'

" I ought to have stated that when I called to the stewardess and made her light the lamp, immediately after I heard the voice and felt the hand on my shoulder the second time, I then asked her to tell me what o'clock it was, and she said, ' Four o'clock.' I looked at my own watch and it was the same. I being an only daughter and my mother having been a widow the last five years of her life, she was much wrapped up in me and in my children, and the tie between us was of no ordinary kind. I have always looked upon this as a direct voice from herself, just as she was dying and passing into the spiritual world.

"Lucy Hancock."

We find from the Coventry Herald that the death took place on Nov. 9, 1865. Mrs. Hancock can hardly be mistaken as to having heard the news from her brother on her arrival, i.e., on the day following that on which she started. We may conclude therefore that the 7th in the first line of her account is a mistake for 8th.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Hancock adds; —

" In reply to your question, whether I have at any other time, besides the one described, ' had an experience of the kind, i.e., fancied I heard or felt a human presence when no one was present,' I have to say that I never did.

" My brother has just been here, and says he recollects saying to me ' all was over at 4 o'clock this morning,' on the day he met me at the station, November 9th, 1865; but he does not recollect the particulars of what happened to me on board the steamer. He has at any rate a very bad memory, whereas I have the reputation of having an unusually good one; and to my mind that pressure on my arm, twice, and the words ' Come quickly ' are as vivid now as if all had happened last week, instead of 19 years ago."

[The weak point in this case is of course the state of anxiety which preceded the experience; the strong point, if correctly remembered, is the exactitude of the coincidence. Mrs. Hancock had no previous belief in anything like telepathy, and takes no special interest in the subject.]

(509) From Mrs. Sprague, Sunnyside, 275, Coldharbour Lane, Brixton, S.W., who says that "the particulars are plain unvarnished truth."

"Aug. 25th, 1886.

[The narrator's mother, Mrs. Green, to whom she was deeply attached, had promised that, if she died when they were apart, she would let her daughter " know that she was quitting this world." ^ Soon after Mrs.

1 As to repetition after a short interval, see p. 105, first note.

2 See p. 66, note.

474 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

Sprague's marriage, her mother went to keep house for a son, at Major's Creek, Braidwood, N.S. Wales, and the two had not met for 12 years. In the summer of 1868, Mrs. Sprague, who had been in New Zealand, was on her way to pay her mother a visit.] " She was expecting me; and the last letter was cheerful and happy, intensely expectant of my visit; also she was, she said, quite well.

"On Sunday night, the 14th of June, 1868, I retired to bed about 11.30, and slept soundly until 3 o'clock, when I suddenly woke hearing my mother's voice. She stood at the foot of my bed. She said, ' Oh, come! I want you! ' The moon was at the full; and the room as light as day. I threw myself out of bed instantly. She was gone. I then realised how far away she was: and a strange supernatural feeling, a feeling impossible to describe, took possession of me: like lightning the compact made in England many years before returned to my mind, and I knew with certainty that she was dying. I looked at my watch; it was 3 o'clock. I lay awake till the morning dawned, and at 12 o'clock that day I had a telegram from my brother, asking me to come on quickly as she had had a fit [late on the Saturday night] and could not live. This was Monday. I could not leave Melbourne till the following Thursday, there being only steamers twice a week, so on the Wednesday [corrected in conversation to Thursday] I received another telegram saying she was dead. Her body was kept for 10 days that I might attend the funeral, which I did, travelling post all the time.

" On questioning the nurse who attended her, she said, ' Your mother ceased to breathe on Wednesday, June 17th, but the last sign of life she gave was on the Sunday night, or morning, when at about 3 o'clock, appearing still insensible, she rose up and attempted to stand, but fell heavily forward. With assistance I replaced her in the bed, and she remained motionless till she ceased to breathe.' This was the exact moment that her spirit appeared and called me."^

In conversation, Mrs. Sprague stated that not only her child, but also her landlady, Mrs. Bellman, was sleeping with her on the night of the vision. We are endeavouring to trace Mrs. Bellman. The brother and the nurse are dead. Miss Alice Sprague stated independently that she distinctly remembers being woke by her mother's exclamation; and she also remembers Mrs. Bellman's remonstrating with Mrs. Sprague for disturbing her; but Miss Sprague has no recollection of being told at the time what her mother had seen.

Mrs. Sprague has had only one other hallucination in her life, which followed the above by nearly 7 years: it was again of the " borderland " type, and represented her deceased mother.

[The fact that the percipient's mind had no doubt been considerably occupied with the thought of her approaching meeting with her mother, somewhat weakens the case; but I know of no other instance where the idea of a happy meeting has originated so abnormal an experience.]

§ 3. The next little group are first-hand cases which have already been published.

(510) From the Memoir of the Hon. and Rev. Power-le-Poer Trench, last Archbishop of Tuam (1845), by the Rev. J. D'Arcy Sirr, D.D.,

^ See p. 48, note.

