§ 7. The remaining head that we have to consider is expectancy. The evidence as to the power of this condition of mind to produce waking hallucinations is rather more definite than in the case of anxiety. Braid describes a lady who, as soon as the idea was suggested to her, saw coruscating flames issue from the poles of a magnet, or wherever she believed the influence of the magnet to extend; and

1 As our telepathic theory is a psychical one, and makes no physical assumptions, it would be perfectly applicable (though the name perhaps would be inappropriate) to the conditions of disembodied existence. And it may be quite fairly asked why this possibility was not taken account of above, in connection with the phantasms that have shortly followed deaths. What need is there, it may be said, to trace these phenomena to a state of the agent preceding or exactly synchronising with his physical decease, when his psychical life may be supposed t" be continuing after the great change? The answer is that the point is not one of theoretic possibilities, but of evidence; and that the evidence for post-mortem communications seems to us inconclusive. In all the evidential cases cited in this book, the very keystone of the argument is the coincidence — more or less close, but always close enough to be remarked — with death or some other external fact. That — and often that alone — is the obstacle to regarding the cases as purely subjective: failing that, very special and peculiar features must be present, to establish even a presumption of some exciting cause external to the percipient's own mind. For example, the same hallucination might affect several persons independently and at different times; or the phantasm might convey information, afterwards discovered to be true, of something which the percipient had never known — this last condition being probably the only one which could prove an intelligent external cause. A certain amount of evidence of both these types exists, of a quality which makes it imperative on us to keep our minds open for more; but at present it will bear no sort of comparison with the evidence for telepathy. For a sketch and criticism of the present state of the question, see Mrs. Sidgwick's paper " On the Evidence, collected by the S.P.R., for Phantasms of the Dead," in Vol. iii. of the Proceedings.

in the dark, liability to this form of delusion seems not very uncommon. Crucial examples of a more developed type — except in crises of epidemic excitement (see Vol. II., pp. 187-8) — are less easy to find. I have one daylight case where a man who was searching for a tennis-ball had a distinct apparition of the missing object in a spot where it was not. And expectancy may probably be answerable for a good many apparitions seen in rooms believed to be " haunted." I select the following example, however, as free from all superstitious associations, and as almost certainly a hallucination, and not a mere illusion. A barrister — whose name I am at liberty to mention, but

not to print — writes to me: —

" December 21st, 1885.

"In October, 1885, I was stopping for the night at the Swan Hotel at B., on circuit. My bedroom was No. 17. My friend K., a brother barrister, occupied No. 16. Between No. 17 (my room) and No. 18 there was a communicating door, and before retiring to rest I was under the impression that the door was between my room and my friend K.'s. I had told my friend K. so, when bidding him good-night, and he had jokingly remarked that he would come in and frighten me during the night. I discovered before going to bed that our rooms did not communicate. I must have been asleep some hours, when I woke up with a sensation that someone was close to my bed, and feeling about the other side of the chintz curtain at the head of the bed. I could hear the rustling and crackling of the curtain close to my face. I felt perfectly unable to move, or protect myself — not through any fear, but from a want of power of movement.1 After a few seconds this powerlessness went off, and I sprang out of bed, and saw the figure of my friend K. retreating towards the foot of the bed. He kept his face averted, his head a little bent, but I could see the wire and one of the glasses of his spectacles as he turned from me; he was dressed in his night-shirt. And what made me believe in the reality of the appearance was the ' solidity ' of the white nightdress, and the light on the spectacles. The room was in dim light, owing to gaslamps in street, and a fanlight over door admitting light from gas in passage. I grasped at my friend with both hands and supposed I had missed him as my hands met in the grasp. I attempted again to grasp him, when he disappeared as if through the floor under the washing-stancl. I then realised, with some interest, that it was a hallucination, and I sat on the bed, wide awake, interested in thinking it over. I told K. of it next morning. I am uncertain whether there was a fan-light over the door, but such was my impression at the time; anyway, the room was light. " " T. H. L."

" K." sent me a completely concordant account a month earlier. He says that he never walked in his sleep, and adds: —

" I had no notion where L.'s room was that night, but afterwards

1 I have two other cases where a subjective hallucination seen on waking was accompanied by inability to speak or move. See also the telepathic case No. 210, below.

2 K

514 TRANSIENT HALLUCINATIONS OF THE SANE: [chap.

found that it was separated from mine by a passage. I don't think the sleep-walking theory is possible; and he is quite clear as to my vanishing."

The auditory examples are commoner and clearer. As might be expected, they are specially connected with sounds which occur in an isolated way, such as those of bells and clocks. Thus a lady tells me that more than once, in her student days, when wondering what time it was, she distinctly heard the college clock strike, and then ascertained that the impression had been a delusion. She has also heard an imaginary " Come in," after knocking at a door. Another lady not unfrequently had a similar clock-hallucination when she was afraid of being late in the morning. A gentleman tells me that he has had the hallucination of hearing billiard-balls, when in bed near a billiard-room. That the habit of half-unconsciously looking out for any particular sound has a tendency to produce a phantasm of it is also shown by the experience of domestic servants. I have cases from two members of this class who occasionally, when at their household work, have heard the voice of their mistress calling them in tones as unmistakeable as if they were real. And another informant tells me that she distinctly heard her father's voice call to her one morning, " Come, Sissy, it's past 8, you're late," and ascertained that he had said nothing. No one will doubt that such experiences as these are purely subjective.

Cases occur, however, where the other explanation seems less ■clearly excluded. Mr. Charles Ede, of Wonersh Lodge, Guildford, a doctor by profession, who describes himself as a very unlikely person to be " deceived by morbid fancies," sends us the following example. Some ladies who lived about half-a-mile from him had a large alarmbell outside their house, and one night he seemed distinctly to hear the sound of this bell. He learnt afterwards that there had been an alarm of thieves that night, and that at the very time, 1.30 a.m., when he was startled by the sound, his friends had been on the point of ringing the bell in the hope that it would bring him; but they had not actually rung it. The hallucination may have been due to the sub-conscious idea of a possible summons in Mr. Ede's mind; and the coincidence may probably have been accidental; but if such a thing as telepathy exists, the probability does not amount to certainty. Again, a clergyman is awakened at 7.30 one morning by the sound of his name, ascertains that no one has called him, and learns in less than an hour that a friend, for whom he was fulfilling a trust, had unexpectedly died at 7.30 that morning. He has never on any other

occasion heard an imaginary voice. Still, an experience of this sort,

coming in sleep, and at the very time when the organism would be,

so to speak, preparing itself for the sudden change and the summons

to activity which waking involves, must be classed as ambiguous.

A type of case which often makes a great impression on those who

experience it is where the expectation is of some one's arrival. The

following auditory specimen is from the Hon. Mrs. Fox Powys, already

mentioned (p. 271).

"July, 1882.

" I was expecting my husband home, and shortly after the time he ought to have arrived (about 10 p.m.) I heard a cab drive up to the door, the bell ring, my husband's voice talking with the cabman, the front door open, and his step come up the stairs. I went to the drawing-room, opened it, and to my astonishment saw no one. I could hardly believe he was not there, the whole thing was so vivid, and the street was particularly quiet at the time. About 20 minutes or so after this my husband really arrived, though nothing sounded to me more real than it did the first time. The train was late, and he had been thinking I might be anxious.

"Amy C. Powys."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Powys adds: —

" To me the whole thing was very noisy and real, but no one else can have heard anything, for the bell I heard ring was not answered. It was a quiet street in town, and there was no vehicle of any kind passing at the time; and on finding no one on the landing as I expected, I went at once to the window, and there was nothing to be seen, and no sound to be heard, which would have been the case had the cab been driven off."

Now the hearing of a bell, and the hearing of a carriage driving up, are both known forms of subjective impression, even apart from expectancy, nor is there anything odd in their combination; and if, as I suspect, slight hallucinations of such non-vocal sounds are tolerably common, it is natural to suppose that expectancy might exaggerate them. The recognised voice was, no doubt, a more distinctive feature; but in the percipient's circumstances, and after the other sounds heard, this seems too natural an addition to warrant us in connecting it with the fact that her husband's thoughts happened to be directed to her at the time. And if this case may be dismissed, a fortiori may others of a less prolonged and complicated kind — especially those lacking the distinct timbre-element of bell and voice, and so more easily accounted for as mere misinterpretations of real sounds whose source was not evident.

In the parallel visual cases, the impression is, at any rate, often of the most distinctive and unmistakeable kind; and it is impossible not to be struck by the number of instances in which this startling

2 k 2

516 TRANSIENT HALLUCINATIONS OF THE SANE: [chap.

experience — -the single visual hallucination of a person's life — has represented the figure of a friend or relative who was on his way to the place where his figure appeared, and whose mind was probably to some extent picturing his own arrival.1 None the less, I think, if expectancy existed on the percipient's part, must it be assumed to have been the sufficient cause of the hallucination. Such a case as the following, sent to us by the Rev. F. R. Harbaugh (Pastor of the Presbyterian Church), Red Bank, Monmouth Co., New Jersey, U.S.A., is very instructive.

"February 7th, 1884.

"While a resident of the city of Philadelphia, I made an appointment to meet a personal friend. At the appointed hour I was at the designated place. My friend was tardy in his appearing. After a while, however, I saw him approaching (or thought I did). So assured was I of his advance that I advanced to meet him, when presently he disappeared entirely.

" The locality where I thought I saw his approach was open, and unobstructed by any object behind which he could have disappeared. Only by leaping a high brick wall (an enclosure of a burying-grouncl) could he have secreted himself. The hallucination was complete — so distinct as to lead me to advance to meet him without a thought of optical illusion.

" I immediately went to the office of my friend, and there learned from him that he had not been away from his desk for several hours.

" F. R. Harbaugh."

In answer to an inquiry, Mr. Harbaugh adds: —

" The appointment was forgotten by my friend, as he stated in his apology when I entered his office."

Telepathy from an unconscious region of the defaulter's mind would scarcely be a plausible explanation of this occurrence.

At first sight it may perhaps seem strange that the ordinary every-day sort of expectancy which existed in these cases should be a sufficient cause for so rare and startling a delusion. But remembering that in the majority of startling delusions of the sort there is no

1 The following case, from Mrs. Smith, of 9, Morden Road, Blackheath, is a typical one.

"My father and mother lived, when young, near St. Albans, in a house separated by three fields from the high road. My father had been staying in Warwickshire, and was returning by the night mail coach. My mother had risen early to be ready for his return, and after seeing that breakfast and a bright fire were ready for his reception, she took her work to the window and sat there awaiting my father's return. She presently looked up and saw him approaching; she watched him until close to the house, when she went to the house door intending to meet him, but he had vanished. Half an hour afterwards he really arrived. My mother was a Quakeress of exceeding truthfulness, and possessing to the full the perfect self-command and self-repression inculcated by her sect. I have often heard her say that she never had seen my father more distinctly than on that occasion."

assignable cause at all, and that a person may therefore be on the very verge of hallucination without knowing it, we may not unreasonably suppose that a very slight ostensible cause might give the final impulse. It must be noticed, moreover, that in these arrival-cases the alternative to the hypothesis of the subjective origin of the hallucination is by no means clear. For what would the telepathic explanation involve? That on the agent's part the mere sense of being about to arrive, with thoughts perhaps affectionately turning to the percipient, is adequate to generate a telepathic impulse. Now have we any right to make such an assumption?

§ 8. This question, it will be seen, brings us round to the head of ambiguity numbered 1 in the above list; — where the doubt was whether a supposed agent's condition is abnormal enough for a synchronous hallucination of the percipient to form with it a coincidence deserving of attention. And it happens that it is only in the arrival-cases that this question has practically been difficult to decide. Many individual incidents of other types have, of course, been excluded from our evidence, on the ground that the abnormality of the alleged agent's condition was only slight, or that it was prolonged over a considerable time; x but these arrival-cases seem to

1 I give the following case as an interesting puzzle: the reader must decide whether or not it affords evidence for telepathy. The narrator, Mr. W. A. S., is an unexceptionable witness, and has never had any other visual hallucination.

" January 14th, 1883.

" In the month of April, 1871, about 2 o'clock in the afternoon, I was sitting in the drawing-room of my father's house, in Pall Mall. The window of the room fronted south; and the sun was shining brightly in at the window. I was sitting between the fire-place and the window, with my back to the light; my niece was sitting on the opposite side of the fire-place; and opposite me, at the further corner of the room, was a door partly open, leading directly to the staircase. I saw what I supposed at the first moment to be dirty soapy water running in at the door; and I was in the act of jumping up to scold the housemaid for upsetting the water, when I saw that the supposed water was the tail or train of a lady's dress. The lady glided in backwards, as if she had been slid in on a slide, each part of her dress keeping its place without disturbance. She glided in till I could see the whole of her, except the tip of her nose, her lips, and the tip of her chin, which were hidden by the edge of the door. Her head was slightly turned over her shoulder, and her eye also turned, so that it appeared fixed upon me. She held her arm, which was a very fine one, in a peculiar way, as if she were proud of it. She was dressed in a pale blue evening dress, worked with white lace. I instantly recognised the figure as a lady whom I had known some 25 years or more before; and with whom I had frequently danced. She was a bright, dashing girl, a good dancer, and we were good friends, but nothing more. She had afterwards married, and I had occasionally heard of her, but do not think I had seen her for certainly more than 20 or 25 years. She looked much as I used to see her — with long curls and bright eyes, but perhaps something stouter and more matronly.

"I said to myself, ' This is one of those strange apparitions I have often heard of. I will watch it as carefully as I can. ' My niece, who did not see the figure, in the course of a minute or two exclaimed, ' Uncle A., what is the matter with you? you look as if you saw a ghost! ' I motioned her to be quiet, as I wished to observe the thing carefully; and an impression came upon me that if I moved, the thing would disappear. I tried to find out whether there was anything in the ornaments on the walls, or anything else which could suggest the figure: but I found that all the lines close to her cut the outline of her

518 TRANSIENT HALLUCINATIONS OF THE SANE. [chap.

form a distinct little class of their own. It happens also that some of them have presented features which tell rather strongly in favour of a telepathic origin. For instance, the vision representing the coming person has included some detail of dress or appearance which the percipient's mind would have been most unlikely to supply; or again, though the person whom the vision represented was actually about to arrive, his arrival was improbable and unexpected, and therefore the vision could not be connected with the percipient's attitude of mind. Such instances — though forming too small a group to be conclusive — do not seem any longer to be ambiguous in at all the same degree as those before considered, and they may fairly take their place among the positive evidence in a later chapter.1 On the other hand — in view of the fact that in the vast majority of the cases where the evidence for telepathy reaches a certain strength, the agent is doing or suffering something much more remarkable than merely returning home — we do not feel that the telepathic explanation can claim any high degree of probability in any arrival-case where the hallucination has not presented some exceptional evidential feature; and accordingly no such case has been admitted in the sequel.

The discussion of these ambiguous cases has not, I hope, been altogether without positive instruction; but it was necessary, if only to clear the way for further examination of the telepathic phantasms. For if the question whether, or in what sense, those phantasms are hallucinations requires us to compare them with other hallucinations of the sane, the comparison must clearly be confined to cases which are certainly subjective, to the exclusion of cases which may conceivably themselves be telepathic.

figure at all sorts of angles, and none of these coincided with the outline of her figure, and the colour of everything around her strongly contrasted with her colour. In the course of a few minutes, I heard the door-bell ring, and I heard my brother's voice in the hall. He came upstairs, and walked right through the figure into the room. The figure then began to fade away rather quickly, at first losing the colours and then the form; and though I tried, I could in no way recall it.

" I frequently told the story in society.treating it always as something internal rather than external, and supposing that the lady was still alive; and rather making a joke of it than otherwise. Some years afterwards I was staying with some friends in Suffolk and told the story at the dinner table, saying that it was no ghost, as the lady was still alive. The lady of the house said, ' She is not alive as you suppose, but she has been dead some years.' We looked at the peerage, and we found she had died in 1871. (I afterwards found out that she had died in November, whereas the apparition was in April.) The conversation continued about her, and I said, ' Poor thing, I am sorry she is dead. I have had many a merry dance with her. What did she die of? ' The lady of the house said, 'Poor thing, indeed, she died a wretched death; she died of cancer in the face.' She never showed me the front of her face; it was always concealed by the edge of the door."

1 See Chap, xiv., § 7. In § 6 will be found a few cases where even the condition of arrival was lacking, and the coincidence that suggests telepathy depended simply on a peculiarity of dress or aspect.



Chapter XII. The Development of Telepathic Hallucinations.

§ 1. The main points which I shall illustrate in the present chapter are two: (1) the gradual development of many telepathic hallucinations; and (2) the frequent embodiment of the idea which is at the root of them in an original, improbable, or fantastic manner — its clothing upon (so to speak) with images that indicate a distinct process of mental activity. Both of these points present themselves also in hallucinations of the sane of the purely subjective class; and the consideration of them will, I think, sufficiently establish the parallelism — as phenomena for the senses — of subjective and telepathic phantasms.

As regards gradual development, — one form of it might be found in that deferment of the percipient's experience, which is as frequent a feature in the phantasmal group as we have found it to be in other groups of telepathic cases.1 We should scarcely look for any very precise analogy to this deferment in the purely subjective class; inasmuch as the connection of a purely subjective hallucination with an idea which has previously obtained unconscious lodgment in the mind must, from the very nature of the case, be hard to establish. I may, however, refer once more to the N'IMPORTE incident, and to the other case described at p. 492, note, where an idea which was so far latent that even a deliberate search for it failed to evoke it, projected itself in sensory form at what appeared to be a quite casual moment. I will add an experience which has been described to me by a naval Captain, who has never in his life had any other hallucination of the senses. During his first important command, he twice in one night had a distinct auditory impression of the words, " Captain F., come on deck " — the reality of the impression being

1 See, e.g., pp. 201, 265, 329.

520 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

shown by the fact that he obeyed the imaginary summons. He does not recall any preceding knowledge of danger. But it turned out that the course which the ship was running was in fact a dangerous one; and it is natural, therefore, to conclude that some sub-conscious idea that his presence might be needed shaped itself in this outward form.1

But the development of which I wish here to speak is that which occurs after the abnormal experience has actually commenced. Such development may take various forms. Thus, (1) the phantasm may be recognised only some moments after it has been perceived, or even after it has ceased to be perceived; or (2) a visible figure may take shape gradually; or (3) the process of illusion may include several distinct stages. In all these cases we may suppose that the idea, at first but dimly conceived and vaguely apprehended, is working itself into definiteness (as so often occurs in the processes of abstract reasoning), and that the character of the projection undergoes a corresponding change. Nowhere do we more clearly see the affinity of the waking hallucinations to dreams, which often, of course, exhibit the working out of an idea in a prolonged and elaborate form.

§ 2. And first very briefly to exhibit these types among purely subjective experiences — the following case, which most of my readers will probably refer to that class, is one where the phantasm was only recognised in the instant of or after disappearance. The narrator is Mr. R. Gibson, of Mulgrave Cottage, Limerick.

"February 25th, 1884. " As well as I can remember, it was in the year 1862. I know it was in the early part of my courting days, so that it must have been 1862 or 1863. I was walking home one night about 10 p.m. — the night was not dark, I could see clearly for many yards ahead — when I met face to face a man in the bye-road which leads from the high road to my father's house. I felt that sort of start one does when you feel you are coming against something in the dark, without actually striking against it. Then the thought came, ' Confound his impudence, why does he not move out of my way? ' and I stepped straight forward, intending to walk bang into him, but as I stepped right up to him, with my chest up to him, he was gone, and the instant as he vanished I thought, ' Oh, Lord, that is my Grandfather Gibson.' I felt rather queer, I can tell you, but I looked well round, and there was no one near. I carefully went to that place night after night again, and watched the spot often other nights over our wall,

1 The more striking case quoted in the note on pp. 481-2, may without improbability be attributed to a similar latent idea of danger.

and I could never either see or think I saw anything again. My grandfather was dead about 1 1 years at the time, and was never much in my thoughts, as I had never been much with him; and at the time I was thinking only of the events of the evening, as I suppose most young men madly in love, as I was, would have been. I was about as happy and as full of health and life as I suppose any fellow could possibly be. It was quite a puzzle to me for many years what it could have been for; but I think I know now." [This last sentence merely refers to the fact that Mr. Gibson was at that time becoming involved in an affair that turned out unfortunately.]

The gradual formation of the phantasm is a decidedly rare phenomenon. M. Marillier, in one of the most interesting accounts of subjective hallucination ever published,1 says of his own experiences, " C'est un fait interessant a noter que les hallucinations n'apparaissent pas d'ordinaire d'emblee, mais qu'elles se developpent et grandissent, se rapprochent peu a peu, tandis qu'elles disparaissent toujours brusquement." On the whole, I think that it is less uncommon for the disappearance to be gradual — a fading away, occasionally accompanied by an expansion of the figure.2 Other cases do not get beyond the stage of indefinite cloudy forms. But I have very few subjective cases where a definite object took shape out of a vague mass. One of these belongs to the " swarming " class — the faces, sometimes hideous and sometimes beautiful, being described by my informant as developing out of mist. Another informant tells me that during fainting-fits, to which in boyhood he was rather liable, he always saw white cloudy masses pass in front of him, which gradually assumed a general resemblance to human forms. A third case is from Mr. Robert Collings, of 118, Earl's Court Road, S.W. When a boy, he awoke one night, and found the moon brightly illuminating the side of the room facing the bed.

" While gazing, I distinctly saw — rising in the moonlit space between the curtains at the foot of the bed — what appeared to be vapour or cloud, and as this grew higher, it gradually assumed the shape of a draped female figure, holding towards me in one hand a lamp and in the other a basin, from which steam seemed to rise. The form vanished slowly, and I afterwards fell asleep without experiencing either fear or horror."

Mr. Collings' brother, who was sharing his room at the time, writes, from the Royal Naval Club, Portsmouth, that he distinctly remembers hearing of this vision immediately afterwards.

1 Revue Philosophique for February, 1886, p. 212.

2 For example, Mr. I. Nicholl, of 32, Lancaster Gate, W., describes to me a waking hallucination representing a child of his, whom he '' saw in his night-gown, coming from the window. It increased in size and gradually vanished."

522 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

This experience may probably be accounted for as a recrudescence of what the boy's eyes had shortly before beheld on several occasions during a trifling illness. The case, however, ought strictly to rank as ambiguous, because the relative who had tended him in this illness had just died (see p. 512). It will be seen that the disappearance, as well as the appearance, was gradual.

The occurrence of subjective hallucinations in several stages is, on the other hand, common enough. I have mentioned the occasional development of an undefined impression of a presence into definite visible or audible form (p. 483, and see Vol. II., p. 201). In another case, as to the subjective character of which I myself entertain little doubt, my informant describes seeing an unusual light on the staircase, looking up, and then perceiving a deceased relative standing with a candle on the stairs. Dr. Jessopp (p. 499, note) saw a large white hand, before he turned round and beheld the complete form of his nocturnal visitor. But the more usual type is where two or more senses are concerned. So marked an instance as the incident of the servant and the message, quoted above (p. 499, note), is no doubt exceptional; but a figure which speaks, or which shakes the percipient's arm; the sound of footsteps or of an opening door, followed by an entrance; a voice and a kiss — such incidents, though far less frequent than hallucinations of the single senses, are yet well represented among the subjective delusions of the sane.

§ 3. I turn now to the telepathic cases. The most striking case of delayed recognition in our collection is perhaps that of Mr. Marchant above (p. 207). A case where the phantasmal figure was taken first for one person and then for another, the latter being the one who died at the time, will be found in Vol. II., p. 71.1 In the

1 See also case 501, and compare the very parallel dream-case, No. 455. There is a curious case in the Supplement, No. 572, where a phantasm was not recognised at the first moment, owing to its appearing too near the face of the percipient.

As it happens, we have only one simple auditory example of delayed recognition; and that one cannot be presented as a numbered item in the telepathic evidence, since the 12 hours' limit (p. 139) is known to have been slightly exceeded. The account was written down, a few months after the occurrence, from the dictation of the percipient — Sister Bertha, Superior of the House of Mercy at Bovey Tracy, Newton Abbot— who read it through on December 29th, 1885, pronounced it correct, and signed it.

" On the night of the 10th of November, 1861 (I do not know the exact hour), I was up in my bed watching, because there was a person not quite well in the next room. I heard a voice, which I recognised at once as familiar to me, and at first thought of my sister. It said, in the brightest and most cheerful tone, 'I am herewith you.' I answered, looking and seeing nothing, ' Who are you?' The voice said, ' You mustn't know yet.' I heard nothing more, and saw nothing, and am certain that the door was not opened or shut. I was not in the least frightened, and felt convinced that it was Lucy's [Miss Lucy Gambier Parry's] voice. I have never doubted it from that moment. I had not heard of her being worse; the last account had been good, and L was expecting to hear

two following examples, the face of the apparition seemed familiar, though the percipient could not at the time identify it. The first is from Mr. T. W. Goodyear, now of Avoca Villa, Park Road, Bevois

Hill, Southampton.

" Highfielcl Villa, Winchester.

"February 9th, 1884.

(191) "I may remark first of all I am considered by my friends as possessing iron nerves, am passionately fond of athletics, and certainly not given to letting imagination or fear run off with my senses. But although 1 can without boasting say I hardly know what fear is, I am peculiarly susceptible to mental impressions; that is, I can often tell what is passing in the minds of others (especially my wife) when out walking with them — so much so that I have almost frightened one or two people by offering to tell them the subject on which they were thinking, and in some cases exactly what they were thinking about that subject. However, I daresay that is common enough, but what I am particularly writing you on is to tell you two facts, one of which occurred 10^ years ago and the other 7 years ago nearly. [For the second case see Vol. II., p. 115.] It seems a long time ago to be reproduced, but to me the scenes are fresh as if they only happened yesterday.

" The first was this. I was going from the house I lived at to a shop kept by my brother, and when about half way, it came on to rain very fast. I called in at the house of a lady friend and waited some time, but it did not clear, and as I was afraid my brother would be leaving, I said I must go. I rose to do so, and went into the hall, and my friend rushed away upstairs to get an umbrella, leaving me in the dark. In the higher part of the door was a glass window, and I all at once, in the darkness, saw a face looking through that window. The face was very well known to me, though for the instant I did not associate it with the original, as she was 300 miles away. I instantly opened the door, found nobody there, and then searched the ivy with which the porch and house are covered. Finding nothing, and knowing it was impossible anyone could have got away, I then for the first time inquired of myself whose was the face I had seen. I at once knew the face was that of a married sister-in-law of my wife's. I told all our family of the circumstance directly I got home, and judge of our dismay when we had a letter to say she died at the very hour I saw her. Monday was the evening I saw the face, and on Wednesday, when we were at dinner, the letter came.

"T. W. Goodyear."

In answer to the usual question, Mr. Goodyear replies that he has had no other experience of a visual hallucination.

that she was at Torquay. In the course of the next day (the 11th), mother told me that she had died on the morning of the 10th, rather more than 12 hours before I heard her voice."

The narrator informs us that she has never in her life experienced any other hallucination of the senses.

Mrs. Gambier Parry, of Highnam Court, Gloucester, step-mother and cousin of the " Lucy " of the narrative, writes: —

" Sister Bertha (her name is Bertha Foertsch) had been living for many years as German governess to Lucy Anna Gambier Parry, and was her dearest friend. She came to us at once on hearing of Lucy's death, and told me of the mysterious occurrence of the night before. "

524 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

Miss Goodyear corrobrates as follows: —

" Hartley Wintney, Winchfield.

"March 12th, 1884.

" My brother (Mr. Goodyear, of Winchester) says you wish confirmation of a statement he made as to seeing the face of a friend — who lived some 300 miles off — the evening she died. We are none of us likely to forget the assertion he made as to seeing the face, one evening some 1 2 years or so ago; still less the great astonishment when two days after (midday of second day) we had a letter to say she had died on that particular evening. My other brother, who was away from home, was written to on the intervening day, and mention was made of the strange affair, so that he, too, could corroborate the statement, as his letter would reach him before the one announcing the death reached us.

" Mary Appletost Goodyear."

A brother of Mr. T. W. Goodyear writes: —

"March 19th, 1884.

" I recollect my brother mentioning the strange occurrence of seeing the face of a friend a day before her death, though he was in Hampshire and she in Yorkshire. I have not kept my letter, or would forward it to you, but can vouch for the accuracy of the account.

'• G. A. Goodyear."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death took place on November 3, 1872; consequently 12^, not 10^, years before Mr. Goodyear wrote to us. Mr. Goodyear seems also to have made an error as to the day of the week; for Nov. 3 was a Sunday. But it seems very unlikely that at the time both he and his sister should have been wrong in their identification of the evening of the vision as that of the death. Mr. G. A. Goody ear's words "a day before her death," if more than a slip of writing, can hardly weigh against the evidence of the other two witnesses; and so far as they had any weight, it would tell against the supposition that the vision was as late as Monday.

In the next case our informant is unwilling to have her name published, as relatives might object; but says that " the narrative can be verified by private communication."

" Belgravia Institute for Trained Nurses.

"December, 1884. (192) "On the afternoon of Sunday, December 18th, 1864, my father-inlaw, Mr. B., my husband, and I were sitting in the dining-room at D. Hall. The room was a large one, about 26ft. by 30ft.; on one side was the fireplace, with a door at each side; opposite the fireplace were three windows; standing with your back to the fireplace, at the end of the room on your right were two more windows, and on your left a blank wall. These windows were some height from the ground, probably 7ft. or more, so that no one could look in unless standing on a chair. It was dark, and we were sitting round the fire, the shutters not having been closed. Mr. B. faced the two windows, I sat on the other side of the fireplace, with my back to the said windows, my husband being in the

middle facing the fire. Suddenly Mr. B. said, ' Who is that looking in at the window 1 ' pointing to the furthest of the two windows. We laughed, knowing that no one could look in, as there was nothing there for them to stand on. Mr. B. persisted in his assertion, saying that it was a woman with a pale face and black hair; that the face was familiar to him, but he could not remember her name: and he insisted on my husband going round the outside of the house one way, whilst he went the other. They, however, saw no one. As they went out, I looked at the clock. The time was 5.45 p.m.

" On the following Tuesday I heard of the death of my mother, Mrs. Ranking, who had died at St. Peter's Port, Guernsey, exactly at 5.45 p.m. on Sunday, December 18th, the hour at which the face appeared at the window. She had been delirious before her death, and calling piteously for me. Directly Mr. B. heard of her death he exclaimed, ' It was Mrs. Ranking's face I saw in the window on Sunday ' (he had only seen my mother two or three times). We were not aware that my mother was seriously ill. I do not presume to offer any scientific explanation of these facts, but I firmly believe that my mother's last thoughts were of me, her eldest child. I had only been married two months, and she had not seen me since my wedding-day. " E. A. B."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. B. says: —

" Both my father-in-law and my husband are dead. I know of no independent way in which I can fix the date of the apparition, but I know that my husband and I had been to church tha.t afternoon, and if you look at any almanack for 1864, you will see that December 18th in that year was on a Sunday, and that was the day on which my mother died."

We find from the Times obituary that Mrs. Ranking died on Sunday, December 18, 1864, "after a short illness."

I have had a thoroughly satisfactory interview with Mrs. B., who is anything but a sentimental witness. She showed me a photograph of D. Hall, which made it evident that the face at the window cannot have belonged to a real person. Even a tall man's head could not have been visible from inside the room where the party were sitting, the ledge being more than 6 feet from the ground; and there was nothing under the window to climb up by. Still, the father-in-law would not be persuaded but that it was a real face, though of course totally unable to account for it. He was certain he knew the face, though unable to put a name to it. He had seen Mrs. Ranking only twice. It is practically certain that he had never had any other hallucination; and he was most unwilling to regard this as one. The death was very sudden, from dysentery. Mrs. B. distinctly remembers noting the time, 5.45, while her husband and father-in-law were searching. The light was bright firelight.

In the next two cases we have the feature of gradual formation, as well as delayed recognition. The following account appeared in the Church Quarterly Revieiv for April, 1877, pp. 210-11.

(193) " In the house in which these pages were written, a tall and wide staircase window, with a northern aspect, throws a strong side-light on the entrance into the chief living room, which stands at the end of a

526 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

passage running nearly the length of the house. It was after mid-day, in mid- winter, many years since, that the writer left his study, which opens into the passage just mentioned, on his way to his early dinner. The day was rather foggy, but there was no density of vapour, yet the door at the end of the passage seemed obscured by mist. As he advanced, the mist, so to call it, gathered into one spot, deepened, and formed itself into the outline of a human figure, the head and shoulders becoming more and more distinct, while the rest of the body seemed enveloped in a gauzy, cloaklike vestment of many folds, reaching downwards so as to hide the feet, and from its width, as it rested on the flagged passage, giving a pyramidal outline.1 The full light of the window fell on the object, which was so thin and tenuous in its consistency that the light on the panels of a highly varnished door was visible through the lower part of the dress.2 It was altogether colourless, a statue carved in mist. The writer was so startled that he is uncertain whether he moved forward or stood still. He was rather astonished than terrified, for his first notion was that he was witnessing some hitherto unnoticed effect of light and shade. He had no thought of anything supernatural 3 till, as he gazed, the head was turned towards him, and he at once recognised the features of a very clear friend. The expression of his countenance was that of holy, peaceful repose, and the gentle, kindly aspect that it wore in daily life was intensified (so the writer, in recalling the sight, has ever since felt,) into a parting glance of deep affection. And then, in an instant, all passed away. The writer can only compare the manner of the evanescence to the way in which a jet of steam is dissipated on exposure to cold air. Hardly, till then, did he realise that he had been brought into close communion with the supernatural. The result was great awe, but no terror, so that instead of retreating to his study, he went forward and opened the door close to which the apparition had stood.

"Of course, he could not doubt the import of what he had seen; and the morrow's or the next day's post brought the tidings that his friend had tranquilly passed out of this world, at the time when he was seen by the writer. It must be stated that it was a sudden summons, that the writer had heard nothing of him for some weeks previously, and that nothing had brought him to his thoughts on the day of his decease."

The widow of the narrator writes to us: —

" Pozzoforte, Bordighera.

"December 18th, 1883. " The article in the Church Quarterly to which you refer was written by my husband, but I regret to say that I can add no particulars relating to the experience he therein relates. He never could talk of it — could scarcely bear to refer to it even.4 I do not think that he ever had any other experience of the same kind."

1 For this sort of formation, compare cases 311, 315, 485. The appearance of mist is described in other cases which do not present the same gradual development; see, e.g., No. 210 below; No. 555, where the figure seemed to have a cloudy fringe; No. 518, where it remained cloud-like throughout; and compare the appearance of "massed and disordered drapery " in case 252.,

2 This peculiarity has been observed in purely subjective hallucinations; see Vol. n., p. 38, note.

3 I must again point out that this unfortunate word is quite opposed to our own view of the phenomena.

4 This being so, it would not be justifiable to publish his name.

The next account is from a lady known to the present writer, whose only reason for withholding her name and address is her fear that a near relative might object to their publication. The description seems to warrant us in regarding the visual experience, at any rate, as a waking and not a mere " borderland " specimen.

"December 17th, 1883.

(194) "Years ago, a friend and myself made the time-worn arrangement that whichever died first would endeavour to return to visit the other. Some years after, I asked this man's sister to remember me to him and say, did he remember his promise, and having received for answer

' Perfectly, and I hope I shall appear to, and not she to me,' the

whole matter passed out of my mind. My friend was in New Zealand, his sister I don't know where. One night I awoke with a feeling some one was in the room. I must tell you that I always have a bright light burning on a table, not far from my bed. I looked about, and presently saw something behind the little table; felt myself grow perfectly cold -,1 was not in the least frightened, rubbed my eyes to be sure I was quite awake, and looked at it steadfastly. Gradually a man's head and shoulders were perfectly formed, but in a sort of misty material, if I may use such a word. The head and features were distinct, but the whole appearance was not substantial and plain; in fact it was like a cloud, formed as a man's head and shoulders. At first I gazed and thought, who is it, some one must be here, but who 1 Then the formation of the head and forehead (which are most marked in my friend) made me exclaim to myself ' Captain W.' The appearance faded away.

" I got up and put the date down; and waited until news from New Zealand was possible. I made inquiries about my friend, never doubting but that he was dead. The answer always came ' No news.' At last this also, ' We are so anxious; it is so long since we have heard. We shall again wait another mail, and write to so-and-so.' And then came the news, a mere scrap, ' Have had a severe fall off the coach; can't write; head all wrong still.' That was all, and pretty much the exact words as far as I can remember. In due time we heard more. He had fallen off the coach, and was insensible for some time, and then, as he had said, his head was not clear for a while. I have never had the slightest doubt but that, while insensible, his spirit came here. The appearance to me was coincident with the time of his insensibility. I have never had but this one experience of an apparition. " E. W. R."

In a subsequent letter, Miss R. adds: —

"January 1st, 1884.

" I put the date down in a book I use daily; there is a page for every day in the month. I mentioned it to several people — quite 3 or 4. One was extremely amused because my friend had not died; which she always used to assure me was — she was sure — a cause of sincere regret to me."

The present writer has seen the book, which is one containing reading

1 As to this sensation see Vol. ii., p. 37, note.

528 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

for every day of the month. The words written in pencil, on the page of the 15th day, are: "Night of this day, March, 74."

In answer to further inquiries, Miss R. adds: —

" I saw his sister, I should say fully a year and a-half before I saw him myself, but as this is not to be substantiated in any possible way — and is only a thought — I cannot verify it. I certainly did not write to him or hear from him between the time of my sending the message and receiving the answer, and his appearing. I am not aware that I had had anything to recall him to me particularly.

" My sister has written the note on the other sheet. She feels as sure as I do that I told her very soon afterwards, but does not like to write more positively."

The following is the sister's note: —

" Ditchingham.

"May 1st, 1884.

" As far as I can remember, my sister told me of her vision soon after it occurred, and before the news of her friend's accident arrived. It is so many years ago that I cannot speak more positively.

"Mother C."

In conversation, Miss R. especially, and unasked, confirmed the fact that the feeling of a presence in the room preceded the vision. She described the formation of the figure as like a cloud taking a definite shape. She further said that the hair of the head which appeared was distinctly grey, and that this was the chief reason why she did not sooner recognise the face. Her friend had black hair when she last saw him, and she had never thought of him otherwise; but she found out afterwards that he had become grey, and was so at the time of his accident.1 She also stated that she had ascertained beyond a doubt that her vision fell during the period of her friend's insensibility; and her memory on this point may reasonably be trusted, since, when the news of the accident arrived, she had in her written entry the means of fixing with certainty the date of her experience.

The previous compact in this case is to be specially noted. It is a feature which we have already encountered (cases 146, 165, 169) and shall encounter again (see Vol. II., p. 66). In the next two examples, again, a feeling of a presence preceded the visual hallucination.2 Miss Rogers, of 56, Berners Street, W., narrates as

follows: —

"October, 1884. (195) " I was on a visit at Colnbrook, in Buckinghamshire, in 1878, and one nio'ht when I went to bed, and while yet fully awake, I felt an influence

1 As to this point see the beginning of § 8 below; and compare cases 449 and 515 where a still more marked change in the aspect of the agent's hair reappears in the vision.

2 Cf. the "borderland" case, No. 172, where the apparition was preceded by a feeling as of " someone bending over." In such cases one may suspect that what is described as a sense of presence (as sometimes in ordinary life) is really a faint auditory impression, not noticed as such, and here of course hallucinatory like the visual impression which it introduces. Cf. cases 182, 201.

as if some one was in the room. I sat up to see what it was, and saw my grandmother, in the plaid cloak she usually wore, leaning upon my mother's arm.1 I looked round the room to see whether the vision could have arisen from any reflection from the mirrors in the room, and while doing so I saw the figures walk slowly round the room and disappear. I afterwards ascertained that my grandmother died in London about the time I had seen the apparition in Buckinghamshire. « j£ATB Rogers "

In conversation, Miss Rogers told Mr. Podmore that she was not absolutely certain as to the year in which this incident occurred. Subsequently she found from the Times obituary (as we had meanwhile discovered from the Register of Deaths) that her grandmother, Mrs. Macdonald, died on March 14, 1877.

In answer to inquiries, Miss Rogers says that she has had no other hallucination. She adds that the phantasm was seen " soon after getting to bed, about 10 p.m."; and that "on my return home, I heard that my grandmother had passed away just about the time of my vision."

Appended is a letter from Mrs. Rogers, (a sister of our valued helper, the Rev. J. A. Macdonald,) who was herself nursing her mother at the

time- " October 30th, 1884.

" On receipt of your letter relative to the hour of my mother's death, I made inquiries of those who remembered the time, and I find she died nearer to 12 o'clock p.m. The reason my daughter mentioned 10 as the time of the vision only depended upon the usage of the family she was visiting, who generally retired at 10. Her memory could not serve her to fix the time exactly; besides, in cases of visitors being in the house, the family remained up later. The exact time of the appearance cannot be noted now, only that on reflection my daughter thinks it would be later than 10. Besides, she would, perhaps, have remained up a long time in her room, conversing with the lady of the house, before going to bed, as was often the habit. It was between 7 and 8 years ago that this experience occurred, and my daughter cannot fix exact times and hours; but, at the time, she thinks her vision corresponded with the time of the death. My daughter is very sorry that a more definite account cannot be given of the circumstances. The facts can be depended upon, but the hours and times have entirely slipped our memories.

"My daughter suggests that she was so greatly attached to her grandmother that, in so continually thinking of her, the vision might have come through the influence of strong imagination; but it impressed itself upon her mind at the time as a real presence, and she told me about it on her return to town. She did not expect her grandmother's death just then, as she had been ailing for years, and the death occurred rather suddenly. « jANE M> R0GERS.»

In conversation, Mrs. Rogers explained to Mr. Podmore that Miss Rogers, being absent from home, did not know of any change in her grandmother's condition.

The following is a letter from Miss R.'s friend, Mrs. F. She is not 1 As to the appearance of the second figure, see p. 545 below.

530 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

explicit as to the vision having been mentioned before the news of the death arrived. But we presume she means to imply that it was, as the question was definitely asked; and in a previous short note she uses the words, " Kate certainly seemed to know her grandmother was dead, before the news reached us." „ April 8thj 18g5>

" Mrs. R. has sent your note to me, asking me to reply to it; but it is really little I can tell you in reference to the matter, beyond that Miss R. felt convinced that her grandmother was dead before the news reached us, from a dream or vision1 (whichever you like to call it) that she had had. I cannot give you her words as she told it to me. The fact that Miss R. had a vivid dream in reference to the death of her grandmother did not strike me as anything but natural. She was always deeply attached to her, and doubtless had gone to bed with an anxious mind, knowing that her grandmother was ill. " C. B. F."

The next account is from Mr. J. G. F. Russell, of Aden, Aberdeen-

shire- "32, Upper Brook Street, W.

"January 3rd, 1886.

(196) " Early in October, 1872, whilst at H. M. Embassy, at Constantinople, to which I belonged, when crossing a garden (which separated the secretary's house, where I lived, from the Ambassador's palace), on my way to dine there, about 8 o'clock in the evening (it was about dusk), I felt some irresistible, magnetic sort of influence compel me to turn round and look behind me.2 I saw an indistinct white form, about the height of a human being, gazing at me, as if it were trying to attract my attention. It was only a very few yards off. I at once walked towards it, and spoke, but it vanished.3 So convinced was I that something had got within the precincts of the Embassy walls and gates (all being well secured and watched), that I returned to my own quarters, examined the closed gate, and questioned the guard on duty as to whether any stranger could have entered. ' Impossible,' he said; and our sporting dogs, none of which were white, were sleeping peacefully on the doorsteps. I then returned, through the same garden, to the Embassy Palace, to dinner, and back again at night. I saw nothing. Again I made inquiry whether any intruder had entered the gates, but it was proved to me to be materially impossible; nor could any one have scaled the high wall, or disappeared as quickly as did the white figure when I advanced towards it.

" Very soon after, I learnt that a married aunt of mine, to whom my family and myself were much attached, had died in my father's house, in the North of Scotland, during the afternoon of the same day on which I saw the figure. " J. G. F. Russell."

Mr. Russell adds, in reply to inquiries: —

" I have no recollection of mentioning, at the time I saw the ' white figure ' in question at Constantinople, to any one but the guard at the gate that I had seen anything; I may have done so, but anyhow I could now get no corroborative testimony from my then colleagues. I have no

1 As to the great injustice done to the telepathic argument by confounding dreams and waking visions, see above, pp. 394-7, and Vol. ii. pp., 2, 3.

2 Compare case 162, where Mr. Symonds says, " I knew that I must turn my head."

3 As regards the vanishing of hallucinations on sudden speech or movement, see Vol. ii., p. 91, second note.

record in my book as to the evening when I saw the white figure. I simply recollect that, on hearing of her death, I found it was on the same day, and making allowance for distance at the same hour, as when I saw the said apparition. When I heard of my aunt's death from my wife, I replied that on that night I had seen a strange white apparition."

We learn from Mr. Russell that he has had no other experience of the sort, with the exception of a single faint impression of a shadowy figure at a time when he was out of health, and the very palpable " apparitions " that may be seen at seances.

His diary, though it contains no mention of the incident above described, affords a means of confirming the coincidence. He finds from it that he dined at the Embassy on September 26th, September 28th, and October 1st. On the two latter occasions he visited elsewhere after dinner, and returned home by the quay; but on September 26th, when the party was a large and gay one, he returned home by the route through the garden; and on passing through the scene of his odd experience, he distinctly remembers saying to himself, "Well, that apparition has not spoilt my evening; let us see if it will come to me again." It was on the 26th of September, 1872 — as we find from an obituary notice in two Aberdeen papers — that his aunt died. Mr. Russell says, " As far as my wife can recollect, the hour of my aunt's death was between 4 and 5 p.m." — which would be between 6 and 7 at Constantinople; thus the vision followed the death by between 1 and 2 hours.

In the following case a visual phantasm first appears, and then words are heard which, in the mind of both agent and percipient, were probably of all others the most significative of the bond between them. The narrator is Mrs. Bishop, formerly Miss Bird, the well-known traveller and authoress. The account, received in March, 1886, is almost identical with a second-hand version which was given to us in March, 1883. When travelling in the Kocky Mountains, Miss Bird had made the acquaintance of a half-caste Indian, Mr. Nugent, known as " Mountain Jim," over whom she established a considerable influence.1

(197) " On the day in which I parted with Mountain Jim, he was much moved and much excited. I had a long conversation with him about mortal life and immortality, and closed it with some words from the Bible. He was greatly impressed, but very excited, and exclaimed, ' I may not see you again in this life, but I shall when I die.' I rebuked him gently for his vehemence, but he repeated it with still greater energy, adding, ' And these words you have said to me, I shall never forget, and dying I swear that I will see you again.' '2

" We parted then, and for a time I heard that he was doing better, then that he had relapsed into wild ways, then that he was very ill after being wounded in a wild quarrel, then lastly that he was well, and planning revenge. The last news I got when I was at the Hotel

1 See A Lady's Life in the Rocky Mountains, Letters vi-ix. and xiii-xvii.

2 As to this promise, see Vol. ii., p. 66.

2 l 2

532 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

Interlaken, Interlaken, Switzerland, with Miss Clayton and the Kers. Shortly after getting it, in September, 1874, I was lying on my bed about 6 a.m., writing to my sister, when, looking up, I saw Mountain Jim standing with his eyes fixed on me, and when I looked at him he very slowly but very distinctly said, ' I have come, as I promised '; then waved his hands towards me, and said, ' Farewell.'

" When Miss Bessie Ker came into the room with my breakfast, we recorded the event, with the date and hour of its occurrence. In due time news arrived of his death, and its date, allowing for the difference of longitude, coincided with that of his appearance to me. «j j} »

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Bishop says that she has never had any other hallucination of the senses; that she had last seen Mountain Jim at St. Louis, Colorado, on December 11th, 1873; and that he died at Fort Collins, Colorado. She hopes to be able to show us the diaries in which the date was recorded; but she wrote from, abroad, and under very great pressure.

We have procured a copy of some of the testimony given at the inquest at Fort Collins, from which it appears that the death took place on Sept. 7, 1874, between 2 and 3 p.m. — which would correspond with about 10 p.m. at Interlaken. The coincidence therefore cannot have been as close as Mrs. Bishop imagines. If the vision took place on the 8th of September, it followed the death by 8 hours; but if it took place on the 7th, then the 12 hours' limit was exceeded by some 4 hours.

In the next two cases there is a distinct hallucination of sound,, suggestive of some one entering or approaching the room (compare the " borderland " cases 182 and 190); and in the second of the two, a short interval elapses before the visual percept is developed.

Mrs. Stella, of Chieri, Italy, writes, on January 14th, 1884: —

(198) "When I was about 15, I was staying on a visit to Dr. J. G., of Twyford, Hants, and I formed a friendship with my host's cousin, a boy of 17. We became inseparable, boating and riding together and sharing all our fun, just like brother and sister. He was very delicate, and I took care of him, and looked after him, until we never passed an hour away from each other. I tell you this to show there was not a particle of morbid sentiment between us; we were like two boys together.

" One night Mr. G. was sent for to see his cousin, who had been taken suddenly very ill with inflammation of the lungs, and the poor boy died the next night. They did not tell me how ill he was, so I was quite unaware of his danger, and therefore not anxious in any way. The night he died, Mr. G. and his sister went round to their aunt's house, leaving me alone in the drawing-room. There was a bright fire, and like many girls I delighted to sit by the fender, reading by firelight. Not knowing of my friend's danger I was not uneasy, only vexed that he could not come and spend the evening with me, so I felt lonely. I was reading quietly when the door opened,1 and Bertie (my friend) walked in. I jumped up to get him an arm-chair near the fire, as he looked cold, and he had no greatcoat on, and as it was snowing, I began to scold him for

1 See p. 102, note.

coming out without his wraps. He did not speak but put up his hand to his chest and shook his head, which I mistook to mean his cold was on his chest, and that he had lost his voice, to which he was subject. So I reproached him again for his imprudence. While speaking, Mr. G. came in and asked me to whom 1 was speaking. I said, ' There's that tiresome boy without his coat, and such a bad cold he can't speak; lend him a coat and send him home.' I shall never forget the horror and amazement on the good doctor's face, as he knew (what I did not) that the poor boy had died half-an-hour ago, and he was coming to break the news to me. His first impression was that I had already heard it, and that I had lost my senses. I could not understand either why he made me leave the room, and spoke to me as if I were a small child. For a few moments we were at cross purposes, and then he explained to me that I had had an optical illusion; he did not deny that I had seen Bertie with my eyes, but explained it all most scientifically, as he was anxious not to frighten me or leave a distressing impression. I have never spoken of it to anyone before now, partly as it is a most distressing remembrance, and partly in the fear of being thought fanciful and being disbelieved. My mother said I was dreaming, and forbad me ever to mention it. I was not dreaming, but reading a book called ' Mr. Verdant Green,' not at all a book to send one to sleep, and I well remember at the time the door opened I was laughing heartily over some of its absurdities. " I. S."

Asked if she has ever had any other visual hallucination, Mrs. Stella answers in the negative; and adds that she is " not at all imaginative or nervous." She has had an auditory hallucination which was veridical, and is described in Vol. II., p. 109. She cannot recall the exact date; but we find from the Medical Register that Dr. J. G. was only at Twyford from 1864 to 1873 — within which period the occurrence must have fallen.

In answer to further inquiries, Mrs. Stella writes: —

" Their house must have been a quarter-of-an-hour's walk from Mr. G.'s, and Bertie died about 20 minutes before he [i.e., Mr. G.] left the house. The apparition had been in the room about 5 minutes when Mr. G. came in. What to me has always been so strange is, that I heard the handle of the door turn and the door open; in fact, it was the noise of the lock turning which caused me to look up from my book. The figure walked across the room to the opposite side of the fireplace, and sat down while I lighted the candles. It was all so real and natural that I can hardly realise even now that it was not so."

Later she adds: — -

" With regard to the 5 minutes, I daresay the time was not quite so long, although some minutes may have elapsed between the entrance of the apparition and that of Mr. G. The only light in the room was that of the fire, and as, of course, I had no idea but what it was the real ' Bertie,' I did not take much notice of him. I purposely did not ask him any questions on account of his apparent inability to talk, and I myself went on speaking in order to give him time to regain breath, which, on account of his delicate chest, often occurred, and his silence for 5 minutes or even longer would not have astonished me, as the cold outside was intense, and great cold often oppressed his breathing. There was nothing in his

534 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

appearance that struck me as different from usual, except his paleness and silence, and to both I was accustomed.

" I am sorry to say that Mr. G. died about 10 years ago. Unfortunately the circumstance was never mentioned to any members of my family; partly because Mr. Gr. advised me to say nothing, and partly from my own fear of being laughed at, as I was very young at the time."

[Here, as in so many other cases, the central fact of the coincidence is independent of the details, and is far more likely than they to have been correctly retained in memory.]

The second case is from Mr. B., confidential clerk to a firm

with a principal of which we are well acquainted. He withholds his

name from publication, having a strong dislike to the subject. The

account is in the words of Mr. D. H. Wilson, of Rosemont, Hyeres,

but has been read over and corrected by Mr. B. The fact that the

percipient had just got up and opened his door may be taken as

a proof that he was awake when the visual experience took place.

"October 24th, 1883.

(199) "Mr. B. is a gentleman whom I have known for more than 15 years. He is practical, shrewd, and very trustworthy. I am indebted to him for the following narration: One morning, a few months ago, at 5 o'clock, he was awakened by a noise outside his room, but near his room door. Opening the door he saw no person. He returned to bed, and had scarcely composed himself when he was very disconcerted by seeing the form of a lady friend of his glide or flit across the room. He thereupon woke Mrs. B. and informed her of the fact. This was Saturday, and at the end of the next week Mr. B. called at the house of his friend, the subject of his vision, and was informed that the lady had thrown herself out of the window the previous Saturday at about 5 o'clock in the morning, and was instantaneously killed."

We learn from Mr. B. that the hallucination of the senses here described is the only one that he has ever experienced.

In this example we observe a failure to co-ordinate the elements

into a completely natural-seeming incident. A feature in Mr. Keule-

mans' case (No. 184) has been reserved for mention here as illustrating

the same point. He says: —

" The sound [of the child's voice] did not proceed from the locality where the vision [of the child] was seen, nor did it seem to be in any way produced by the organs of speech belonging to the apparition; for the mouth did not move. I heard the voice at a short distance, and on my right side, simultaneously with the vision, which appeared at a greater distance, on my left, or rather in front of me."

§ 4. So much, then, for gradual development. I proceed to my second main point — the embodiment of the idea which is at the root of the hallucination in a manner that is to some extent original, and implies a creative process carried out by the percipient's own mind.

There is no need to illustrate this process at any length in the purely subjective class. A certain amount of it is, in fact, involved in every sensory hallucination which is anything more than a mere momentary revival of familiar images, due, as I have suggested, to a disturbance at the sensory centre, unprompted by any agitation in the higher tracts of the brain (pp. 489-90). Wherever the higher tracts of the brain are the first in action, and the hallucination represents an object which the senses have never actually encountered, there clearly the mind has more or less created its object; and of the transient hallucinations of the sane the majority seem to belong to this class. A special type that is worth noting is where the hallucination is in part mere reminiscence and in part a new creation. For example, a gentleman tells me that, having been compelled to kill a favourite dog, he very soon afterwards had the subjective vision of a dog running across the lawn, and pursued by a man in a white flannel jacket; and my friend Mrs. Hunter, of 2, Victoria Crescent, St. Helier's, describes how, having just dismissed for the night a young daughter under 15 years of age, heard her lock her door, locked her own, and resumed her own train of thought, she looked up, and there the child " stood smiling, in dressing-gown and hair floating down her back, just as she had left me, but with a baby in her arms" — the apparition lasting for a few seconds.1 A good example of a subjective hallucination whose development from the root-idea is obvious, is a visionary crown, clearly seen by a lady hovering near the head of a preacher to whom she was listening (as she implies) with sympathy and admiration. As more or less fantastic instances, I may mention the apparition, out of doors, of a tall female figure, which went on in front of the percipient, and whose head then left its body; a man in parti-coloured Oriental garb, about as wide as high, and with a face like a king on a card; and some curious appearances of " flats," human-looking figures without any apparent depth, by which a gentleman tells me that he has been more than once visited. Peculiarities in costume and appurtenances are very common; a woman in grave-clothes, a woman in brocaded silk with a small book in her hand, a black man with a knife in his hand, a sweet- looking creature in a low black dress and mantilla, a tall man with dark curly hair and in antique dress, a woman with a crown and a child, recalling a statuette of the Virgin — such are among the visual hallucinations in my collection which there is no reason to suppose other than purely 1 Cf. Mr. Blacker's case, p. 502.

536 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

subjective affections. Of auditory cases, some that have been already giyen show the construction from a root-idea in the percipient's mind very plainly — e.g., the words, " You can't save him," " Your brother is dead," " Take up that knife and use it " (pp. 509, 478, note). Another good example is that of a clergyman's wife, who tells me that she was once startled by the remark, " Those ladies will borrow money from George to-day," while she was sitting alone, and picturing a call which her husband was paying to some impecunious parishioners whom she mistrusted — unless, indeed, the fact that the loan was actually requested be held to make the case "ambiguous." The hearing of long, original discourses could, of course, not be reckoned as a transient hallucination, and is a type which scarcely occurs at all among hallucinations of the sane; but occasionally a very few words may be quite sufficient to show independence of mental action — as where a lady who was expecting to be called by her sister in the morning, distinctly heard, in fictitious tones, not the expected message, but the much more agreeable one, " Not five; don't get up yet."

§ 5. And now to turn to the parallel features of original or fantastic construction in the telepathic class of hallucinations. The question as to the existence and interpretation of these features is of such special importance to my general argument that, at the risk of wearying the reader, I must make its bearings plain.

I must recur for a moment to the breach which has been more than once noted (pp. 111-12, 190, and 234) as dividing telepathic phantasms from the less concrete forms of telepathy, and especially from the results of experiments in thought-transference. To resume the two marked points of difference: — in the experiments, (1) the " subject " never perceives the transferred image as an actual sight or sound — there is never an external hallucination; and (2) the image always represents the precise object which is consciously occupying the agent's mind; whereas in the case of the spontaneous phantasms the percept (1) appears to be external, and (2) represents something which is certainly not consciously occupying the agent's mind — to wit, his own form or voice.1 Here is an undoubted crux. When the

1 I am here speaking of the common type of spontaneous cases. There are other cases, both visual and auditory, which conform more nearly to the experimental type, in so far as something that is occupying the senses or the mind of the agent is distinctly represented in the phantasmal appearance (see, e.g., cases 151, 157, 158, 220, 221, 267, 268, 269, 270, 288, 291). But such representation is decidedly exceptional, and in visual cases applies usually to only a single feature in the appearance; e.g., in case 210 below we might trace the perception of the wound, and in case 213 the perception of the checked shawl, to the agent's conscious thought, but not the perception of his or her complete figure.

agent is painfully concentrating his attention on a card, with the object of getting the impression of it transferred to the percipient, one might have imagined that he was in a stronger and more hopeful condition for producing a telepathic effect than when his thoughts are wandering at random, and are perhaps not occupied with the percipient at all; and yet the effect on the percipient seems often to be of a far more dominant and startling kind in the latter case than in the former. We may observe further that just the two forms of telepathic impression which, in the ordinary course of experiment, do occasionally reach the pitch of hallucination — the transferences of pains and of tastes — are conspicuous by their absence from the records of spontaneous cases, the latter being totally unrepresented and the former very rare: while, on the other hand, the spontaneous class abounds in specimens where the psychical condition of the agent — whether sleeping, swooning, or dying— has apparently lapsed to the very verge of nothingness. Spontaneous telepathy would thus seem to depend as little on the agent's intensity of feeling (for what can be more intensely felt than acute physical pain?) as on his intensity of concentration; or, if some actual intensity of experience be imagined for him even at moments when it is least apparent (Chap. V., § 10), it will at any rate not be imagined as abnormal preoccupation with his own physical attributes.

Now it is manifest that these differences may be reduced, in proportion as the extent of the impression actually transferred from the agent to the percipient in the phantasmal cases can be conceived to be small, and the part which the percipient's own creative energy supplies can be conceived to be large. If we are at liberty to assume that even a dim and shadowy idea, when once it obtains a lodgment in the mind, may body itself forth as a sensory phantasm, clearly ail that we shall have to suppose transferred from the one mind to the other is a dim and shadowy idea. We shall thus shift, so to speak,.the responsibility for the hallucination to the percipient's mind; which we shall conceive as actively generating and projecting it under a peculiar form of impulse, instead of passively receiving a fullfledged percept from the agent's mind, where nothing in the least resembling such a percept had any conscious place.

An unknown quantity — the peculiar form of impulse — has, no doubt, here to be assumed; for unless the transferred idea involves a certain impulsive force which causes the mind to react on it, and to project it as a hallucination, why does it not remain as a mere idea?

538 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

It might, indeed, be not unreasonably replied that it does remain as a mere idea in many cases, as we saw in the 6th chapter; and that there may be many other cases where it never reaches the stage of even a conscious idea — never forces itself on the attention at all, — and where, therefore, we never hear anything about it (see p. 97). We have already had numerous experimental instances of what may be called " underground telepathy ": in Mr. Newnham's cases, for instance, (pp. 64-70,) no one would ever have known that there had been a transference of ideas, but for the fact— which was not in any way vital to the transference — -that Mrs. Newnham had her hand on a planchette at the time. And if we could conceive that a great deal of spontaneous telepathy takes place similarly underground and unnoticed, then we might regard the sensory phantasms as a sort of accidental group — as just the cases which here and there get above ground, owing to some exceptional favouring condition in the percipient. The question why an idea that has been telepathically transferred should give rise to a hallucination, might thus be answered by saying that it does so only in the proportion in which purely subjective ideas develop purely subjective hallucinations — the specific cause being as unknown in the one case as in the other. All this, however, is highly hypothetical; and we need not shrink from the provisional hypothesis that a telepathically-conveyed idea which is to some extent charged with emotion, really has a certain peculiar tendency to develop into hallucination. Our very ignorance in some measure justifies this assumption; for unable as for the most part we are to connect transient hallucinations of the sane with any antecedent condition at all, we need the less scruple to admit a novel condition when we find one. And in connection with such an onward passage of the impression, it is very pertinent to recall the particular impulsive quality which we found to attach to some of the experimental transferences — where the impulse took effect not in sensory but in muscular disturbances, (see pp. 74-9, and 84.)1

To return, however, to the actual content of the percepts, and

1 I may note further how the very fact of an unrecognised telepathic phantasm bears witness to the suggested specific tendency of telepathic impressions to pass into hallucinations. We have had instances, in former chapters, of vague but strong impressions, not connected by the percipient at the time with any particular person, which afterwards seemed to have been due to the condition of a particular person. Now one would have supposed, if an undistinctive telepathic idea was to assume more definiteness, that it must be by becoming a distinctive idea, an idea of the particular agent. But what we find is that the undistinctive telepathic idea sometimes becomes more definite in a quite different way — namely, by becoming an undistinctive percept, an unrecognised form. It is hurried on into hallucination, so to speak, without having first declared itself as an idea; it assumes the definiteness of visible shape, while yet its content or message remains indefinite.

their relation to the ideas from which they spring. If once it be granted that the telepathic phantasm need not be the literal embodiment of any clearly-defined idea or image, but may be worked out from a suggestion of a vague kind, we should certainly be prepared for variety and independence in the working out. The mind is no mere collection of separate compartments, into which new ideas will fit and then rest in a passive way; but an organism of interacting parts, where any change or any intruding element may set in motion whole trains of images and associations. We know what small and dim suggestions will sometimes set large tracts of mental machinery to work; we may therefore well credit the vaguer or sub-conscious order of telepathic impressions with such a power. What more natural, then, than that these further images and associations should be embodied in the sensory projection? We have already noted the process in dreams; we found the telepathic impression operating not to suspend or fetter, but simply to invoke and inform, the spontaneous activities of the dreaming condition. We have since caught the percipient mind at work, so to speak, in the gradual stages which waking hallucinations often present; and we have noted the originative activity which often goes to the shaping of purely subjective specimens. What is now suggested is that the waking mind may unconsciously react, as in a dream, on the nucleus of a " transferred impression," and, in the act of externalising the percept, may invest it with its own atmosphere and imagery.1 We shall thus have a ready explanation for many degrees of distinctness and individualisation, and many diversities of character, in what is perceived. Suppose the same kind of real event — say the peaceful death of an aged parent — to occur in twenty cases, and in each of them to produce a real and unique sort of disturbance in some absent person's mind; then, if that disturbance clothed itself in some sensory form — or, as I should say, if it reached the point of causing hallucination — the hallucination might take twenty different forms. One percipient may hear his parent's voice; another may imagine the touch of his hand upon his head; a third may see him in his wonted dress and aspect; a fourth may see him as he might appear when dying; a fifth

1 The psychological identity of hallucinations and dreams — alike in subjective and in telepathic cases— is a point which I am the more anxious to enforce in that there seems sometimes to be a difficulty in catching it. For example, a leading daily paper contrasts members of the Society for Psychical Research with the sensiWe people " who believe that all those apparitions and stories of second-sight which engage the curiosity of that Society may be relegated to the limbo of waking dreams." With the substitution of "class " for " limbo," this " relegation " is precisely what the present argument seeks to effect.

540 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

may see him in some transfigured aspect; a sixth may see a figure or hear a voice resembling his, but not recognise it, or recognise it only in recollection; and others may invest the disturbing idea with every sort of visible symbolism, derived from their minds' habitual furniture and their wonted trains of thought.

§ 6. This frequent activity of the percipient's mind in the elaboration and projection of his percept forms a ready key to much of the evidence that follows. How, for instance, on any theory of merely passive affection of the percipient's mind or senses, could we account for the appearance of a dying friend, attired in the style of dress which was habitual to him at the time when the percipient associated with him, but which has been discontinued, or, at any rate, is not that in which he would be pictured in his own mind? The " ghosts of clothes " in general — a stock bugbear — are the simplest things in the world to explain on a theory of telepathic impressions; but the ghosts of old clothes — how could they be impressed ab extra? What, on the other hand, is more natural, when once the percipient's active share in the phenomenon is recognised, than that he should do what we saw Mr. W. A. S. do in the neutral case quoted above (p. 517, note) — that he should invest the idea of his friend with the visual traits that memory supplies, and should project the figure into space in its most familiar aspect?

A few instances of this sort may be quoted. The first is from Miss Cressy, of Biverhead, near Sevenoaks.

"December 18th, 1883.

(200) " My younger brother was in Australia, and had not written to his family for some four or five months, from which my mother had concluded he

must be dead. I was sitting with her and my sister in our dining-room one morning, about 11 o'clock, engaged with my sister in writing a German exercise. Being at a loss for the right declension, I looked up, repeating the declension, when I saw my brother standing on the lawn in front of the window apparently looking at us. I jumped up, saying to my mother, ' Don't be frightened, mother, but there is T. come back all right.' (My mother had heart disease, and I feared the sudden shock.) ' Where 1 ' said my mother and sister, ' I don't see him.' ' He is there,' I answered, ' for I saw him; he is gone to the front door,' and we all ran to the door. My father, who was in his library, heard the commotion, and opened his door to ask the cause. I had by this time opened the front door, and not seeing my brother, I thought he was hiding for fun among the shrubs, so I called out, ' Come, T., come in, do not play the fool or you will kill dear mother.' No one answered, and then my mother exclaimed, ' Oh, you did not see him really, he is dead, I know he is dead.' I was mystified, but it did not seem to me the right solution of the mystery. I

could not think he was dead, he looked so honestly alive. To tell the truth, I believed for some time that he was in the garden. However he was not, nor was he dead. About a year afterwards he returned home, and when recounting his troubles, he told us that he had been very ill, and that while he was delirious he had constantly requested his comrades to lay him under the great cedar tree on his father's lawn, and turning to my father he went on, ' Yes, father, and do you know I seemed to see the dear old place as plain as I do now.' ' When was that 1 ' said my father. He gave the date, and my mother, who had written it down, looked and said, ' Why, that was the very time when your sister declared she saw you on the lawn.' 'Yes,' said my father, 'and your mother at once killed you,' and there was a good laugh at my expense.

" I have often thought over it, but have never been able to account for it. This brother was not a particular favourite. Had it been my sister, I could have supposed that, as she was rarely absent from my mind, I might have conjured up her form in my imagination. Then I would have bitten my tongue out rather than have startled my mother. But I never doubted for a moment that my brother was there. I was about 25 years of age, and had no theory as to ghosts or spirits in general. I was at that time far too much occupied with the cares and anxieties of the family to have time to dwell on such fancies, and was also too matter-of-fact to think much about such phenomena. I remember at the time, that I saw my brother dressed as he usually was when he came home from London, not as he was when he left home, nor as he could be in Australia, nor as I had ever seen him when walking in the garden. He had on a tall hat and a black cloth suit, neither of which he had taken with him. Of course, at the moment none of these thoughts occurred to me, but when, in consequence of the jokes and ridicule at my expense, I tried to follow up the ideas that had been floating through my mind, to see whether they had any connection with my absent brother, I could make nothing of it. « a nRPSSY "

In answer to inquiries, Miss Cressy adds: —

" I have delayed answering your last communication in the hope of recalling the name of some person still living to whom I had mentioned the vision about which I wrote to you, but I am sorry to say there is no one. I only am left of all the party. You ask when it occurred. As nearly as I can remember it was at the beginning of 1854. My brother left England for Melbourne in September or October, 1852. As nearly as I can remember, I got his first letter at the beginning or middle of May, 1853. We got three or four letters in succession, the last saying that he and his companions were going to Fryers Creek diggings. Then we heard nothing more for eight months. During those eight months it was that I saw him as I have described. I believe it was February, 1854.

" I have never before or since had any apparition, and that was the reason I wrote you the account of it, because it seemed to me to prove that it was no hallucination,1 but simple fact. I was then young and vigorous; I had no superstitions, never having experienced any exceptional sorrows: those I had gone through were common enough, and more calculated to develop the matter-of-fact side of my character than to induce a morbid or dreamy imagination. That brother was always said to

1 The word is of course used here in its common sense of purely subjective hallucination.

542 THE DEVELOPMENT OF [chap.

be very like me, and it is a singular fact that in matter of health we suffered very much alike. He always leant on me when in any trouble, and his thoughts during that illness might almost unconsciously have wandered to me."

Miss Cressy tells me that her recollection of her mother's entry of the date in her pocket-book, and of the reference to this date after her brother's return, is quite distinct; and it is a confirmation of this that, unprompted by me, she had made a search for the book, which, however, could not be found. She considers that the dress and rapid disappearance of the figure would alone exclude the hypothesis of mistaken identity; but, in fact, the figure was close to the window; and had not the recognition been absolute and startling, she would never, she says, have exclaimed as she did, since the importance of not causing any shock to her mother was much on her mind.

The next case (which again exemplifies the development of a feeling of presence into distinct hallucination) is from Mrs. Bolland, of 7, Cranbury Terrace, Southampton, the narrator of case 126 above.

"July, 1884.

(201) "About March, 1875, the circumstances hereafter detailed hap^ pened to me at Gibraltar. I wrote an account of them from memory in 1878. It was published in All the Year Round, of August, I think, that year, but I have not since seen it, so I can only give the story as far as I remember it now.

" I was lying down in my drawing-room on a bright sunshiny afternoon, reading a chapter on Chalk Streams in ' Kingsley's Miscellanies,' when I suddenly felt that some one was waiting to speak to me. I looked up from my book and saw a man standing beside an arm-chair, which was about 6 feet from me. He was looking most intently at me, with an extraordinary earnest expression in his eyes, but as I walked forward to speak to him, he disappeared.1

" The room was about 18 feet long, and at the further end of it I saw our servant [Pearson], holding open the door as if he had admitted a visitor. Thinking that perhaps he too was but a delusion, I spoke to him, asking if anyone had called. To which he replied, ' No one, ma'am,' and walked away. I then tested myself as to whether I had been sleeping, seeing that it was 10 minutes since I lay down. I said to myself what I thought I had read, began my chapter again, and in 10 minutes had reached the same point.

" 1 then thought it over again. I knew the face quite well, but could not say whose it was, but the suit of clothes impressed me strongly as being exactly like one which my husband had given to a servant named Ramsay the previous year. This man was a discharged soldier whom I had found in a dying state in Inverness, and who had been taken into our service after leaving the infirmary. He turned out badly and I had to send him away before we went to Gibraltar [in February, 1875], but he was taken on as waiter at the Inverness Club, and I had no cause to be anxious about him, as I thought he was well and doing well, and would probably profit by his past experience and keep that situation.

1 Cf. case 196, and see Vol. ii., p. 91, second note.

