On February 16th, 1885, Mrs. Stone wrote as follows: — " A few days since, I came upon my son's letter, written rather more than a week after the occurrence. The post-card mentioned was lost, and it was by chance this letter turned up. I enclose the first page for what it is worth, very trivial save for the impression it made on me. I am more than ever convinced of the value of verifying matters of this kind."

The first page of the son's letter ran as follows: —

"Eton, January 22nd, 1882.

" Dearest Mother, — If you heard my voice it must have been when I was waiting for the arrival of the carriage, and expressing loudly my surprise at its not having arrived at the station to meet me. I think I told you that Frank was there, on his bicycle, and we both jabbered considerably. You ought to have heard him too."

[Mrs. Stone has had no other hallucination of a recognised voice, except on one occasion, 20 years ago, soon after a bereavement (see Yol. I., pp. 510-2). More than five years ago, she had on several evenings the impression of hearing voices in the room below her own. This slight 7 ^ predisposition to auditory hallucination would hardly affect the case; but the coincidence is of course rendered less striking by the reflection that

Mr. Stone may have spoken " eagerly and as if bothered " on a good many other occasions.]

The next case is more complete, inasmuch as the actual word used by the agent was distinguished by the percipient. The account is from Mr. E,. Fryer, of Bath, brother of our valued friend and helper, the Eev. A. T. Fryer, of Clerkenwell, who tells us that he " distinctly remembers being told of the occurrence within a few weeks of its happening." He explains that " Rod " was the name by which his brother, the percipient, was called in the family. p

"January, 1883.,,^.<^' '

(268) "A strange experience occurred in the autumn of the year '-^^'' ^^ 1879. A brother of mine had been from home for 3 or 4 days, when, one d^'^'^ "' afternoon, at half-past 5 (as nearly as possible), I was astonished to hear my name called out very distinctly. I so clearly recognised my brother's..c'f^ voice that I looked all over the house for him; but not finding him, and indeed knowing that he must be distant some 40 miles, I ended by attributing the incident to a fancied delusion, and thought no more about the matter. On my brother's arrival home, however, on the sixth day, he remarked amongst other things that he had narrowly escaped an ugly accident. It appeared that, whilst getting out from a railway carriage, he missed his footing, and fell along the platform; by putting out his hands quickly he broke the fall, and only sufiered a severe shaking, ' Curiously enough,' he said, ' when I found myself falling I called out your name.' This did not strike me for a moment, but on my asking him during what part of the day this happened, he gave me the time, which I found corresponded exactly with the moment I heard myself called."

In answer to an inquiry, Mr. R. Fryer adds: —

" I do not remember ever having a similar experience to the one narrated to you; nor should I care to, as the sensation, together with the suspense as to the why and wherefore of the event, is the reverse of pleasant."

In conversation, he has explained that he had frequently expostulated with his brother on the latter's habit of alighting from trains in motion; and the automatic utterance of his name, on this occasion, might thus be accounted for by association.

The agent's account of the matter is as follows: —

" Newbridge Road, Bath.

"November 16th, 1885.

"In the year 1879, I was travelling, and in the course of my journey I had to stop at Gloucester. In getting out of the train, I fell, and was assisted to rise by one of the railway officials. He asked if I was hurt, and asked if I had anyone travelling with me. I replied ' No ' to both questions, and inquired why he asked. He replied, ' Because you called out " Rod." ' I distinctly recollect making use of the word Rod.

" On arriving home, a day or two afterwards, I related the circumstance, and my brother inquired the time and date. He then told me he had heard me call at that particular time. He was so sure of its being my voice that he made inquiries as to whether I was about or not.

"John T. Fryer."

104 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

Curiously similar is the next case, sent to us by Miss Frome, of Ewell, Surrey, in the handwriting of the friend, a doctor by profession whose experience is narrated. She thoroughly relies on his word, and has communicated his name. He himself dislikes the subject, and has no belief that such coincidences can be anything but accidental.

"April 14th, 1884.

(269) "In February, 1862, an undergraduate of one of our northern universities was, and had been for some time, reading hard for the approaching examination for the degree which he was desirous of acquiring. His brother, an officer in the merchant service, was at sea, and at this time in a ship not far from the coast of the East Indies.

" One evening, about 7 p.m., the former was at work in his own rooms, in company with a friend, also studying with the same object, when he suddenly heard his Christian name, shortened as was the custom in his own family circle, of which there were none (or even of intimate friends) in the city he was then inhabiting. He heard himself called sharply and clearly, and, astonished rather, looked up from his books and asked his friend if he spoke, who answered in the negative, evidently surprised. Again, in an instant, he heard the sound again, and turned to his friend, saying, ' Don't be foolish; what is it? ' The reply was, ' I said nothing.' He then asked, ' Did you not hear anything ^ My name called 1 ' ' No, I heard nothing,' was the answer.

" Almost as these brief words were passing between the two men, he of whom this story is related heard again, once, twice, quickly repeated, his name, clearly and distinctly, and then he seemed to recognise it as like his brother's voice. He could not understand it, and, feeling rather mystified and put out, thought he would stop work and rest, so telling his friend he would do no more that night, went off to the theatre. On his return, sitting over the fire, he thought the matter over, and came to the conclusion that, being out of health to some extent, the mental fatigue he was going through had upset his brain functions a little; so he put the subject from him, simply making a note of the occurrence, and thought no more of it.

" Some months later, about the end of June, he was in London to meet his brother, who was returning from sea. On the evening of the arrival of the latter, the two brothers were talking together, the younger describing his voyage and the various incidents that had happened, and suddenly said, ' By the way, I was very nearly not coming home any more; I had a very narrow squeak of being drowned. I fell overboard one night somewhere about midnight, and I thought I was done for, but after a while I was luckily picked up. However, it was a close shave, and I did not expect to see you again, old chap, but I thought of you, and sung out and called at you.'

" The elder brother, recollecting the occurrence to himself in the northern city, asked the other when this occurred, and heard in reply that it was on the same day on which that which has been stated happened to him. He then told his brother his story, and, comparing the two, all points agreed except the hours, about 7 o'clock and about midnight — when the sailor brother quietly pointed out that, allowing for the difference of time in the two places, the actual time was probably the same.

" They talked the matter over, but could make no more of it. Neither of them had any belief in supernatural manifestations. Nothing of the kind ever happened to them again in after life in any degree. The younger brother died at sea a few years ago."

Here we have once more the feature of repetition after a short interval, which seems, by the way, to be decidedly commoner in auditory hallucinations of the telepathic than of the purely subjective class.^ Another fact to be noticed is that the voice was not heard by the percipient's companion — this being a point in which the hallucinatory character of telepathic affections of the senses often appears (Chap. XII., § 10).2

In the following case, it is alleged that the actual words heard

were used by the agent. The narrative is from an English physician

residing in a foreign town, who wishes his name suppressed, fearing

professional prejudice. ^

" October 22nd, 1883. i^o'^^^^

(270) " Years ago there were two girls, half Italian half English, here, ^*^ one with a very fine voice. The poor girl from over-straining got spitting

of blood. I attended her. One morning she begged me to see her sister, who was crying her heart out, as she expressed it, hysterics, &c., &c., owing to an absurd dream, she said. I went into her sister's room, and found her as described; she then told me it was not a dream, but that she was broad awake, and heard her sister's voice from the garden — 'Georgie, Georgie, I must see you before I die.' By dint of coaxing, bullying, reasoning, and exhortation, I got her quieted down, and nothing more was thought of it; but at the time required to hear from England, a letter came announcing her sister's death; and further inquiries elicited that it occurred exactly at the time she heard the voice (allowing for distance), and that the last words she uttered were those heard from the garden."

[In answer to an inquiry, the narrator says that he did not actually see the letter which conveyed the intelligence of the sister's death; the exactitude of the coincidence rests therefore on second-hand evidence. He was, however, in daily communication with the family.]

In the next case, the words heard were vividly imagined by the agent, and may very probably have been uttered, or half-uttered. The account is from Mr. J. Pike, of 122, Stockwell Park Road, S.W.,

"October, 1883. ^. •'

(271) "Travelling some years since from Carlisle to Highbury, by the ^ *'. ^ night mail train, and, finding myself alone in my compartment, I lay at ^^' full length on the seat with a view to sleep, having previously requested the

1 Compare cases 154, 266, 278, 285, 287, 341, 342, 508, 674, 676, 679; and see Chap, xii., § 10.

2 See, e.g., cases 28, 34, 189, 206, 212, 242, 265, 271, 274, 307, 329, 337, 347, 355, 491, 517, 522, 534, 561, 567, 607, 609, 610, 618, 620, 633, 634, 'C38. Cases 552 (see " Additions and Corrections, " under heading p. 511), and 685 should perhaps be added. In cases 666 and 684, the experience was unshared by one of the persons present.

106 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

guard to wake me at the Camden Town Station. I soon fell into a deep sleep, one of those profound slumbers the awakening from which is almost painful. Roused suddenly by the guard waking me (somewhat roughly and impatiently, because the train was behind its time), I found that I had been dreaming (what proved indeed to be the case) that it was morning; that I was at home, in my bedroom, in the act of dressing, and at the moment of awakening had been on the landing and twice called the servant by her name, ' Sarah,' and asked her to bring me some hot water.

" On actually arriving at home, I learnt that at the time when I had been thus dreaming that I was calling to the servant, she had heard her name called by me twice, distinctly; that — forgetting for the moment that I was not in the house — she, hastily discontinuing the breakfast preparations, ran upstairs, and afterwards came down again ' as white as a ghost ' — according to the description given to me by the children who, with astonishment, witnessed her proceedings, and not having themselves heard the call, naturally wondered what it all meant. Sarah subsequently informed me that the ' fright ' she experienced on realising the fact that I was not there had made her ' quite ill.' "

Mr. Pike's daughter gave the following corroboration on Oct. 30, 1883: —

" I distinctly remember the incident of our servant being frightened by hearing my father's voice calling from upstairs, at a time when we knew he could not be anywhere near our home. The servant took a poker in her hand and went upstairs, thinking there must be some man there who had imitated my father's voice. ISTothing, however, was discovered to explain the mystery until my father's arrival at home, when he told us that at the time the call was heard he had been dreaming that he was at home and calling for hot water. u Alma M. Pike."

[The genuineness of this case does not, of course, depend on the servant's evidence, but on the testimony of Miss Pike that the servant mentioned her experience before Mr. Pike's arrival. I have stated above (Vol. I., p. 514) that my collection of purely subjective hallucinations includes several instances where a servant has seemed to hear her mistress calling her — a fact which of course goes to weaken the force of the described coincidence. But the superior vividness of the impression in the present instance seems proved by the emotion and alarm which followed it, and which had no sort of parallel in the purely subjective cases referred to.]

Here, it will be seen, the condition of the agent was not one of distress or crisis, but simply that of vivid dream; and the case is in this way exceptional. Affections of a waking percipient by a dreaming agent— or at any rate cases which could be used as evidence for such affections — seem a rarer tjrpe than that of simultaneous and correspondent dreaming, illustrated in Vol. I., pp., 314-8, and in Chap. III. of the Supplement; but cases 94 and 96 were very probably examples of it. In the present instance, it should be noted that the part of the dream which apparently affected the percipient took place in the very shock of waking; and such a shock,

though not critical or exactly painful, clearly involves a far wider and

more sudden change of psychical condition than often occurs to us

during waking life.

In the next case it is very possible that the agent actually used

the words heard, but proof of this fact is unattainable. If he did not,

we must suppose some idea of his distress to have been objectified

by the percipient in the " agonised tone." The account is from Mr.

Lister Ives, master at the Grammar School, Stockport.

"1883.

(272) " About midday of the 24th July, 1875, I was in the baths at Llandudno, when I suddenly and distinctly heard my boy's voice calling loudly and in an agonised tone. So assured was I o£ it being his voice, that I hastily got out of the bath and looked out of the nearest window, thinking he must be on the rocks beneath — the bath-house stands on a rock, though since then much has been cut away — though I believed him at the time to be, as indeed he was, at the other side of the Orme's Head, three or four miles away. The boy was killed at that very time by a fall from the rocks."

We find from a report of the accident in the Stockport Advertiser that the date was the 26th (not the 24th) of July. The boy had joined his parents on the 24th, which may perhaps account for the mistake.

Mrs. Ives says: —

'''■ Until late at night, when the boy did not return, my husband had thought no more of the circumstance. When the boy could not be found he exclaimed, ' We shall never see him alive again,' for he remembered the sound of the voice; but it was not until some time afterwards that he * told me that he felt assured he had heard the last cry, not a supernatural ' warning, but a cry for help when none could reach him. I madel memoranda of all the circumstances connected with the unhappy afiair, and of that [i.e., the voice] among the rest. With regard to the distance which the sound came, I can scarcely give absolute information. The headland is of peculiar form; but according to local maps, if they are to.,'^, ff^ Jcji be relied upon, if it were possible to take a direct line through the v ^^^^J^ mountain from the Crab Rocks, where my boy was found, to the baths ^

where Mr. Ives was, it would measure something over 3,000 yards; round by the path, as it then was, about 3 miles; over the summit, I cannot tell how far."

Mr. C. Kroll Laporte, of Birkdale, Southport, says: —

" Mr. Ives told me all this [i.e., the incident of the voice] the day after the funeral, and I noted it down."

[Our colleague, Mr. Richard Hodgson, has had an interview with Mr. and Mrs. Ives. Mr. Ives has had no other hallucinations. The time of the boy's death was estimated only. He was expected back to dinner at 1 p.m., and it was between 12 and 1 p.m. that Mr. Ives was bathing and heard the cry. The words he heard were, ' Papa! mamma! ' in an agonised tone. The boy was 18 years of age. He appeared to have fallen on the rocks face downwards, from a height of about 80 feet. The

108 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

cliff at the spot begins at the summit with a sloping bank of grass, "which suddenly, however, is followed by an almost sheer precipice, not seen from the top of the bank.]

§ 2. We come now to cases where the name heard was probably not actually spoken. The fact that the impression so often takes the form of a call of the percipient's name might be connected with the fact that this is also the commonest form of purely subjective auditory hallucination; and might be taken as a fresh indication — parallel to the indications which have been noted in the visual class — that the telepathic phantasm, as a sensory phenomenon, truly belongs to the class of hallucinations. But it is in the very nature of this form of communication that it should strongly suggest — what in the following instance is positively affirmed — a certain occupation of the agent's thoughts with the percipient. We have often independent reason to suppose a similar condition in the visual cases; but there is seldom anything in the visual phantasm of the agent to make it apparent.

The first case is from Mr. G. A. Witt, of Fontenay House, Grove Park, Denmark Hill, S.E.

"September 26th, 1885.

(273) "When I left Bombay, on March 1st, 1876, by ss. 'Persia,' for Naples, an elder brother of mine was living in Germany, and in very bad health, though I did not, at the time, anticipate his early death. When in the Red Sea one day, sitting on deck and reading the Saturday Review, with other passengers — and I think Mrs. Fagan also — sitting near me and reading, I fancied I heard my brother's voice calling me by my Christian name. It seemed so distinctly his voice, and T thought I heard my name so clearly called, that it quite startled me, and made such an impression on me that I mentioned it to some of my fellow passengers, and at their suggestion took note of the hour and day it occurred.

"On arriving at Naples, some 12 or 14 days later, I found a letter there from my mother, bearing the same date as the one I had put down in the Red Sea, in which she told me that she was sitting writing by my brother's deathbed, &c., adding in a postscript the same day that he had just passed away.

" I never ascertained whether the hour I had put down was the same in which my poor brother had died, and now really all I remember is what I have just stated. <( q. ^ Witt "

In answer to inquiries, Mr Witt says: —

" I was, at the time, not at all anxious about my brother; and the ' voice ' at the time impressed me as very strange, as I really had not thought of him for some time. My brother died in Kiel, Holstein. The date was the 13th of March, 1876. This was the date of my brother's death; and I remember that that was what caused me to mention the matter again to those whom I had told on board the steamer that I

thought I had heard my brother's voice. I must repeat, however, that what I am stating now is from memory only, and the ' note ' I had made of the occurrence at the time no longer exists.

" It is also the only time that, as far as I remember, anything of the kind has happened to me." [This is in answer to the question whether he had experienced a hallucination of the senses on any other occasion.]

Mrs. Fagan, of 26, Manchester Square, W., writes to us as follows: —

"August 28th, 1885.

" On board ship, coming from India, one morning I passed Mr. Witt, who was reading on deck. He stopped me and said that a strange thing had happened to him, and on my asking what it was, said that he had heard his brother's voice calling him, ' Gustave,' more than once (three times, I think, but am not sure). He added that he had heard, before leaving Bombay, that his brother was very seriously ill,i and thinking that perhaps he was then dying, or just dead, he made a note of the date. I asked him to let me know afterwards if the brother really died about that time, and he said he would do so.

" On meeting him in London afterwards, I inquired if his conjecture had proved correct, and he said it had. I do not know whether the time when Mr. Witt heard the voice coincided exactly with the brother's death, as the difference in the local time made it difficult to decide that point without calculation; and I did not hear that any calculation was made. But the two events occurred at about the same time. Mr. Witt offers no explanation or opinion on the matter, only saying that it was very strange."

We have procured, through the Biirgermeister of Kiel, an official certificate of the death of Mr. John T. Witt, which shows that it occurred on March 13, 1876, at 9.30 p.m. Supposing therefore that Mr. G. A. Witt's experience was immediately mentioned by him, and that Mrs. Fagan is right in her recollection that this was in the morning, it must have preceded the death by a good many hours. If either of these suppositions is incorrect, the coincidence may have been closer.

The next account is from Mrs. Stella, of Chieri, Italy, who was

the percipient in the visual case, No. 198.

"December 29th, 1883.

(274) " On the 22nd of May, 1882, I was sitting in my room working with other members of my family, and we were talking of household matters, when suddenly I heard the voice of my eldest son calling repeatedly ' Mamma.' I threw down my work exclaiming, ' There is Nino,' and went downstairs, to the astonishment of every one. Now my son was at that time in London, and had only left home about a fortnight before, for a two months' tour, so naturally we were all surprised to think he had arrived so suddenly. On reaching the hall, no one was there, and they all laughed at my imagination. But I certainly heard him call, not only once, but three or four times, impatiently. I learnt, a few days afterwards, that on that day he had been taken ill in London at the house of some friends, and

1 This of course was true, in a sense; but, in view of the possible suggestion that the hallucination was due to mere anxiety, it is important to notice that Mr. Witt had regarded his brother as a chronic invalid, and expressly affirms that, so far from being anxious about him, he had not even thought of him for some time.

110 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

that he had frequently expressed a wish that I should come and nurse him, as not speaking English he could not make himself understood."

Mrs. Stella tells us, on inquiry, that this is her only experience of an auditory hallucination.

The following corroboration is from a lady who was present at the time: —

"Breslau, February 18th, 1884.

" Mrs. Stella asked me to give you an account of an episode which occurred in my presence, while on a visit to her two years ago; and the following are the facts as nearly as I can remember them. We were sitting working together, when Mrs. Stella said she heard the voice of her son, who was absent in England at the time, calling her. This caused us some surprise, as he was not expected home, nor had we heard any sounds of an arrival.

" On going downstairs to meet him, we found no one, which astonished us, as Mrs. Stella had been so positive that she had heard him call. We afterwards heard that on that day he had been taken ill in London. I may here remark that young Mr. Stella is very much attached to his mamma, and especially dependent upon her in sickness.

" Clara Schmidt."

The next case is from Mr. W. T. Bray, of Schekoldin's Paper Mill, Yimishma, Government of Kostroma, Russia.

« June 14th (O.S.), 1885.

(275) " I was employed as assistant engineer on the Moscow-Kursk Railway, and one day was standing in the erecting shop. There were 14 engines under repair, and 4 tenders, and amidst all the attendant noise of such work of fitters and boilermakers, I heard a voice quite close to me call twice, ' Will, Will! ' The voice resembled my father's (he was the only person who called me ' Will '), and in a tone he used when he wished to particularly draw my attention to anything. When I went home I remarked to my wife I was afraid, if ever I heard from poor father again, or from any one about him, [there had been a certain breach of intercourse,] it would be bad news, for I distinctly heard him call me twice. About three weeks afterwards, I had a letter from a sister, stating he had died, and when; and his last words were, ' Good-bye, Will! good-bye, Will! ' Upon comparing thedate and time, he died about the time I heard the voice."

Mr. Bray adds, in a letter dated August 21st (O.S.), 1885: —

" I am sorry I cannot get a few lines likely to confirm my statement to you; the circumstance occurred so long ago. I remember mentioning it to my wife at the time, but she cannot distinctly remember it, and I mentioned it to no one but her, and then only at the time. I remembered the work I was looking after at the time, and upon hearing of my father's death I traced the time by the factory books; and as no one either here or in England ever called me ' Will ' but he, I always feel quite satisfied in my own mind that I heard his voice, especially as I was told in the letter announcing his death his last words were, ' Good-bye, Will! good-bye, Will! ' " W. Thos. Bray."

In answer to a question whether he had ever had any other auditory

hallucination, Mr. Bray replies, " Such a thing never occurred to me before, neither has anything occurred since." He adds that his father died on March 22, 1873; and we have confirmed this date by the Register of Deaths.

We first heard of this case from Mr. Bray's son, who said that he was himself told of his father's experience at the time, and that at his suggestion a note of the day and hour was made. But his account presents so many differences from the first-hand one that his memory on this point cannot be relied on.

The next case is from Mr. D. J. Hutchins, of 173, Severn Road,

Cardiff.

"December 17th, 1883. ^,-. ^^

(276) " My father died suddenly, about 48 miles away from where my (^y^^ mother resided. I had to acquaint her of the melancholy fact. A railway journey, and then a drive of 12 miles would take me to her abode. I should arrive about 6 a.m. on a dark November morning. Secretly perplexed how I should break the news, I was relieved and surprised to see, as I neared the house, smoke issuing from parlour and kitchen chimneys. On arriving at the gate, and before time was given me to jump out of the trap, mother was at the door and said, ' Daniel, your father is dead.' I asked, ' How do you know? ' She replied, ' He came and called for me last night about 9 o'clock, and then vanished. I have not been to bed since.' Sorrow, combined with a strange feeling that somehow or other she might have been the means of hastening his death, caused her to die suddenly a short time afterwards. She was an intensely religious woman, without superstition. I well remember the anger she always displayed when she heard that her children had been listeners to the usual fireside talk about ghosts and presentiments.

" D. J. Hutchins."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Hutchins adds: —

"February 15th, 1886.

" With reference to the time of the death of my father, it was on the 21st November, 1855. He was found dead in the fields between Llantrissant Station and Lanclay House, Llantrissant, where he had for many years resided as house-steward to Lady Mary Cole. [In conversation Mr. Hutchins has explained that his father was last seen alive, walking from the station, and apparently in perfect health, about 6 p.m., and that his body was found soon after 9 o'clock the same evening.] My mother was in our cottage — Rose Cottage — near Penrice Castle, where we usually resided during summer. She was preparing to leave just preparatory to closing the place for the winter. My father left her on the morning of the day of his death, [having been requested to superintend some work at a distance].

" At the time when I wrote to you, the circumstances were more vivid in my memory than at present; consequently I cannot actually say whether my mother said, 'Your father appeared to me,' in connection with his voice. But this I distinctly remember: my mother said, ' I heard your father call me by my name, " Mary, Mary," and then I went to the door; and I have not been in bed since.' " In conversation, however, it appeared that Mr. Hutchins is morally certain that the experience was visual as well as auditory.

112 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

In a later letter, Mr. Hutchins expressed some doubt as to the year of the occurrence; and we find from the Register of Deaths that the death took place on November 21st, 1853, not 1855.

The next case is from Miss Burrows, residing at Hollar d Hall,

Stretford Eoad, Manchester.

" December, 1884. (277) " I can furnish you with an instance of my name being called by my mother, who was 18 miles off, and dying at the time. I was not aware she was ill, nor was I thinking about her at the time, No one here knew my name, and it was her voice calling, as I was always addressed at home, ' Lizzie.' I can give you more exact information if you require it.

Later, Miss Burrows writes: —

"March 18th, 1885.

"In regard to the voice which I heard call my name on the 19th February, 1882, I recognised it instantly as being that of my mother. It was very loud, sharp, and impetuous, as if frightened at something Our house is detached, very quiet, and the only inmates of the house beside myself were two gentlemen, aged respectively 58 and 37, and a widowed daughter-in-law [of the elder gentleman] who had lived with them five years; and not one of them knew my Christian name. I was thunderstruck, and ran out of my room to see if I could account for the voice. / told the lady the same morning.

" I never saw anything I thought supernatural, and only once before had anything like a similar hallucination. [This other experience took place 1 2 years previously, when Miss Burrows and her mother heard some sounds which seemed to them unaccountable.] My father and mother were not superstitious people, and a healthier family could not possibly be than ours."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Burrows adds: —

" I heard the voice call my name on the Sunday morning at 8. My mother was dying, and quite unconscious, from the Saturday night (the night before) until the Monday at 8 a.m., when she died."

We find from an obituary notice in the Bury Guardian that Mrs. Burrows died on Monday, February 20, 1882.

Mrs. Griffiths, of 31, Rosaville Road, Fulham Road, S.W., confirms as foUows:— "March 25th.

" I am very glad to be able to corroborate the statement made by Miss Burrows, about hearing herself called by name at the time of her mother's death. I cannot remember the exact date, but it was a Sunday morning in February, 1882, and when I came down to breakfast she told me about it, and said that a voice called ' Lizzy ' distinctly, and it sounded just like her mother's. The next morning she had the news of her mother's death; and she had not any idea that she was ill before, so that it could not have been fancy.

" H. Griffiths."

It will be seen that Miss Burrows gives February 19th as the date of her experience, and Mrs. Griffiths mentions independently tiiat the day

was a Sunday in February. The 19th of February, 1882, fell on a Sunday. There having been an interval of 24 hours between the percipient's experience and the death, the case could not be included in the group which I used in the statistical argument above, Chap. XIII., § 6.1

We owe the next case to Mrs. Passingham, of Milton, Cambridge. The narrator is Mrs. Walsh, a sick-nurse whom Mrs. Passingham knew well, and of whom she says: —

(278) " The fact of her having quarrelled with her favourite sister, and her dying without a reconciliation, affects her deeply, and she had tears in her eyes as she told me the story. She declares she was not asleep, and it was not a dream; she had only just put out the light and had not got into bed."

Mrs. Walsh writes to us on May 6th, 1884: —

" 107, Queen's Crescent, Haverstock Hill. "On October 24th, 1877, I was in London, and after preparing to go to bed, I had just extinguished the light, when I heard the voice of my sister, who was then in Wolverhampton, call me by my name, ' Joanna.' I instantly answered, ' Yes, Polly.' The voice was low, almost a whisper, but perfectly clear, and I was so sure that she spoke that I turned to the part of the room from which the voice came. Again I heard the voice, and after that, once more, making three times in all.

" When I realised that it could not possibly be my sister, I felt — not exactly frightened — but awed, and I could not sleep till near morning for thinking of it. The next day, I heard from my family that they had had a telegram to say that she was dangerously ill, and some one was to go to her. Another sister went and found her dead; and the time of her death agreed exactly with the time when I heard the voice. She died very suddenly of mortification, and I had not the least idea she was ill; also, we had become estranged from each other, although we were exceedingly fond of each other, and I think that is the reason she spoke to me.

"Joanna Walsh."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death took place at Wolverhampton on the 23rd October, 1877, and not the 24th. The 24th was probably impressed on Mrs. Walsh's memory, as being the day when the alarming news reached her.

In reply to inquiries, Mrs. Walsh adds: —

" In answer to your first question I must tell you that at the time of my sister's death I was with almost entire strangers, and therefore do not think I mentioned what I had heard to anyone until after I had a letter saying she was ill, and almost directly afterwards a telegram saying she was dead. To explain clearly, when I had the letter saying she was ill, I mentioned it to my sister who brought the letter; then when I had the telegram to say she was dead, I found that the time corresponded exactly with the time I heard her voice.

" This is the only experience of the kind that I ever had. [This is in answer to the question whether she had ever had any other hallucination of the senses.]

114 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

" I didn't for one moment doubt whose voice it was, as I immediately answered by name."

§ 3. I may make the transition from the recognised to the unrecognised auditory phantasms by an account of several experiences, occurring to the same percipient, in one of which the voice was recognised, but not in the others. The witness is Mrs. Wight, of 12, Sinclair Koad, West Kensington.

(279) " On five occasions in my life I have heard my Christian name uttered in a peremptory manner, as if by some one who was in need of my aid; and after each occasion I have learnt that a relation had died at a time closely corresponding to the call. I have never on any other occasion had any sort of hallucination of the senses whatever.

" The first two occasions of my hearing the call corresponded with the deaths of two aunts, who had brought me up in my childhood, when my parents were in India. In these cases I cannot say whether the call was on the very day of the death or not; it was certainly within a very few days.

" The next and most striking occasion was at the time of the death of my mother, which took place in India, on November 8th, 1864. I was living at the time with a cousin, Mrs. Harnett, and her husband, at St. John's Wood. I was sitting one morning in a room with Mr. Harnett, when we both distinctly heard a voice utter my name as it seemed from outside the room. I at once went to look, but it proved that no inmate of the house had called me. Indeed, there was no one except my cousin who would have used my Christian name; and all our search and efibrts to solve the mystery were unavailing. As Mr. Harnett had heard of the similar occurrence on the death of my aunts, he made a note in writing of the date. In about three weeks, we received the news of my mother's death in India, after a week's illness; and I had Mr. Harnett's assurance, as well as my own memory, that the date of death corresponded with the day of the call.

" The next occasion was at Brighton; and this was the only time when the voice was recognised. As I awoke in the morning, I heard the voice of Admiral Wight, my father-in-law, who had died before my mother, calling me as he frequently had done in life. In a day or so, his widow wrote and told me of the death of his son, my husband's half-brother. I had known that he was very ill, but was not in immediate anxiety about him.

" The fifth occasion was in June, 1876, and was immediately followed by the news of the death of an infant niece, aged 9 months, whom also I had known to be ailing. In these last two cases, again, I cannot be sure whether the days of the call and of the death corresponded; if not, they most certainly very nearly did. u Sarah Wight."

[The above account was written out by me, January 31st, 1884, immediately after a long interview with Mrs. Wight, in which every detail was gone over again and again. I sent the account to Mrs. Wight, who made a few trifling additions, and signed it.]

Mrs. Wight adds: — " Mrs. Harnett is in delicate health, and I should not like to trouble her. When I spoke to her about it, she remembered the incident."

The strength of this narrative, of course, lies in the third case, where the correspondence of day was made out to be exact. The ciw wi^^ hypothesis that the call on this occasion was a real call outside the house, though repudiated by Mrs. Wight, cannot be so confidently rejected by those who realise the difficulty of localising sounds with precision. Still, the fact of her having on other occasions experienced impressions of exactly this form — the commonest of all forms of sensory hallucination — distinctly supports the view that the experi- ''-^ ^ "^ ence was hallucinatory; and if so, the coincidence of day is a strong -'/^ '-«^'^ point in favour of the telepathic explanation. I will not pause here ' -y""**^ on the fact that in this instance there was a second percipient, as d^o v»-<^-'«- < that topic will be fully discussed in the chapter on " Collective sfenii^---^ Cases." f '■"^^.

The next account is from Mr. Goodyear, now of Avoca Villa, Park Road, Bevois Hill, Southampton, who refers in it to a visual case quoted in Chap. XII., § 3.

"February 9th, 1884. i.^^

(280) " I am very fond of shooting, and one evening I had gone out rs yK

with my bag and gun. I was crossing some open meadows, when suddenly f^" a fearfully shrill cry of ' Tom ' rang in my ears. I instantly answered loudly, ' Yes, yes,' turning sharply round to see who was in pain, but there was no one near, and again the scream rang out terribly loud. I answered again, ' Yes, yes,' and then I heard no more. I retraced my steps, for I was quite unstrung; but later on, when it was dark, I went over to see the keeper in whose woods I was going to shoot, and told him what had happened. He said, ' Bad news,' and he was right; for next morning summoned me to join my bereaved sweetheart, who at that very time, certainly to within a very few minutes, lost her father. I knew her father was ill, had been for some 18 months, but was not thinking about them at the time. I do not know whether these cases are particularly striking, or whether there are heaps of similar ones, but they are just what happened, and will for ever live fresh in my memory.

" T. W. Goodyear."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death took place on March 7, 1876, after a 2 years' illness.

Asked if this is the only auditory hallucination that he can recall, Mr. Goodyear replies in the affirmative.

Asked whether the lady really uttered his name at the time, he replies, " My wife does not think she uttered my name aloud, though for several reasons she was thinking intensely of me." He has told me in confidence special circumstances which caused the mind of the dying man

116 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

to be much occupied with him, and which caused the mind of his fiancee to be directed towards him with a special longing for his presence.

The following account was received in October, 1884, from Mrs. Wilkie, who prefers that her address should not be published.

(281) " In September, 1875, I was in Callander, in lodgings with my sister and other friends. On the night of the 8th I had gone to bed, but had only lately put out the light, and was quite wide awake; when I heard from apparently just behind the curtain, at the side of the bed, the words 'Oh! Eliza,' (my name) in a mournful tone. I was so much impressed by the occurrence that I noted down the date next morning, and told my sister of what I had heard. As time passed on, and I heard from all my own people and heard of nothing having happened to any of them, I quite forgot the circumstance.

" Several months after, I heard of the death by drowning, in the Fiji Islands, of a gentleman, a distant cousin of mine, whom I had known very well. His relations did not know on which day his death took place, but it was between the 7th and 9 th of September, as they got a letter from him begun on the 7th, and his partner, who was away from the place, came home on the 9th, and found him drowned. He had gone out bathing, it was supposed, and taken cramp.

"E. K. Wilkie."

We find a notice in the Edinburgh Courant which states that the death occui-red "early in September, 1875."

In answer to the question whether this was the only hallucination of the senses that she has ever had, Mrs. Wilkie replies, "Yes, the only one." She believes that the diary in which her experience was at once noted may still be in existence, but has searched for it in vain. Should she ever find it, she has promised to show me the entry.

Mrs. Wilkie's sister, Mrs. Rowe, writes to us on December 1, 1884: — ■

"South Ste. Marie, Mich., U.S.A.

"In the year 1875, the month of September, I was staying at Callander with my sister, Mrs. Wilkie. I remember her telling me one morning of having heard her name spoken the night before, from behind the curtain at the head of her bed, these words: ' Oh! Eliza '; and this occurred hefore she heard of the death of her friend. n J)oea H Rowe "

The narrator of the next case is Mrs. Wyld, of 59, Devonshire Road,

Birkenhead,

"May 10th, 1885.

(282) " I would very gladly write the short statement you ask for, but though to my own mind it is pretty cone usive, still I feel that to outsiders it is wanting in two important details: (1) I mentioned the fact of hearing the voice to no one at the time [but see below], and (2) I could not tell whose voice it was.

" It was on Thursday evening, January 10th, 1884, that I was sitting alone in the house reading, and it seemed strange, and still not strange, to hear my name called with a sort of eager entreaty.

" Shortly after, the others came in. I was leaving for Ellesmere next day, and in the bustle of departure I thought no more of the circumstance. It was only when coming down to breakfast on the Saturday morning and finding the letter telling of E.'s death, that I instantly recalled the circumstances, and saw that the time and day corresponded with when they knew she must have slipped out, and down to the river.

" I wonder I did not associate it with her, for she had written me some very pitiable letters beforehand. I had not the least idea her mind was affected. We were school-fellows together for nearly three years and great friends. " Mary Wtld."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Wyld adds: —

" I never have had a hallucination of the senses at any other time. It was about 8 o'clock in the evening, I fancy, when I heard the voice. She was not found till 2 o'clock the next morning when the tide turned on the river; she then had been dead several hours, having slipped out, I fancy, between 7 and 9 the previous evening."

We have verified the date given, and the circumstances of the death, in two local newspapers. It appears that though the body was not recovered till early next morning, it was seen, and the shawl that was round it was even seized and drawn into a boat, at 10 p.m.

Mrs. Wyld afterwards found that she had mentioned her experience at the time to her mother, who writes to us on March 19, 1886: —

" Mrs. Wyld was staying with me in Scarborough, when she heard the voice in which you are interested. She was alone in the house (excepting servants), and when I returned, an hour after, she related what had seemed to her peculiar. The date I do not now remember; but Mrs. Wyld left Scarborough the next day; and in two or three days after, she wrote to tell me of the sad event having taken place that evening.

"M. Balgaenie."

[The non-recognition here rather tends to strengthen the case, by increasing the improbability that the hallucination was due to anxiety about the absent friend.]

The following case is from Miss Harriss, of 25, Shepherd's Bush

Koad, W.

"January 25th, 1884.

(283) " Exactly the hour in the afternoon that my mother died, being out for a long walk in the country with a companion, and having parted from her to pick wild flowers, I heard myself distinctly called several times. With a feeling as if some ill were approaching, I looked at my watch instinctively, and found it half-past 4. I cannot tell why I did so, for I was then only a school-girl, and calling to my companion I found she had not addressed me. I dreamed of my mother's death the same night.

"A. Harriss."

In answer to inquiries. Miss Harriss adds: —

" My mother died on 25th September, 1875. She was in better health than I had seen her for years when I left her about six weeks before, which was the reason of my doing so. She died suddenly of heart disease. I had heard from her only two days before, in good health and spirits. The

118 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

hour of death was stated in the letter and telegram; I think I have both still.

" I never had another auditory hallucination. I never had another dream of death besides that about my mother; it was very vivid and distressing. I saw her dying."

The following is an extract, copied by the present writer, from a letter written to Miss Harriss by her father, and dated September 25, 1875: —

" Ashfield. " My Dear Annie, — You will be much surprised that your dear mamma passed away this afternoon about 3.45, so gently that we could not believe that she was really gone... I think she was not quite conscious at the time. — Your affectionate father, "J. H. Harriss."

The friend who was with Miss Harriss at the time writes to us on July 12, 1884, from 58, Cornwall Gardens, S.W.:—

" The following is an answer to your inquiries regarding my recollection of a certain incident relating to the death of Miss Harriss' mother. I remember her coming down one morning much disturbed at a very vivid dream she had during the night, in which she saw her mother lying dead. About an hour after she told us, the post came in, bringing Miss Harriss the news of her mother's death. The previous day Miss Harriss had been in the woods with me, and came and asked me why I called her, and what was the matter. On finding I had not, she told me she had been quite sure some one was calling her, and wanted her. I believe afterwards we were struck at the curious coincidence of her mother being taken ill that afternoon, and being actually dead about the time of her dream.

" Edith Darwin."

[In conversation. Miss Harriss assured me again that she is positive that the hour at which she heard the voice was the hour of her mother's death. If her recollection of the time which she noted by her watch is correct, this is an instance of exaggeration of correctness, as there was an interval of three-quarters of an hour.]

Here we can hardly attribute the dream to any excitement caused by the previous hallucination, since that does not appear to have suggested her mother to Miss Harriss. If we regard both incidents as telepathic, and as due to a common cause, the case would be an interesting instance of " deferred impression " — the dim impulse which immediately after the death emerged as an unrecognised phantasm, developing into more definitely " veridical " shape in sleep.

§ 4. And now we come to cases where the auditory impression was of a complete sentence, conveying either a piece of information or a direction. The following account is from the Rev. R. H. Killick, of Great Smeaton Rectory, Northallerton, and is quoted from an undated letter to the Rev. R. H. Davies, of Chelsea, who tells me, on November 25th, 1885, that it must have been received " ten or

twelve years ago." Mr. Killick sent us on April 23rd, 1884, an almost precisely similar account. We have not been able to obtain direct confirmation from his wife, who is an invalid; but he tells us that her memory confirms his own. The incident happened, however, rather more than 80 years ago.

(284) " A very much loved little daughter (now married) was with my family at our vicarage in Wiltshire, and I was in Paris. One Sunday afternoon, I was sitting in the courtyard of our hotel, taking coffee, when a sudden thought shot into my mind, ' Etta has fallen into the water.' [In the later account the parallel clause is — "when all at once I seemed to hear a voice say, ^ Etta has fallen into the pond.'"] I should tell you that we had large grounds, and a fine piece of artificial water, with a grass walk all round, and a waterfall and cave, &c. — a favourite part. [In the later account, Mr. Killick adds that this pond " was my horror for the children. They were never allowed to go near it, except with one of the family."] I tried to banish the thought, but in vain. I went out into the city and walked for hours, trying to obliterate the impression in every possible way, but in vain. I walked till I was too tired to walk any longer, and returned and went to bed, but not to sleep. I went next day to the Post-office, hoping for letters; but there were none. I could not stay in Paris, so I went to the Ambassador's and got a passport for Brussels.

" In the course of time I had letters saying all were well; and I finished my journey, and never spoke of my ' foolish nervousness ' — as I admitted it to be.

" Some months afterwards I was at a dinner party, and the hostess said, ' What did you say about Etta, when you heard 1'

" ' Heard what 1 ' I said.

" * Oh! ' said the lady, ' have I let out a secret 1 '

" I said, ' I don't leave till I learn! '

" She said, ' Don't get me into trouble, but I mean about her falling into the pond.'

" ' What pond 1 '

" ' Your pond.'

" ' When 1 '

« ' While you were abroad.'

" I was about leaving, so I said very little more, but hastened home. I sought our governess, and inquired what it all meant.

" She said, ' Oh, how cruel to tell you, now it's all over! Well, one Sunday afternoon we were walking by the pond, and Theodore said, " Etta, it's so funny to walk with your eyes shut "; so she tried, and fell into the water. I heard a scream, and looked round and saw Etta's head come up, and I ran and seized her and pulled her out. Oh, it was so dreadful! And then I carried her up to her mamma, and

she was put to bed, and soon got all right.' ^., i _

" 1 inquired the day; it was the ver]/ Sunday that I was in Paris, and cKur^ f]

had this dreadful conviction. h^) ii

" I asked the hour. About 4 o'clock! The very time, also, that the i,Jt..M^

unwelcome thought plunged into my mind. Lf^*

120 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

" I said, ' Then it was revealed to me in Paris the instant it happened '; and, for the first time, I told her of my sad experience in Paris on that Sunday afternoon. " R. Henry Killick."

Mr. Killick writes us on May 6th, 1884: —

" As to your queries: you ask was the impression unique in my experience. I think it was. I cannot remember anything like it. You ask, was the pond a source of danger, &c. The children were never allowed to go near it without grown-up people being with them; it was prohibited; and it was quite away from their part of the grounds. We were so strict! and careful that the accident seemed an impossibility. We had never had \ any alarm on the subject.

" At that time I had ten children at home; and yet it was the special one that had the accident who was present to my mind at that moment. The voice seemed to say, ' Etta has fallen into the pond.' "

The two expressions " A sudden thought shot into my mind," and " I seemed to hear a voice say," are perfectly compatible, as expressing a hallucination only slightly externalised (Vol. I., pp. 480-1); but such descriptions might, no doubt, apply equally to something too inward to be called hallucination at all; and in fact a parallel but less distinct case (No. 80) has been classed among emotional and not sensory impressions. In other respects, the present narrative reminds us of Mr. Jukes's case (Vol. I., p. 407), and of Mr. Everitt's case (Vol. I., p. 409). The sense of a third personality — a messenger — implied in the form of the message, may be interpreted as the subjective contribution of the percipient; who projects his impression in the fashion in which it would most naturally strike his senses, if it really came to him in a normal way from without.

A still more remarkable case has been supplied to us by Dr. Nicolas, Count Gon^mys, of Corfu, a member of our Society, from whose long paper, which was in French, the following account is abstracted. The first person is retained for the sake of clearness.

"February, 1885.

(285) "In the year 1869, I was Officer of Health in the Hellenic army.

By command of the War Office, I was attached to the garrison of the

Island of Zante. As I was approaching the island in a steamboat, to

take up my new position, and at about two hours' distance from the

shore, I heard a sudden inward voice say to me, over and over again, in

Italian, ' Go to Volterra.' I was made almost dizzy by the frequency

with which this phrase was repeated. Although in perfectly good health

/ at the time, I became seriously alarmed at what I considered as an

"^ auditory hallucination. I had no association with the name of M.

Yolterra, a gentleman of Zante with whom I was not even acquainted,

although I had once seen him, 10 years before. I tried the effect of

^ stopping my ears, and of trying to distract myself by conversation with

the bystanders; but all was useless, and I continued to hear the voice in the same way. At last we reached land; I proceeded to the hotel and busied myself with my trunks; but the voice continued to harass me. After a time a servant came, and announced to me that a gentleman was at the door who wished to speak with me at once. ' Who is the gentleman?' I asked. ' M. Volterra,' was the reply. And M. Volterra entered, weeping violently in uncontrollable distress, and imploring me to follow him at once, and see his son, who was in a dangerous condition.

"I found a young man in a state of maniacal frenzy, naked, in an empty room, and despaired of by all the doctors of Zante for the last ' five years. His aspect was hideous, and rendered the more distressing by ' constantly-recurring choreic spasms, accompanied by hissings, bowlings, barkings, and other animal noises. Sometimes he crawled on his belly like a serpent; sometimes he fell into an ecstatic condition on his knees; sometimes he talked and quarrelled with imaginary interlocutors. The violent crises were often followed by periods of profound syncope. When I opened the door of his room he darted upon me furiously, but I stood my ground and seized him by the arm, looking him fixedly in the face. In a few moments his gaze fell; he trembled all over, and fell on the floor with his eyes shut. I made mesmeric passes over him, and in half an hour he had fallen into the somnambulic state. The cure lasted two months and a half, during which many interesting phenomena were observed. Since its completion, the patient has had no return of his [(uiZ^K malady." iKjUl^

A letter written to Count Gonemys by M. Volterra, dated Zante, ' ' * 7th (19th) June, 1885, contains the most complete corroboration of the above statement in all that concerns the Volterra family. The letter concludes as follows: —

"Before your arrival at Zante I had no acquaintance with you whatever, although I have been many years at Corfu as Deputy to the fJ Legislative Assembly; nor had we ever spoken together, nor had I ever ' ■ said a word to you about my son. As I before said, we had never thought of you, nor desired your assistance, until I called on you on your arrival as officer of health, and begged you to save my son.

" We owe his life first to you and then to mesmerism. " I hold it my duty to declare to you my sincere gratitude, and to subscribe myself affectionately and sincerely yours, j/jM-t*^

" Demetrio Volterra, Count Crissoplevri. ^ c*«i

(Additional signatures) " Laura Volterra " [M. Volterra's wife]. ^ ^^^^

" DiONisio D. Volterra, Count Crissoplevri." vH'<«^

" O flepaTTsvOstc Av«?a(7toc 'BoXreppoc." (Anastasio M- ^y

Volterra, the cured patient). " C. Vassopoulos (come testimonio) " " Demetrio, Comte Guerino (confermo)." " Lorenzo T. Mercati."

The form of the monition here, as the form of the statement in the former cases, I should attribute to the percipient's shaping i imagination. The narrative, however, will be seen to present one i

122 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

peculiarity which we have encountered in no other instance; ^ at the time that the impression was received, the agent and the percipient were personally unknown to one another. Still, if my surraise be allowable as to the conditions by which a line of telepathic communication may be established between persons unconnected by blood or affection, we might certainly find a likely condition in such an attitude as that of the supposed agent in this case. We cannot reasonably suppose that any casual stranger had as good a chance of being telepathically impressed by M. Volterra as the person who — though his name and personality may have had no place in M. Volterra's mind — was yet, by virtue of his special knowledge and of his actual approach, more nearly connected than any one else with the engrossing subject of his thoughts.

The following example, from a clergyman who unfortunately withholds his name from publication, is very similar, the inward nature of the sound being again noticeable. But here the agent and percipient were friends.

(286) "In March, 187 —, I went to the curacy of A., and had been, as well as I remember, about a month there, when the following happened. I am a native of a town in the North of England, and in my childhood had a friend of my own age whom I will call C. Our friendship lasted till manhood, though our circumstances and walks of life were very different; and I had always a great deal of influence over him, insomuch that he would allow himself to be restrained by me when he would not by others. He became, towards his 20th year or so, rather addicted to drink, but I always had the same friendship for him, and would have done anything to serve or help him.

"In 187 — his family were living at X. (near Z.), and as all my other old friends had long left the neighbourhood of Z., my native town, I always used to go to them whenever I visited that part, as I was and am still on sufficiently friendly terms with them to go at any time without notice. On the day in question I had been visiting some of the parishioners, and having made an end of this, came to a cross-road of two of the lanes near the church; and not only was I not thinking of my friend, whom I had not heard of for some years, but I distinctly remember what I was thinking of, which was whether to go home to my lodgings for my tea, turning to the left, or whether to trespass on the hospitality of a lady who lived to the right of the crossing. "When thus standing in doubt, a kind of shudder passed through me, accompanied by a most extraordinary feeling, which I can only compare to that of a jug of cold water poured on the nape of the neck, and running down the spine; ^ and as this passed off, though I cannot say I heard a voice, I was distinctly conscious of the words, ' Go to Z. by this evening's train,' being said in my ear. There was no one at the

1 A possible exception is case 30, Vol. i., pp. 214-8. 2 Cf. case 223, p. 37, and the note thereon.

time within 100 yards of me. I was not very flush of money just then, and could not well afford the expense, besides not wishing to absent myself from duty so soon after taking it up. But it seemed so distinct that I almost made up my mind to obey it; but on announcing the fact to my landlady, to whom, of course, I could not tell my true reason, she remonstrated so earnestly that, coupling this with the affairs of my duty, &c., I did conclude to disregard it. I could not, however, settle to anything, read, write, or sit in comfort, till the time was elapsed when I could have caught the train, when the uneasy, restless feeling gradually went off, and in a few hours I was ready to laugh at myself.

" Three or four days after, I received the sad news that my friend had on that day gone down home from London, had been taken ill, and two days afterwards had, in a fit of temporary insanity, put an end to his life. I have no doubt in my own mind that had I obeyed the intimation I might have saved his life; for I must have gone to their house, no other in the neighbourhood being available; and had I found him in the condition in which he was, you may be very sure he would never have got out of arm's length of me until all danger was over. I have ever since reproached myself with it, and have made up my mind that should I ever have such another experience I will do what is directed, seem it never so absurd or difficult."

In reply to inquiries, the narrator adds: —

" I was in health just as usual, no better and no worse. I had good health all the time I was at A., and in particular I never have suffered from indigestion since I was a child. I have never at any other time had such a physical sensation, or such a sensation of a voice; and nothing has ever happened to me which would lead at all satisfactorily to the conclusion that any abnormal phenomena were present."

The narrator has privately told us the year of the occurrence, and the place where the suicide took place; and we have verified these details in the Register of Deaths. The event took place later in the year than he imagined — in November. In conversation, he has explained that " Go to Z " practically meant the same for him as " Go to these friends," as he would be quite certain to stay with them. Their place of business was still at Z. At the time of his experience, his friend was in a very critical condition.

The next case is worth quoting as parallel to the two last, though it has less evidential force; for, at this distance of time, we cannot make sure that something had not occurred during the preceding days, that might have half unconsciously suggested to the percipient the need which he was so strangely impelled to relieve. The account is from Dr. Joseph Smith, for many years leading medical practitioner in Warrington, and a class-leader in the Wesleyan Methodist Church.

" November 24th, 1884.

(287) " When I lived at Penketh, about 40 years ago, I was sitting one

evening reading, and a voice came to me, saying, ' Send a loaf to James

Gandy's.' Still I continued reading, and the voice came to me again,

' Send a loaf to James Gandy's.' Still I continued reading, when a third

124 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

time the voice came to me with greater emphasis, ' Send a loaf to James Gandy's '; and this time it was accompanied by an almost irresistible impulse to get up. I obeyed this impulse, and went into the village, bought a large loaf, and seeing a lad at the shop door, I asked him if he knew James Gandy's. He said he did; so I gave him a trifle and asked him to take the loaf there, and to say a gentleman had sent it. Mrs. Gandy was a member of my class, and I went down the next morning to see what had come of it, when she told me that a strange thing had happened to her last night. She said she wanted to put the children to bed, and they began to cry for food, and she had not any to give them; for her husband had been for four or five days out of work. She then went to prayer, to ask God to send them something; soon after which a lad came to the door with a loaf, which he said a gentleman gave him to bring to her. I calculated, upon inquiry made of her, that her prayer and the voice which I heard exactly coincided in point of time.

" Joseph Smith, M.D."

§5.1 will now give one case where the sound heard, though vocal,

was not articulate.^ The seemingly direct reproduction of the actual

sound which the agent was making (and therefore hearing) at the

time recalls the first cases of this chapter; but in the present instance

there was no recognition, which is of course an evidential defect. The

case is one where jpros and cons have to be carefully balanced; it

has been admitted as the experience of a matter-of-fact man, but

1 would certainly have been rejected had it been that of a nervous or

^ imaginative woman. The narrator is Mrs. B., who contributed also

■ case 192, (to which she refers in the first line,) and whose name may

be given to anyone interested in the subject.

"December, 1884.

(288) " Some six years after the above occurrence, in the September of 1870, my husband was at D. Hall for his holiday. His parents were then living at Dieppe. He was roused one night by a peculiar moaning, as if some person or animal was in pain. He got up and went through the house and out into the gardens and shrubberies, but could see nothing. He heard the same noise at intervals all that day, but could not find out the cause. He returned to London next day, to find a telegram summoning him to Dieppe, as his mother was dying. When he got into the house at Dieppe, the first sound he heard was a repetition of the same noise that he heard at D. Hall, and he found it was his mother who was making it, and he learned she had been doing so for two days. She died a few hours after he arrived. We had no knowledge of Mrs. B.'s illness at the time my husband heard the noise.

" My husband's parents had been obliged to leave D. Hall under painful circumstances, and possibly the thoughts of her loved home may have been paramount with Mrs. B., or it may have been that they flew to

1 The strongest example in our collection that can be thus described is the scream case, No. 34, to which some "borderland" parallels are given in Vol. i., pp. 403-5. As possibly a direct reproduction of the agent's sensation, the present experience might be compared to cases 151 and 342.

my husband, who was her youngest son. At any rate, my husband always held that it was his mother's moaning he heard at D. Hall though she was in France. She was speechless when he reached her, so no solution could be arrived at. " E. A. B.

We find from a newspaper obituary that the death took place at Dieppe, on September 12, 1870.

In reply to inquiries, the narrator says: —

" My late husband was alone, at his old home in Norfolk, when he heard the moaning I told you of. He was shortly after (the same afternoon, I think) telegraphed for to go to Dieppe to see his mother. He was quite unaware, till he got the telegram, that she was ill. He returned to Selhurst, where we were living, and where I was, on his way to Dieppe, and then told me about this noise. On his return from Dieppe, after his mother's death, he said, ' You remember my telling you of the moaning I heard at D. The first sound I heard in the house at Dieppe was the same, and it was my mother making it.' He further added that he was told she had made it for a day or two. I am perfectly clear about his hearing it first at night in the house, and on the following morning in the shrubberies, which were a little distance from the house. I never heard either my husband or his father speak of ever hearing sounds, or seeing anything before or after the occurrences I have mentioned [^.e., this case and case 1921. They were both matter-of-fact men, and very free from superstitious ideas. I was a young woman at the time these things took place (I am only 41 now), so my memory of them is very clear and good. Six weeks or two months after my husband heard these sounds, we were together at D., and he showed me the spot in the shrubbery where the sound had been loudest."

[If the percipient's experience had been confined to the moaning heard in the night, the incident would not have been worth attending to, for reasons to be immediately adduced. But the continuance of the sound during the day, and out of doors, makes a decided diflference.]

I 6. We now come to a few specimens of the non-vocal soundphantasms — the mere noises or shocks — which are the parallel among auditory hallucinations to the rudimentary visual hallucinations which were considered in the last chapter. But the auditory cases need a far more jealous scrutiny, before we are justified in regarding them as even probably telepathic in origin. Odd noises, especially at night, are very common phenomena; and though the particular cause of them is often hard to detect, the physical conditions of our indoor life are prolific of possible causes- Most of us are in constant proximity to wind that may blow through crevices, and rattle or flap or dislodge loose parts of our windows and walls and chimneys; and to water in pipes or cisterns that may leak, or burst, or may contain bubbling air; and to slates that may fall; and to wooden furniture and floors that may crack and creak. And if any one should say that he has heard a noise which, from its nature or its position, could not be

126 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

accounted for by any such ascertainable cause, he might be reminded that sounds are the hardest things in the world to localise; and that no one who has not given special attention to the subject can realise how easy it is to mistake the source and character of an auditory impression.^ Thus, while it is impossible to contend that the " ball of light " which appeared to Mr. Saxby was a real ball, and impossible therefore to deny that the coincidence of the hallucination with the death of some one to whom he was attached was an odd circumstance, it is quite possible to contend that some unaccountable crash which someone has heard was not a hallucination at all, but a real objective sound; d,nd the coincidence of such a crash with the death of a near relative is the less odd in proportion as unaccountable crashes are common occurrences. Still, unaccountable noises are not of such daily and hourly occurrence but that a sufficiently large and well-established group of the coincidences in question might be taken as possible

1 I may mention, as a marked instance of this, a personal experience which I have again and again repeated. The dripping of a small fountain, heard from some yards ofif, produces on my ears the precise effect of a heavy waggon which is being slowly dragged up a gravelly road at a considerable distance.

The following is probably a case of mistaken localisation. The account is from the Rev. Edward Bonus, of the Rectory, Hulcot, Aylesbury.

"July, 1882.

■' The house is the Rectory of in the county of Wilts. Of the two clergymen

concerned, one is now dead; the other has read through and signed this account, certifying its accuracy. This matter happened about 20 years ago.

"One day, a friend of the then rector came on a visit for a few days, and rode on horseback. It was winter time. He put his horse into his friend's stables, and the two clergymen spent the evening together. They went to bed as usual about 11. During the night the friend heard the steps of a horse very distinctly on the stairs; was not frightened, but greatly surprised. He at once got up, lighted his candle, and went downstairs, but could see nothing, and now was frightened. He returned to bed, and shortly again heard the same noise; again he got up, this time too frightened to go downstairs, but went to his friend's room. He was asleep, so he roused him, and told him what he had heard; they then remained together, leaving the light. Very soon they both heard the noise in the most certain and distinct manner; so they both dressed and searched the house — could see or find nothing; they then went to the stables, and to their sorrow the horse was dead.

" They both believed the spirit of the horse had entered the house. The horse died of heart disease; it was afterwards examined. Never again, as far as I have ever heard, was the same man visited by any kind of noise.

" I was intimately acquainted with the two clergymen, and have heard them tell the story very many times.

"Edward Bonus."

" This account is correct. — H. S. L."

What one may surmise to have happened is that the friends heard a sound resembling heavy steps, and inferred that it was on the stairs. We learn, on inquiry, that " a horse kicking in the stables could be distinctly heard in the house "; which suggests the true nature of the particular horse's "agency " in the matter.

In Morrison's Reminiscences of Sir W. Scott there is an account of the strange sounds —like the drawing of heavy boards along the new part of the house— which woke Scott and his wife on the night of the death of their friend, Mr. Bullock, who had lately been assisting them in the work of building and improving. The coincidence made a great impression on Scott, which, however, we cannot hold to have been justified. For Lockhart's Life contains a letter of Scott's, from which it appears that the same sound had been heard on the preceding night, when, though "awaked by a violent noise," be only "fancied something had fallen, and thought no more about it."

indications of telepathic action, especially as we have the analogy of rudimentary visual hallucinations to point to.^ Moreover, there is no doubt that surprising noises and crashes, though often due to undiscovered external causes, are also a form of purely subjective hallucination^ — which makes it at least probable, if telepathy be a reality, that they will also be a form of telepathic hallucination.

The kinds of non- vocal impression which are least likely to be due to a real but undiscoverable cause in the vicinity are those which are distinctly musical — the sound being produced not in the gliding random fashion of an ^olian harp, but in a series of well-defined tones. Some examples of literal music will be given in Chap. XVIII. But I will give here an example where the sound heard was of the ringing of bells, which is a known form of hallucination.^ The narrator is a gentleman who does not wish his name and address to be published, though he has no objection to their being communicated

privately.

"May 28th, 1885.

(289) " In 1862, I sailed to Bombay in one of Dunbar's old frigate.-built ships. I was depressed the whole voyage with an undefined presentiment of 'bad news from home.' At Bombay I used to get my messmates to go ashore for letters (a great privilege), even when it was my turn to do so; my nervousness was so great. However, we sailed for home, and reached and left St. Helena, and no black letter was delivered to me.

" Two days after leaving St. Helena I was up aloft doing some trifling sailor's work with the fourth officer, on the mizen topsail or top gallant yard, when I heard a bell begin to toll. I said to him, ' Do you hear that bell tolling '? ' ' No,' he said, ' I hear nothing.' However, my agitation was so great that I went down and examined both our bells; and placed my arm near them, to see if they were vibrating or if any chance rope was swinging loose and striking them. However, while doing this, I still heard the boom of the tolling bell, and it seemed far away. I then, when I had satisfied myself that the sound was not attributable to either of our ship's bells, went up aloft and scanned the horizon in search of a sail, but saw none. I then said to my messmates, ' That's my " black letter." I knew I should have bad news this voyage.'

1 A combination of rudimentary visual with rudimentary auditory hallucinations is recorded by Madame G-uyon [La Viede Madame Guyon, ecrite par elle-meme, Paris, 1791, Vol. iii., p. 170) — in a case, however, which cannot be presented as telepathic, inasmuch as Madame G-uyon was expecting the death of the friend which coincided with the hallucination. The sight was a glimmer in the room, which caused some little gilt nails near the bed to glow: the sound was a crash as if all the window-panes in the house had fallen.

2 See the statistics given in Vol. i., p. 503.

3 For instance, no one is likely to explain as a misinterpretation of real sounds the case given by Mr. Kinglake in Eotlien, p. 239. In the midst of the desert he heard pealing for ten minutes, as it appeared to him, the familiar bells of his native village. I have received a very similar example from a lady who heard bells when leading a very solitary life in a remote part of India — which is one of the 7 cases mentioned in Vol. i., p. 503. A second apparently telepathic case is No. 344.

128 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

" At Falmouth we called for orders; and there I found that a lady who filled the place of elder sister to me (my aunt by marriage), and to whose younger sister I am married now, had been suddenly carried off by illness — at that time, as near as we could calculate, allowing for the different longitude. She was young (29), lovely, and most winning in her manners. I, boy-like, adored her, and she used to say that I was her young sailor lover; as my uncle, a captain in the Navy, was her old sailor lover.

" I am 40 years old now, and have been through dangers of all sorts, in imminent danger of death many times, but I have never had a presentiment since. After nearly 25 years I can still remember the boom, boom, of that old bell in the Manx churchyard, which I heard in latitude 14 S., or thereabouts."

Asked whether he had ever experienced a hallucination on any other occasion, the narrator replied: —

" I have never suffered from any hallucinations. I have led an active life, including much loneliness, being for weeks together in the jungles shooting and surveying alone, save for native servants, and far from white men, and during all that time my brain never played me any tricks." Later, he wrote: — " I have not been a dreamer, fool, or a mystic, but a hard-working, clear-headed man of business. I tell you all this, not in a boasting spirit, but simply to prove, so far as possible, that I am not a likely subject for ' illusions ' or ' hallucinations.' You must remember that this occurred when I was a careless youngster of 17, on my first voyage to sea. I could not account for it then; nor can I now. The impression is as vivid as ever."

Asked whether any bells would have been ringing at the time of the lady's death, he says: —

" Yes. Malen Church bell would have been tolling in Castletown at that time, for the passing hell or for the funeral. I never asked whether the passing hell was rung, but it is a common habit in the Isle of Man to toll the church bell immediately after the decease of any one of some social importance. I feel sure it was done in this case; we were so well known there. I mean it is done for the gentry, and such of the farmers. and shopkeeping class who care to pay for it.

" I may add that the lady who died was inexpressibly dear to me, being more like a sister than an aunt."

The name of the lady was given to us in confidence, and also the date of her death; and we have verified this date by reference to an Isle of Man newspaper. The day proved to be a Sunday. This was pointed out to our informant, in case he might be able to recall anything which would point to a Sunday as the day of his experience. He replied: —

" I cannot well remember the day, but I think that, from what I do remember, it was a Sunday. I was probably stowing the mizen topgallant sail, or doing some necessary work up aloft; but I remember that when I went down to look at the bells the ship was still, and I don't remember any work going on. I am, however, not certain on this matter. "^

If this case was telepathic, it must remain doubtful whether the form of the impression represented the last sensations or ideas of the dying person, or was a piece of death-imagery supplied by the percipient, as illustrated in several of the visual cases of Chap. XII. The preceding distress and nervousness were probably subjective, but can scarcely be regarded as the cause of the hallucination.

When we pass from musical impressions to noise proper, the degree of oddness and unaccountableness in a sound is a point which it is very hard to judge of from description. The reader may form his own opinion of the following account, received from Mrs. Samuda, of Shipton Court, Chipping Norton. I do not number it as an evidential case.

" If the details of what occurred to me (and which I believe to have been purely accidental) can be of any service to your Society, I will with pleasure describe them; but in doing so I must beg that you will thoroughly understand that I do not in the least believe in any of these coincidences, and at the time was much amused when I was told that the sounds I heard were death- warnings. On the 5th of October, 1878, about 3 o'clock in the morning, I was suddenly aroused by three distinct loud knocks exactly over the head of my bed. At the time I was ill, and the nurse was sleeping in my room. She also distinctly heard the sounds. The first thing the next morning, I received a telegram to say my grandfather, Sir Francis Grant, P.R.A., had died suddenly the night before at 8 o'clock. When I told the nurse of the telegram, she instantly said the three knocks I had heard were a death warning.

"On the 20th March, 1879, I received a letter from my mother, saying that my brother, Rupert Markham, had been ill, but was now going on quite well again, and that I need not be the least anxious. On the morning of the 21st, about 3 o'clock in the morning, I distinctly heard the same three knocks; my husband also heard them. At 10 o'clock that morning I received a telegram desiring me to come immediately, as my brother was dying. When I arrived at Melton Mowbray, 9.30 p.m., my brother was just dead.

"About the 2nd of May, 1879, at 6 o'clock in the morning, my husband and I both heard the same three knocks, and were so much impressed at this occurring for a third time that he instantly made a note of it. At that time my eldest brother had just started for Zululand, so we much feared something might have happened to him. For three weeks after this we heard nothing, then a letter came saying my brother was dangerously ill, but shortly afterwards we heard by telegram that he was perfectly well again. I tell you this third instance to show you that there cannot possibly be anything but a mere chance in these accidents being repeated."

[The coincidence in the first case was probably closer than is represented; for all the newspaper accounts give the date of Sir F. Grant's death as Saturday, October 5th; the Times and the Leicester Chronicle say "Saturday morning"; and the Daily Telegraph says, " early on Saturday morning."

The Leicester Chronicle confirms the date of death in the second case.]

130 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES [chap.

Mrs. Samuda does not say whether she herself regards the knocks as hallucinations, or as objectively caused. If they were the former, then the question of " belief in these coincidences "—i.e., the question whether they are due to accident, or to telepathy — must (as we have seen) be judged by the application of the doctrine of chances on a basis of very wide statistics; and certainly will not be decided in favour of accident by the fact that the percipient has observed a coincidence in two cases and not in a third. But the coincidence with the death was not very close in the second case, and possibly not in the first; and real sounds due to some defect in the house or furniture may have happened to be a little louder than usual on these occasions, and perhaps afterwards became exaggerated in memory. The fact that the experience was in each case shared by a second person is strongly (though, as we shall see later, not decisively) in favour of this view.

The following case has more weight. The account was written down on June 2nd, 1876, by Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood, from the dictation of the percipient, the late Miss Vaughan, of 6, Chester Place, Regent's Park, N.W.

(290) " In the autumn of 1856, Mrs. D. was lying dangerously ill, near Windsor; when I received a letter on Friday from her daughter, who had been invited to the marriage of Mr. Cox with Miss Alderson, telling me that as their mother was rather better, they thought they might come up to the marriage on Tuesday if I could give them a bed. On the Saturday night I went to bed at my usual hour, 12 o'clock, but did not go to sleep for some time; when I was suddenly startled by three sets of three extraordinary loud knocks, like strokes of a hammer on an empty box, at my bed head, followed immediately by a long loud cry of a woman's voice, which seemed to die away in the distance. I called my maid instantly, and begged her to look out of the window, and see if there was anyone in the street. She opened the shutters, threw up the window, and said there was no one; that I must have been dreaming; it was quite late. I said ' No, it had not yet struck 1,' and sent her to look at the clock; she returned, and said it wanted 10 minutes to 1. I said the noise must have come from the room adjoining mine, in the next house. She said the house was empty; but this I could not believe, so I sent her early on Sunday morning to see. She came back, saying the windows were all shut, and she had knocked for some time in vain. On the following morning I sent her to the person in Albany Street who had charge of the house, thinking somebody must have slept in it on Saturday night. The person in charge said this could not be the case, as she had the key; but she went to look, and came to tell me that no one could possibly have got in.

" In a very few hours afterwards I received a letter from one of the Miss D.'s, to tell me that their mother became suddenly worse on

Saturday morning, and had died in the course of the night. Some time subsequently, I had an opportunity of seeing the nurse, and she told me that Mrs. D. had exactly died at a quarter before 1 on Sunday morning, uttering a loud cry at the moment of her death. She had just been giving her a cup of beef tea, and had replaced it on the mantelpiece, where there was a clock, on which she observed the hour. I had thought that the whole must have proceeded from the next house.

" Mrs. D. had been a very intimate friend of mine; I know I was much in her thoughts, and a few days before her death she had said she hoped, now she was a little better, to be well enough to see me."

We find from the Register of Deaths that Mrs. D.'s death took place on a Sunday — October 26th, 1856.

In November, 1876, Mr. H. Wedgwood read the account of Miss Vaughan's vision to Miss E. T., a common friend of Miss Vaughan's and Mrs. D.'s, whom Mr. Wedgwood has known all his life. She was staying with her sister at Hastings at the time of the incident, and received a letter from Miss Yaughan telling them of Mrs. D.'s death, and of her having come to her. Miss T. was greatly interested in this intelligence, and hurried up to London, where she heard from Miss Yaughan the story exactly as narrated by Mr. Wedgwood, down to the news of Mrs. D.'s death; but Miss Yaughan had not then seen the nurse, and was consequently ignorant of the precise agreement in time between the fact of her outcry at the moment of death and Miss Yaughan's hearing the scream. Two or three months after, Miss Yaughan told her what she had heard from the nurse.

Miss T. has seen this statement, and appends the words: " Quite correct.— E. H. T. November 5th, 1883."

Mrs. Yaughan, of the Deanery, LlandafF, writing on June 10, 1886, sends us an account of the occurrence which differs from Miss Yaughan's only in one or two trifling details, and adds: " Miss Yaughan often spoke of it to us."

The fact of the scream, though it seems to have corresponded with an actual cry of the supposed agent, could not be pressed; as such sounds are not uncommon in London streets at night, and the loudness and apparent closeness of the cry may have been exaggerated. But the knocks in this case, if correctly described, seem less easy to explain, except as hallucination; and the hallucination (if the present class be admitted at all) would have a 'prima facie claim to he considered telepathic — the tie of affection between the two parties being a strong one, and the coincidence extremely close. Technically, the incident ought perhaps to be classed among " borderland " cases; hut this particular form of hallucination does not seem to be specially connected with the moments that immediately precede or follow sleep; and the percipient must apparently have been wide awake before the sounds ceased. A few more examples of the non-vocal sort will be found among the " collective " cases in Chap. XYIII.; others,

132 FURTHER AUDITORY CASES. [chap.

in view of the evidential weakness of the class, are relegated to the

Supplement.

I will conclude this chapter with a case of a phantasm which,

though located in the ear, perhaps rather concerned the sense of touch

than that of hearing. If it was telepathic, it is a remarkably clear

instance of the direct reproduction of the agent's sensation in the

percipient's consciousness.^ The account is from Mrs. Arthur Severn,

of Brantwood, Coniston.

"1883.

(291) "Years ago, in Scotland, at my own home, I was in the drawingroom with my mother and aunt; the latter was busy writing at a table in the middle of the room, facing my mother, who was on a sofa sewing, while I was quietly amusing myself in my own way. It was all very quiet, when suddenly I was much startled by my mother, who gave a scream and threw herself back on the sofa, putting both her hands up to cover her ears, saying, ' Oh, there's water rushing fast into my ears, and I'm sure either my brother, or son James, must be drowning, or both of them! ' My aunt Margaret jumped up, and was rather angry and said, ' Catherine, I never heard such nonsense, how can you be so foolish! ' My aunt seemed vexed and ashamed it should happen before me, for I was very frightened, and remember it all so vividly. My poor mother cried, saying, ' Oh, I know it's true, or why would this water keep rushing into my ears? '

" Alas! it proved too true, for very soon I could see people running very hard towards the bathing-place, and I remember the shudder that then ran through me, and the hope that my mother would not look out of any of the windows. Soon my uncle came hurrying to the house very white and distressed; all he could say was, ' hot blankets! ' but it was too late — poor James was drowned. He was 21 years old, and my mother's eldest child. Both the other witnesses of this scene are dead.

" Joan R. Severn."

[The narrator's brother, James Agnew, was drowned while bathing in the river Bladnoch. The date, as we find from a copy of an inscription in Wigtown churchyard, was June 8, 1853.]

It is to be noted that the narrator here was herself the percipient in the still more remarkable case of apparently direct transference, quoted in Vol. I., p. 188.^

1 Other drowning cases, on the other hand, if correctly described, afford an equallyclear illustration of the percipient's independent investiture of the idea transferred, the impression being of the dripping of water — a sound which would be neither in the agent's ears nor in his thoughts. See, e.g., cases 513 (1) and 528; and compare the account of the Breton tradition in the Dictionnaire Historique et Geographique de la Province de Bretagne, by J. B. Ogde (Edition of 1845), Vol. i., p. 374.

2 Other possible instances of hereditary or family susceptibility to telepathic influence are cases 14 and 15; the cases mentioned in Vol. i., p. 424, note; cases 310, 497, and 617; cases 413, 111, 161, 464; cases 232 and 561; cases 450 and 462; cases 421 and 503; cases 422 and.586; cases 496 and 532; case 562; and several of the collective cases in Chap, xviii., §§ 2 and 6, and in the Supplement, Chap. ix. I may add that my collection of casual subjective hallucinations of the sane includes 4 cases where a parent and child have been affected at different times. In one of these cases (received from Mrs. Freese, of Granite Lodge, Chislehurst) the son's vision nearly reproduced the one w-hichhis mother had experienced years before. Another instance of hereditary susceptibility to hallucinations is mentioned by Abercrombie; see Vol. i., p. Ixxxii.



Chapter XVI. Tactile Cases and Cases Affecting More Than One of the

PERCIPIENT'S SENSES.

