" We were living at 3, Henry Street, Pentonville. The two windows in the room were shut tight and fastened; and as near as I can remember, it must have been between 2 and 3 in the morning. The music lasted several minutes." She further says that, when the sounds began, her mother exclaimed, "Anne, do you hear that? " — so that her niother's statement is not quite exact; but she confirms the fact that some hours passed before they ventured to describe their impressions to one another.

224 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

The foregoing instances may perhaps suffice to show that a purely psychical account of these joint experiences — as due either partly or wholly to a thought-transference between the percipients — ^is at all events possible; and that acceptance of the phenomena as genuine, i.e., as percepts truly described, does not imply any materiahstic theory of phantasmal beings who travel about through space (sometimes in their carriages) on their own account. And possibly a certain number of my readers may further agree with me in supposing some, at any rate, of these cases to have been in their inception purely subjective, and will not feel the need of invoking for them an unknown or 'post-mortem "agency," however little disposed to rule the possibility of such agency out of court. I cannot, indeed, deny a certain force to an objection which Mr. Myers urges,^ that we know of no instances where a hallucination which can be connected with insanity or other distinctly morbid conditions in the person impressed, and which is thus quite clearly proved to be purely subjective, has become collective in the way supposed. But then neither do we know of instances where a person in one of these morbid conditions has exercised any other form of telepathic influence. We have no instances of telepathic impressions of the deaths of dying lunatics. The ultimate conditions of telepathic agency are as little known to us as the ultimate conditions of telepathic percipience; and transient hallucinations of the sane, such as those of the preceding examples, differ so greatly in their nature and ostensible conditions from the types of hallucination to which Mr. Myers points as never transferred, that it seems rash to assume that they may not differ also in the particular point of transferability. At any rate, whatever the difficulties of that view, it is one that may be provisionally entertained by those who see equal difficulties in any other; and whatever my own surmises as to future discovery may be, in the present state of the evidence I feel as much bound here to press the theory of thought-transference, before admitting causes of an obscurer kind, as in a former chapter to press the theory of unconscious physical indications before admitting the reality of thought-transference.

The degree in which the infectious character may exist is very hard indeed to determine; for the majority of hallucinations (purely subjective and telepathic alike) occur to persons who are alone — silence and recueillement being apparently favourable conditions; and we

1 See pp. 280-2.

XVIII.] COLLECTIVE CASES. 225.

have no means of knowing how many of these hallucinations might have been shared by some one else, if some one else had happened to be present at the time. All that can be said is that, taking the whole class of transient hallucinations of the sane, the cases where the experience has been shared by a second person appear to be more numerous than those where a second person has been present, awake, and rightly situated, and has not shared the experience. Nor, again, can I at all adequately explain why these phenomena should be a form of mental impression specially liable to spread to neighbouring minds. That those of them which are telepathically produced in the first instance should have a tendency to spread in this way may appear, perhaps, less remarkable, if we remember that a telepathic impulse, as such, seems sometimes to have very distinct and peculiar physiological effects; witness Mrs. Newnham's exhaustion (Vol. I., p. 64) in experiments where the ideas conveyed were in themselves of a quite unexciting sort. But as regards the transference in purely subjective cases, all I can suggest is that sensory hallucinations, and especially the occasional hallucinations of sane and healthy people, are to begin with and in themselves very peculiar things; and that a fresh peculiarity, meeting us in something that we do not completely see round or understand, is less staggering than if it met us in something of which we have held our knowledge to be complete. At any rate the fact, if admitted, that purely subjective hallucinations may spontaneously become collective, greatly simplifies the consideration of the collective cases whose origin is traceable to an external " agent." The appearance of an absent person's figure to several spectators at once has had in it something specially startling; and when associated with the idea of death, it has almost inevitably suggested a material or " etherial " spirit — an independent travelling ghost. But as soon as the experience is analysed, it is found to involve nothing new or antagonistic to scientific conceptions. In being connected with the absent person, it is merely on a par with other specimens of telepathy — e.g., many of those cited in the preceding chapters: in being collective, it is merely on a par with other specimens of hallucination — e.g., some of those already cited in this chapter. Still, though a telepathic impulse from an absent person may not be an essential condition, it may be, and I believe is, an exceptionally favourable condition, for a collective hallucination. And I now proceed to the final group of examples, of which that condition is the distinguishing mark.



Vol. Ii. Q

226 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

§ 6. I will begin the list with the auditory class. The following

account is from Mr. J. Wood Beilby, of Redbank Cottage, Elgin

Road, Beechworth, Victoria.

"October 17th, 1883.

(339) " A young lady, a friend of my wife's, staying with us in the bush, had gone some hours, on horseback, to our post-town — some eight miles distant— when my wife and I in the house, a servant-man and woman and my adopted son, a youth, in an outside kitchen, heard this young lady scream, and call out, ' Oh, Johnnie! Johnnie! ' — that being my boy's name, he being a usual attendant to the fair equestrian. All simultaneously rushed out; but nothing further could be heard or seen of the exclaimant for nearly an hour, when she arrived, and informed us that at a spot between four and five miles distant she had to open a gate. Trying to do this without dismounting, she leaned over it from her side-saddle to undo a sort of hasp. Her horse took fright at something and bounded aside, leaving her, happily, detached from him, hanging over the gate. She said she shrieked for help, and fancied ' Johnnie ' was behind, but got extricated— I forget how — and her horse caught. She remounted, and came on to us without injury but the fright. It was absolutely impossible her natural voice could have been heard over a forest country intervening for even one-third of the distance. The strange thing to me is that others, not so specially gifted with magnetic impressions as I am, should have simultaneously and distinctly heard the ejaculation. All instantly acted a reply, going out of the several houses which they were in at the time, and making for an entrance gate, expecting to find the lady in some difiiculty close at hand; and all were astonished that she was not even in view upon an extensive plain, skirted by the forest-land she had to traverse. " J. Wood Beilby."

Mrs. Beilby corroborates as follows: —

" I perfectly recollect the voice being heard, as narrated above by my husband. I vouch for the accuracy of the narration.

" Catherine W. Beilby."

In another account, written on January 28fch, 1886, and signed by Mr. and Mrs. Beilby, it is more clearly brought out that the young lady. Miss Snell, actually called out the name, " Johnnie, Johnnie." The only point of difference between the two accounts is that the second, instead of saying that all four persons rushed out simultaneously, states that Mr. and Mrs. Beilby went out and called to the servants that Miss Snell had returned, and that " they said they heard her call, and immediately went to the gate of entrance to the homestead," but found no one there.

Mr. Beilby further adds: —

" The homestead is isolated from any other residence, some 3 miles; and no one was about at the time, except the servants and the employers in separate but closely adjacent buildings." He implies that he has had no other auditory hallucination.

The next account, which was first received by the Rev. W. Stainton Moses from an intimate friend of the agent's, was revised

by his parents, the percipients, who have since again read it over and

pronounced it correct.

"1881.

(340) " About two years ago W. L. left England for America. IS^ine months since, he married, and hoped to bring his wife home to see his mother, to whom he was tenderly attached. On February 4th, however, he was taken with sudden illness, which terminated fatally on the 12th, about 8 p.m. On that night, about three-quarters of an hour after the parents of W. L. had retired to rest in England, the mother heard the clear voice of her son speaking. Her husband who also heard it, asked his wife if it was she who was speaking. Neither of them had been asleep, and she replied, ' No! Keep quiet! ' The voice continued, ' As I cannot come to England, mother, I have come now to see you.' At this time both parents believed their son to be in perfect health in America, and were daily expecting a letter to announce his return home. A note was made of this very startling occurrence; and when a fortnight since news of the son's death arrived, it was found to correspond with the date on which the spirit-voice ^ had announced his presence in England. The widow said that the preparations for departure had nearly been completed, and that her husband showed much anxiety to get to England and see his inother.^^

[Unfortunately the percipients in this case dislike the subject, and it has been thought better not to press them with further inquiries. Otherwise we should of course have ascertained whether or not they had ever had other hallucinations.]

The next account is from Commander T. W. Aylesbury (late of

the Indian Navy), of Sutton, Surrey. The case, at first sight, may

seem as if it belonged to the reciprocal class; but Commander

Aylesbury's vision did not include enough detail to justify us in

regarding it as other than subjective, the scene being apparently such

as he might naturally have conjured up.

"December, 1882.

(341) "The writer, when 13 years of age, was capsized in a boat, when landing on the Island of Bally, east of Java, and was nearly drowned. On coming to the surface, after being repeatedly submerged, the boy called his mother. This amused the boat's crew, who spoke of it afterwards, and jeered him a good deal about it. Months after, on arrival in England, the boy went to his home, and while telling his mother of his narrow escape, he said, ' While I was under water, I saw you all sitting in this room; you were working something white. I saw you all — mother, Emily, Eliza, and Ellen.' His mother at once said, ' Why yes, and I heard you cry out for me, and I sent Emily to look out of the window, for I remarked that something had happened to that poor boy.' The time, owing to the diiference of E. longitude, corresponded with the time when the voice was heard."

Commander Aylesbury adds in another letter: —

" I saw their features (my mother's and sisters'), the room and the

See p. 48, note.

228 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

furniture, particularly the old-fashioned Venetian blinds. My eldest sister was seated next to my mother."

Asked as to the time of the accident, Commander Aylesbury says: —

" I think the time must have been very early in the morning. I remember a boat capsized the day before, and washed up. The mate said we would go and bring her off in the morning, but the exact time I cannot remember. It was a terrible position, and the surf was awful. We were knocked end over end, and it was the most narrow escape I ever had — and I have had many; but this one was so impressed on my mind with the circumstances — the remarks and jeers of the men, — ' Boy, what was you calling for your mother for'? Do you think she could pull you out of Davey Jones' locker,' &c., with other language I cannot use."

The following is an extract from a letter written to Commander Aylesbury by one of his sisters, and forwarded to us, in 1883: —

" I distinctly remember the incident you mention in your letter (the voice calling ' Mother ' ); it made such an impression on my mind, I shall never forget it. We were sitting quietly at work one evening; it was about 9 o'clock. I think it must have been late in the summer as we had left the street door open. We first heard a faint cry of ' Mother'; we all looked up, and said to one another, ' Did you hear that? Someone cried out " Mother." ' We had scarcely finished speaking, when the voice again called, ' Mother ' twice in quick succession, the last cry a frightened, agonising cry. We all started up, and mother said to me, ' Go to the door and see what is the matter.' I ran directly into the street and stood some few minutes, but all was silent and not a person to be seen; it was a lovely evening, not a breath of air. Mother was sadly upset about it. I remember she paced the room, and feared that something had happened to you. She wrote down the date the next day, and when you came home and told us how near you had been drowned, and the time of day, father said it would be about the time 9 o'clock would be with us. I know the date and the time corresponded."

[The difierence of time at the two places is a little more than 7 hours; consequently 9 in the evening in England would correspond with " very early in the morning " of the next day at the scene of the accident. But the incident happened too long ago for memory to be trusted as to the exactitude of the coincidence.]

In the next case, though the sound heard was apparently vocal, it was not articulate; and it can scarcely be pronounced impossible that such an effect might be produced by bubbling air, or some other local cause. The coincidence, however, appears to have been very close, though perhaps not so absolutely precise as is alleged; and the form of impression is not without analogy (see e.g., case 288 above). The account is signed by one of the percipients, but is in the words of her son, Mr. W. R. Weyer, of 7, Willis Street, St. Paul's, Norwich.

"June, 1883. (342) " At the time that this occurrence took place, my mother's brother

xviii.] COLLECTIVE CASES. 229

was lying in a dangerous condition, suffering from a complication of disorders, together with an old wound received in the Crimea some time previous; consequently at that time my parents' minds were in a great state of anxiety. It was on the night of July 6th, 1865; my parents were retir- V ing to rest at a somewhat late hour, when they were both suddenly startled -h by a sound of three distinct sobs as (according to my mother's experience) of a person dying. My father immediately arose, procured a light, and a thorough search was made, but with no success. On again retiring, the sobs were again repeated, this time in a perfectly clear and distinct manner.^ My mother then noted the time, which was then 10.50 p.m., remarking at the same time that we should hear bad news. After making another search they again retired to rest, the sobs being heard no more.

" On the next day my mother received a letter bearing the Chatham post-mark, stating that her brother, David Mackenzie Annison, had died at Chatham Hospital on the night of July the 5th, at 10.50, being the exact time that the sobs were heard by my parents.

"William E,obt. Wbyer." [Signed as correct by Mrs. Weyer, the surviving witness]

"Maria E. Wbyer."

Mr. Weyer, the father, died a year after the occurrence. In answer to inquiries, Mr. W. R. Weyer adds: —

" My parents informed my cousin and aunt (who is now deceased) of the circumstance, before she received the letter; and my aunt, who is just dead, remembered the circumstance quite well. My grandmother often used to mention it. I have appealed to my cousin to write her recollection of the incident, but I cannot at present persuade her to do so."

In conversation Mrs. Weyer stated that there were no water-pipes near the room, and that the sound seemed startlingly near — close to the head of the bed. She is not at all predisposed to alarms or fancies, and has never had any other hallucination — unless we are to reckon as such a startling sound of knocks which others also heard, and for which no external cause could be discovered. The idea which she expressed that the sounds in the present case were premonitory of bad news, since it was not founded on any sufficient knowledge of the evidence for telepathic occurrences as facts in Nature, indicates, no doubt, an uncritical acceptance of marvels. But the only question for us is how far such a habit of mind, may have affected the evidence to the facts; and my strong impression is, that it has not appreciably affected it. We may regard it as probable, however, that the sobs were not described as like those " of a person dying " until after the fact of the death was realised.

The following is the result of an independent inquiry as to the time of death.

1 As regards the repetition, see p. 105. As to the three sobs, in examining a large mass of evidence respecting abnormal phenomena (and especially second-hand accounts), one finds this number recurring with somewhat noticeable frequency — which at any rate suggests unconscious modification of the facts. Nor need we assume any specially superstitious habit of mind on the part of the witness, to find it natural that, at the points where memory is hazy, slight resulting errors should take lines which are (so to speak) marked out for them by literary or religious associations.

230 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

" Melville Hospital, Chatham. "July 18th, 1885.

" In reply to your letter asking to be informed of the exact hour of the death of David Mackenzie Annison, I beg to state that there was a David Annison, chief stoker, aged 38, admitted into this hospital 26th June, 1865, from H.M.S. ' Cumberland.' He was suffering from chronic liver disease and jaundice. He died at 11.35 p.m., on the 5th July, 1865, and his friends took his body away to Sheerness.

" In case of a death in this establishment, the body is seen by the medical ofl&cer on duty, who Aimse//' notifies on the man's ticket the hour and minute of his decease. It was from this document I gathered the information you required. u Belgrave Ninnis, M.D.

"(Deputy Inspector-General.)"

With respect to this point, Mr. Weyer writes, on August 7th, 1885: —

" In reference to the mistake regarding the time, I have consulted my mother upon that point, and she asserts that she might possibly be mistaken, but of this fact she is most positive, viz., that the time she noted on that night exactly corresponded with the time given in the message which arrived next day; this, she says, there is no mistake about. My mother felt almost certain that the time was 10.50, but as it occurred so long ago she is not likely to have it on record; therefore she thinks that the medical official report would be the most reliable."

The percipients here are described as having been in great anxiety. We have seen grounds for rejecting from the telepathic evidence instances where this condition has existed on the part of a single percipient (Vol. I., pp. 508-9); but where two are affected the case is different. For, even if the experience of one was purely subjective in origin, it would be extravagant to suppose that of the other to have taken place by accident at the same moment; so that there would at least have been a " psychical " phenomenon — a transferred hallucination. But in the present instance there is some reason for going beyond this, and supposing a telepathic origin to the experience. For the sort of sound heard is scarcely a likely one for anxiety to suggest; and, moreover, in no case could the hypothesis of a joint rapport of the agent with two percipients seem more in place than where the two are his near relatives, whose minds are already similarly and fully occupied with him.

I will add a couple of specimens of the non- vocal type. In the first, the hallucination presents a curiously close connection with the probable idea of the agent at the moment. The account is from Mrs.

Paget, of Famham, Surrey.

"June 5th, 1884. (343) " A man-servant, who had lived with us from a child, and who was a real friend, fell into a consumption, and thinking that the climate

XVIII.] COLLECTIVE CASES, 231

of Ventnor might prolong his life for some months, we sent him to St. Catharine's Home in September, 1880. On the 8th of October, I received a letter from the Sister-in-charge, saying that Arthur Dunn was decidedlyworse, but that the doctor thought there was no immediate danger, and therefore she did not think I need go to Ventnor at once. I therefore wrote to say I would be there on the following Monday, when I hoped to be able to stay with him to the last. That morning I said to my girls, ' I really must remember to speak to the new servant about putting out the gas upstairs at half -past 10, for since poor Arthur left us, it has not been put out punctually, and even some nights the burner close to my bedroom and my eldest girl's dressing-room has been alight all night.'

" That same evening was very warm, and my daughter and myself both left our doors open, in order to be able to talk after we went upstairs (the gas-burner being close to our rooms). Whilst we were both saying our prayers, the clock struck half-past 10, and at that moment we heard a man's heavy step along the passage, which stopped at the gas-burner, and then we heard the footsteps retiring. Almost at the same moment my daughter and myself came to our respective doors and exclaimed, ' Why, the man did not put out the gas after all. How like his step sounded to poor Arthur's heavy tread.'

" The next morning I received a telegram from the Sister-in-charge at St. Catharine's Home, saying, ' All was over last night.' I went down to Yentnor at once to make arrangements, and in telling Sister Mary Martha how I grieved that I had not started for Yentnor before, she remarked, 'We did not think there was immediate danger, and his mind was wandering so much that day that he was hardly conscious. It was curious to see what form his wandering took, for, after he had been very silent for some hours, the clock struck half -past 10, when he raised himself in bed and said distinctly, * The clock has struck, I must go and put out the gas,' and fell back and died immediately.

" I ought to mention that punctuality had been a perfect mania with him. He was never, as far as I can remember, three minutes late for anything he was ordered to do, and he was most devotedly attached to us and our home. " Frances Paget."

Miss Paget (now Mrs. P. Hanham) wrote as follows, on June 11, 1884: — ■

" I can only most emphatically confirm my mother's statement. I distinctly heard the ' footsteps ' as described by her, and it happened at half-past 10 at night, the exact time, as we heard afterwards, that our poor man-servant died. I may mention that I questioned our new manservant in the morning as to whether he had not been upstairs on the previous night; but it turned out that he had forgotten the orders given him to turn out the gas, and had not been upstairs. The footsteps, as I remarked at the time, were exactly similar to those of poor Arthur Dunn, and you may judge of my surprise when, on my mother's return from the funeral, she told us about her conversation with the Sister, who was with him at the last, and his last words having been, ' The clock has struck, I must go and put out the gas.'

" In answer to your questions: —

(1) "The occurrence happened here, and it was on October 8th, 1880, as I have since found on referring to a diary.

232 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

(2) " Neither my mother nor myself ever remember to have had any hallucinations of any sort, before or since. " Gertrude F. Paget."

[The diary, which I have seen, gives the date of the death only. Miss Paget's meaning was that this was fixed on their minds next day as having happened on October 8th, on which day — as they could not then be mistaken in recollecting — the sounds had been heard.]

To a suggestion that the steps might have been those of a heavy-footed housemaid, Mrs. Paget replied: —

" I can positively affirm that the housemaid did not come upstairs on the night of my servant's death; for that point was inquired into at the time."

The Sister-in-charge at St. Catharine's Home, Yentnor, writes as follows, on March 6, 1885:—

"Arthur Dunn died at 10.30 p.m. on the 8th of October, 1880. I was with him when he died; he was only with us eight days.

"Matilda S. S. S. M."

Mrs. Paget's account having been sent to Sister Matilda, she replied as follows, on March 9, 1885:—

" Arthur John Dunn was only here eight days before his death. I nursed him, and was with him when he died on October 8th. I do not recollect what Mrs. Paget says at all; all I can remember was that he was in bed three days; his breathing was very laboured; he had a weak heart; he was not unconscious at all; he was a very silent man, and seldom spoke, except to answer any question asked. Just before he died he asked me the time; it was half -past 10; his words were: ' What is the time V I do not think he spoke after. There was nothing about the gas. He could not hear any clock strike, for there is not one in the ward or near it. Sister Mary Martha was in charge of the house at the time, and I had the nursing of the men."

Sister Mary Martha writes from St. Margaret's, East Grinstead, on March 17, 1885:—

" I regret that I am quite unable to recall any particulars of Arthur Dunn's death. I remember the young man perfectly well; he was at the Home only about eight days, and died almost suddenly. He suffered from heart disease as well as consumption. He was a very nice fellow, and we all liked him much. Mrs. Paget, I remember, spoke in the highest terms of him. My impression is that his end was very sudden — too much so for any last words. u Sister Mary Martha."

[It will be observed that there are two discrepancies between Mrs. Paget's and the Sisters' account. The point as to the way in which the man ascertained the time — whether by hearing the clock strike or by in quiry of the Sister — is not in itself important: the point about his mention of the gas, though not vital, has more importance. I have thoroughly talked over the matter with Mrs. Paget and her daughter. Mrs. Paget is quite clear in her recollection of Sister Mary Martha's statement; but she does not recollect having heard or realised who it was to whom the man made the remark. The daughter is equally clear about her mother's mention of this detail at the time. Had there been a consider-

xviii.] COLLECTIVE CASES. 233

able interval between Mrs. Paget's conversation with the Sister and her narration of it to someone else, it would not be hard to suppose that the incident of the man's asking the hour, combined with her own and her daughter's experience at that exact time, had gradually led to her imagining the crowning detail of his mentioning the gas; but that this detail, if it was not reported to her, should have got immediately im- ^. pressed upon her mind as though it had been reported, seems decidedly '; less likely than that it has slipped from the memory of the Sisters, for whom it would have no special interest, since Mrs. Paget did not tell them what had occurred at home. And there is a further point which tells, I think, decidedly in favour of this view. On the supposition that the man made the remark about the gas, it is very easy to see how Mrs. Paget may have made the mistake about his hearing the clock strike; for the remark would become the fact of interest, and the manner in which the man ascertained the time would retain no significance. If, on the other hand, the only thing reported to Mrs. Paget had been that the man asked and was told what the time was, that would have served completely to stamp the coincidence, and to suggest the direction of the man's thoughts, and would thus have given a quite sufficient impressiveness and completeness to the story. Briefly, the introduction of the clock, on the first hypothesis, seems more easily comprehensible than the introduction of the gas, on the second.

Mrs. Paget showed me the scene of the incident. The gas burner is at the end of a long passage, just outside her and her daughter's rooms. The house is a very quiet one, standing in grounds far back from the road; and it is difficult to imagine any sort of real sound that could possibly have been mistaken for heavy steps twice traversing the length of the passage, the doors of both hearers (it will be remembered) being open. Mrs. Paget says, moreover, that Arthur Dunn's tread was decidedly peculiar. That the steps were not those of the man-servant for ij^^a^ the time being was practically proved (apart from his own assertion next «^ ^ day) by the fact that the gas was not turned ofi"; for he could have no j^,^^^^ possible duty in that corner of the house at night, except to turn it off; «. ^ and there was no other man in the house. Mrs. Paget and her daughter 7*^ ^. both confirmed the statement that they have had no other hallucinations. ■^'"A'' They are far from being credulous or superstitious witnesses; but the strangeness of this incident made an extremely strong impression upon them.]

In the next case the coincidence seems again to have been close % Uff i. to within a very few minutes; but the form which the hallucination fr^^^ (if it was one) took had no special connection with anything that we can conceive to have been present to the agent's mind. Bells are, however, a not uncommon form of purely subjective impression.^ And if the principle of telepathic hallucinations be granted, one would naturally expect that the rudimentary specimens of that class — specimens which do not suggest any conscious idea of the agent, but

1 See Vol. i., p. 503, and above, p. 127, note.

234 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

are projected, as it were, blindly under the telepathic impulse — should follow the ordinary lines of hallucinations in general. The account is from the Misses Lafone, of Hanworth Park, Feltham.

"January, 1884.

(344) " My sister and I were both much astonished at hearing our church ' bell ring in a loud and hurried manner, at a few minutes before 7.30, one evening, when we knew no service was to take place. Our church is within 5 minutes' walk across fields, and all the neighbouring churches a jnile or more ofi". We talked together of the occurrence, and mentioned it at dinner, but did not connect it with anyone in particular. The next day we heard an aunt had died at 7.20 the evening before, but did not connect I the two facts until a few days afterwards, when we made inquiries, and found no one had been in the church at the time we imagined the bell to be ringing. This took place 19th September, 1883. No one else in the house heard the bell."

The Times obituary confirms Sept. 19, 1883, as the date of death.

In answer to inquiries, Miss Lafone adds: —

" There was no particular bond of sympathy betwqen my aunt and my sister and myself, although we knew her very well. We were aware she was seriously ill, but being very much occupied with another subject the evening she died, had hardly thought of her at all. We are not conscious of ever before experiencing ' auditory hallucinations.'

"Mary E. Lafone." "March 18th, 1884.

" My sister's account of the bells we heard is perfectly correct. We were dressing for dinner at 7.30, in difierent rooms, when I was attracted by the sound of the bells, as I supposed from our church, ringing in a most eccentric way, and having called to my sister found that she heard them too. We discussed the possibility of someone being shut in, as there was no service, and the sounds were too irregular and too quick to be tolling for a death. We mentioned the subject downstairs, and then forgot it, until having heard the following day that our aunt had died at 7.20, just at the time we were listening to the bells. We made inquiries as to whether anyone had been in the church at the time, but could not find that anyone had, or that the bells were heard by anyone besides ourselves.

"Jenny Lafone."

[I have been to Hanworth, and realised the relation of the house to the village church, and also to Feltham Church. There seems to be no possibility whatever that the sound heard could have proceeded from the latter, or any more distant edifice. Feltham Church lies more than a mile to the back of the house; the intervening space is thickly clothed with trees; and the Misses Lafone's windows look out in the directly opposite direction. Miss Lafone does not recall that she has ever so much as heard the Feltham bell, even faintly; whereas the sounds on this occasion appeared louder even than those which the neighbouring churchbell usually produced. It is extremely unlikely that this neighbouring bell should have been rung at this time (on a week-day evening when there is never any service), and in this eccentric way; and it is even more

unlikely that, if so rung, it should have been unobserved by others. The result of my visit is that I find it all but impossible to doubt that the case "was one of collective hallucination — whether connected with the death of the aunt or not is of course a different question.]

I now come to cases where the sense of sight was involved. And I may begin with a few specimens where the experiences of the several percipients were either not exactly simultaneous or not exactly similar, and where, therefore, the theory that they were severally derived from the agent receives some slight support. (Compare in this respect the auditory case, No. 36.)

In the following example the experience of the second percipient

included an auditory as well as a visual impression, and was,

moreover, separated by an interval of 3 hours from that of the

first. The narrator is Mrs. Cox, who wrote from Summer Hill,

Queenstown, Ireland.

"December 26th, 1883. ♦<

(345) " On the night of the 21st August, 1869, between the hours of,, 8 and 9 o'clock, I was sitting in my bedroom in my mother's house at Devonport, my nephew, a boy aged seven years, being in bed in the next room, when I was startled by his suddenly running into my room, and exclaiming in a frightened tone, ' Oh, auntie, I have just seen my father walking around my bed.' I replied, ' Nonsense, you must have been dreaming.' He said, ' ISTo, I have not,' and refused to return to the room. Finding that I was unable to persuade him to go back, I put him in my own bed. Between 10 and 111 myself retired to rest. I think about an hour afterwards, on looking towards the fireplace, I distinctly saw, to i" my astonishment, the form of my brother seated in a chair, and what particularly struck me was the deathly pallor of his face. (My nephew was at this time fast asleep.) I was so frightened, knowing that at this time my brother was in Hong Kong, China, that I put my head under the bed clothes. Soon after this I plainly heard his voice calling me by name; my name was repeated three times. The next time I looked, he was gone. The following morning I told my mother and sister what had occurred, and said I should raake a note of it, which I did. The next mail from China brought us the sad intelligence of my brother's death, which took place on the 21st August, 1869, in the Harbour of Hong Kong, suddenly, [of heat-apoplexy].:" Minnie Cox."

We have received from the Admiralty an official confirmation of the date of the death.

In answer to further inquiries, Mr. Cox (at present Secretary to the Naval Commander-in-Chief at Devonport) wrote: —

"February 21st, 1884. " As my wife is too unwell to reply to your letter she has asked me to state with reference to your question on the subject of the appearance of her brother to her, that: —

" As she has no note now in her possession, and as her mother is

236 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

dead, she cannot be positive as to the hour at which her brother died. The circumstance happened about 15 years ago — both the persons she mentioned it to are dead. All that she can now state positively is that she now believes it must have been after midnight when she saw the appearance, but at the same time she is quite certain that her little nephew came into her room before midnight. She is sure that afterwards, when the news came from China, the time corresponded, but has nothing to prove it. I fear that she has not sufficient evidence, or in fact any evidence now; but it is an old story she has often told me, and I have not the slightest doubt that she did see the appearance. " James Cox."

In conversation Mrs. Cox told me that she was quite certain of having put down the date, and compared it with the date in the letter. She has never had the slightest hallucination on any other occasion. The child was not in the least given to frights, and had no dread of the dark.

[If the time either of Mrs. Cox's or of her nephew's impression coincided with that of the death, the first date in the account is of course given wrongly, as 9 p.m. in England would correspond with about 5 a.m. of the next day at Hong Kong. If the first date is right, then the percipients' experiences must have followed the death by some hours. It might be suggested that Mrs. Cox's experience was due to suggestion from her nephew. But it is scarcely probable that a person who has no tendency to hallucinations should evolve one from what she took to be the dream of a frightened child.]

In the next case, the difference between the several impressions was perhaps rather one of degree than of kind. The account is from Mr. T. N. Deane, of University Club, 3, Upper Merrion Street, Dublin, and was procured through the kindness of the E,ev. J. N.

Hoare, now vicar of Keswick.

" 1882. (346) " In the year 1851, on the 4th of June, I was in a large bedroom of a country house in the County Cork. The wiadows of the room faced the River Lee; both were open. The air was sultry and still; all the inmates of the house were out, with the exception of my wife and an intimate friend (now dead), who were with me in the room. We sat on three chairs near one of the open windows, and talked on ordinary subjects. The old-fashioned four-post bed occupied the side of the room to my right, and the only door (which was open) was on my left. We sat into the twilight, but there was still sufficient light to recognise each other, and see objects pretty clearly. A figure approached me from the side of the room occupied by the large bed, and apparently from the side of it, moved directly towards me, and placed its hand on my shoulder. It was a female figure, but I could not recognise the features. I followed it to the lobby, but did not see it again. I returned to my companions, and asked them had they seen it. They replied in the affirmative. I said, ' If ever there was a ghost, that was one.' That evening my mother was seized with fatal illness. Next morning I got a telegram stating that she was in extremis, and for hours before was asking for me to be sent for. On receipt of the telegram I started for Dublin, and was just in time to see my mother before her

death. The first person I met was Mr. Hoare's father [deceased], to whom I said, ' My mother will die! I saw her last night.' " Thos. N. Dbane."

We find from the obituary in the Freeman's Journal that Lady Deane died on June 5, 1851, at Dublin.

Mrs. Deane writes on March 7, 1883: —

" I must say I felt the presence more than saw it, and it certainly came up to where we (three friends) were sitting, All saw it or felt it; in fact, it was both, for I could describe it as a misty shadow passing through the chamber, and went out silently. Of course we did not turn round until we all three said, ' Was not there some one near the chair who is gone from the room 1 ' Then one of our number got up and inquired had any one been in, and all were absent from where we were — some downstairs in other sitting-rooms reading, others in the garden, and the servants at tea in their kitchen; then it appeared doubly odd, and it seized hold of one's mind there had been an apparition or vision. We had been talking of the 1 1 lady at the time she appeared to us. " Henrietta Deane."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Deane says, " Neither my wife nor I ever saw anything of the kind before or since."

Here the vaguer form of Mrs. Deane's impression, as compared to that of her husband, seems a good example of rudimentary or arrested development (see p. 73, note).

The following case is one that would not have been included here, but for the favourable opinion which our colleague, Mr. Richard Hodgson, formed of the principal witness. The account was written down by Miss Atkinson, of Park Head, Jesmond Dene, Newcastle-on-Tjrne, and is signed by Mrs. Reed, of 7, Miller's Lane, Byker Hill, Newcastle-on-Tyne, the younger of the two percipients; the other is dead.

"July, 1884.

(347) " It was at Christmas time. Mr. and Mrs. Adams and their daughter Annie had been spending the evening with some friends, not far from home. Annie (a girl of 12 at the time), along with another girl, was j|. sent home to fetch something that had been forgotten. On entering the kitchen, Annie said to the other girl, ' See, there's a man sitting by the fireside.' The other girl said there was nobody there. The two went upstairs to get what they had been sent for, when Annie said ' There's the man again.' i The other girl persisted that there was nobody there. Having got what was wanted, they returned to the friend's house. On coming home late at night, Mrs. Adams said to her husband — ' There's my brother standing beside that house; don't you see him, all in white 1 ' Mr. Adams did not see him. A day or two afterwards she received a letter to say that her brother was killed down the pit, the night and the hour corresponding with the time that Annie saw the man (as she said)

1 For the feature of repetition in visual hallucinations, see cases 159, 160, 184, 213, 240, 503, 519, 540. In Vol. i., p. 414, second note, I mentioned an example in my collection of subjective cases, for which I am now allowed to name Mr. J. Champ, of High Street, Chelmsford, as my authority. What he saw (after a fatiguing march) was a grotesque, parti-coloured figure, about as wide as high, which appeared on the wall of the room, disappeared, and re-appeared after an interval of a few minutes.

238 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

sitting by her mother's hearth. Annie had never seen her uncle, as she had always travelled from place to place with the regiment, and had never been taken to the colliery village where her mother's family lived.

" This is a correct statement. "Annie Reed."

We find from the Register of Deaths that Mrs. Reed's uncle was crushed by a fall of stone in the Washington coal mine on December 29, 1862; which confirms the first words of the account.

Miss Atkinson tells us that Mrs. Adams, unlike her husband, was of a superstitious turn of mind. She adds on July 31, 1884; —

" I have been to see Mrs. Reed, but cannot say I have gained much information. She says that the figure she saw upstairs was the same as she had seen sitting by the fireside downstairs. She cannot give any definite information about the girl who was with her, except that her name was Sophie Arnup, and that she belonged to Norwich, where the incident occurred. Mrs. Reed does not know whether she is living or dead, or whether married. Mrs. Reed cannot remember that there were any differences noted when she and her mother talked about what they had seen. She mentioned about the man in white sitting by the fireside, as soon as she reached the friend's house where her mother was, and before her mother returned. She cannot remember any details about face or dress, except that the dress was white; she was too frightened to observe carefully, and I am glad to find she is too truthful to set her imagination to work, and fancy she remembers what she does not. This is the only hallucination that she ever had. " E. E. Atkinson."

Mr. Hodgson writes in September, 1884: —

"I have talked with Mr. Adams [now resident at 144, High Street, Jarrow-on-Tyne], who told me the story as given above. The pit where the brother was killed was in the Durham district; the figure was seen at Norwich. I have also seen Mrs. Reed, who first saw the figure, and who also told the story as given above. She impressed me as being exceptionally truthful."

[We might conceive that Mrs. Adams' hallucination was due to apprehensions caused by her daughter's account. But it will be observed that there had been nothing in the daughter's account to suggest Mrs. Adams' brother; the point therefore that Mrs. Adams mentioned her brother (which there is no reason to doubt) is important. And even if we suppose that she was given to apprehensions about this relative, which may have taken a superstitious colour, this would not explain the other hallucination, unique in her daughter's experience, occurring on the same evening. That the impressions were hallucinations and not illusions, is strongly indicated by the fact that neither of them was shared by a second person whose attention was drawn to the appearance (p. 105, second note).]

In the remaining visual cases, the impression seems to have been distinct and identical to all the percipients. I will begin with a case where it is a question whether a distant agent was or was not the source of the phenomenon; but where the flashing of the hallucination from one of the percipients to the other seems specially well

L

illustrated, since the figure which appeared was one which the second percipient had never seen in the flesh. The account is firsthand, though written in the third person. It is from Mrs. Elgee, of 18, Woburn Road, Bedford.

"March 1st, 1885.

(348) "In the month of November, 1864, being detained in Cairo, on my way out to India, the following curious circumstance occurred to me:-

" Owing to an unusual influx of travellers, I, with the young lady under ■!^'my charge (whom we will call D.) and some other passengers of the outward- ^^ *"" ^j bound mail to India, had to take up our abode in a somewhat unfrequented "^^^ hotel. The room shared by Miss D. and myself was large, lofty, and ^'S ■yt-''^ gloomy; the furniture of the scantiest, consisting of two small beds, placed nearly in the middle of the room and not touching the walls at all, two or three rush-bottomed chairs, a veiy small washing-stand, and a large old-fashioned sofa of the settee-sort, which was placed against onehalf of the large folding-doors which gave entrance to the room. This settee was far too heavy to be removed, unless by two or three people. The other half of the door was used for entrance, and faced the two beds. Eeeling rather desolate and strange, and Miss D. being a nervous person, I locked the door, and, taking out the key, put it under my pillow; but on Miss D. remarking that there might be a duplicate which could open the door from outside, I put a chair against the door, with my travellingbag on it, so arranged that, on any pressure outside, one or both must fall on the bare floor, and make noise enough to rouse me. We then proceeded to retire to bed, the one I had chosen being near the only window in the room, which opened with two glazed doors, almost to the floor. These doors, on account of the heat, I left open, first assuring myself that no communication from the outside could be obtained. The window led on to a small balcony, which was isolated, and was three stories above the ground.

" I suddenly woke from a sound sleep with the impression that somebody had called me, and, sitting up in bed, to my unbounded astonishment, by the clear light of early dawn coming in through the large window before-mentioned, I beheld the figure of an old and very valued friend whom I knew to be in England. He appeared as if most eager to speak to me, and I addressed him with, ' Good gracious! how did you come here? ' So clear was the figure, that I noted every detail of his dress, even to three onyx shirt studs which he always wore. He seemed to come a step nearer to me, when he suddenly pointed across the room, and on my looking round, I saw Miss D. sitting up in her bed, gazing at the figure with every expression of terror. On looking back, my friend seemed to shake his head, and retreated step by step, slowly, till he seemed to sink through that portion of the door where the settee stood. I never knew what happened to me after this; but my next remembrance is of bright sunshine pouring through the window. Gradually the remembrance of what had happened came back to me, and the question arose in my mind, had I been dreaming, or had I seen a visitant from another world 1 — the bodily presence of my friend being utterly impossible.

240 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

Remembering that Miss D. had seemed aware of the figure as well as myself, I determined to allow the test of my dream or vision to be whatever she said to me upon the subject, I intending to say nothing to her unless she spoke to me. As she seemed still asleep, I got out of bed, examined the door carefully, and found the chair and my bag untouched, and the key under my pillow; the settee had not been touched, nor had that portion of the door against which it was placed any appearance of being opened for years.

" Presently, on Miss D. waking up, she looked about the room, and, noticing the chair and bag, made some remark as to their not having been much use. I said, ' What do you mean 1 ' and then she said, ' Why, that man who was in the room this morning must have got in somehow.' She then proceeded to describe to me exactly what I myself had seen. Without giving any satisfactory answer as to what I had seen, I made her rather angry by affecting to treat the matter as a fancy on her part, and showed her the key still under my pillow, and the chair and bag untouched. I then asked her, if she was so sure that she had seen somebody in the room, did not she know who it was? ' No,' said she, ' I have never seen him before, nor anyone like him.' I said, ' Have you ever seen a photograph of him 1 ' She said, ' No.' This lady never was told what 1 saw, and yet described exactly to a third person what we both had seen.

"Of course, I was under the impression my friend was dead. Such, however, was not the case; and I met him some four years later, when, without telling him anything of my experience in Cairo, I asked him, in a joking way, could he remember what he was doing on a certain night in November, 1864. ' Well,' he said, ' you require me to have a good memory; ' but after a little reflection he replied, ' Why that was the time I was so harassed with trying to decide for or against the appointment which was ofiered me, and I so much wished you could have been with me to talk the matter over. I sat over the fire quite late, trying to think what you would have advised me to do.' A little crossquestioning and comparing of dates brought out the curious fact that, allowing for the difierence of time between England and Cairo, his meditations over the fire and my experience were simultaneous. Having told him the circumstances above narrated, I asked him had he been aware of any peculiar or unusual sensation. He said none, only that he had wanted to see me very much.

" E. H. Elgee."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Elgee says: —

" I fear it is quite impossible to get any information from Miss D. She married soon after we reached India, and I never met her since, nor do I know where she is, if alive. I quite understand the value of her corroboration; and at the time she told the whole circumstance to a fellowtraveller, who repeated it to me, and her story and mine agreed in every particular, save that to her the visitant was a complete stranger; and her tale was quite unbiassed by mine, as I always treated hers as a fancy, and never acknowledged I had been aware of anything unusual having taken place in our room at Cairo. I never have seen, or fancied I saw, any one before or since.

" My visitant, also, is dead, or he would, I know, have added his testimony, small as it was, to mine. He was a very calm, quiet, clever, scientific man, not given to vain fancies on any subject, and certainly was not aware of any desire of appearing to me."

[This seems at any rate an interesting example of collective hallucination; though as regards its supposed origination in the thoughts of Mrs. Elgee's friend in England, one may doubt whether, after a lapse of 4 years, complete certainty as to the identity of dates was attainable. If there has been an error on this point, the case would properly belong to the preceding section.]

The next account (which has been very slightly condensed) was written down for us, in 1883, by the late Miss Katherine M. Weld, one of the two percipients, at the request of Mr. James Britten, of Isleworth. It proves to be identical with a former account, as to which Miss Weld wrote to Mr. Wilfrid Ward, of Sherborne House, Basingstoke, on May 19, 1883, as follows: —

"The account was written about 15 years ago; it was an account which appeared in a book and in the newspapers at that time, and which I, at the request of friends, revised and corrected. I believe every word of the account to be perfectly true, as such things become impressed on one's mind; but at the same time it must be remembered that the account was not written at the time, but many years afterwards. Therefore I can only say that as far as I remember every detail is exact."

" The Lodge, Lymington.

(349) " Philip Weld was the youngest son of Mr. James Weld, of Archers Lodge, near Southampton, and a nephew of the late Cardinal Weld. He was sent by his father, in 1842, to St. Edmund's College, near Ware, in Hertfordshire, for his education. He was a well conducted, amiable boy, and much beloved by his masters and fellow-students. In the afternoon of April 16th, 1845, Philip, accompanied by one of the masters and some of his companions, went to boat on the river, which was a sport he enjoyed much. When one of the masters remarked that it was time to return to the college, Philip begged to have one row more; the master consented and they rowed to the accustomed turning point. On arriving there, in turning the boat, Philip accidentally fell out into a very deep part of the river, and, notwithstanding every effort that was made to save him, was drowned.

" His corpse was brought back to the college, and the Very Rev. Dr. Cox (the president) was immensely shocked and grieved. He made up his mind to go himself to Mr. Weld, at Southampton. He set off the same afternoon, and passing through London, reached Southampton the next day, and drove from thence to Archers Lodge, the residence of Mr. Weld; but before entering the grounds he saw Mr. Weld at a short distance from his gate, walking towards the town. Dr. Cox immediately stopped the carriage, alighted, and was about to address Mr. Weld, when he prevented him by saying: —

" ' You need not say one word, for I know that Philip is dead.

242 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

Yesterday afternoon I was walking with my daughter, Katherine, and we suddenly saw him. He was standing on the path, on the opposite side of the turnpike road, between two persons, one of whom was a youth dressed in a black robe. My daughter was the first to perceive them and exclaimed, " Oh, papa! did you ever see anything so like Philip as that is? " " Like him," I answered, " why it is he." Strange to say, my daughter ' thought nothing of the circumstance, beyond that we had seen an extraordinary likeness of her brother. We walked on towards these three figures. Philip was looking, with a smiling, happy expression of counten\.. nance, at the young man in a black robe, who was shorter than ti h^ ^ ^himself. Suddenly they all seemed to me to have vanished; I saw nothing lA. f/*"''^ 'but a countryman, whom I had before seen through the three figures, which gave me the impression that they were spirits. I, however, said nothing to anyone, as I was fearful of alarming my wife. I looked out anxiously for the post the following morning. To my delight, no letter came. I forgot that letters from Ware came in the afternoon, and my fears were quieted, and I thought no more of the extraordinary circumstance until I saw you in the carriage outside my gate. Then everything returned to my mind, and I could not feel a doubt that you came to tell me of the death of my dear boy.'

" The reader may imagine how inexpressibly astonished Dr. Cox was at these words. He asked Mr. Weld if he had ever before seen the young man in the black robe, at whom Philip was looking with such a happy smile. Mr. Weld answered that he had never before seen him, but that his countenance was so indelibly impressed on his mind that he was certain he should know him at once anywhere. Dr. Cox then related to the afflicted father all the circumstances of his son's death, which had taken place at the very hour in which he appeared to his father and sister. Mr. Weld went to the funeral of his son, and as he left the church, after the sad ceremony, looked round to see if any of the religious at all resembled the young man he had seen with Philip, but he could not trace the slightest likeness in any of them. About four months after, he and his family paid a visit to his brother, Mr. George Weld, at Seagram Hall, in Lancashire. One day he walked with his daughter Katherine to the neighbouring village of Chipping, and after attending a service at the church called on the priest. It was a little time before the rev. father was at leisure to come to them, and they amused themselves meantime by examining the prints hanging on the walls of the room. Suddenly Mr. Weld stopped before a picture which had no name, that you could see, written under it (as the frame covered the bottom), and exclaimed ' That is the person whom I saw with Philip; I do not know whose likeness this print is, but I am certain that it was that person whom I saw with Philip.' The priest entered the room a few moments afterwards, and was immediately questioned by Mr. Weld concerning the print. He answered that it was a print of St. Stanislaus Kostka, and supposed to be a very good likeness of the young saint.

*' Mr. Weld was much moved at hearing this; for St. Stanislaus was a Jesuit, who died when quite young, and Mr. Weld's father having been a great benefactor to that Order, his family were supposed to be under the particular protection of the Jesuit saints; also, Philip had been led of late, by various circumstances, to a particular devotion to St. Stanislaus.

Moreover, St. Stanislaus is supposed to be the special advocate of drowned men, as is mentioned in his life. The rev. father instantly presented the picture to Mr. Weld, who, of course, received it with the greatest veneration, and kept it until his death. His wife valued it equally, and at her death it passed into the possession of the daughter [the narrator], who saw the apparition at the same time he did, and it is now in her possession."

In answer to some questions put by Mr. Ward, Miss Weld wrote on June 20th, 1883:—

" I will repeat the questions you ask, to make the answers more clear.

"'Did you as well as your father, think the disappearance strange?' — No; I thought no more about it. i

'"Did your father, before Dr. Cox spoke to him, look upon the apparition as significant of some mishap to his son V — Yes; he thought much about it, and was very anxious for the arrival of the letters the next morning; but he did not speak of the matter until afterwards. He had frightened my mother so much on a former occasion that he had promised never to speak of such things again."

Miss Weld adds in another letter: —

" When I saw Philip, I thought no more of it than one does in seeing a great and unexpected likeness in a stranger to some absent friend. The matter passed out of my mind so completely that I never felt a sensation of uneasiness. I did not remember the circumstance until the arrival of Dr. Cox, and the announcement of my brother's death. I saw that two persons were walking with the young lad who so closely resembled my brother. He looked happy and smiling; but I neither remarked their countenance nor dress; consequently I did not recognise the print in the parlour of the priest."

In answer to an inquiry as to whether this was her only experience of a sensory hallucination. Miss Weld adds: "I never before or since the event have seen anything from the other world. "^

The apparition of St. Stanislaus is quite consistent with the telepathic hypothesis, since we can conceive that the idea of his favourite saint may have been actually present to the mind of the drowning boy; but we have no explanation of the third phantasmal figure. This, from its irrelevance, is an unlikely feature to have crept into

1 See p. 48, note.

The following version of the same incident, which we have received from a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, is useful as illustrating the slight inaccuracies which may creep into a narrative, without the least affecting the essential point: —

"I was mentioning this \i.e., a similar case] to Baron French, or rather we were talking over the incidents connected with it, when he told me of a strange occurrence which happened at the school where he was, near Ware, in England, a Catholic college, — president, a Dr. Cox. There was a boy there of the name of Weld, a very well-known Catholic family. This boy was accidentally drowned. The father and mother were at the time at Southampton, and on the day in question were walking on the quay near the shipping. They suddenly saw the said boy approaching, and hurried to meet him, but immediately he appeared to fade away, so that they could see the masts of the ships, and through what had seemed to be his body. The next day, or the day following, Dr. Cox called on them, when Mr. Weld said, ' I know why you are here, it is to tell me that my son is dead. I saw him yesterday, and knew then that he had departed.' "

244 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

the memory, if not really observed; but it also makes the hypothesis of mistaken identity less improbable than it would otherwise be. As against that hypothesis we have the fact that the figures were seen in daylight, only a few yards off; that their disappearance seems to have been strangely sudden; and that, if the narrator's memory may be trusted as to Mr. Weld's spontaneous recognition of the picture, the mistake on his part would have been a double one. Moreover it must be observed that even if the case was one of mistaken identity — of illusion and not hallucination — the coincidence remains to be accounted for. If we suppose — as according to the account I think we may — that the eyes of the two percipients were independently deluded, and that Mr. Weld's delusion was not merely conjured up by his daughter's remark, we cannot ignore the improbability of two persons making a mistake of the sort on the very afternoon that the relative whom they seem to see is drowned. How prodigious this improbability is may be realised from a simple computation. Let us suppose — surely a liberal estimate — that it is a common thing, which one may suppose to have happened to each of. the percipients, to make in the course of life 50 equally remarkable mistakes of identity, in an equally good light and when equally near to the figure observed; and also that the probability that one particular relative of most familiar aspect will be the subject of the Y^' mistake on any one of these occasions amounts to ^ — which is /' again an extravagant allowance. Let us further suppose that the adult life of each percipient amounted to 35 years, or 12,775 days. Then, for each percipient, the probability of making one of the mistakes of identity on the particular day that the subject of the mistake dies is -^o^f^; and the probability of the supposed combination of coincident mistakes is sAo^. In other words, the odds against the occurrence by accident of the incident above related are more than 26 millions to 1. If, therefore, the experiences were illusions, they may fairly be supposed to have been telepathic illusions (see pp. 62-3.)

We owe the next account in the first instance to Mrs. Willink, of Lindale Parsonage, Grange-over-Sands. The three first-hand witnesses all appear to be persons of good sense and of some education. Mrs. Willink writes, on Sept. 9, 1884: —

(350) " One night (Friday) my nurse, Jane, came to tell me that they had been startled by seeing a ghastly face at the kitchen window. The servants had been annoyed for some time previously by some young men

coming to the kitchen window, and making a noise on the glass, and trying to look in. The flower bed under the window had been freshly dug up and tidied, and they were hoping the visits had ceased. The dog, whose kennel was close to the window, and who had been put on a long chain to keep away these visitors, began to how], and Helen (now Mrs. Robinson), who was sitting so as to see through the edge of the blind, looked up, and seeing a ghastly face, which she recognised as Mrs. Robinson's, told the others, who got up and drew the blind on one side, and so saw the face distinctly. Their account was that it gradually faded away below the bottom of the window. Jane and Aggie then went to the door, but though the dog continued howling (as he always does when a death in the village takes place), they could see nothing.

" I doubt the accuracy of the statement that the apparition looked at Helen rather than at the others; she sat where she could see through the space between the blind and the edge of the window, so naturally saw it first. Jane had never seen Mrs. Robinson, but some time after, on looking through a photograph-book in the village, she recognised the face, and was then told to whom it belonged. When she told me on the Friday evening of what they had seen, I rather pooh-poohed the story, as I found that the ' dog's howling was beginning to make them always nervous; and it was not ' until after service on Sunday that I was told how Mrs. Robinson had been persuaded to go to Leeds to the hospital there, and to undergo an operation, under which she died on Friday afternoon, I think, between 2 and 3. The appearance would be between 8 and 9. Mrs. Robinson had been servant to the clergyman here before she married; she had been away from the village some time before her death; was always an invalid, but none of us knew of her being more ill than usual.

"Margaret Willink."

We learn from the clerk at Finsthwaite, where Mrs. Robinson was buried, that she died at the Leeds Infirmary on March 25th, 1882, and a neighbour thinks that the hour was between 8 and 9 in the morning. Friday was the 24th, not the 25th; and the coincidence was thus not so close as Mrs. Willink supposes; but the interval probably did not exceed 12 hours.

Mary Jane Farrand says: —

" It was a Friday evening, of the exact time I am not sure, but it was between half-past 8 and 9 o'clock. The other two maids, with myself, were sitting at supper in the kitchen, close to the window, when we all became conscious of being watched by a woman from the outside, whom the other two immediately recognised as a person whom they both knew as Mrs. Robinson. Before her marriage, she lived at the parsonage for some time as housemaid. She looked intently upon each one, and then turned her face quite to the cook, looking slightly reproachful, then pleadingly. They asked one of the other where she could be staying, and they said it was strange for her to be out (as it rained heavily) without her bonnet. One was just about to go and ask her in, when we saw a great change come over the face, and it looked like that of a corpse, then disappeared altogether. I never saw the person previously, or remember ever hearing of her, however indirectly. The following Sunday morning I heard that she was dead from Mrs. Willink. The cook, whom we called

246 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

Nell, was married to John Robinson about two years afterwards. As we sat at the table I had such an impression of the face, eyes, and front of the hair as to be able to recognise the photograph a few months afterwards, without the least trouble, or being told. " Mary Jane Farrand."

A. Nicholson (now Mrs. Capstick, of Silverdale, Carnforth,) writes to Mary Jane Farrand, on September 4th, 1884: —

" Woodwell.

" In answer to your letter about the face at the window, I cannot remember much about it, except that we were sitting at supper, and Nell happened to look up at the window, and said some one was looking in, then told us to come and look. It was like the face of a skeleton, and we looked, and it was a very thin face, with large staring eyes. We still thought it was some one till you and I went to the door, but could see nothing. Nell was in the kitchen, and it never moved, but was still there when we got back. It seemed to gradually fade out of sight. I don't remember who passed the remark that it was like Mrs. Robinson.

" A. NicHOLSOisr."

In conversation, Mrs. Capstick stated that she has never had any other experience of a hallucination.

Mrs. Willink writes, on September 18th, 1884: —

" In answer to your question as to when the servants told me it was Mrs. Robinson's face they saw, as far as I recollect it was that same evening. Helen knew (as we all did) that Mrs. Robinson was ill, and had been so for years with an internal complaint, from which she never could recover; but she did not know that she was any worse than she had been before she left the village some months before.

" They went out next morning to look for footmarks on the flower bed, which would have been disturbed by any one standing at the window, but there were no traces of any."

In answer to inquiries, Mary Jane Farrand writes, on September 24th, 1884:—

" When I recognised Mrs. Robinson's photograph I was staying at Arnside with Mrs. Willink's children, and went to visit a person who had lived near Lindale and had not long been married, and she it was who when showing me the different things in her house, quite by chance took up her album, and showed me the photos of her friends, amongst them Mrs. Robinson. I cannot quite remember whether or not I told her that I recognised the face; for it seems so long ago to remember each fact, and I should not like to assert what I did not feel confident about, but you certainly may write to her to ask her.

" Never before had I seen anything of the kind, although I had heard of similar events, but was greatly wanting in faith with regard to such things happening, and thought it but a fancy in others, until I saw Mrs. Robinson [i.e., the photograph]."

She mentions, however, that she has had two subjective hallucinations, which fell within a few days of one another — one representing Mrs. Willink, and the other a fellow-servant.

Mrs. Jackson Thompson, of Ashmeadow Lodge, Arnside, Grange-over-Sands, writes, in February, 1886: —

" The only remark I remember Mary Jane Farrand making on the late Mrs. John Robinson's photograph was that it resembled the face which appeared at the Lindale Parsonage kitchen window.

" Charlotte Thompson."

[The evidence of " ISTell " (now Mrs. Robinson), the third witness, will be found in the " Additions and Corrections " at the beginning of this volume.]

The next account is from Mrs. Bennett, of Edward Street, Stone.

"March, 1882.

(351) "My daughter, Annie, and I had been drinking tea with the late Mrs. Smith and Miss Moore, and talking about their brother Preston being very ill and not expected to recover, and were returning home in the evening, when between the little wicket which opens out of the Vicarage field and Mrs. Newbold's house we met the identical man in face, form, and figure, dressed as he was always wont; slouched hat, old frock coat, open in front, knee-breeches and gaiters, with a long stick. He passed so near us that we shrank aside to make way for him. As soon as we got to Mrs. Newbold's she exclaimed, ' So Preston Moore is dead! ' when we both answered in a breath, ' Oh, no, we have just seen him! '

"We found, in fact, that he had died about half an hour before he appeared to us. "J. Bennett."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Bennett adds, on Dec. 19, 1883: —

" We cannot call to mind anyone at all resembling the individual in question; his appearance, dress and gait were utterly unlike anyone else residing in or about the neighbourhood."

We learn from the Rev. A. J. Wright, Vicar of Stone, that the death occurred on April 13th, 1860.

The Rev. Samuel Plant writes to us from Weston Vicarage, Stafibrd: —

"July 8th, 1885.

" I know very well the lady who, with her daughter, saw the apparition of Moore on the day of his death, and I have every reason to believe that she would not deviate from the truth in any respect. I have several times heard her account of it."

Mrs. Sidgwick writes, on December 17, 1883: —

" This afternoon Professor Sidgwick and I called on Mrs. Bennett. She told us the story as in her letter, and her daughter, afterwards called in, confirmed it. They do not remember when it happened, probably 12 or more years ago. She remembers distinctly, and so does her daughter, that it was in the summer, and that it was light enough to see things quite distinctly— though they are not sure of the hour.' They had been having tea with Mrs. Smith (Preston Moore's sister, a farmer's widow, retired and with means), and were on their way to call on Mrs. Newbold, now dead. About 3 yards from Mrs. Newbold's gate they saw Preston Moore coming towards them; they came round a slight bend in the road, and saw him first (Mrs. Bennett said), about the distance across Edward Street from them. He and they were both walking on the road close to the

1 This statement is not incompatible with the fact that the season was really the middle of April; but it will be seen that the " 12 or more years " are really more than 23.

248 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

causeway, and they got on to the causeway and let him pass. He did not greet them in any way, but though he did generally touch his hat, and say ' Good-day,' he did not then. His not doing so did not seem to them odd; the only thing that did was that a man who they had just heard was not expected to recover should be out at all. Mrs. Bennett has often wondered since that she did not turn her head to look after him, but she did not; and they do not remember saying anything to each other about him, during the few seconds that elapsed before they got to Mrs. Newbold's door. It was a natural enough place to meet him. There is no doubt that they both saw him, and that neither doubted at the time that what they saw was Preston Moore in the flesh. They say he was a peculiar-looking man — very plain, and with an eye chronically inflamed; wore habitually a white hat on one side of his head, a loose shabby long coat, open down the front, and carried a long, hooked, heavy stick; and all these marks they seem to recognise him by. They took no particular interest in him, just knew him. There was something forbidding about him, and he was very odd; in fact I suppose mad at times. The people called him ' moonstruck; ' his sister. Miss Moore, was odd too. He seems to have had a sort of interest in Mrs. Bennett, for once he brought her pansies, stolen from a neighbouring gentleman's garden, and another time cauliflowers — equally illegitimately acquired. But he used to take stolen gifts to others in the same way. Both Mrs. and Miss Bennett disclaim being superstitious or nervous, and neither has had any other visual hallucination. Mrs. Bennett has had an auditory hallucination of music, and also what may have been a hallucination of raps and noises."

[In this case, we certainly cannot suppose that a purely subjective

hallucination was independently and simultaneously caused in both

percipients by their previous talk about the man, in whom they were not

specially interested. The alternative is, therefore, between telepathy and

mistaken identity. It was remarked in a former case that recollections as

to details of appearance are often untrustworthy, as it is easy to imagine

that one has distinctly seen some familiar figure, when in reality one has

assumed its presence on the strength of the slightest and most general

glance. But this criticism scarcely applies here. Preston Moore was the

Y>< t'^ last person whom the percipients would at that moment have expected to

U..^«f'^*meet out of doors; and they were, therefore, very unlikely to assume that

( the figure was he, without looking at him attentively.]

The following case is from Mr. S. S. Falkinburg, of Uniontown,

Ky., U.S.A., decorator and house painter.

"Sept. 12th, 1884.

(352) " The following circumstance is impressed upon my mind in a manner which will preclude its ever being forgotten by me or the members of my family interested. My little son, Arthur, who was then five years old, and the pet of his grandpapa, was playing on the floor, when I entered the house a quarter to 7 o'clock, Friday evening, July 11th, 1879. I was very tired, having been receiving and paying for staves all day, and it being an exceedingly sultry evening, I lay down by Artie on the carpet, and entered into conversation with my wife — not, however, in regard to my parents. Artie, as usually was the case, came and lay down with his little head upon my left arm, when all at once he exclaimed, ' Papa!

papa! Grandpa! ' I cast my eyes towards the ceiling, or opened my eyes, I am not sure which, when, between me and the joists (it was an oldfashioned log-cabin), I saw the face of my father as plainly as ever I saw him in my life.^ He appeared to me to be very pale, and looked sad, as I had seen him upon my last visit to him three months previous. I immediately spoke to my wife, who was sitting within a few feet of me, and said, ' Clara, there is something wrong at home; father is either dead or very sick.' She tried to persuade me that it was my imagination, but I could not help feeling that something was wrong. Being very tired, we soon after retired, and about 10 o'clock Artie woke me up repeating, ' Papa, grandpa is here.' I looked, and believe, if I remember right, got up, at any rate to get the child warm, as he complained of coldness, ^ and it was very sultry weather. Next morning I expressed my determination to go at once to Indianapolis. My wife made light of it and overpersuaded me, and I did not go until Monday morning, and upon arriving at home (my father's), I found that he had been buried the day before, Sunday, July 13th.

" Now comes the mysterious part to me. After I had told my mother and brother of my vision, or whatever it may have been, they told me the following: —

" On the morning of the 11th July, the day of his death, he arose early and expressed himself as feeling unusually well, and ate a hearty breakfast. He took the Bible (he was a Methodist minister), and went and remained until near noon. He ate a hearty dinner, and went to the front gate, and, looking up and down the street, remarked that he could not, or at least would not be disappointed, some one was surely coming. During the afternoon and evening he seemed restless, and went to the gate, looking down street, frequently. At last, about time for supper, he mentioned my name, and expressed his conviction that Grod, in His own good time, would answer his prayers in my behalf, I being at that time very wild. Mother going into the kitchen to prepare supper, he followed her and continued talking to her about myself and family, and especially Arthur, my son. Supper being over, he moved his chair near the door, and was conversing about me at the time he died. The last words were about me, and were spoken, by mother's clock, 14 minutes of 7. He did not fall, but just quit talking and was dead.

" In answer to my inquiries, my son Arthur says he remembers the circumstances, and the impression he received upon that occasion is ineffaceable. " Samuel S. Falkinburg."

We have procured a certificate of death from the Indianapolis Board of Health, which confirms the date given.

Mrs. Falkinburg writes to us, on Sept. 12, 1884: —

"In answer to your request, I will say that I cheerfully give my recollection of the circumstance to which you refer.

" We were living in Brown County, Indiana, 50 miles south of Indianapolis, in the summer of 1879. My husband (Mr. S. S. Falkinburg) was in the employ of one John Ayers, buying staves.

1 For phantasms seen in positions which would in reality be impossible compare cases 203, 204, and 205.

2 See p. 37, note.

250 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

'On the evening of July 11th, about 6.30 o'clock, he came into the room where I was sitting, and lay down on the carpet with my little boy Arthur, complaining of being very tired and warm. Entering into conversation on some unimportant matter, Arthur went to him and lay down by his side. In a few moments my notice was attracted by hearing Arthur exclaim: ' Oh, papa, grandpa, grandpa, papa,' at the same time pointing with his little hand toward the ceiling. I looked in the direction he was pointing, but saw nothing. My husband, however, said: ' Clara, there is something wrong at home; father is either dead or very sick.' I tried to laugh him out of what I thought an idle fancy; but he insisted that he saw the face of his father looking at him from near the ceiling, and Arthur said, ' Grandpa was come, for he saw him.' That night we were awakened by Artie again calling his papa to see ' grandpa.'

" A short time after my husband started (Monday) to go to Indianapolis, I received a letter calling him to the burial of his father; and some time after, in conversation with his mother, it transpired that the time he and Artie saw the vision was within two or three minutes of the time his father died. " Clara T. Falkinburg."

Asked whether this was his sole experience of a visual hallucination, Mr. Falkinburg replied that it was. Occasionally, however, since that time, he has had auditory impressions suggestive of his father's presence.

Here it may perhaps be suggested that Mr. Falkinburg's hallucination was due to the child's remark. But I know of no evidence to support such a hypothesis. Where sensory hallucinations have been traceable to verbal suggestion, as I have already mentioned, (p. 188), there has either been a previous abnormal dominance of one person by another, or the effect has been worked up among a considerable number of people, in an atmosphere of emotion and excitement. Till evidence is brought, we must, I think, decline to credit the words of a child of five with such magic sway over its father's mind as is exercised by a practised mesmerist over the " subject " whose will he has annulled, or as causes the visions of a hysterical fanatic to spread to her like-minded companions.

The next case is from Mrs. Fairman, of 43, Clifton Hill, N.W. She has given us in confidence the names of the persons concerned, who are all dead. The first account sent to us was written on December 29, 1884; but I quote the following slightly fuller one, which was sent after a search had been made for the letter therein mentioned. The sentence between brackets is taken from the former account.

"December 4th, 1885.

(.353) " I much regret that the search I have made through my sister's

letters has proved useless. You see, the letter relating to the circumstance

was addressed to my mother, and has been destroyed long ago. In that

letter, my sister related the circumstance of both herself and her husband

seeing what he imagined, to be his brother — ^the exact likeness to him being apparent — passing the breakfast-room.window; so much so that he spontaneously jumped up to go to the hall to meet him, but on arriving did not see him. (They were at the time — as nearly as I can remember, in 1844 — living in the Highlands, and he had parted from his brother, who was living in Nottinghamshire, on very unfriendly terms.) After a fruitless search in the grounds, he awaited the arrival of the post-bag, which contained a letter requesting him to start at once: his brother, whom he had not seen for 15 years, being in a dying state. He did so; and found on arrival that he died at the exact time he had seen him pass the window.

It was on his immediate departure that Mrs. wrote home to us, and

before she had received tidings from her husband of his brother's death. He repeated this statement to me some few years after, and said how convinced he was at the time that his brother had arrived, and how kind, he considered it that he should make the first advances towards a reconciliation. " Catherine A. Fairman."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death took place on May 2, 1841, the cause being "efiusion on the brain."

In answer to an inquiry whether she is certain that her sister saw the figure, Mrs. Fairman replies: —

" I feel sure that my sister saw a figure pass the window at the same time as her husband did; bnt as she had. never seen her brother-in-law, she could not say, ' There's Edward.' I remember perfectly her letter at the time mentioning that she saw a someone go by."

[In conversation, Mrs. Fairman told me that she saw, immediately on its arrival, the account written to her mother by her sister on the day of the occurrence; and if this was so, her evidence is that of a person who was made aware of the percipient's experience before the event with which it corresponded was known (Vol. I., p. 148). But after an interval of more than 40 years, no memory can be trusted as to details of this sort. ISTor, taking the evidence as it stands, can the hypothesis of mistaken identity be absolutely excluded. Still a mistake of the kind is far more unlikely in a country place — where the aspect of persons who come to the house is usually familiar, and where the sudden disappearance of an approaching visitor would be very unlikely — than in a crowded street. See also above, pp. 62-3.]

The next account is from the late Surgeon-Major Armand Leslie, and was first published in the Daily Telegraph. That newspaper, during the autumn of 1881, contained a good deal of correspondence of this sort; and Dr. Leslie was one of the few contributors who had the good sense and courage to sign his name, and thus to make his record available as evidence. We have ascertained from four different sources that he used to live at 5, Tavistock Place, W.C. He afterwards served through the Russo-Turkish war with the Turkish army; was one of the twelve doctors sent out to Egypt at the time of the cholera; was chief of the medical department of Baker's staff;

252 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

and was killed at the battle of Teb. Unfortunately, we failed to identify him till too late, and I can only quote the account as originally given. Confirmation might perhaps be obtained from his family, but our efforts to trace them have been, so far, unavailing. Not having communicated with the narrator, we cannot vouch for the hona fides of the account, the very startling incidents of which, and especially the detail of the goloshes, are suggestive of a hoax; and I therefore do not give the case an evidential number. On the other hand, it seems unlikely that a medical man of repute, even if he took the trouble to invent such a story, would allow his name to appear as the authority for it in a prominent newspaper. If the story was invented, its final sentence, which introduces the writer's true place of residence, is a clever touch of realism, and the point made at the end of the second paragraph is a master-stroke.

"October, 1881.

" In the latter part of the summer of '78, between half-past 3 and 4 in the morning, I was leisurely walking home from the house of a sick friend. A middle-aged woman, apparently a nurse, was slowly following, going in the same direction. We crossed Tavistock Square together, and emerged simultaneously into Tavistock Place. The streets and square were deserted, the morning bright and calm, my health excellent, nor did I suffer from anxiety or fatigue.

" The following scene was now enacted: A man suddenly appeared, striding up Tavistock Place, coming towards me, and going in a direction opposite to mine. When first seen, he was standing exactly in front of my own door. Young, and ghastly pale, he was dressed in evening clothes, evidently made by a foreign tailor. Tall and slim, he walked with long measured strides, noiselessly, without a sound^ — a tall white hat, covered thickly with black crape, and an eye-glass, completed the costume of this strange form. The moonbeams, ^ falling on the corpse-like features, revealed a face well known to me — that of a friend and relative. The sole and only other person in the street, beyond myself and this being, was the woman already alluded to. She stopped abruptly, as if spellbound, then rushing towards the man, she gazed intently and with horror unmistakeable on his face, which was now upturned towards the heavens, and smiling ghastly. She indulged in her strange contemplation but during very few seconds, and with extraordinary and unexpected speed for her age and weight, she ran away with a terrific shriek and yells. This woman never have I seen or heard of since, and but for her presence I could have explained the incident — called it, say, subjection of the mental powers to the domination of physical reflex action — and the man's presence would have been termed a false impression on the retina.

" A week after the above event, news of this very friend's death

1 As regards this point, see p. 68, note.

2 The " moonbeams " and the " morning bright and cahn " do not go well together; and I certainly shall not argue that a hoaxer would have been careful to avoid the discrepancy.

reached me. It had occurred on the morning in question. From the family I ascertained that, according to the rites of the Greek Church, and to the custom of the country he had resided in, he was buried in his evening clothes, made abroad by a foreign tailor, and, strange to say, he wore goloshes or indiarubber shoes over his boots, according also to the custom of the country he died in; these deaden completely the sound of the heaviest footstep. I never had seen my friend wear an eye-glass. He did so, however, whilst abroad, and began the practice some months before his death. When in England he lived in Tavistock Place, and occupied my rooms during my absence. " Armand Leslie."

[Supposing this to be a genuine case, it is still highly probable that some of the detail of the apparition was read back into it, after the real facts were known.]

The lady who sends us the following narrative occupies a position of great responsibility, and desires that her name may not be pub- ^^

lished; but it may be given to inquirers. j/o ^^

"1883. t.

(354) " When I was eight months old, my mother's younger sister, Mercy '^ -Cox, came to reside with us, and to take charge of me. My father's ^

position at the Belgian Court, as portrait painter, obliged him to be much 5^"^ abroad, and I was left almost wholly to the care of my very beautiful aunt. The affection that subsisted between us amounted almost to idolatry, and my poor mother wept many bitter tears when she came home, to see how little I cared for anyone else. My aunt took cold, and for three years lingered in decline. I was a quick child, and could read well and even play prettily, so that I was her constant companion day and night. Our doctor, Mr. Field, of the Charter House, greatly disapproved of this close contact, and urged my parents to send me quite away. This was a difficult feat to accomplish, the bare mention of the thing throwing my aunt into faintings. At last Mr. Cumberland (the theatrical publisher) suggested that I should join his two daughters, Caroline, aged 16, and Lavinia, younger, at Mrs. Hewetson's, the widow of a clergyman resident at Stourpaine, in Dorsetshire, who only took four young ladies. This was represented to my aunt as something so wonderfully nice and advantageous to me, that she consented to part with me. My portrait was painted, and placed by her bed, and I remember how constantly she talked to me about our separation. She knew she should be dead before the year of my absence would be ended. She talked to me of this, and of how soon I should forget her; but she vehemently protested that she would come to me there. Sometimes it was to be as an applewoman for me to buy fruit of, sometimes as a maid wanting a place, always she would know me, but I should not know her, till I cried and implored to know her.

" I was but nine when they sent me away, and coach travelling was very // slow in those days. Letters, too, were dear, and I very rarely had one. My parents had sickness and troubles, and they believed the reports that I was well and happy, but I was a very miserable, illtreated little girl. One morning, at break of day — it was New Year's Day — I was sleeping beside Lavinia. We two shared one little white tester bed, with curtains, while Caroline — upon whom I looked with awe, she being 16, slept in

254 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

