various French observers (Camuset, Annates Medico-jysychologiques, 1882, p. 75; Jules Voisin, Archives de Neurologie, September, 1885; Bourru and Burot, Revue Philosophique, October, 1885, and Archives de Neurologic, November, 1885); and the hypnotic experiments described by Mr. Myers, in his paper on "Human Personality, " Proceedings of theS.P.R. Part x. A theory of the transcendental self, in its relation to various abnormal states, has been worked out at length in Du Prel's Philosophic der Mystik (Leipzig, 1885).

[chap.



Chapter VI. Transference of Ideas and of Mental Pictures.

§ 1. The advance-guard of cases in the last chapter has afforded a glance at the whole range of the phenomena. But I must now start on a methodical plan, and take the narratives in groups according to their subject-matter. The groups will follow the same order as the preceding specimens; but though theoretically the best, this order has the practical disadvantage that it puts the weakest classes first. Of the two great divisions, the externalised impressions are by far the most remarkable in themselves, and by far the most conclusive as evidence; but as they constitute the extreme examples of telepathic action, they are logically led up to through the non- externalised group, which presents more obvious analogies with the experimental basis of our inquiry. I must, therefore, beg the reader who may be disappointed by much of the evidence in this and the two following chapters, to note that it is no way presented as conclusive; and that though it is well worthy of attention if the case for spontaneous telepathy is once made out, it is only when we come to the " borderland " examples of Chap. IX. that the strength of the case begins rapidly to accumulate.

The great point which connects many of the more inward impressions of spontaneous telepathy with the experimental cases is this — that what enters the percipient's mind is the exact reproduction of the agent's thought at the moment. It is to this class of direct transferences, especially between persons who are in close association with one another, that popular belief most readily inclines — as a rule, without any sufficient grounds. Nothing is commoner than to hear instances of sympathetic flashes between members of the same household — cases where one person suddenly makes the very remark that another was about to make — adduced as evidence of some sort of supersensuous communication. But it is tolerably evident that a

number of such " odd coincidences " are sure to occur in a perfectly normal way. Minds which are in habitual contact with one another will constantly react in the same way, even to the most trifling influences of the moment; and the sudden word which proves them to have done so would have nothing startling in it, if the whole train of association that led up to it could be exposed to view. Moreover, physical signs which would be imperceptible to a stranger, may be easily and half-automatically interpreted by a familiar associate; and thus what looks sometimes like divination may perfectly well be due to unconscious inference. It is very rarely that conditions of this sort can be with certainty excluded. Still, experimental thought-transference would certainly prepare us to encounter the phenomenon occasionally in ordinary social and domestic life; and one or two examples may be given which have a strong prima facie air of being genuine specimens.

One frequent form of the alleged transferences is that of tunes. It is matter of very common observation that one person begins humming the very tune that is running in some one else's head. This admits, as a rule, of a perfectly simple explanation. It is easy to suppose that some special tune has been a good deal " in the air " of a house, half unconsciously hummed or whistled, as tunes often are, and that thus the coincidence is an accident which may very readily occur. At the same time, if the telepathic faculty exists tunes should apparently be a form of " thought " well calculated for transference. With many people the imagining of a tune is the sort of idea which comes nearest to the vividness of actual sensation. And moreover, it contains not only the representation of sensory experience, but also a distinct motor element — an impulse to reproduction. A person with a musical ear can silently reproduce a tune, with such an inward force as almost produces the illusion of driving it into objective existence. Such an incident as the following therefore, where there is no question of a family knowledge of the tune, or of its having been in any way in the air, is of decided interest; though, of course, the actual force of any single case of the sort is very small.1 We received the account from Sir Lepel Griffin, K.C.S.I.

1 The phenomenon is not without experimental support. Just a century ago, Puys^gur wrote, of one of his "magnetised" subjects: "Je le forcais a se donner beaucoup de mouvement sur sa chaise, comme pour danser sur un air, qu'en chantant mentalement je lui faisais repeter touthaut." (Memoires, <bc, du Magnetisme Animal, 3rd edition, p. 22. See also Dr. Macario, Du Sommeil, des Rives, et du Somnambulism*,

234 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

" 53a, Pall Mall.

"February 14th, 1884. (37) " Colonel Lyttleton Annesley, Commanding Officer of the 11th Hussars, was staying in my house some time ago, and one afternoon, having nothing to do, we wandered into a large unoccupied room, given up to lumber and packing cases. Colonel A. was at one end of this long room reading, to the best of my recollection, while I opened a box, long forgotten, to see what it contained. I took out a number of papers and old music, which I was turning over in my hand, when I came across a song in which I, years before, had been accustomed to take a part, ' Dal tuo stella to soglio,' out of ' Mose in Egitto,' if I remember right. As I looked at this old song, Colonel A., who had been paying no attention whatever to my proceedings, began to hum, ' Dal tuo stellato soglio.' In much astonishment I asked him why he was singing that particular air. He did not know. He did not remember to have sung it before; indeed I have not ever heard Colonel A. sing, though he is exceedingly fond of music. I told him that I was holding the very song in my hand. He was as much astonished as I had been, and had no knowledge that I had any music in my hand at all. I had not spoken to him, nor had I hummed the air, or given him any sign that I was looking over music. The incident is curious, for it is outside all explanation on the theory of coincidence."

Later, Sir L. G-riffin wrote: — « 28th April, 1884.

"I promised to write to you when I received a reply from General Lyttleton Annesley, to whom I had written, in the same words I had used to you, the little incident which struck you as noteworthy. I may mention that it had never formed the subject of conversation or correspondence between us from the day that it happened until now. He says: ' I perfectly recollect the incident you refer to about the song " Dal tuo stellato soglio." I had my back to you at the time you were taking out the music, and did not even know what you were doing. I was close to a window and you were at the bottom end of the room. In fact your account is exact to the minutest point.' "Lepel Griffin."

We have other cases in which the transferred impression was not of a tune, but of a word or phrase, while still apparently of an auditory sort, conveying the sound of the word rather than its meaning. When the two persons concerned have been in close proximity, it is, of course, difficult to make sure that some incipient sound or movement of the lips, on the part of the supposed agent, did not

p. 184.) Mr. Guthrie has successfully repeated the experiment several times with a " subject " in anormal state (Proceedings of the S.P.R., Vol. iii.) — with contact, it is true, which prevents the results from being quite conclusive. Still, the only element in a tune which could be conveyed with any accuracy by minute movements is the rhythm. Now this could only be conveyed by sudden movements at definite moments — a very different matter from the continuous slightly-varied pressure of the willing-game; while even supposing that these discrete and accurate indications could be unconsciously given, it is hard to believe that they could lead to the identification of the tune, unless their rhythmic character were consciously perceived.

supply an unconscious suggestion.1 But the following case cannot be

so explained. We received it from Mr. J. G. Keulemans, who

was mentioned above (p. 196) as having had a number of similar

experiences.

"November, 1882,

(38) "In the summer of the year 1875, about eight in the evening, I was returning to my home in the Holloway Road, on a tramcar, when it flashed into my mind that my assistant, Herr Schell, a Dutchman, who knew but little English (who was coming to see me that evening), would ask me what the English phrase, ' to wit,' meant in Dutch. So vivid was the impression that I mentioned it to my wife on arriving at my house, and I went so far as to scribble it down on the edge of a newspaper which I was reading. Ten minutes afterwards Schell arrived, and almost his first words were the inquiry, ' Wat is het Hollandsch voor " to wit"V (The words scribbled on the newspaper were not in his sight, and he was a good many yards from it.) I instantly showed him the paper, with the memorandum on it, saying, ' You see I was ready for you.' He told me that he had resolved to ask me just before leaving his house in Kentish Town, as he was intending that evening to do a translation of an English passage in which the words occurred. He was in the habit of making such translations in order to improve his knowledge of English. The time of his resolution corresponded (as far as we could reckon) with that of my impression."

[Unfortunately no corroboration of this occurrence is now obtainable; but the incident of the newspaper does not seem a likely one to have been unconsciously invented.]

The next case, if correctly reported, is of a transitional sort; for though it was a distinct idea, and not a mere sound-image, that seems to have been transferred, the transference was probably connected with the fact that the words were actually on the tip of the agent's tongue. This fact, of course, suggests again the chance of unconscious suggestion by actual sound or movement of the lips;

1 For instance, we should not be justified in laying stress on such an occurrence as the following, described to us by Mr. Dismorr, of Thelcrest Lodge, Gravesend.

" November 19th, 1884.

" A somewhat curious little incident occurred this morning, which, though not of any value, might be of interest to you.

" Last evening a friend of mine, Mr. F. P., and I, unable to fix upon a suitable name for a new invention of ours, agreed to think it over and communicate the names selected this morning. The only names I could think of at all suitable were three, ' Matchless,' ' Marvel,' and ' Express.'

"We met in the train, and I said to P., 'Have you thought of any name?' he replied ' Yes, ' and leant across to mention it, but suddenly stopped short, and said, ' Tell me yours.' I at once commenced, as I thought, to give the three I had selected in the order named; but quite as much to my surprise as that of Mr. P., the first name I mentioned was the word ' Superb, ' a name that had never entered my mind, but strangely enough the actual name that P. had settled on and was about to mention.

" As there was not any reflection whatever, nor time for it, between P.'s question and my rejoinder, it struck me as rather curious. " J. S. Dismorr."

[Mr. P. admits the fact, but would rather his name did not appear.]

This may have been a lucky chance, or it may have been that Mr. P., before checking himself, had given a hint of the coming word.

236 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

but such an explanation seems here practically excluded by the length of the sentence. The case was recorded in the Spectator of June 24th, 1882, and has been confirmed to us by the writer.

"Ferndene, Abbeydale, near Sheffield.

" June 22nd.

(39) " I had one day been spending the morning in shopping, and returned by train just in time to sit down with my children to our early family dinner. My youngest child — a sensitive, quick-witted little maiden of two years and six weeks old — was one of the circle. Dinner had just commenced, when I suddenly recollected an incident in my morning's experience which I had intended to tell her; and I looked at the child with the full intention of saying, ' Mother saw a big, black dog in a shop, with curly hair,' catching her eyes in mine, as I paused an instant before speaking. Just then something called off my attention, and the sentence was not tottered. What was my amazement, about two minutes afterwards, to hear my little lady announce, ' Mother saw a big dog in a shop.' I gasped. ' Yes, I did! ' I answered; ' but how did you know 1 ' ' With funny hair,' she added, quite calmly, and ignoring my question. ' What colour was it, Evelyn?' said one of her elder brothers; 'was it black? ' She said, ' Yes.'

" Now, it was simply impossible that she could have received any hint of the incident verbally. I had had no friend with me when I had seen the dog. All the children had been at home, in our house in the country, four miles from the town; I had returned, as I said, just in time for the children's dinner, and I had not even remembered the circumstance until the moment when I fixed my eyes upon my little daughter's. We have had in our family circle numerous examples of spiritual or mental insight or foresight; but this, I think, is decidedly the most remarkable that has ever come under my notice. " Caroline Barber."

Mrs. Barber has shown to Mr. Podmore the note-book in which she noted the occurrence, and from which her letter to the Spectator was taken almost verbatim. The incident was recorded on Jan. 11, 1880, as having taken place on Jan. 6. She adds that the governess and the other children at table were positive that she had not said anything about the dog, and were as much astonished as she was.

§ 2. In the next case (which might fairly have been included under the head of experiments) we break away altogether from the auditory symbols of thought, and have a transference of an idea pure and simple. For even if the agent was formulating his thought to himself, he would naturally do so in English, while the percipient described his impression in Italian. The account is from Mr. Robert Browning, and was first cited by Mr. James Knowles, in a letter to the Spectator of January 30th, 1869.

(40) "Mr. Robert Browning tells me that when he was in Florence some years since, an Italian nobleman (a Count Giunasi, of Ravenna), visiting at Florence, was brought to his house without previous introduction, by an intimate friend. The Count professed to have great mesmeric or

clairvoyant faculties, and declared, in reply to Mr. Browning's avowed scepticism, that he would undertake to convince him, somehow or other, of his powers. He then asked Mr. Browning whether he had anything about him then and there, which he could hand to him, and which was in any way a relic or memento. This, Mr. Browning thought, was, perhaps, because he habitually wore no sort of trinket or ornament, not even a watch-guard, and might, therefore, turn out to be a safe challenge. But it so happened, that by a curious accident, he was then wearing under his coat-sleeves some gold wrist-studs to his shirt, which he had quite recently taken into wear, in the absence (by mistake of a sempstress) of his ordinary wrist-buttons. He had never before worn them in Florence or elsewhere, and had found them in some old drawer, where they had lain forgotten for years. One of these studs he took out and handed to the Count, who held it in his hand awhile, looking earnestly in Mr. Browning's face, and then he said, as if much impressed, ' C6 qualche cosa che mi grida nell' orecchio, " Uccisione, uccisione! " ' [There is something here which cries out in my ear, ' Murder, murder! ']

" 'And truly,' says Mr. Browning, ' those very studs were taken from the dead body of a great-uncle of mine, who was violently killed on his estate in St. Kitts, nearly 80 years ago. These, with a gold watch and other personal objects of value, were produced in a court of justice, as proof that robbery had not been the purpose of the slaughter, which was effected by his own slaves. They were then transmitted to my grandfather, who had his initials engraved on them, and wore them all his life. They were taken out of the night-gown in which he died, and given to me, not my father. I may add that I tried to get Count Giunasi to use his clairvoyance on this termination of ownership, also; and that he nearly hit upon something like the fact, mentioning a bed in a room, but he failed in attempting to describe the room — situation of the bed with respect to windows and door. The occurrence of my great-uncle's murder was known only to myself, of all men in Florence, as certainly was also my possession of the studs.' "

Mr. Browning, in a letter to us, dated the 21st of July, 1883, affirms that the account "is correct in every particular" — adding, "My own explanation of the matter has been that the shrewd Italian felt his way by the involuntary help of my own eyes and face. The guess, however attained to, was a good one."

If a spurious diviner can thus feel his way as far as murder, and even Mr. Browning's expression is so inadequate to veil his thought, then indeed is our daily life compassed with dangers of which genuine telepathy has shown no trace.

With this account it is interesting to compare the following, from

Miss Caroline B. Morse, of Northfield, Vermont.

"April, 1884.

(41) "I early became conscious of a peculiar sensitiveness to

the undertones — the unuttered thoughts — of others. Later, this

tendency developed into an occasional lightning-like reading of facts

that apparently came to me through none of the ordinary sensory

238 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

channels, and which always, whatever their nature, gave me a shock of surprise. As an instance: About 13 years ago I went with an uncle to a jeweller's shop to see a wonderful clock. I had never met the proprietor of the shop; he was known to my uncle, who introduced him as he came forward and stood with us before the clock. At that instant came a sensation as if every nerve in my body had been struck. The affable jeweller had extended his hand, but with a shudder, that only habitual self-control repressed, I said within myself: ' I cannot touch your hand — there is blood upon it — you are a murderer.' Outwardly, I merely bowed and looked at the clock, as if nothing could interest me so much, thus ignoring the proffered hand. Several weeks after, I learned that the jeweller and a companion, when young men, had been accused of and tried for the murder of a pedlar. They escaped conviction through the garbled testimony of the chief witness, who at the preliminary hearing had made a clear statement strongly against them. « Caroline B Morse "

The following corroboration is from Mr. B. T. Merrill: —

" Montpelier, Vermont.

"May 31st, 1884. " I think it was in the fall of 1871 that I asked my niece, Miss C. B. Morse, to go with me to see a musical clock. We went into the shop. I introduced the jeweller; he reached out his hand to shake hands with her, but she refused to take his hand. After we left the shop, I asked her why she did not shake hands with him. She did not make much reply, and I did not know the real reason till long afterwards. I did not then know that the jeweller had been tried for murder, but some time after learned the facts from some of the residents of this place.

"Benjamin T. Merrill."1

In contrast to this purely ideal sort of horror, I may quote the following two cases where the impression, though still extremely indefinite in character, was yet sufficiently concrete to suggest the very presence of the object.

The first account was given to us by Miss Charlotte E. Squire, then residing at Feltham Hill, Middlesex (now Mrs. Fuller Maitland).

1 Compare case 379, where the impression seems to have been received when the agent's hand was actually touched. The following account of a parallel incident occurs in the Zoist, Vol. x., p. 409, in a letter from the Rev. C. H. Townshend to Dr. Elliotson.

"October 6th, 1852.

" There is a curious story that M. Woodley de Cerjat wanted you to know. I believe he wrote it to Dickens to tell you again. However, I may as well repeat it.

"A young lady, a friend of M. Cerjat's, who had been with her family at Lausanne, was taken ill at Berne with typhus fever. Her doctor found her one day in a lucid interval (she was generally delirious), but no sooner had he touched her hand than-she seemed to pass into an extraordinary state, and cried out, ' Oh that poor child! that poor little boy! why did you cut his head open? How is he now? ' The doctor, astonished, replied, ' I left him well; I hope he will recover,' and tried to calm the patient. But when he got out of the room, he said, ' That was the most extraordinary thing I ever knew in my life. I am come from trepanning a boy whose head had been injured, but there was no

human means by which Miss could have known it, as I am only this moment come

direct from the boy here, and no one knew of the accident, nor had Miss 's nurse ever

left the room.' The explanation seems to be that the touch of the doctor's hand threw the young lady into clairvoyance. She is since dead, and M. de Cerjat attended her funeral."

"January 17th, 1884.

(42) " My brother and I were travelling together from Cologne to Flushing. We were alone in the carriage when suddenly my brother, who had been half asleep, said to me that he had an odd idea that some one else was in the carriage sitting opposite to me. The very same idea had struck me just before he spoke.

" Though my feet were on the opposite seat, I was certain that some one was there, though I was wide awake and never saw the slightest appearance of anything. The impression only lasted for a moment, but it was strange that our thoughts should have been simultaneous. This happened three years ago."

Asked if this impression was a unique experience in her life, Miss Squire replied that it was.

The following corroboration is from Mr. W. Barclay Squire: — "The incident took place in the second week of February, 1881. My sister and myself had been to Hanover, and were returning home vid Flushing. We were alone in a first-class carriage, I sitting with my face to the engine, she with her back, at the diagonal corners of the carriage. In the evening, as we drew near to Flushing, I was dozing, or rather in that half-awake, half-asleep state when dreams become mixed up with reality, and actual objects become mingled with dream images. From this state I suddenly woke, under the vivid impression that a figure was seated in the corner of the carriage opposite my sister, i.e., at the other end of the seat on which I was. The impression was quite transitory, but so vivid as to wake me thoroughly, though the figure was vague and dark, as if muffled up in a cloak, no features being visible. I immediately mentioned the hallucination to my sister, when she told me she had a similar one. I was careful to note that there were no bags or rugs on the seat on which I saw the figure, which could have given rise to its appearance by some fanciful combination. " W. Barclay Squire."

Asked whether he had ever had any other hallucinations of vision Mr. Squire replied that when quite a child he had seen figures, which were to be accounted for by an "almost continual state of delicate health. I never saw figures from the time I was about 7 or 8 until this experience in the railway carriage."

It naturally occurred to us that the impression might have been unconsciously suggested to one of the two persons by the other, through some unconscious gesture or sudden change of feature. But the following communications seem decisive against this hypothesis: —

" 39, Phillimore Gardens, W.

"March 15th, 1885. " The idea of a third presence in the railway carriage occurred to both my brother and myself, without either of us ever having seen the other's face. I had my eyes closed at the time, and as we were sitting on the same side of the carriage we could not see each other's faces.

" C. E. Fuller Maitland." "lam certain the impression on my part was entirely spontaneous and not suggested by any action or look of my sister.

" W. Barclay Squire."

240 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

[It will be seen, however, that there is a discrepancy as to the positions in the carriage.]

Supposing this incident to have been telepathic, it is natural to regard Mr. Squire as the agent, and his impression of the strange presence as the momentary survival of a dream. But in the next example, if we surmise that a sort of waking nightmare of one of the three sisters affected the other two, we cannot at all assign their respective shares in the occurrence. The writer of the narrative is well known as an authoress and practical philanthropist.

"1884.

(43) "It was on a Saturday night, the end of October, or early in

November, 1848, that I was staying at St. M 's Yicarage, Leicester.

My two sisters were at home, at H., about 14 or 15 miles from Leicester. The room in which I slept was large and low, opening into a broad, low corridor; the nursery was on the same floor; the rest of the family slept on the one below. I had been asleep for some time, and was not consciously dreaming at all. I was awoke instantaneously, not by any sound, but intensely awake, starting up in a panic — not of fear, but of horror, knowing that something horrible was close by. The room was still dimly lighted by the dying-out fire. I suppose it was seeing the room empty made me at once know that whatever it was, it was still outside the door, for I rushed at once to lock it. The impression I had was so vivid that I can only describe it by speaking of ' It ' as objective. ' It ' was living, not human, not physically dangerous; I think it was malevolent, but the overpowering consciousness I had was horrible; I did not represent it to myself in any shape even, except as an indefinite blackness, like a cloudy pillar, I suppose. The presence seemed to stay outside the door five minutes (but probably it was a much shorter time), and then it simply was not there. Whilst it was there I knew that it was nearly 2 o'clock, and the church bells chimed 2, about ten minutes, as I suppose, after it ceased. Whilst it was there I was very angry with myself for being so absurd; and I remember wondering whether a young German, who was living there as a pupil, a protege of Chauncey Townsend's, could be mesmerising me. He had been telling us about mesmerism and clairvoyance the day before, but I had not the slightest faith in either, at any rate not in C H. T.'s accuracy of observation.

" I went home on the following Tuesday, and that night, in talkingover my visit with my two sisters, I told them what a strange delusion I had had.

" They were both astonished, and related a similar experience each had had on the same Saturday night, or rather Sunday morning, for both agreed their impression at the time had been it was about or near 2. They were sleeping in separate rooms, but next each other.

" R. was awoke in the same sudden manner, with the consciousness that something dreadful or harmful was near, not in her room, but a little way off. Her impression was the same in character, but less vivid than mine.

" E. was awoke suddenly, as I had been, with a sense of intense horror,

Some presence, fearful, evil and powerful, was standing close by her side; she was unable to move or cry out; it seemed to her also to be a spiritual presence. Her room was quite dark, so she could see nothing. Her impression was at the time so much more overpowering, and it was so much closer to her, that it seemed to me, on talking it over, to have been the cause of ours. Not one of us for a moment connected it with a ghost. That notion never occurred to us.

" R. and E. had told each other before my return, I believe on the next day. Afterwards we told the strange coincidence to my father and mother. She thought she had also been awoke by a cry, if I remember right, that night; but her recollection was too vague to be relied upon.

" Nothing ever came of it, except that the known date of the commencement of E.'s fatal illness was the Saturday following. But neither she, so far as I know, nor we ever thought of it in this connection. She was very much interested in it afterwards, but not in the slightest degree uneasy or alarmed at it, only eager to find out how the coincidence could be accounted for. I was 28 at the time; E. was just 25."

[R. remembers this incident vaguely, and can add nothing.]

§ 3. I now come to cases where the impression was of a more definite sort, representing actual people and actual events. We sometimes encounter persons who allege that they have repeatedly experienced some occult sort of perception of what was happening to friends or relatives at a distance. As a rule their statements have no force at all as evidence for telepathy; partly because we have nomeans of judging how far the idea of the distant event may have been suggested in some normal way; partly because the impressions have not been recorded at the time, and it is specially easy to suppose that failures may have been forgotten, while a lucky guess has been remembered. We have, however, one example of marked correspondence where two witnesses were concerned, each of whom professes to have had other similar experiences, and where the particular incident narrated is adequately confirmed. The witnesses are Mr. and Mrs. L. H. Saunders, of St. Helen's, near Ryde. As to former experiences, Mr. Saunders says: —

" I have mentally noted frequent ' vivid impressions ' during many years past, and in the majority of instances, when such impressions have appeared to be spontaneous and intuitive, the facts have actually corresponded."

Mrs. Saunders says: —

" I have had other similar strong impressions at distant intervals, and as far as I can recollect they have corresponded with the reality. I cannot say if I have had any such impressions which have not corresponded with the reality, but my opinion is that I have had none such."

Mr. Saunders' account of the particular incident is as follows: —

242 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

" San Claudio, Sandown, Isle of Wight.

"March 12th, 1883. (44) " On Thursday evening last (8th inst.) in the house of friends with whom we were staying at Tavistock, Devon, I suddenly asked my wife ' What she was thinking of? ' She replied, ' I cannot get M. R. and A. F. out of my head all day; they will run through all my thoughts.' I replied, ' What makes you think of them V She said, ' I don't know, but it seems just as if they were married,' to which I asked, ' Have you any reason to suppose they would be married to-day 1 ' She replied, ' Oh no! I am sure Mary would not be married during Lent.' I then allowed my mind to travel to the house where M. R. resided in London, when I became immediately conscious of receiving the strongest possible conviction that they were married that day, so that I quickly but firmly replied, 'They are married to-day, and we shall see the wedding announced in the Times on Saturday] at which there was a general titter. However, I was so convinced of the accuracy of our joint thoughts that I foolishly offered to wager the whole of my belongings on the truth of it, and until seeing the confirmation, I was anxious to risk anything in support of my belief. I may here mention that there were present, who could testify to the foregoing conversation, three independent witnesses, quite unknown to the persons referred to as M. R. and A. F. Neither of the latter had been seen nor communicated with by my wife for nearly six months, but I had seen them once about three months before. We knew they were to be married, but understood not until April or May. This knowledge and the question of Lent made my wife doubtful as to the fulfilment of her presentiment when I pressed her finally at noon on Saturday; soon after which, on reaching Exeter station, I procured a copy of the Times, and before opening it again declared my conviction absolutely unshaken. As you may have guessed, there was the notice of marriage, as having taken place on the 8th inst., all right. [We have verified this fact independently.] I may conclude by saying this notice is all we know of the wedding, no communication having passed between us and any member of the bride's or bridegroom's family, &c. Further, if you deem it of sufficient importance I will supply correct names and addresses of all parties interested, as I feel sure our Tavistock friends could not object to contributing to scientific truth by testifying to the facts."

The ladies who were present when Mr. and Mrs. Saunders had this impression corroborate as follows, in a letter written to Mr. Saunders from Harleigh House, Tavistock: —

" After a lengthy discussion you both emphatically concluded that she was married on that day. We were quite sceptical at the time, but on receipt of the Times the proofs were quite convincing.

"Lily Sampson. "Kathleen Sampson."

Here the state of the supposed agent or agents was presumably excitement of a happy nature. This, however, is rarely the case — which may perhaps be taken as indicating the superior vividness of pains over pleasures. Impressions of death, illness, or accident are

the almost unbroken rule. I will first quote cases where a distinct

idea of the particular event was produced, without any distinct

representation of the actual scene.

The following account is from Mrs. Herbert Davy, of 1, Burdon

Place, Newcastle-on-Tyne.

" December 20th, 1883.

(45) " A very old gentleman, living at Hurworth, a friend of my husband's and with whom I was but slightly acquainted, had been ill many months. My sister-in-law, who resides also at H., often mentioned him in her letters, saying he was better or worse as the case might be.

" Late last autumn, my husband and I were staying at the Tynedale Hydropathic Establishment. One evening I suddenly laid down the book I was reading, with this thought so strong upon me I could scarcely refrain from putting it into words: ' I believe that Mr. C. is at this moment dying.' So strangely was I imbued with this belief — there had been nothing whatever said to lead to it — that I asked my husband to note the time particularly, and to remember it for a reason I would rather not state just then. ' It is exactly 7 o'clock,' he said, and that being our dinner hour, we went downstairs to dine. The entire evening, however, I was haunted by the same strange feeling, and looked for a letter from my sister-in-law next morning. None came. But the following day there was one for her brother. In it she said: ' Poor old Mr. C. died last night at 7 o'clock. It was past post time, so I could not let you know before.' "

Mr. Davy corroborates as follows: —

" December 27th, 1883.

" I have a perfect recollection of the night in question, the 20th October, 1882, when my wife asked me to tell her the time. I told her the time, as she ' had a reason for knowing it,' she said. She afterwards told me that reason. " Herbert Davy."

The following is a copy of an obituary card, referring to the Mr. C. of the narrative: —

" In loving memory of John Colling, of Hurworth-on-Tees, who died October the 20th, 1882, aged 84 years."

Mrs. Davy has had one other experience, to be quoted later (case 395), which also corresponded with a death. With this exception, she states that the present case was quite unique in her experience.

In an interview with Professor Sidgwick, on April 15th, 1884, Mrs. Davy described the impression as strong and sudden, not emotional, but merely the sudden conviction that Mr. Colling was at that moment dying, though a strange feeling of sadness followed and remained during the evening. " She called it strange," says Professor Sidgwick, " meaning (as I understand) that her interest in Mr. C. was too slight to account for it; and she has no reason to suppose that he thought of her at the moment of death. In this case her recollection of the uniqueness and strength of her conviction is confirmed by her request to her husband to note the time; she was certain that she had never on any other occasion made a similar request in consequence of a similar impression. Her belief at the time

r 2

244 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

was not the result of any reasoning process leading her to have confidence in her impression." More than two years later, in conversation with the present writer, Mrs. Davy mentioned the surprise which she herself afterwards felt at having made the request to her husband.

The next case is from Miss A. S. Jarry, of Settle, Yorkshire.

"June 2nd, 1884.

(46) "I was making a hurried tour in the North of Italy, having left a sister at home, who for some time past had been subject to sudden attacks of illness. Owing to short halts, and some uncertainty as to these, I had not had any tidings from home for nearly a fortnight. Although much disappointed at this, I can confidently say that I had not dwelt upon the thought so as to induce any nervous anxiety. One evening, in Venice, at about half -past 10, the certain conviction was suddenly forced upon me that my sister was ill. The impression was so distinct that it would have been impossible, in any case, to doubt the reality of the fact, but having had two similar communications some years before in the case of my mother's illness, I knew quite well that my sister was ill. Under these circumstances, it would be difficult to measure time accurately; my impression was that I had been about two hours arranging in my own mind to leave Venice by the earliest morning train, when suddenly an assurance as strong as the first was conveyed that all cause for anxiety had passed away. On my return home I found that both impressions had been correct, as my sister's account subjoined will show. I also send the evidence of a friend to whom, on the following morning, I communicated the impressions of the night. "A. S. Jarry."

Miss Jarry's sister writes: —

" Having for some time been liable to sudden attacks in my head, the symptoms of which were great confusion of thought, an attack was never surprising. On the night of April 21st, 1882, as I was preparing for bed (being at the house of a friend), I all at once felt that I was not in my own room at home, and I could not account for that circumstance; for some moments, it might be minutes, I did not know where I was. At last I became clear on that point, but not as to the reason of my being there. I was so far clear as to know that at the time I was ill, and that I must hasten into bed as soon, but with as little movement, as possible. It was about 10.30 p.m. the attack came on; it continued to cause great and distressing confusion for about 2 hours. The time I was quite aware of, as a clock near, striking the quarters, marked the time accurately. After this, clearness of mind gradually returned, and I felt convinced I was recovering. I heard 2 a.m. strike before I fell asleep, but before that time I had felt convinced all danger was over. « ^ ^ Jarry."

In answer to inquiries, Miss A. S. Jarry says: —

"June 30th, 1884.

" My impression of my sister's illness occurred on the same night, and, as exactly as can be ascertained at that distance, at the same time as her illness occurred. By comparing notes as strictly as can be, the certainty of all danger being over coincided exactly with her consciousness that she was going to fall into a refreshing sleep. I told my impression to Miss Barnett on the following morning. The previous correct impression to

which I alluded in the account I sent you, referred to two communications of precisely the same nature in the cases of two distinct illnesses of my mother's.1 The impressions were equally clear and unmistakeable. I have never had any false impression."

Miss Julia Barnett confirms as follows: —

"81, Fitzwilliam Street, Huddersfield.

" Miss Barnett begs to say that she is able to bear testimony to the accuracy of the statements contained in Miss Jarry's letter, as she shared her room the night the strong impression of her sister's illness came over her, and, on awaking in the morning, received from her a vivid account of the distress she had endured whilst (as it appeared to her) her sister's attack lasted.

" Miss Barnett can also state that, on arriving at home, she learned from the elder Miss Jarry that the latter had really had an attack on the night, and at the hour, when the certainty of it was felt by her sister. "Julia Barnett."

Here the noteworthy points are, of course, the sudden resolution to start homewards next morning, and the distinct and unaccountable cessation of the anxiety. But in both these last cases the percipient was aware that the supposed agent was in a state where the event surmised was not wholly improbable, which reduces the force of the evidence. There are many cases of sudden accident where this objection does not apply.

The following account is from Mrs. Muir, of 42, Holland Park, W.

"April 7th, 1885.

(47) " In the year 1849 I was staying in Edinburgh. One Sunday as I was dressing my second boy (aged 5 years) for church at about 10.30 a.m., he looked up at me and said, ' Mother, Cousin Janie is dead.' I asked him which Cousin Janie he meant, and he answered, ' Cousin Janie at the Cape, she's dead.' I then tried to make him explain why he thought so, but he only kept repeating the statement. This 'Cousin Janie' was a girl of about 16 who had been staying in Edinburgh, and had gone out to the Cape with her parents some months before. She had been very fond of my boys, and had often played with them. I was rather struck by the way the child kept repeating what he had said, and wrote down the day and the hour, and told my mother and sisters. Some time afterwards the Cape mail brought the news that the girl had died on that very Sunday. She had been badly burnt the night before, and had lingered on till a little after midday. a Alice Muir "

In answer to questions, Mrs. Muir says: —

(1) "The child was not in the habit of saying odd things of this kind.

1 We have received full accovmts of these other cases; but as they occurred at a time when Miss Jarry was in distinct anxiety about her mother, they cannot be presented as evidence.

246 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

(2) " As to the kind of impression I could discover nothing.

(3) "I have no record in writing, but it is possible that my mother and sisters may remember the occurrence."

On November 25th, 1885, Miss M. A. Muir wrote:—

" All that we have gathered is that neither my grandmother nor my mother's two sisters have any distinct remembrance of the occurrence. The person who seemed to have been most impressed by it was a sister who died some years ago. I remember hearing her describe her feeling of wonder and awe, when the news came and they found the child's words were true."

Very similar is the following incident, of which the first account was sent to us by Mr. C. B. Curtis, of 9, East 54th Street, New York.

"November 20th, 1884.

(48) " The incident I have to relate occurred 18 years ago, the present month. My wife at the time was making a visit at the house of her sister, about 300 miles from this city, in the central part of the State of New York. Thirty miles distant a brother resided with his family, among them a son, David, about 12 years of age.

" One afternoon, my wife was sitting with her sister, while a child of the latter, a girl 3 years of age, was amusing itself with toys in another part of the room. Suddenly the child ceased its play and ran to my wife, exclaiming, ' Auntie, Davie's drowned.' Not being attended to at once, the child repeated the words ' Davie's drowned.' The aunt, thinking she had not heard correctly, asked the mother what the child said, when the words were again repeated. Nothing, however, was thought of the matter at the time, the mother simply saying the little one was probably only repeating what it had heard from some one.

" A few hours later a telegram was received, announcing that at just about the time these words were spoken, David, the child's cousin, with a brother, a year or two older, were drowned while skating 40 miles away.

" Charles B. Curtis."

[The Penn Tan Express for January 9th, 1867, describes the accident as having occurred on the afternoon of January 2nd. Mr. Curtis is, therefore, not correct in saying that it occurred in November.]

On February 6th, 1885, Mr. Curtis sent us a copy of the following statement from his sister-in-law, Mrs. Ogden.

" Kings Ferry, New York.

"On the afternoon of January 2nd, 1867, my little daughter, Augusta, aged 3 years, was playing with her dolly, sitting near her aunt, who was spending the day at my house in Genoa, New York. Her little cousins, Darius and David Adams, aged 11 and 9 years, to the younger of whom she was tenderly attached, were living in Penn Yan, New York, 25 miles away. The cousins had not met since the preceding summer or early autumn.

"While busy with her play, the child suddenly spoke, and said, ' Auntie, Davie is drowned! ' Her father who was present, and I, heard

her distinctly. I answered, ' Gussie, what did you say? ' She repeated the words, ' Davie is drowned! ' Her aunt, who was not familiar with the childish accent, said, ' Gussie, I do not understand you '; when the child repeated for the third time, ' Auntie, Davie is drowned! ' I chanced to look at the clock, and saw it was just 4.

" I immediately turned the conversation, as I did not wish such a painful thought fastened on the child's mind.

" I cannot recall that any allusion had been made to the boys that day; neither was I aware that my daughter even knew the meaning of the word drowned. She simply uttered the words without apparent knowledge of their import.

" That evening a telegram came from my brother, saying, ' My little boys, Darius and Davie, were drowned at 4 o'clock to-day while skating on Kenks Lake.' " E. M. O."

The impression of a very young child, corresponding to such an accident as this, has far more force than that of an adult would generally have; for seasons when relatives are supposed to be skating or boating are likely times for nervous apprehensions, which will naturally now and then be fulfilled.1 The following case is a strong one of its kind; since the coincidence appears to have been close to the hour, while the ground for nervousness, such as it was, extended over a good many days. The impression, moreover, seems to have been of a peculiarly definite and startling kind, being almost if not quite externalised as actual sound. The account is from the Rev. A. W. Arundel, who wrote from Colorado Springs, U.S.A., in 1884.

(49) "In the fall of 1875, I took a trip to Madison, Ohio, to Johnson's Island, Kelly's Island, and neighbouring points. There were nine of us in all, and our conveyance was a small sailing vessel. One Sunday morning we crossed from Cedar Point to Sandusky, in order to attend church. During the service a heavy storm came up, and when we went down to the landing, on our return, we found a pretty rough sea. We ventured, however, to try and get across, and in the end succeeded; but in the trial we

1 To a person who is constitutionally free from nervousness, and who recognises the impression received as having been a unique one, such an incident w ill naturally seem more striking than it does to others. This description applies to Mrs. Rachel Tuckett, of Southwood Lawn, Highgate (a member of the Society of Friends), who tells us that on August 10th, 1878, she was impressed, in a way unknown in her previous experience, with a sense that some member of a party who had gone out on a steam yacht had fallen overboard. This accident had actually happened at that very time to her daughter (now Mrs. Green), who remembers her mother's mentioning the impression to her when she returned home, dripping wet.

We have a similar case from Mr. J. N. Maskelyne, the celebrated conjurer. When a boy he was nearly drowned. He says: " The last thing I could remember was a vivid picture of my home. I saw my mother, and could describe minutely where she sat, and what she was doing." This, however, would clearly not be evidence for telepathy, unless what the mother was doing was something very unusual, which does not seem to have been the case. But on Mr. Maskelyne's return home, though he concealed from her what had happened, " she questioned me closely, and said she felt strangely anxious about me, and thought some accident had befallen me." The percipient's first-hand testimony cannot, however, be obtained. Nor have we any means of knowing the number of such maternal impressions about childish accidents that go unconfirmed.

248 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

had a very narrow escape. We had gone about halfway, when a very heavy gust of wind struck our little vessel, and turned her over on her side. The water rushed in, and it seemed almost impossible to keep her afloat. There we were clinging to the side that was still out of water, and expecting every moment to be swamped. By dint of almost superhuman effort, those who had sufficient presence of mind cut away all the sail we were carrying, and the boat righted just enough to allow the men to bale out some of the water. We managed, after one or two almost hopeless struggles, to get ashore. Now just at the moment of greatest danger, when escape seemed impossible, I thought of my wife and child a hundred miles away. I thought of them in a sort of agony, and felt that to leave them was impossible. If ever there was an unuttered cry for loved ones, it was at that moment. This was on the Sunday afternoon.

" I reached home on the following Saturday afternoon. Having to preach that Sunday, I held no conversation with my wife that morning, and it was not until Sunday after dinner that we had an opportunity for a chat. Just as I was about to commence an account of my trip, my wife said, ' By-the-way, I had a very peculiar experience last Sunday, just about this time. I was lying on the lounge, when all at once I had a startling impression that you wanted me, and even fancied I heard you call. I started up and listened, and went out on to the porch, and looked up and down the road, and acted altogether in a very agitated way.'

" This happened, as nearly as we could determine by comparing notes, at precisely the same hour that I was clinging to that side of the sinking boat, and facing what seemed to be the possibility of a watery grave. I do not believe it was coincidence. It must, I think, be explained in some other way. "Alfred W. Arundel,

"Pastor 1st U.E. Church."

[For Mrs. Arundel's testimony, see the " Additions and Corrections."]

The next case is well-known, having been published in the Life of Bishop Wilberforce, Vol. L, p. 397.

(50) " The Bishop was in his library at Cuddesdon, with three or four of his clergy, writing with him at the same table. The Bishop suddenly raised his hand to his head, and exclaimed, ' I am certain that something has happened to one of my sons.' It afterwards transpired that just at that time his eldest son's foot (who was at sea) was badly crushed by an accident on board his ship. The Bishop himself records the circumstance in a letter to Miss Noel, dated March 4th, 1874; he writes: 'It is curious that at the time of his accident I was so possessed with the depressing consciousness of some evil having befallen my son Herbert, that at last on the third day after, the 13th, I wrote down that I was quite unable to shake off the impression that something had happened to him, and noted this down for remembrance.' "

[If the Bishop was correct in stating that he connected the impression at the time with the particular son who was hurt, the exclamation put into his mouth in the earlier part of the account is perhaps not exactly what he uttered. We have not been able to learn who were present at the scene. Here, as in other cases, I shall be most grateful for further testimony, should this book fall into the hands of anyone able to supply it.]

In the next case, though it seems certain that the percipient's experience was mentioned at the moment, we unfortunately cannot obtain her own account, or her friend's confirmation, as Mr. Smith has changed his residence, and we have failed to trace him. He was personally known to Professor Barrett, to whom the account was sent.

" Leslie Lodge, Ealing, W.

"October 10th, 1876.

(51) "I had left my house, 10 miles from London, in the morning as usual, and in the course of the day was on my way to Victoria Street, Westminster, having reached Buckingham Palace, when in attempting to cross the road, recently made muddy and slippery by the water cart, I fell, and was nearly run over by a carriage coming in the opposite direction. The fall and the fright shook me considerably, but beyond that I was uninjured. On reaching home I found my wife waiting anxiously, and this is what she related to me: She was occupied wiping a cup in the kitchen, which she suddenly dropped, exclaiming, ' My God! he's hurt.' Mrs. S. who was near her heard the cry, and both agreed as to the details of time and so forth. I have often asked my wife why she cried out, but she is unable to explain the state of her feelings beyond saying, ' I don't know why; I felt some great danger was near you.' These are simple facts, but other things more puzzling have happened in connection with the singular intuitions of my wife. " T W Smith "

As Mr. Smith was cognisant of his wife's distress, and probably heard her tale before informing her of what had befallen him, this evidence is practically first-hand (see p. 148); but it is incomplete, since, for aught we can tell, Mrs. Smith may have had similar alarms that did not correspond with reality — which would diminish the improbability of an accidental success.

There is a similar defect in the next piece of evidence — this time owing to the fact that M. Ollivier will not answer our letters. He probably thinks his own account sufficient, and does not see the importance, for our purposes, of fuller information.

"Janvier 20, 1883.

(52) " Le 10 octobre, 1881, je fus appele pour service medical a la campagne a trois lieues de chez-moi. C'etait au milieu de la nuit, une nuit tres sombre. Je m'engageai dans un petit chemin creux, cloniine par des arbres venant former une voute au dessus de la route. La nuit etait si noire que je ne voyais pas a conduire mon cheval. Je laissai l'animal se diriger a son instinct. II etait environ 9 heures; le sentier dans lequel je me trouvais en le moment etait parseme de grosses pierres rondes et presentait une pente tres rapide. Le cheval allait au pas tres lentement. Tout a coup, les pieds de devant de l'animal flechissent et il tombe subitement, la bouche portant sur le sol. Je fus projete naturellement par-dessus sa tete, mon epaule porta a terre, et je me fracturai une clavicule.

250 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

" En le moment meme, ma femme, qui se deshabillait chez elle et se preparait a se mettre au lit, eut un pressentiment intime qu'il venait de m'arriver un accident; un tremblement nerveux la saisit, elle se mit a pleurer et appelle la bonne. ' Venez vite, j'ai peur; il est arrive quelque malheur; mon mari est mort ou blesse.' Jusqu'a mon arrivee elle retint la domestique pres d'elle, et ne cessa de pleurer. Elle voulait envoyer un homme a ma recherche, mais elle ne savait pas dans quel village j'etais alle. Je rentrai chez moi vers 1 heure du matin. J'appela la domestique pour m'eclairer et desseller mon cheval. ' Je suis blesse,' dis-je, ' je ne puis bouger l'epaule.'

" Le pressentiment de ma femme etait confirme.

" Voila, monsieur, les faits tels qu'ils se sont passes, et je suis tres heureux de pouvoir vous les envoyer dans toute leur verite.

"A. Ollivier,

" Medecin a Huelgoat, Finistere."

I have mentioned that occasionally, where the same percipient has had several such impressions, all of them are alleged to have corresponded with a real event — or (as we may say for brevity) to have been veridical; and this special susceptibility, though often imagined or exaggerated, is more likely to have been correctly observed, if the impressions have been connected with marked incidents, befalling one or more members of the witness's immediate circle. We found such a percipient in Mrs. Gates, of 44, Montpelier Road, Brighton, who has given us several instances of the singular sympathy existing between herself and her children, and manifesting itself by marked disquiet at moments when they are in danger or pain, although she may have no means of knowing it.

To our inquiries whether she had ever noticed any failures, she said: —

"I cannot recall any occasion of my experiencing ominous sensations with regard to certain of my children that have been entirely groundless; still, the results have been of less importance than my emotions presaged. For instance, on a certain evening, about three months ago, I was troubled about my son Ross. I received a letter, which he must have been writing while I was so nervous about him, and this is the postcript: —

" ' Excuse bad writing. I am feeling downright ill to-night, cold shivers, headache, and intense thirst. I think I'm in for a fever, &c, &c.'

"He had, however, no illness; the feverish symptoms passed away.'

Now, this, of course, is quite unavailable as evidence; but several such inconclusive incidents could hardly be held to weaken the force of more striking ones. Here, for instance, is a case where the coincident crisis was more sudden and serious.

"November 21st, 1882.

" My son Ross, a fine, tall young fellow, is musical attendant at an establishment for the mentally afflicted near Bath. Sitting with my

family, on Monday afternoon, I remarked to my son-in-law, Mr. Evelyn Dering, ' I'm so unhappy this afternoon about Ross, I can think of nothing but him. What a nuisance I am to people! ' This morning I received a letter from my son in which he says, ' I had a narrow escape on Monday afternoon; one of our patients, named Rummell, attacked me with a chair. After a close struggle, I managed to blow my whistle, and get help from the next apartment. I was by myself with a large number of men, the other attendants being out and on duty in other places; but thank goodness I did not get hurt,' &c, &c. This, then, was happening at the very time those singular feelings possessed me."

Mr. Evelyn Dering corroborates as follows: —

" 5, Hova Villas, West Brighton.

" I write to confirm what Mrs. H. S. Gates gave you particulars of. It was certainly previous to receiving the letter from her son Ross that she expressed to me the painful anxiety she was suffering on his account."

The next instance is more definite still, and may be numbered as an evidential case.

(53) "One August morning, in 1874 or 1875, at breakfast, the wellknown feeling stole over me. Waiting till all had left the table excepting my second daughter, I remarked to her, ' I am feeling so restless about one of my absent boys! It is; and I feel as if I was looking at blood! ' '

The son in question, in a letter received a few days later, inquired of Mrs. Gates as follows: " Write in your next if you had any presentiments

during last week. We were going to canal, fishing, and I got up at

the first sound of the bell, and taking my razor to shave, began to sharpen it on my hand, and being, I suppose, only half awake, failed to turn the razor, and cut a piece clean out of my left hand. An artery was cut in two places, and bled dreadfully."

The fact of Mrs. Gates's alarm and vision of blood has been confirmed to us independently by the daughter, Mrs. Darnley, to whom she described it at the moment. The letter, which we have seen, was dated August 16th, but without the year. The full description shows that the pain was exceedingly severe, and that the writer had fainted.

| 4. There is one interesting group of cases where the idea apparently impressed on the percipient has been simply that of the agent's approach. But here, again, great caution is necessary. Popular opinion is extremely apt to invest presentiments of this sort with a character to which they have no claim. Every day, probably, a large number of people have a more or less strong impression, for which they can assign no distinct reason, that some particular person is near them or is coming to see them. That with some people such an impression should prove correct often enough to be remarked on, is only what we should naturally expect; and it is probable that the impression, when apparently confirmed in this way, would look to memory more

252 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

definite and confident than it had really been. When it is always about the same person that the impression is felt, there is more prima facie ground for supposing that it may be telepathic. But still the circumstances may make it quite unavailable as evidence. For instance, Mr. Rowland Rowlands, of Bryncethin, Bridgend, tells us that when he was manager of the Pen-y-graig Collieries, a man who was acting under him as foreman (since dead) had constantly to come to his house on business in the middle of the night.

" I was invariably aware of his coming, in dream, before he actually appeared, and would leave my bed and watch for him at the window. He himself noticed this, and told the other men that he never came but he found me at the window watching for him."

But those who are in the habit of being waked at night for a special purpose know the way in which the expectation will often haunt their dreams; and in the absence of more definite assurance that the man was never expected when he did not come, and that he never came unexpected, accident is the reasonable explanation of the coincidences. Mrs. Wheeler, of 106, High Street, Oxford, tells us that in the summer of 1869, she had a similar impression " dozens of times " with respect to the coming of a friend from Iffley, and that it never played her false. But this friend was a constant visitor, and if she came thirty times in the course of a few months, and Mrs. Wheeler had the impression on six of these occasions (which is, perhaps, a fair scientific translation of " dozens "), accident again would easily account for the case. Mrs. Stella, of Chieri, Italy, tells us how, when she was ill years ago, a son, who was quartered six miles off, got away at night on five or six occasions, against rules and at considerable risk, to inquire about her at the lodge.

"Although unconscious and frequently delirious, I always knew when he came, and called him, showing signs of eagerness and restlessness. At first they treated it as pure raving on my part, but on inquiry they found that he had been there during the night."

This is a more plausible sample, since telepathic sensibility seems often heightened in illness; still, the necessary precision is wholly lacking. We have, however, stronger cases, of which a couple may be worth quoting here. The first is remarkable from the extreme improbability of the visit; the second from the number of times in succession that the impression proved correct.

Miss M. E. Pritchard, of Tan-y-coed, Bangor, says: —

"January 30th, 1884.

(54) " One night, at 1 2 o'clock, I felt a conviction that a friend of ours, Mr. Jephson, was coming to see us very shortly. I mentioned it to my sister, who merely said it was very improbable, as he must be on his way to Canada, as such was his intention when we had last seen him.

" It was greatly to her astonishment when he actually arrived next morning at 9 a.m. When questioned as to the time of his arrival, we found it corresponded to the time of my remark, and, still more curious, he was then thinking of coming straight down to see us, but decided to wait till morning. This was in March, 1880, as far as I can remember."

In reply to inquiries, Miss Pritchard adds: —

" February 7th, 1884.

" In reply to your question as to whether any other previous impressions had not turned out true, I think, as far as I can remember, any deep impression I have ever had as to anyone calling has invariably been true."

The following corroboration is from Miss Pritchard's sister: —

"Tan-y-coed, February 8th, 1884.

" I distinctly remember my sister telling me (at the time) of her impression that a friend was on his way to see us, which turned out to be the fact. — E. B. Pritchard."

Mr. Robert Castle, estate agent to many of the Oxford colleges, and well known to Mr. Podmore, writes as follows: —

"Oxford, 13th October, 1883.

(55) " In the years 1851 and 1852, when I was from 15 to 17 years of age, I was left in charge of a considerable extent of building and other estate work at Didcot, Berks, at which some 50 or 60 men were employed; and for so young a person a good deal of responsibility was put upon me, as I was only visited occasionally, about once a fortnight on an average, by one of the seniors responsible for the work.

" Occasionally this senior was my brother Joseph, about eight years older than myself, and who had always taken, even for a brother, a very great deal of interest in my welfare, and between whom and myself a very strong sympathy existed.

" I was very rarely apprised by letter of these visits, but almost invariably before my brother came (sometimes the day before, at other times at some previous hour on the same day) it would suddenly come into my mind as a quite clear and certain thing, how, I cannot say, that my brother was coming to see me, and would arrive about a certain hour, sometimes in the morning and sometimes in the afternoon, and I cannot remember a single occasion on which I had received one of these vivid impressions, on which he did not arrive as expected.

" I had, without thinking particularly about it, got to act upon the faith of these impressions as much as if I had received a letter; and the singularity of the occurrence was not brought very forcibly to my own mind until one day when the foreman asked me to give him instructions as to how a portion of the work should be carried out — when I answered

254 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

him quite naturally, ' Oh, leave it to-day, Joe will be here about 4 o'clock this afternoon, and I would rather wait and ask his advice about it.'

" The foreman, who had access to my office, and usually knew what letters I received, said, ' Perhaps it would be as well, but I didn't know that you had received a letter from Oxford.'

" I had to explain to him that I had not received a letter, and that it was merely by an impression 1 knew my brother was coming, and upon this I got a hearty laugh only for my credulity.

" As my brother turned up all right at the time named, the foreman would not be convinced that I had not been playing a trick upon him, and that I had not received a letter and put it away so that he might not know of it.

" The strangeness of the matter then induced me to arrange with the foreman always to let him know, as soon as I might have the opportunity, of the occurrence of these impressions, so that he might check them as well as myself; and he, although he gave up all attempts to explain the singularity of the thing, came afterwards to trust the certainty of their being right as much as I did myself.

" I told my brother of them, who was very much puzzled, and could not account for so strange an occurrence; but on comparing my statements as to the time when the impressions occurred to me, in a number of cases, he said that, so far as he could check the time, it would seem to have been always at or about the time when he first received his instructions, or knew of the arrangement having been made for him to come.

" As both the foreman and my brother have been dead for some years past, I have no means of comparing their recollections of these matters with my own.

" Perhaps I should add that my brother was living at Oxford at the time, 10 miles or so from Didcot; and that although I was visited from time to time by other gentlemen beside my brother, I cannot remember having had these previous impressions in any case except his.

" Robert Castle."

Here real pains seem to have been taken to test the phenomenon fairly; but the case is rather remote, and it is very unfortunate that no notes were taken at the time. Some further specimens will be found in the Supplement; and parallel cases where there was an actual sensory impression of the person about to arrive will be found in Chap. XIV., § 7.

§ 5. So far, the impressions that corresponded with real events have all been ideas of a more or less abstract kind; the fact was realised, but no image of the actual scene was called up in the percipient's mind. We now come to a series of more concrete impressions — still belonging, however, to the non-sensory family; for though they have evoked sensory images with more or less distinctness, they have not suggested

to the percipient any actual affection of the senses. And they continue to present this marked point of analogy to the results of experimental thought-transference, that the images or the scene evoked before the percipient's mind reflected (either wholly or in great part) the images or scene with which the agent's attention was actually occupied.

In alleged transferences of this distinct and detailed sort, it is, of course, essential to the evidence that the scene with which the percipient is inwardly impressed should not be one that might, in the ordinary course of things, have been pictured correctly, or with sufficient correctness for the description to seem applicable. The tendency to make the most of such correspondences must here be carefully borne in mind. For instance, a lady of our acquaintance communicated the following experience. An old friend of hers in Wales had been earnestly longing to receive the Communion on a particular Sunday, but was prevented by illness. On this Sunday, our informant, who was in London, and who was unaware of her friend's desire, and had never seen the church^

" Had a vision of her sitting quietly in her place in the little village church, waiting to receive the rite. The church was evidently much neglected, and the floor and the matting were thickly covered with dust. On inquiry, I was assured that such was the condition of the church. The phantasm appeared as really present at the spot to which my friend's desire had focussed her thoughts."

But here, it will be seen, the one detail that the narrator

(who was much given to visualising) would not have been quite

likely to imagine spontaneously, was the dusty condition of the church.

Even that is a doubtful exception; and it is moreover a point which

would be very likely to get unconsciously worked into the vision after

the actual state of the case was learnt. The following cases seem to be

free from these objections. The first shall be another specimen from

the remarkable series of impressions which have been experienced by

Mr. J. G. Keulemans (see pp. 126 and 235).

" November, 1882.

(56) " One morning, not long ago, while engaged with some very easy work, I saw in my mind's eye a little wicker basket, containing five eggs, two very clean, of a more than usually elongated oval and of a yellowish hue, one very round, plain white, but smudged all over with dirt; the remaining two bore no peculiar marks. I asked myself what that insignificant but sudden image could mean. I never think of similar objects. But that basket remained fixed in my mind, and occupied it for some moments. About two hours later I went into another room for lunch. I was at once

256 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

struck with the remarkable similarity between the eggs standing in the egg-cups on the breakfast table, and those two very long ones I had in my imagination previously seen. ' Why do you keep looking at those eggs so carefully V asked my wife; and it caused her great astonishment to learn from me how many eggs had been sent by her mother half an hour before. She then brought up the remaining three; there was the one with the dirt on it, and the basket, the same I had seen. On further inquiry, I found that the eggs had been kept together by my mother-in-law, that she had placed them in the basket and thought of sending them to me; and, to use her own words,' I did of course think of you at that moment.' She did this at 10 in the morning, which (as I know from my regular habits) must have been just the time of my impression. " j q. Keulemans."

Mrs. Keulemans tells us that she has almost forgotten the incident. " All I can say is that my husband looked at some eggs and made the remark that he had seen them before. I know he told me my mother had; sent them."

Here the very triviality of this incident, as well as the smallness and definiteness of the object visualised, makes the resemblance to cases of experimental thought-transference specially close.1

In the examples which follow, the idea of something less circumscribed than a single object, and more of the nature of a complete scene, seems to have been transmitted. I will begin with a case where the visualisation, if there was any, was extremely vague. Miss M. E. Pritchard, Tan-y-coed, Bangor, (the contributor of case 54 above,) writes:— "January 30th, 1884.

(57) " Two years ago I awoke, one night, with a curious sensation of being in a sick room, and of the presence of people who were anxiously watching the bedside of some person, who was dangerously ill. It was not till some time after that we heard that one of the sisters, then living in Florida, had been very ill of a fever, and was at the time of the incident in a most critical state. " Maggie E. Pritchard."

In reply to inquiries, Miss Pritchard adds: —

" I have never had any other experience of an impression of sickness or death.

" The impression of sickness was not the continuation of a dream, and hardly a distinct waking impression. I woke from a heavy sleep with a

1 Mr. Keulemans is a trained observer, and has made a careful study of his peculiar mental pictures, the subjects of which range from single objects, as in the above case, to complete scenes. He says: " They are always marked by a strange sensation. There is no attempt on my part to conjure them up — on the contrary, they come quite suddenly and unexpectedly, binding my thoughts so fixedly to the subject as to render all external influences imperceptible. Whenever I took the trouble to ascertain whether my impressions corresponded to real events, I found them invariably to do so, even in the most minute details." But his cases naturally differ in their evidential force. He tells us, for instance, that on New Year's Eve, 1881, he had a vivid picture of his family circle in Holland, but missed from the group his youngest sister, a child of 14, whose absence from home on such an occasion was most improbable. He wrote at once to ask if this sister was ill; but the answer was that, contrary to all precedent, she had been away from home. This may plainly have been an accidental coincidence.

great sense of oppression, which gradually seemed to assume a distinct impression. It lasted about half an hour, that is the actual impression, but I had a great feeling of uneasiness for several days. I have never had any hallucinations or dreams of death."

The following corroboration is from Miss Pritchard's sister: —

"February 8th, 1834.

" I recollect my sister telling me of her feeling of being in a sick room with people watching round a bedside. She did not mention it to me till the morning (it occurred during the night). It did not make much impression on me at the time — not till afterwards, when we heard of our sister's dangerous illness. » g jj Pritchard."

The next instance is somewhat more definite. It is from Mr. John Hopkins, of 23, King Street, Carmarthen.

"May 2nd, 1884.

(58) " One evening, in the early spring of last year (1883), as I was ">: retiring to bed, and whilst I was in the full enjoyment of good health and active senses — I distinctly saw my mother and my younger sister crying. I was here in Carmarthen, and they were away in Monmouthshire, 80 miles distant. They distinctly appeared to me to be giving way to grief, and I was at once positive that some domestic bereavement had taken place. I said to myself, 'I shall hear something of this in the morning.' * When the morning came, the first thing which was handed to me was a letter from my father in Monmouthshire, stating that they had, on the day of writing, had intelligence that my nephew had just died. The little boy was the son of my elder sister, living in North Devon. There was no doubt but that my mother and younger sister had both given way to grief on the day of my strange illusion, and it was in some mysterious manner communicated to my mind — together with a certain presentiment that I was on the eve of intelligence of a death in the family. I thought it most probable, though, that the imaginative faculty added — in a purely local manner — the idea of speedy intelligence to the communication which the mind received in some way from Monmouthshire.

" It was the only occurrence of the sort I have ever experienced.

" John Hopkins."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Hopkins writes, on May 15, 1884: — "I, at Carmarthen, had news on the following morning, as I thoroughly expected to, of a death — that of a nephew. I had no opportunity of mentioning the circumstance to anyone before the letter came. I am sorry to say, too, that I have destroyed the letter.

"As to the reality of the scene in my mind — speaking as correctly as I can at this distance of time from the occurrence (about a year ago) — I don't think the affair did produce a picture on my mind more vivid than might have been summoned there by closing the eyes and putting some strain upon the imagination. It certainly did not make the outward eye fancy it saw something, as the Bishop of Carlisle has suggested may be the case in some instances. But there was this peculiarity. The scene was impressed upon my mind without closing of the eyes or any other

258 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

inducement to absent-mindedness, and without the imagination from myself, so far as I can say, going out in that direction. It was also more firmly rivetted upon my mind than any passing, or what one may term accidental, impression would be. It was fixed there. I could not get rid of it, and I felt certain it meant something, which it certainly did.

" Although the locale was familiar to me, I don't think there had been more wanderings of memory to it than to other places I knew, and the state of grief which my relatives were in may be said to have been the only exceptional feature."

In conversation with Mr. Hopkins, I learnt that his father, mother, and younger sister were the only three relatives at home; and that his impression as to the grief of the two latter resulted in apprehension about his father — led him, that is, to a wrong guess. On the other hand I am sure, from his account, that the impression itself was of a very strong and peculiar kind.

The scene, however, sometimes makes a much more vivid impression than this. Here are a couple more cases from the rather considerable group where the event that befalls the agent is either death or a near approach to death by drowning. One example of this sort has already occurred (p. 246); and their number altogether is sufficient to suggest that this particular condition on the agent's part is, for some unknown reason, a specially favourable one for the generation of the telepathic impulse,

The following account is from Mrs. Paris (nee Griffiths), of

33, High Street, Lowestoft.

"April 30th, 1884.

(59) " We were a family of eight. Twenty years ago we were all at home but one, H. This was by no arrangement, but by what seemed a series of coincidences. H. was to join us on Wednesday, August 3rd, to leave his situation, and spend a few days at home before entering on his new one. On the Sunday previous to his coming we had been to church — I for the first time after a protracted illness. My sister was too much occupied with her infant niece, and had not been with us. We met my sister's friend, Miss J., a Russian lady, highly accomplished, and very intelligent. She walked home with us, and we insisted on her staying to our early dinner. My sister was delighted to have her to recount the precocious charms of our infantile treasure. It was a very pleasant morning,

" I have given these details rather minutely to show that there was nothing in the surrounding circumstances to cause depression. My sister was in good health, even better than usual. Well, we had gone through the first course, the second was being placed on the table, when Miss J. asked ' Where is Marianne 1 ' — my sister. My mother remarked that she had left the room some minutes since, and did not seem well. I immediately went out, and after looking all through the house and not finding her, went into the garden. There I found her sitting with her head resting on her hands, looking into what was called the ' quarry ' — an unused working,

then and for years before flooded. From where she sat she could see the water looking so still and black. She was quite unaware of my presence. I put my hands on her shoulders, and asked, ' What is the matter? ' She evidently neither felt nor heard me. I then went to her side and shall never forget the expression of her face. She looked perfectly paralysed with fear and horror. Her eyes seemed rivetted to that water, as if she was witnessing an awful scene, and could give no help. ' What is the matter, my dear 1 ' She was still insensible to my presence and touch. In a few seconds she gave such a cry of suppressed agony and said,' ' Oh, he's gone.' She then seemed to become aware of my presence and turned a look of agonised entreaty on me, and yet there was a little relief. Presently she said, 'Oh, J., do go away and leave me.' I begged her to come in, and then as if she could bear it no longer she said, ' Oh, J., he's gone. Oh, God, he's gone, my poor dear H.' I begged her not to restrain herself so terribly, but to tell me what was wrong. Very slowly, as if it cost her unspeakable suffering, she said, ' There is something terrible taking place.' I lightly answered, ' Of course, that is true all the year round. When is the moment but that some soul is meeting its Author?' She shivered, and after a good deal of persuasion she returned with me into the room — she evidently not wishing to excite or trouble me. I thought no more of it. Miss J. had gone with her to her room and had insisted on her lying down, and induced her to relieve herself by telling her, Miss J., all about it. She was so much impressed with what she had heard that she left my sister, promising to return after afternoon service.

"At about 3 o'clock that afternoon, we received the news of the death of our dear H. by drowning. He was on his way to church with the other members of the choir. Tempted by the delightful weather, and the inviting look of the water, several of them proposed a 'dip,' 'just one for the last time, H.' He complied, was first in, and had only gone into water up to his knees, when he called out that he was drowning. His companions were panic-stricken, and declared afterwards that they could not move. One at last recovered presence of mind sufficient to shout, and then to run the short distance to the church, and called out, ' G., H. is drowning, come, quick.' G. rushed out, undressing as he went, and throwing his clothes along the road, jumped in, and would undoubtedly have saved him, but H, clutched hold of him, and they both sank to rise no more, just a few minutes before 2 o'clock, and at the moment my sister called out, ' He's gone.'

" We found her in a deep sleep, looking years older, but quite prepared for the news, for when my brother roused her, she said, ' Have they come? They have not brought him home yet, have they 1 ' Miss J. came, seemingly quite prepared to hear of our sorrow. She told me afterwards that my sister had described the scene and the place, although she had certainly never been there. There was no precedent for his; bathing on Sunday, nothing to suggest to her mind the possibility of his doing so.

"Had T been the recipient of this 'warning,' 'presentiment,' 'revelation,' or whatever it may be called, weakness and consequent nervousness might have been urged as a predisposing cause, but it could not be urged in my sister's case. She was twenty-seven at the time, and we have always been pronounced 'sensible women with no nonsense about them.'"

s 2

260 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Paris writes, on May 10, 1884: — " My sister and Miss J. are both dead.... In answer to your next inquiry I have written to my father to ask the questions as to the distance, &c. He thinks ' Bo'ness,' where the accident took place, was about 13 or 14 miles from Blackhall (where the family were then residing). I think I said 3 o'clock the news reached us. He puts it a little later. As to the character of the water, it was the Firth of Forth; but I know nothing of the place. My father says there was a steep place, caused by water running in from an engine in connection with Mr. Wilson's works there, and that H. got into that deep pool. The time of afternoon service was from 2 till 3.30. Perhaps you know that in the Scotch churches there is only a short interval between the services. My brother was nearly 19. As to there being any special reason why my sister should have had the experience rather than myself, there are, to my mind, two. First, she was of a much more contemplative cast of mind. She was dreamy, I very active. But the second is, to my mind, the most powerful reason in this instance. You will have observed in all large families the members pair off, on the principle of like drawing to like, I suppose. She and H. paired off. « jANE pARIS.»

The Airdrie Advertiser for Saturday, August 6th, 1864, confirms the fact that the accident took place on the afternoon of the previous Sunday.

In conversation, Mrs. Paris told me of another apparently veridical impression which her sister mentioned to her at the time of its occurrence, relating to the death of a cousin who was drowned at sea.

The following case is given on the authority of the late Dr. Goodall Jones, of 6, Prince Edwin Street, Liverpool; and as he was not oniy made cognisant of the percipient's impression immediately after its occurrence, but also actually saw the percipient in the state of excitement which the impression had produced, and many hours before the coincident event had been heard of, his account may be taken as on a level with first-hand evidence, and perhaps even in this particular instance as preferable to first-hand evidence. Dr.

Jones wrote to us: —

" November 28th, 1883. (60) " Mrs. Jones, wife of William Jones, a Liverpool pilot, living at 46, Virgil Street [since removed to 15, St. George's Street, Everton], was confined on Saturday, February 27th, 1869. On my calling next day, Sunday, February 28th, at 3 p.m., her husband met me, saying he was just coming for me, his wife was delirious. He said that about half-anhour before, he was reading in her room, when she suddenly woke up from a sound sleep, saying that her brother, William Roulands (also a Liverpool pilot), was drowning in the river (Mersey). Her husband tried to soothe her by telling her that Roulands was on his station outside, and could not be in the river at the time. She, however, persisted that she had seen him drowning. News arrived in the evening that about the time named, 2.30 p.m., Roulands was drowned. There was a heavy gale outside; the pilot boat was unable to put a pilot on board an inward-bound ship, and

had to lead the way in. When in the river, opposite the rock lighthouse, another attempt was made, but the small boat upset, and Roulands and another pilot were drowned. When Mrs. Jones was informed of his death she calmed down, and made a good recovery."

The following two cases differ from most of the preceding, in that the condition of the agent was only slightly abnormal, and the probability that the impressions of the percipients were telepathic rests entirely on the exactitude of detail in the correspondence. The first is from Mr. and Mrs. Wilson, of Wale House, Winding Road,

Halifax.

"May, 1884.

(61) " About the year 1858, on a Sunday afternoon, as I sat with my wife by my fireside in Halifax (my brothers Tom and George having gone to Africa), in awaking from a nap, I saw my brothers in Portugal ]in a row in the street over a dog which I saw Tom take by the tail, and, with a swing round, pitch over a bridge into the water. I told my wife what I had seen, and the impression was so strong that I wrote the particulars, together with the date, with a pencil on the cupboard door. In about a month after, I had a letter from my brothers stating that they had arrived safely in Africa, and mentioning that on their way they called at Lisbon, and there got into a row through Tom's throwing a dog over a bridge into the water, and that they had narrowly escaped getting locked up about it. The information contained in the letter showed also that the time of the incident corresponded exactly to the time of my vision.

"John Ambler Wilson."

" The foregoing statement is quite true. — Sarah Ann Wilson."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Wilson says: —

"March 30th, 1885.

" I did not know that my brothers were likely to go near Lisbon. I do not remember either churches or ships. I was standing on a bridge over a river, and all along, so far as I saw, were woodyards with wooden workshops. With regard to the letter in which my brother spoke of the accident, I never keep letters."

The following is from a daughter of Mr. Wilson: —

" Heath Villas, Halifax.

"April 12th, 1885. "I remember, when a child, seeing my father start up, open the cupboard door, and write there something which he had just related to my mother that he had seen in a vision. And I remember that a letter came from my uncles, which was said to confirm the truth of the vision. I have often heard the particulars referred to by my father since.

" Annie S. Oakes."

The next case is much fuller of detail. The name of the narrator, Mrs. L., is only withheld from publication because her friends would

1 It is not meant that the idea of Portugal formed part of Mr. Wilson's impression.

262 TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS [chap.

object to its appearaace. She has had other similar experiences, but the following is the only one that she can accurately recall.

"January, 1885.

(62) " Some years ago, the writer, when recovering froru an illness, had a remarkable experience of ' second-sight.' It was thus: —

" A friend had been invited to dinner, whom the writer was most anxious to consult on a subject of grave anxiety. At 7 o'clock the servant came to ask, ' If dinner should be served or not, as the guest had not arrived.'

" The writer said at once, and without hesitation, ' No, put off the

dinner till 8 o'clock. Mr. A. will arrive at Station by 7.45 train;

send the carriage there to meet him.'

" The writer's husband, surprised at this announcement, said, ' Why did you not tell us this before, and when did Mr. A. let you know of the delay in his arrival 1 '

" The writer then explained that there had been no intimation from Mr. A., but that as she had been lying there, on the couch, and anxiously hoping to see her guest, she had had a distinct vision of him, at a certain place (mentioning the name of the town); that she had seen him going over a ' House to Let '; that, having missed the train and also the ferry, he had crossed the river in a small boat and scrambled up the steep bank, tripping in doing so, and that he had run across a ploughed field,

taking up the train at a side station, which would arrive at at a

quarter to 8 p.m.

" The writer gave all these particulars without any sort of mental effort, and felt surprised herself at the time that they should arise to her mind and tongue.

" Presently Mr. A. arrived full of apologies, and surprised beyond measure to find his friend's carriage awaiting him at the station. He then went on to explain that he had that morning quite suddenly taken it into

his head to leave town for, and finding it so fresh and healthy a

place, he had been tempted to look over some houses to let, hoping to be able to get one for a few weeks in the season; that he had lost time in doing this, and missed both train and ferry; that he had bribed a small boat to row him over; that in getting up the side bank, he fell, which delayed him again, but that he had just contrived to catch the train at a siding, by running breathless over a field; that he had intended to telegraph on arriving at the station, but, meeting the carriage there, he had felt bound to come on, to explain and apologise, in spite of delay, and ' morning dress,' &c, &c."

The following is a letter from Mr. A. to Mrs. L.: —

"February 16th, 1885.

" Dear Mrs. L., — Anent that Indian incident, your seeing me, and what I was doing at Barrackpore one evening, you yourself being in Calcutta at the time.

"It is now so long ago, 13 years, I think, that I cannot recall all the circumstances, but I do remember generally.

" I left home one morning without the intention of going from Calcutta during the day, but I did go from Calcutta to Barrackpore and spent some time in looking through the bungalows to let.

° I remember I crossed in a small boat — not by the ferry, and my impression is that I did not land at the usual jetty, but, instead, at the bank opposite the houses which I wished to see.

" I missed the train by which I would ordinarily have travelled, and consequently arrived in Calcutta considerably later than your usual dinnerhour.

