" The ' appearance ' was: There was a long room or gallery, and several of my friends there, including my brother. He was like ' Pepper's Grhost ' as regards substance, or rather want of substance. None of the other friends had a hazy appearance. They were in ordinary attire, as I should see them in a room. My brother was the only ' ghostly ' figure. He advanced gradually towards me, which made me feel a little nervous, and looked kindly at me. I advanced a little and said, 'James, why do you not speak % ' which utterance seemed to make him recede. He retired a little down the room, and gradually became more indistinct, and disappeared. None of the friends seemed to take any decided notice, and did not speak. I then woke. My forcing or insisting upon a reply seemed to be the cause of my waking, and I had to look round to gather myself together and ascertain that I was in bed when I so awoke.

" I do not think I can afford any corroboration. On the afternoon of the same day, I mentioned the matter to my aunt and her husband. She is now dead, and I do not think my uncle would recollect the account. I did not make much of it, as 1 was a disbeliever in ghosts. I dared not mention the occurrence to my mother, as she would have grieved all day about my brother if I had.

" I have never had any other similar instance. I have had relations die, but have been near them at the time of death, u -^ jj Brooks "

In later letters Mr. Brooks writes: —

" I have communicated with my uncle as I promised, but he does not recollect any of the circumstances.

" In reply to your further queries: —

1. "The dream did not make Sb particularly unpleasant impression; it was certainly unpleasant and unusual, and on waking I felt nervous, but the occurrence faded from my memory slowly, so far as the sharp impression was concerned, All day Sunday, however, I was wondering how my brother was, and when I saw my sister on the Monday I thought of the strange coincidence.

2. " My sister recollects when she informed me (of the ' time ' of the death) on the Monday that I remarked, ' How strange! that is the time I saw James at my bedside.'

416 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

3. " I had no reason to expect my brother's death at the time it did take place, except an expectation that one's worst fears might at any time be realised in a case where consumption had taken hold."

The following is from Mr. Brooks' sister, Mrs. Plaistowe: —

" Brooksby House, August 4th, 1885.

" In answer to your letter, I have to state that my brother William, on his arriving at Hastings in November, 1875, and being informed by me of the hour of my late brother James's death (viz., a quarter to 8 a.m.), said that it exactly coincided with the time that he, my brother William, saw James in a spirit or vision. [In conversation, Mrs. Plaistowe stated that Mr. Brooks came down on the Monday afternoon, and, on hearing the hour of his brother's death, came to the conclusion that the dream was exactly coincident.]

" I may remark that the death was unexpected by the members of the family, as James was away from home with me at Hastings; and although he had been suffering from consumption for three or four years, no intimation of his becoming worse had been received by any one in the family, so that my brother's statement to you is corroborated by me.

"M. Plaistowe."

On examination it turned out that Mr. Brooks' strong impression is that his dream occurred on a Sunday morning — in which case it preceded the death by some 24 hours, though of course falling at a time of critical illness. This view accords with his recollection of mentioning the dream to his uncle and aunt in the afternoon; but is opposed to his recollection (which Mrs. Plaistowe supports) of noticing at the time that the coincidence was exact. There being a doubt on the matter, the case must not be included in the special group of death-dreams dealt with in Vol. I., p. 307.

(449) The journal Psychische Studien (Leipzig) for March, 1874, contains a long and interesting account, written down for the late Professor Perty, of Berne, by the wife of the Russian Imperial Councillor, M. Alex. Aksakof, who says that he has frequently heard all the particulars.

Madame Aksakof was 19 at the time of the occurrence, and says that she "had no ideas about Spiritualism, and no tendency to enthusiasm or mysticism." The principal incidents were that Madame Aksakof's brother-in-law, Dr. A. F. Sengireef, from whom she had parted about half a year previously with some coldness, appeared to her, on the night of May 12th, 1855, in what seems to have been a very prolonged and feverish vision, in which she must have been partially awake, as in the course of it she heard the clock strike 3, and her child and its nurse move. The figure in the vision held his cold hand on her mouth, and repeatedly bade her kiss it; and then, after spreading out a roll of parchment beside her, recited a prayer in front of a crucifix, and finally disappeared, to the sound of sacred music and in a blaze of light. She noticed his "long black hair hanging down on his shoulders, and a large round beard such as I had never seen him wear. The day after this terrible event," she continues, "we received the news of the illness of my brother-in-law, Sengireef, and about a fortnight later, tidings of his death,

which took place in that night of the 12th-13th of May, about 5 o'clock in the morning. The following is noteworthy. When my sister-in-law, a few weeks after the death of her husband, came to live with us at Romanoff-Borissogiiebsk, she mentioned incidentally to a lady in my presence that her late husband had been buried with long hair hanging down to his shoulders, and with a large curious-looking beard which had grown during his illness."

M. Aksakof suggests that the parchment in the vision may have represented a " sin-remission chart " which it is a Russian custom to place in coffins.

I will now give a group of cases where death is symbolised in some more mundane and gloomy manner.

(450) From a lady whose name I am at liberty to mention, but not to print.

"March 5th, 1885.

" Two friends of ours, Mr. X. [name given in confidence] and Mr. Y., lived together till the marriage of Mr. X., and were, therefore, intimately associated in our minds.

" It happened that though Mrs. X. and I had exchanged cards we had not met, and I merely knew her by sight at the time when Mr. Y. also married. But as I had found Mrs. Y. at home, I was slightly acquainted with her.

" It was a few months after Mr. Y.'s marriage, on the night of May 14th, 1879, when my dream occurred. I was staying at Bristol at the time. It seemed to me that I was making my first call on Mrs. Y., and that she proceeded to show me her trousseau — a thing that would never have occurred to her in actual life, or to any but very intimate friends. A variety of dresses were displayed, and as I was looking at a black-net evening dress, with crimson trimmings, thinking it was very like one of my own, a sudden transformation took place. Mrs. Y. had changed into Mrs. X., and the dress was a widow's dress complete. I woke very strongly impressed with the dream, and mentioned it to my father the next morning. It haunted me till, on May 15th or 16th, I saw the Times announcement of Mr. X.'s death.

" Afterwards I learnt that, on the afternoon preceding my dream, Mr. X. had returned home, apparently in his usual good health, only rather tired, but within-half-an-hour had died of quite unsuspected heart disease.

" My father was ill at the time of my dream, and does not remember the circumstance. But my sister remembers it clearly, and testifies to the fact [by her initials]. " A E. R.

We find from the Times obituary of May 16, 1879, that the death took place on May 14.

In answer to inquiries, Miss R. says: —

" My sister was not with me, so I could not speak about it to her. I cannot find any of my letters written after May 14th, so do not know if I wrote



Vol. 11. 2 B

418 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

to her on the 15th or not. But she came to me (as my father was taken seriously ill about that date) and heard of the dream and of the death at the time [■i.e., she heard of the dream at the same time as she heard of the death]. I am quite certain that the dream was on the night of the day of death, May 14th."

Fortunately Miss R. has been able to obtain a copy of a letter (post mark, Bristol, May 17, 1879), which she wrote to a friend 3 days after her dream; in which the following words occur: —

" Poor Mr. X. died on Wednesday; I do not know of what.

" On Wednesday night [May 14th] (having heard nothing of them, Mr. and Mrs. X., for months, since I saw them looking well and happy together), I dreamed Mrs. X. was showing me her trousseau, and that she called special attention to an elaborately made shroud. She said that Scotch people always considered these the most necessary part of a trousseau. The one I saw was her husband's; hers changed to simply a black dress, as I looked at it. It was a very vivid dream and impressed me. Last night we saw the death in the Times, May 14th."

Referring to the account above quoted, Miss R. adds: — " I do not know why I should have forgotten about the shroud; this must have been one of the many dresses I saw before the change took place. My friend did not know the Y.'s, and did not know Mr. X., so that I left out any superfluous matter."

(451) From a niece of the late Rev. G. L. Foote, Rector of Christ's Church, Roxbury, Litchfield Co., Conn., U.S.A. <«18ft4.

" In 1848, the Rev. George L. Foote drove with his family to Windham, Greene Co., N.Y., to visit Mrs. Foote's mother. At this time, his youngest brother, Henry, afterwards Dr. H. H. Foote, of Newtown, Fairfield Co., Ct., was studying medicine in Durham, about 10 miles from Windham, and living with an aunt who resided there. Mr. Foote, with his family, arrived in Windham on Friday, and it was his intention to start on his return to Roxbury on Monday, deferring his visit to his brother and aunt until his return for his family a few weeks later. On Friday night he dreamed that he was taking the body of his brother home to Newtown in a metallic coffin, and that he had died of small-pox. He thought not enough of the dream the next day to speak of it, but on Saturday night he dreamed the same dream in every particular twice, ^ and it so impressed him that he was unable to keep it out of his mind.

" The clergyman of the place desired him to preach for him on Sunday, and he consented; but during the whole of the service and the sermon, the recollection of the dream continually intruded itself upon his thoughts. After service he told his brother-in-law, O. S. Tuttle, now of Minneapolis, Minn., that it was impressed upon his mind that something was wrong at Durham, and he wished he would harness his horse and drive him over there. He accordingly did so, and as they drove up in front of the house of his aunt, she came out upon the porch, and holding up her hands, exclaimed, ' George Foote! What has sent you here? I have just

1 As to the repetition, see Vol. i., pp. 357, 445, and c/. case 213, and cases 457 and 484 below.

persuaded Henry to let me write to ask you to come and take care of him; he is sick with small-pox.' Although she had had the disease and consequently was not afraid of it, she knew she could not alone take care of him, and that of all the relatives George was the only one who could with perfect safety attend him, as, while in Trinity College, Hartford, he had varioloid, in consequence of taking care of a room-mate who had the same disease. Mr. Tuttle returned to Windham, leaving Mr. Foote to nurse his brother through the sickness, which was so terrible that very few have ever been so low and have been raised again to health and strength.

" Mr. Foote used often to say that, if anyone had been nursing his brother who had no special interest in him, he had no doubt he would have been buried; for at three different times he himself thought the last breath had been drawn, but he persevered in the use of restoratives, and by the most assiduous care helped fan to a flame the apparently dying spark."

Mr. H. L. Foote, son of the Rev. George L. Foote in the narrative, writes: —

" The above account is given by the niece of the Rev. George L. Foote, and is substantially the same that I have heard spoken of by the members of my family."

The Rev. R. Whittingham, of Pikesville, Maryland, U.S.A., a Corresponding Member of the S.P.R., writes on September 9, 1884: —

" Several years ago I heard the Rev. Mr. G. L. Foote allude to this dream as having saved his brother's life, according to his belief. He was ignorant of any existence of small-pox [at this place] as it had not been prevalent; nor did it become epidemic, although there were three or four other cases at the time." [This last point is from a reply of the Rev. G, L. Foote himself to an inquiry which had been specially addressed to him on the subject.]

(452) From Miss Tracy, Mawson Road, St. Barnabas, Cambridge (now Mrs. William Tracy).,< December, 1885.

" My mother died on the 11th of February, 1882, about 8.30 p.m., on a Saturday, at Beccles, Suffolk. At that time, my youngest brother, who is blind, was (and is still) at the Blind College, Worcester. On the evening above mentioned, he went to bed as usual, and, I believe, to sleep. Rather later in the evening, one of the masters went into the room where my brother was, to see if all was right. When there, he heard one of the boys crying, and found it was my brother, who said his mother had come to him to say good-bye, as she was going away, &c. It was some time before he coulcl be quieted. He did not hear of his mother's death until the Monday following. He was at the time 9 years old.

" This is as nearly as possible what I was told nearly four years ago. If the master who heard him was found out, he would be able to give it more correctly. " E. M. Tracy."

In conversation with a friend of ours, who made inquiries on our behalf, Miss Tracy said that her mother had died very suddenly. She had complained of a slight headache about 5 o'clock, and died between 8 and 8.30. She was unconscious for some time before she died; therefore it would have been impossible to tell the exact moment of her death;

420 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

and in the consternation of the moment they did not look at the time. The boy said that he had seen his mother (it appears that he always speaks of seeing people, though quite blind); that he had tried to hold her, but that she had slipped away from him. He did not refer to the vision the next morning, nor has he ever alluded to it since; and they do not wish him to be reminded of the circumstance."

The Times obituary confirms the date given, and the fact that the death was sudden.

The following letter is from the Rev. S. G. Forster, Head-Master of the Blind College, Worcester., December 17th, 1885.

" The facts of the boy Tracy's dream, as elicited from himself, are that he dreamed on the Saturday night, during the night (and did not wake up till 7 a.m. next morning), that his mother was dead, and was being buried in part of our old place called The Swings. His mother, as I understand (but Miss Tracy could clear this up), died at 8 p.m. on Saturday night. Tracy would go to bed at 9 or 9.15, an hour or so after the occurrence. Owing to the surprise and trouble at home, we did not hear of it by letter till the Monday after. " S. Gl. Forstee."

In reply to inquiries, Mr. Forster writes on January 5, 1886: — " I do not remember who the particular person was to whom he told his dream, but I can distinctly state we all knew of it, and that the dream was described before the fact was known."

Mr. Forster subsequently ascertained that the dream was first related, not to a master, but to Mr. L. G. Sandford, one of his pupils, who has written to us as follows: —

" Icomb Rectory, Stow-on-the-Wold.

" February 12th, 1886. " I regret that, at this distance, I cannot give you dates. As far as my recollections go, Tracy told me of his dream on the morning following the night on which he had it. It was simply that his mother had died. Beyond this, it was mixed up with all the inconsistencies and absurdities common to dreams, and which I do not think it necessary to mention, unless you particularly wish to hear them. The news of his mother's death reached him on the day after he told me of his dream, her death having happened on the same clay — that is, the day on which he told me. I believe she died late in the afternoon, but of this I am not sure.

« L. G. Sandford." (453) From a lady who prefers that her name should not appear.

" My father was one of a family of 21 children, between many of whom naturally little or no communication was kept up in after years. Among them was an uncle living at Blackheath, whose wife I had never seen, and all I knew of her was that she was sufiering from a mortal disease, but of her prospects of a more or less prolonged life I had heard nothing, nor had my thoughts been in any way turned towards her — when one Sunday night, while I was on a visit to an aunt in Hampshire, I dreamt that I had a letter from my aunt at Blackheath, urgently pressing me to come and see her. Accordingly in my dream I set out, and travelling all night, arrived at Blackheath on Monday morning. I was

III.] DREAMS, 421

shown up to my aunt's room, who lamented to me that she had been so much estranged from our branch of the family, and after talking for a while, she looked at her watch and said, 'It is a quarter past 8, now you must go '; telling me to go down to the others. I had great difficulty in finding my way in an unknown house, and was a long time about it, but at last, when I saw by my watch that it was a quarter to 9, I reached the dining-room, and found there a number of my relations in mourning, who explained it by saying that my aunt was dead.

" In the morning I had a very vivid impression of my dream, which I told to my relations with whom I was staying; and I had so strong a feeling of the reality of the intimation, that I wrote privately to my dressmaker to countermand a pink silk dress that I had ordered. The next day, when a mourning letter arrived, I said, ' Now you will see that Aunt Eliza is dead.' And so it proved to be the case, my aunt having died at 8.30 on Monday morning, midway between the time at which she had told me in my dream that I must go, and the time I reached the dining-room where her relations told me that she was dead. It will be observed that my dream was several hours before the actual death."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death occurred on February 2, 1869, which was a Monday.

[The countermanding of the pink dress may certainly be taken as a sign that the dream produced an exceptional impression. The narrator is out of England, ancl we have been unable to obtain the corroboration of her relatives.]

(454) From Mr. Richard Mountjoy Gardiner (Solicitor), 8, Bath Terrace, Blyth, and 13, Groat Market, Newcastle-on-Tyne.

" February 6th, 1884.

"In 1875 I was in a sailing ship bound for Australia. Amongst the officers on board was one of my dearest friends; he was third mate, and had to keep watch from 8 to 12 on the forecastle. I invariably made it a rule to stay with him during his watch. One night, after his duty was over, instead of staying for an hour and smoking a pipe as was his general custom, he ' turned in.' I remained smoking and talking to the sailors. About 1.15 my friend came up to me in a very excited manner and said, ' I am sure that the Major ' (who was his father) ' is dead, as I dreamt I saw him put in his coffin.' I tried to calm him as much as I could, and told him it was nonsense. However, he would not go back to his cabin that night, so we remained on deck until morning. With the return of daylight he recovered his spirits, and felt inclined to laugh at his dream. In the evening he kept watch as usual, but again turned in a few minutes past 12. I remained on deck; about 1.10 he came rushing up and said he knew his father was dead as he had seen the coffin put into the hearse, and had followed it to Kensal Green Cemetery, and had seen it lowered into the grave. I took him into my cabin and made him sleep in my bunk. He was very quiet for a few days after, and could not bear to have the subject mentioned. However, he shortly recovered his usual good spirits. [On their arrival at Melbourne, a letter conveying the news of his father's death was found there.] After a few weeks he was able to calmly talk the matter over, and on our consulting our diaries, we found that his father had died on the same night as his first dream, and

422 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

was buried on the second. On our return to England, we ascertained (after calculating the difference of time) that his father died and was buried at the exact tiine that he dreamed it. The most curious thing was that he died at an hotel in Harley Street, Cavendish Square, London, of dropsy, and the proprietress — for the convenience of her visitors — requested that he might be buried the day after he died, which was done. There are others besides myself who can vouch that the whole of what I have written is true.

"Another curious fact about my friend's dream was that he dreamed his father was buried at Kensal Green, which was the fact, though his family vault is at Brompton Cemetery, but for some reason there was not time to go through the necessary formalities to have it opened.

" Richard Mountjoy Gardiner."

[We hope in time to receive an account of this incident from the dreamer himself, Mr. C, who is now on distant service. Inquiries have been made at every lodging-house and private hotel in Harley Street, but most of them have changed hands since 1875, and we could obtain no record of the death. There is probably some mistake as to the Kensal Green Cemetery; for we find that no Major G. was buried there in 1875. But apart from this, it is difiicult to see how the statement as to the second dream can possibly be correct. For since the letter had time to outstrip Mr. Gardiner's ship, that ship must have been quite 6 weeks' sail from Australia at the time of death, and probably not far east of long. 0°. To have exactly coincided, therefore, with the second dream, the funeral would have had to take place at midnight. It will be observed that the second dream, while difficult to account for by telepathy, would be a very natural sequel to the first. Cf. case 468 below.]

(455) From Mr. G. H. F. Prynne, 10, Torrington Square, W.C, who wrote the following letter to his mother, from Australia, in the autumn of 1874:—

"I was extremely sorry to hear [in a letter from his mother] of the sad death of poor Miss E. I remember her very well, and have her name in my diary for 1871 mentioned several times, and it is a most extraordinary thing that on the night of the 7th of April (or 8th), I am not quite certain which, I had an extraordinary dream.

" I dreamt I was walking along some road with dear Ted, and that I met two people, carrying a box. We both asked to see the contents. These gloomy personages stood still, put the box on the road, and then ran off". I came and opened the box, which I had no sooner done than a dead hand of a corpse fell on to mine. I can well remember the feeling of horror that came over me, and I ran back, saying I would not examine the box further. The face seemed to me like that of Edith L. Eddie said he would see who it was, and on returning I found it to be the corpse of some well-known person, which in the latter part of the dream I recognised to be that of Miss E. i

" The dream seemed so much out of the ordinary that I told it fully to H. and two other friends at breakfast, and also to the W.'s two days afterwards."

1 As regards the particular form of delayed recognition, this case resembles No. 249 and once more exemplifies the parallelism of dreams and waking hallucinations.

Colonel B., father of the Miss E. referred to, writes that Mr. Prynne had met his daughter a few times, in 1871, when she was about 14|- years old; and that she died on April 8th, 1874. From the Times obituary, we find that she died in the morning of that day. Thus whether the dream in Australia was on the night of the 7th or of the 8th, it may very well have been within 12 hours of the death.

[Mr. Prynne has tried to procure corroborative testimony to his immediate mention of the dream; but his friends have moved, and he has not yet succeeded. He is certain that his dream was on one of the nights mentioned, though he does not now recall what enabled him to fix it so accurately some months afterwards. It will be observed that the doubt which he felt between two nights is a strong indication that he had some independent means of narrowing down the time to that extent. He believes that he mentioned his dream in a letter to his mother at the time, before hearing of the death; but no such letter can now be found.]

(456) From Mrs. Mogridge, of 137, Cowbridge Road, Canton, Cardiff.

"January 3rd, 1884.

" My little girl, aged 7, came into my room on the morning of the 25th of December, 1882. She said, ' Oh, mamma, I have had such a dream: I saw baby Harris in a little box on the table downstairs, and her hands were crossed; and she looked so white.' [Mr. Mogridge tells us that the Harrises were acquaintances in a distant part of the town.] I am certain she had not seen the child, nor had she heard us speak of it or the family, and I do not think she had seen it more than once during the four months of its life.

" On the evening of the 25th or 26th, my daughter, aged 17, told me of the death of the child, which took place on the night of the 24th. And a day or two after, the mother took my little girl into her house, and showed her the child in the cofiin on the table (where it had been placed for the convenience of the inquest), exactly as she had described it to me in her dream. c.j^ j^ Mogeidge."

The death was caused suddenly by an accident; and the Register of Deaths confirms the date given.

[We should not be disposed to lay stress on the correspondence here, beyond the simple coincidence of the death. The details were not written down, and may have crept in afterwards; and in any case the cofiin, as we have found, is a very common dream-symbol. The case is one of those where personal knowledge of the witness has been a specially important element in our judgment.]

(457) From a lady whose friends would prefer that her name should not appear. u 1334.

"I had a dear friend at Ilfracombe — the wife of the incumbent, the Rev. W. M. We did not correspond much, and I had not seen her for some months. I went down to Plymouth, and the first night, as the rooms we took were not quite ready for us, my friend. Miss P., slept with me. I awoke frightened and sad, having dreamt thus: —

" I sat in a wide hall in some unknown house. Mrs. M. entered and walked slowly towards me dressed in white, with a long dark cloak over

424 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

her snowy robes. As she neared me she uncovered her arm, and I sawthat she was carrying a little dead baby. As I looked at her, I felt that she was mad, and yet dead, too! Mr. M. followed her, and signed to me that her mind was gone. It was her pallor that made me feel she was a spirit; the expression in her eyes told me she was insane, or delirious. Mrs. M., after showing me the dead child, turned silently away and went up a staircase on to the roof, which was a flat roof. Mr. M. and I followed her. She dug with her hands at this roof, and earth seemed to come up. She buried the baby in this earth, then lying down upon this strange grave she sank through it, and disappeared from sight. I awoke, and woke Miss P., and related my dream. She soothed my alarm, and, being very tired, I fell asleep. The dream was repeated, and before morning I had dreamt it three times, ^ and knew, instinctively, it was in some way true.

" Throughout the day I was restless and unhappy. The next morning a deeply-edged letter came, and as I saw the black-rimmed envelope I cried out, ' Oh, my dream, my dream! Mrs. M. is dead! ' And so it was. She had been prematurely confined of a dead child; had delirium and fever, and died unconscious, or rather, insane, on the night of my dream."

We find from a notice in the Western Times that the death occurred on Nov. 13, 1862.

In answer to inquiries, the narrator says: —

" My friend Miss P., who was with me that night, I have lost sight of for years. Yes, I often dream, but I have not realised a death in an illustrated form except that once."

[One rather distrusts this amount of detail, remembered after a lapse of a good many years; but some kind of death-imagery was probably a feature in the dream.]

(458) Prom Mrs. Williams, 1, Wilmington Place, Clerkenwell, W.C. A shorter account was given in writing to our friend, the Rev. A. T. Fryer, in February, 1883, immediately after the receipt of news of the

^®^*^- "January 1st, 1886.

"I had an uncle, father's brother, living in Birmingham. On the night of the 21st December, 1882, I dreamt that I saw him standing by my bedside. I saw him quite plainly, and he said, ' If you wish to see me, you must come at once.' Afterwards I saw him in a cart, laid in a coffin. I woke my husband and told him about it — said that I felt sure something had happened. He said it was only fancy, and told me to go to sleep. In the morning we talked about it again. The 22nd December was the anniversary of our wedding, and that fixed the date of the dream in our minds. We heard nothing about the death until February 9th, 1883, when, in answer to a letter from my husband, the enclosed card and letter came from my aunt in Birmingham. The impression on my mind was certainly that something had happened to my uncle. The dream must have been within a few hours, as he died at 5 a.m. 22nd December, and it was in the night of the 21st-22nd that I had the dream and woke my husband."

1 See p. 418, note; also p. 229, note, as to the number three.

The following is an extract, copied by the present writer, from the letter written to Mrs. Williams by her aunt: —

"February 8th, 1883.

" I have lost my poor brother. He went to bed on the 20th December; on the 2 1 st I found him, at 9 o'clock in the morning, in a fit. I sent [for] a doctor. He never spoke, and died the next morning at 5 o'clock — on the 22nd. Poor fellow! Now I am left without anyone."

The enclosed mourning-card contains these words: — " In afiectionate remembrance of David Gillan, who departed this life December 22nd, 1882, aged 64 years. Interred at Witton Cemetery, December 28th."

In conversation, Mrs. Williams told me that she did not remember having dreamt of death, or of her uncle, on any other occasion. Her husband stated to me that his wife woke him immediately after her dream, and that she told him the details of it next morning, and that they noted the date as being the anniversary of their wedding. I asked to see their marriage-certificate, and found that it was for Dec. 22, 1872. Mrs. Williams was not aware of anything being amiss with her uncle, nor had she for a long time previously heard of his being ill in any way at all. His death was sudden.

The next case is, of all the dreams included in this book, the one least easy to harmonise with the view of telepathy that the great bulk of our evidence supports, owing to the absence of any perceptible link between agent and percipient. If we could suppose that we had lighted on the one death-dream (of those occurring during the last 12 years, within our circle of inquiry) which by the doctrine of chances might probably have coincided with reality hy accident (Vol. I., p. 306), this would be the one to select. But though the ty^e is abnormal we should not be justified in suppressing examples of it on that account; and the " borderland " cases, Nos. 490 and 506, of the next chapter, might be adduced as somewhat similar.^

(459) From Miss E. F. How, Stainforth House, Upper Clapton, E.

"April, 1884.

" Date of dream, night between June 20th and 21st, 1883. Age 28. Health perfect. [The form of these sentences is due to the fact that the information was filled in on a census-form (Yol. I., p. 304).] The dream was so vivid that I described the details to my mother; it was of a child being buried alive by two men servants. I asked its name, and was told it was a Fitzgerald, infant son of the Knight of Kerry. The impression was most distressing, and remained all day, and returned in a less degree whenever anything recalled the dream. At the

1 Mrs. Alfred Wedgwood, of 20, Shornclifle Road, Folkestone, dreamt that she heard of the deaths of Mr. Hayward and M. Rouher the night before she saw the announcement of them. The names were in the papers of the day before she had her dream, but she is confident that she had not seen them. If telepathic impressions, caught from an idea which is abroad, are possible (p. 365), this might be a specimen. On the other hand, it may only illustrate the indefinite scope for accident that dreams afford.

426 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

time I knew absolutely nothing about the Knight of Kerry: I did not even know whether he was a married man.

" On June 25th, I saw in the paper an announcement of the death of the only child of the Knight of Kerry, on June 21st. [We have verified the date in the Times and in Burke's Peerage.^ This at once recalled the dream, which I had entirely forgotten.

" I accounted for this coincidence by imagining my eye had unconsciously fallen upon some paragraph mentioning the illness of the child, but I am told there never was any announcement of the kind.

" All the details of the dream were wrong. " E. F. How."

In answer to inquiries, Miss How adds: —

" The whole of the dream, with many details now faded from my memory, was told to my mother on the morning of June 21st. She laughed at the dream, but on June 26th she greeted me with: ' I have seen in a paper that the Knight of Kerry did lose a child the night^ of your dream; you must have seen that it was ill.' I had then also seen the announcement in the paper.

" This winter I met some friends of the present Knight of Kerry, and from them heard that there had been no notice in the paper excepting of the birth of the child."

Asked whether she had previously known that the family name of the Knight of Kerry was Fitzgerald, Miss How replies that she had, having once met a member of the family abroad.

The following is from Mrs. How: —

" Stainforth House, Upper Clapton, London, E.

"April 25th, 1884.

"On the morning of June 21st, 1883, my daughter related to me, in detail, a vivid dream she had the night before.

" I remember perfectly that when she came down in the morning she said she dreamt that the infant son of the Knight of Kerry, a little Fitzgerald, was being buried alive; that she struggled to save it, but felt no surprise at the people trying to bury it alive. A few days afterwards I saw the death of a young son of the Knight of Kerry in the paper, the date being June 21st. " Frances A. How."

[The accuracy of Mrs. How's recollection is shown by her further mention of some details of the dream, which Miss How had previously communicated to us, but had not in any way recalled to her mother's memory.]

In connection with death-imagery of a gloomy kind, I may remind the reader of the passage in Guerzoni's Garibaldi (Florence, 1882, Vol. I., pp. 398-9), in which Garibaldi describes his dream of a funeral procession, of a corpse with his mother's face laid down beside him, and of his impression of an ice-cold hand, remaining even after he was awake. " On that day," he continues, " and in that hour, I lost my parent, the best of mothers." The dream occurred on March 19,

1 We cannot discover that it was mentioned in the papers that the death took place in the night.

in.] DREAMS. 427

1852, when Garibaldi was on a voyage to China; and there is nothing to suggest that he knew his mother's death to be impending.

I will conclude the list of symbolic dreams with the example mentioned in Yol. I., p. 368, where a particular dream, not in itself suggestive of death, has on a noticeable number of occasions more or less nearly coincided with deaths affecting the dreamer. I need not repeat the remarks already made as to the total inconclusiveness of most alleged specimens of this class, and the proneness of mankind in general to remark and record the few hits, and not the thousands of misses.

(460) From Mrs. Burton, Longner Hall, Shrewsbury,

" February, 1883.

" I am a healthy woman, in a responsible position, neither dyspeptic, hysterical, nor morbid, and my mind is chiefly occupied with matters of business. I am 41 years of age, and a grandmother.

" Ever since I was 21, the following dream has occurred with certain varieties: — In my sleep I see suddenly, by a brilliant light, a naked infant, either lying in or falling into a bath. Sometimes I see a person standing by the bath whom I recognise, which gives me a clue on waking, by which I know in what family the death is likely to take place; at other times I only see the infant and the bath; then I know I shall hear of a death within 12 hours, and I suffer anxious suspense until I hear the news.

" I should weary you if I related all the strange fulfilments of this dream, but am willing to send you a few instances with dates, &c., if you wish it.

(1) " On the night of the 29th of January, 1873, I dreamt that I saw a baby in a bath. When the postbag came in the morning, I said to my husband, ' Please don't open it yet, I am sure there will be news of a death in it, but I can't tell whose; none of our friends are ill, and the dream was so vague.' He laughed, and proceeded to open the bag; it contained a letter from the Rev. S. A., announcing the death of his only boy. [Here the dreamer had no knowledge of the illness of the person who died.]

(2) " On the night of April 24th, 1877, I dreamt that I saw an infant in a bath. On the 25th, I heard that my cousin, B. C, had died on the 24th. [Here the dreamer had no knowledge of the illness of the person who died.]

(3) " On June 11th, 1877, while asleep in a chair, I dreamt that I saw my husband's aunt, Mrs. B., looking at an infant in a bath; she was dressed in white, with a strong light round her. She died in the evening of that day. [Here the dreamer knew of the illness of the person who died.]

(4) " Before my husband's death on November 17th, 1880, I had my warning dream. I seemed to stand in deep mourning watching an infant in a bath. [Here the dream preceded the death by more than a day. The husband had been long ill, but his immediate death was not expected.]

" C. S. Burton."

We find the above dates of death in cases 1, 3, and 4, confirmed by the Times obituary, and that in case 2 by the Register of Deaths.

428 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

[Mrs. B. has kept a diary of her dreams, which shows that she has had several dreams of accidents which have never taken place. She thought that she had never had the dream of a baby in a bath without receiving news — usually within 1 2 hours or thereabouts, and never later than 2 days after — of the death of a relative, friend, or at least acquaintance or servant; but on more minute inquiry, it proved that in one case there had been an interval of as many as 11 days. She promised to keep in future a more carefully written record; but writing in March, 1886, she says that she now seldom dreams, and seems to be losing her sensitiveness. She has no idea why the telepathic impressions of death (if such they could be considered) should associate themselves in her mind with these particular images.]

§ 5. I now come to the large class of " clairvoyant " dreams — this word being used in the restricted sense explained in Vol. I., pp. 368-9. The perception still varies greatly both in clearness and amount, and often foreign elements are introduced; so that this class differs rather in degree than in kind from the last. The cases are so numerous that I must present some of them in an abridged form; but I shall suppress no item which could be regarded as a weak point in the evidence.

I will first give a case which, though second-hand, rests on the authority of two persons to whom the dream was narrated before the reality was known. The whole labour bestowed on the present work would be amply repaid if by its means half-a-dozen such incidents, which would otherwise have been left to float, like this one, on the uncertain tide of human memory, obtained immediately and for ever the security of a written record.

(461) From the Bishop of Bedford, who, in January, 1883, corrected for us the account that appeared in the Spectator for Sept. 9, 1882, after comparing it with the written record. The account was written down, he says, "not less than from 20 to 25 years after the occurrence, probably a few years later still. I asked my father and aunt to verify and correct my account, which they did."

" Stainforth House, Upper Clapton, E.

" January, 1883. " When my father, Mr. W. Wybergh How, was a young man, he left his home, which was at Isell, near Cockermouth, to settle in Shrewsbury as a solicitor. In the year 1819 he revisited Cumberland, staying of course with his father, the Vicar of Isell. He and his sister. Miss Christian How, who was to return with him to Shrewsbury, had arranged to leave on a certain Monday, and to spend that night with a former governess, who was married to a Mr. Forrest, and lived at Everton. On the Sunday, after church, Mr. and Mrs. Wybergh, my father's uncle and aunt, who lived at Isell Hall, told them they had invited a party of young people for the Monday night, and would not hear of their leaving that day. They were persuaded to stay, and wrote to Mrs. Forrest, although fearing

there was no post which would reach her sooner than they themselves would on Tuesday night. The party was a very merry one, a large number of their old friends being there. The only fact I need name at present is that a Miss Harriet Fenton, a young lady who had lately lost her brother and was in deep mourning, sat most of the evening alone upon a sofa, not joining in the amusements of the rest.

" My father and his sister reached Everton by the coach on Tuesday night; and when they explained the reason of their delay Mrs. Forrest told them, when the coach had come in the night before without them, she had gone to bed, and had dreamed it was a party for which they had stayed, and that she had dreamt of being there. A little later, while they were at supper, she said she must tell them her dream, as it was so wonderfully vivid; and first of all, she told them who were there. As she had been governess at the vicarage, and knew all the neighbours, this excited little surprise. She then, however, went on to describe the most minute circumstances of the evening, saying she had seen some of them dressed up in fancy dresses and dancing about in them; that they had got a dirty round table, which she had never seen before, into the drawing-room, and were eating something out of a bowl upon it (they had a syllabub, and someone saying it must be eaten from a round table, one was sent for from the kitchen); that old Mr. and Mrs. Wybergh and old Mr. and Mrs. How, who were playing at Boston in the inner drawing-room, came in and asked what they were doing, finding fault with them for having brought in the dirty kitchen table; that the old people were not allowed to come to the round table, but were told they might taste what was in the bowl; with other minute details. Mrs. Forrest had told her husband the dream early in the morning in bed, and had afterwards told her children, one of whom corrected her in her narrative, saying, ' Oh, mamma, you told us so-and-so this morning,' the correction being the true version of what had occurred. My father and his sister were very greatly startled and astounded as Mrs. Forrest went on, but were still more so when she ended by saying, ' And I was sitting all the evening on the sofa, by the side of a young widow lady! ' This was the only mistake; but years afterwards I met this lady (then Miss Fenton), and we spoke of this wonderful dream; and she told me it was not so very far from being all true, for she was at the time engaged to be married, and did marry very shortly, and her husband died on their way out to India directly afterwards.

" I have only to add that the letter written to Mrs. Forrest arrived the morning after, i.e., on the "Wednesday. The narrative was (with the one singular exception mentioned) a perfectly accurate account of all that took place to the minutest details, and the dream appears to have been dreamt at Everton at the very time of the occurrence of the events at Isell. My father and my aunt, before their death, verified and vouched for the above

^*<^^y- " W. Walsham Bedfoed,

" Bishop Suffragan for East London."

(462) From Mr. J. Ridley, 19, Belsize Park, N.W., who tells us that he has had no other impressive dream of death.

" March 5th, 1885.

" Whilst staying at Mrs. M.'s in June, 1867, on the night either of June 3rd or 4th, I had a vivid dream that I saw an old friend [name

430 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

given in confidence] lying dead with a wound in his head — noting the colour of his hair and other particulars. I told Mrs. M. of this dream, and later in the day we heard that the friend I had seen in my dream had actually been killed by a blow on the head, in a fall from a conveyance, on the night before the dream. The wound was on the opposite side of the head from that seen in my dream.

" The scene of the accident was some miles from the house where I was staying. " J. R."

Mrs. Mawson, of Ashfield, G-ateshead, with whom Mr. Ridley was staying at the time of the dream, was asked by Mr. Ridley's daughter, at our request, if she remembered anything of the dream. She replied on March 3rd, 1885:—

" I remember very distinctly Mr. Ridley telling me his dream, and how strongly it impressed me at the time. I remember that your papa had the dream, and spoke of it before the news of J. M.'s death reached him, but I cannot call to mind exactly what was the cause of death — in the dream, I mean; but I think your papa thought he saw him injured by a fall from his horse or conveyance. I think he told me that he saw him lying on the ground injured, and his wife mourning and weeping over him, but I cannot be certain of the exact particulars, only I know that the dream was singularly like what in reality took place on the very same night. ' " E. M."

Miss C, a resident in the village where J. M. lived, was asked if she could discover the exact date of J. M.'s death. She replied: —

" West Boldon.

" March 4th, 1885.

" To-day I saw E. M. (now Mrs. H., the daughter of J. M.). Her father died on June 4th, 1867. On the morning of that day, as Mrs. M. M. was on her way to Hylton, she found him lying insensible at a turn of the road. He was in the habit of driving furiously. It was supposed that in the dark he had not managed the corner, and so was thrown out. He never recovered consciousness. " A. C."

[If Mr. Ridley's dream was on the night of the 3rd, it must have been within a few hours of the accident; if it was on the night of the 4th, it may still have been within 12 hours of the death.]

(463) From Miss Augusta Gould (now Mrs. Temple), the narrator of case 441, above. "December 19th, 1883.

" When a child, I dreamed of places I was not likely to see, and when by chance I did see them they were exactly as my dream foretold. ^

" A curious dream happened one night, I believe in the spring of 1880. I saw the bedroom of an old lady friend, with blood ^ all about the floor and the window broken. I told my brother I was afraid there might be murder for the sake of money. He laughed at my fears, but the next Sunday, on his return from taking service at Lord H.'s private chapel,

1 This experience has pretty often been described; but it would be impossible to attach any importance to it, unless the dream had been written down or described in detail before the reality was seen.

2 Compare cases 135, 221, 432, 466, 467.

near the home of the lady, he informed me of a great alarm her friends had had. They found her insensible in bed, one day, covered with blood, as was the floor of the room, and the window broken. Afterwards, she related that she had awaked in the night, finding her face and chest streamed over with blood, and a suffocation oppressing her; had got out and tried to open the window, but being faint and unsteady had run her hand through the small panes, then turned and fainted before she could get into bed again, and after doing so knew nothing more. I may add that the doctor said this serious attack had saved her from apoplexy."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Gould wrote: —

"January 3rd, 1884.

" I cannot remember if the accident to the old lady was on the same night as my dream of it; but certainly the dream was two or three nights before I heard of the accident.

" My brother, to whom I mentioned the dream beforehand [■i.e., before the news of the event], died in 1881."

(464) From Miss Barr, Apsley Town, East Grinstead, the narrator of case 111. "April, 1884.

"When I was in Singhur, in 186-, I had a very strange dream. I saw, as in a small disc of lighti — something like a magic-lantern picture, only in small — the following scene: — The inside of a small hill tent, lighted (from above, apparently — the whole scene was in vivid light) on the floor, close beside a dhurrie (a small Indian carpet), and, between that and the door, a very large black scorpion, and entering by the door the figure of a man, an intimate friend, now dead. The vision was apparently of but momentary duration, and disappeared before I could see more. I made a note of the fact, with the date, in my diary. On the return of this friend, a few weeks afterwards, from his hunting expedition, he volunteered the information that they had been much pestered by insects of all kinds, and added that one night he had gone into his tent and found there ' a whopping big black scorpion.' The hlack scorpion is not quite so common as the ordinary or pink scorpion.

" I asked him what that night was, and he told me. I remember that he fixed the exact date, either from having made a note of it, or from some other incident having occurred on that same day. I never told him of my dream."

[Miss Barr stated in conversation that she and her sisters had satisfied themselves at the time that the days corresponded.]

(465) From Mr. J. W. Beilby, of Beechworth, Victoria (mentioned above, p. 226), son of Dr. Wm. Beilby, well known in Edinburgh forty years ago. The account was first printed in the Harbinger of Light, Melbourne, August, 1879.

"In 1849, I was on a certain night sleeping at an inn in the Portland district, being there mustering stray cattle to deliver, with miy station sold, when intending to return to Scotland. I dreamt I was, with other members of my family, at my father's death-bed in Edinburgh. Everything said and done was vividly represented, but I wondered that my father was not in his usual bedroom. Several months afterwards news of

1 Cf. case 220, and the remark which follows it.

432 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

my father's death, on that very night, reached me; but it was not until a sister arrived in the colony, later, that every minute particular was corroborated, and I learned the reason for his occupying the bed I saw him die in, in his dressing-room.^ "

Mr. Beilby tells us that he seemed, as if in a vision, one of those around his father's bed; and that the night was May 30th. We find, however, from the Edinburgh Courant that Dr. Beilby died on June 7, 1849.

[Such an error of date is not important, in a case where the narrator has no sejmrate recollection of the date of his own experience. But at this distance of time it is impossible to be sure that the degree of coincidence was accurately ascertained, or that it has not become more exact in memory. To our request for corroboration, Mr. Beilby replies: — -" My sister is too remote to refer to as to facts stated in my last letter." This is not the only instance in which the idea of writing a letter to a distant country has seemed to paralyse an informant's power of assistance.]

(466) From Mr. B. Lomax, Curator of the Brighton Free Library and Museum. "January, 1883.

" In 1860, I took my newly married wife to live on the Fryer's Creek Diggings. Her mother, Mrs. F., lived in Melbourne, so that mother and daughter were 73 miles apart. After a few weeks, having to attend at the Survey Department, I returned alone to Melbourne, intending to pass a week at my father-in-law's house. On the third day, Mrs. F. (who, by the way, was a cousin of the late John Oxenford) came to me in tears, and entreated me to return, as she had last night dreamed that she had seen her daughter covered with blood, and led to bed by two women. Moved by her anxiety, I returned that night, and found the fact as she had stated. A sudden fright, caused by the violent entry of a drunken woman, had brought on a miscarriage, and she had been assisted and tenderly nursed by two neighbours. « Benjamin Lomax."

With this dream may be compared the following hypnotic vision.

(467) From Beitrdge zu den durch Animalischen Magnetismus zeither bewirkten Erscheinungen, by W. Arndt (Leipzig, (1818), pp. 76-9, Arndt held a post to the name of which the nearest English equivalent is Secretaryship to the Royal Prussian Superior County Court. The percipient was a Madame S., 19 years of age, who had been suffering from hysterical attacks, and was hypnotised by Arndt during a period of some months, in 1812.

" During a magnetic stance, the sleeping patient, who had just before been quite gay, all at once began, without any perceptible cause, to utter lamentations, to wring her hands, and to weep. When I asked her the reason, she said, < Ah, God! Ah, God! my father; my good father! he is dying.' ' How do you know that? ' ' Ah, God! don't I see it! he is

1 We have a very similar case from Mr. Alex. B. Burton, of 4, Baronsfield Road, St. Margaret's, Twickenham, who, on January 7th, 1880, dreamt very vividly of his father's death as taking place in a room quite different from that which he believed him to be occupying at the exact hour. He got out of bed, and marked the time by his watch as a little past 4.30. The facts and the time of the death exactly corresponded; and Mr. Burton's mother testifies that the dream was described to her before she mentioned the actual change of room. The death of the father was, however, known to be imminent; and the case is therefore not numbered as evidential.

losing a terrible amount of blood! Ah, he is dying, dying! ' After trying in vain to pacify her and rid her of this fancy, I woke her. She opened her eyes with the brightest smile, and all gloomy thoughts had vanished. To divert her still more, I conversed with her on various subjects • then, as I had broken into her sleep, I hypnotised her again. Before long the disquieting picture again appeared to her. To put an end to her grief, I again woke her. Her joyous look on waking showed that she was quite unaware of what she had just been describing."

On her being put to sleep a third time, the vision was repeated, and her lamentations were heart-rending; but this time she was allowed to sleep, and she gradually became more composed. She woke at last with the exclamation, " Alas! " For the rest of the afternoon she was very melancholy, without being able to say why; and neither Arndt nor her husband (the only two persons who had been present) revealed to her what had passed. Next day she had recovered her spirits.

Her father was at the time 70 German miles away. His last letters had assured her that he was well; nor had she the slightest cause for anxiety on his account. But some weeks later Arndt found her much cast down; and on inquiring the cause, was told that at about 3 p.m. on the day of her strange experience (which Arndt says that he had noted), her father had slipped while descending into the cellar, and the cellar door had fallen on his breast, which caused violent hsemorrhage, and very nearly cost him his life. " So the fact which could not by any possibility have been suspected, actually happened, at the very hour at which the patient at a distance perceived it."

(468) From the Rev. F. Teasdale Reed (Unitarian Minister), Colehill, Tamworth. "October, 1884.

" I had an uncle who, after spending 33 years on board ship, left the sea, got married, and settled down near London. His only son. Jack, and myself were constant playmates, and for a short time school-fellows also. [Jack ran away to sea.] Months passed by and no news came. At length — perhaps it was 12 or 18 months afterwards — my thoughts were again directed to my missing cousin. It was in this way,

" One Sunday morning, my father invited me to go with him to see my uncle and aunt. On the road he told me that during the night he had had a most remarkable dream, and he wished to test it as far as he could, for he was strongly persuaded that it would be fulfilled. At the same time he urged me to notice the date, and preserve in my memory the details as far as possible. I may just say, in parenthesis, that we continued our journey, paid the visit, but found that nothing had been heard of my cousin. The dream, so far as I can recollect it at this distance of time, was somewhat as follows: — The scene is in a foreign port (guessed at the time to be Spanish). On board a British man-of-war that is anchored there a young man (my cousin Jack) is giving instructions to some men at work in the rigging. He is apparently dissatisfied with what they are doing, for he hurries up, makes some slight alteration, and then descends. A rung of the rope ladder gives way as his foot touches it, he falls backward, head first, and dies instantly. The surgeon hurries to the spot, examines the body, but leaves it, as he can do nothing there. Then arrangements are made for the burial. The coffin is taken on shore, some of the officers and

VOL, II, 2 P

434 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

men accompany it, and it is solemnly lowered into the grave. There the dream ended.

" Some time after, my father (he had already ascertained the time it "would take for a letter to come from the Spanish coast to England) asked me one morning if I still remembered his strange dream. He then made me repeat it to him. After that he said: ' Well, if there is anything in it your uncle will have heard something about it by this time, let us go and see him.' When we reached the house we could see at a glance that something had happened. My father at once asked if there was any news yet of Jack. Yes, that morning's post had brought a large envelope bearing the Lisbon post-mark. It was written by one of the officers of a man-of-war that was then anchored at Lisbon, and its purpose was to make known the death of my cousin. After a very kind and favourable notice of Jack's general conduct and abilities, it gave full details of his death and burial. Those details tallied exactly with the details given in my father's dream, and it occurred the very date of the dream. I was perfectly amazed. I inspected the letter and could not see any point in which there was the slightest contradiction or even divergence. Of course my uncle was then informed of the dream.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Reed adds on October 28, 1884: —

" I can quite understand your desire to verify, as far as possible, every statement made, but unfortunately I shall not be able to furnish much corroboration. I have just a little; what there is I will place before you. I found the enclosed ' inspector's certificate.' I see it corrects my story in one point, and confirms it in another. I said that the event happened about 32 years ago; this document is dated 1847, i.e., 37 years ago. At the time of writing the paper I did not sufficiently think over the question of time. I would add that the family consisted of my uncle, aunt — who are both dead — my cousin John (of whom I have written), and his sister, who is still alive in Australia. She may be able to furnish more particulars. [We have written several letters to this lady, which have not been answered.] However weak it may be in collateral evidence, I am positive as to the fact of the dream, and that I have fairly represented it in its essential points."

The inspector's certificate shows that John Tabner, seaman, died at sea, on board H.M.S. " Canopus," on the 24th of April, 1847. In the Navy List for June, 1847, we find the ship reported as " off the coast of Portugal."

[In the absence of an independent account of the details of the death, and of written notes of the dream, we cannot assume that the coincidence of detail was so close as seems to be remembered. Clearly there would be a difficulty in explaining the closing scene of the dream as telepathically produced, though the dream may naturally enough have taken that course. Mr. Reed mentioned in conversation that there had been a very strong bond of afiection between his father and Jack. He was himself 1 1 years old at the time.]

(469) From Mr. W. Noble, J.P., Forest Lodge, Maresfield, Uckfield.

" September 8th, 1882.

" The Baroness van Lynden (my mother-in-law) had a maid who

in.] DREAMS. 435

subsequently lived with Mrs. Noble and myself as housekeeper, and died in this house after 35 years' consecutive service in the family; her name was Elizabeth Gowling, and she came of a most respectable stock of the farming class from Appleby, in Westmoreland. She left Westmoreland when she was young, and had not been near it for a good many years, when the very curious event occurred which I am about to relate.

" I must say here, that when living in Appleby, Gowling had known a woman, by sight, whose name, I regret to say, I have forgotten, but who lived in a suburb called Bongate. They had in no sense ever been friends, nor had any communication passed between them, or any mention of the woman's name ever been made to Gowling by any one, after she left her native county.

"Well, one morning she came down, as usual, to dress her mistress, and, in obviously a very nervous and excited state, told her that she had just had such a terrible dream that she could not get it out of her mind. She had, she said, dreamed that this Bongate woman had gone to a drawer, taken out a piece of rope, proceeded to an outhouse, and hanged herself, and that her daughter had come into the outhouse and cut her mother down. My mother-in-law, of course, pooh-pooh'd the whole affair, told Gowling not to be silly, that dreams were all nonsense, &c., &c. But a week or two afterwards Gowling received a local newspaper from some one of her Westmoreland friends, which contained, inter alia, an account of an inquest on this very woman; who, on the night in which the dream happened, had proceeded to an outhouse and hanged herself, and had been cut down by her daughter. « William Noble."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Noble says: —

" It was some considerable time after it happened that I first heard of it; but I have done so, without the smallest variation, repeatedly, both from my mother-in-law and from Gowling herself."

In conversation with Mr. Podmore, Mrs. Noble gave an account which precisely corresponded with her husband's, and stated that she herself — then a young girl — had heard Gowling describe the dream on the morning after its occurrence.

From the Coroner of the district, who has kindly made inquiries, we have learnt the name of the woman who committed suicide, and the fact that the occurrence took place about 40 years ago; but his and our endeavours to trace the exact date have failed.

(470) From Mr. Henry Maitland, Balmungo, St. Andrews.

"December 28, 1885.

" On the 16th of August, 1820 — it was the anniversary of his wedding - — my father took my mother and eldest sister to dine and spend the night at the country house of an uncle a few miles off. I can see the trio now, through the long vista of years, starting for Lathrisk on the Irish car, my father in high spirits, and seemingly in perfect health.

" That night, my two sisters, who were left at home, one 20 and the other 21 years of age, slept together; and early next morning the younger one awakened her companion, to tell her she had had a strange, unhappy dream. She dreamed she was at Lathrisk with her father and mother; the family party were at dinner, and all went well till the servants had

436 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

cleared the table and withdrawn. My father, she said, then suddenly rose and walked to the window, which he opened as if for air. She, in her dream, went round and set a chair for him, putting her arm round his shoulders to support him in what seemed a sudden faintness. My uncle then came and supported my father, and the doctor soon arrived; but before then my father had breathed his last. Dreams, however impressive to the dreamer, do not sound equally so in other ears, and this one was no exception to the rule; the elder sister made no account of it, and no more was said on the subject.

" A few hours later, a messenger from Lathrisk brought the sad news of my father's death, and the whole details of the closing scene were strictly and literally identical with those of the dream, excepting only that my eldest sister, who went with her parents, was the actor, in place of the dreamer, who remained at home.

" My father was in his 50th year, full of health five minutes before he died; and the mental condition of the family was that of joy and hopefulness."

We find from the Edinburgh C our ant that Mr. Maitland's father died on August 25th (not 16th), 1820. Mr. Maitland explains that he knew his father's wedding day to have been August 16, from an entry in a family Bible, and that he was either told that the day of the death was the same, or has himself, in memory, modified close proximity into identity.

In reply to inquiries, he adds, on Jan. 3, 1886: —

" I am the sole survivor of my family. I was not told of the dream at the time; my age (7 years) precluded this. Let me give you the assurance that both sisters concerned were women in whom, perhaps above most persons, the precious quality of conscientiousness formed the basis of character. In 50 years' close relationship to them, I never heard them speak of a dream but the one in question; and I don't believe either of them was, either literally or metaphorically, a ' dreamer.'

" Henry Maitland."

In conversation Mrs. Maitland told me that she also had heard the incident described by the dreamer, her sister-in-law.

[It is needless to observe that no amount of scrupulousness on the part of a witness can sufficiently guarantee unwritten recollections of a long-past incident, involving some amount of detail. But the quality of the evidence in this case is at any rate good second-hand; and one can hardly doubt that a coincidence of a striking kind occurred.]

(471) From Mrs. Sykes, who at the time to which the narrative refers, was residing with her brother-in-law, the late Dr. Symonds, of Clifton Hill House, Clifton, Bristol. " 1883.

" On the 6th of November, 1854, I want to see a poor woman named Scott, living in St. Michael's parish, Bristol. She had a son in the army, and his regiment was serving in the Crimea. As soon as she saw me, she said, ' I know my dear boy is dead.' On my asking what made her think so, she said, ' Yesterday morning I saw him quite plainly. He and others were fighting and I saw him fall; the men seemed in disorder and were all in their shirt-sleeves. I saw Willie as plainly as I see you now.' I tried to comfort her, saying how improbable it was they should be fighting

in their shirt-sleeves. ' It is true,' she said. ' I know he is gone, and I shall always know the day and time, Sunday morning, November 5th, for I awoke from the sight of this battle as the 8 o'clock bells rang out from St. Michael's Church.'

" Quite late that day (the 6th) we heard of the battle of Inkermann and that the soldiers were surprised early on the 5th, and had not time to dress entirely, but fought in their shirt-sleeves. Young Scott's regiment was there (I forget which). This poor woman never heard of her son's death till some time afterwards, when the list of killed came out; but so convinced was she of the fact that she wrote his name and the date of his death on a tracing (life size) of her soldier son, that she and her other son had drawn on the wall, before he went to the Crimea. This rude drawing I saw." ^ " M. A. Sykes."

[The Christian name William is probably incorrect; among the noncommissioned officers and privates mentioned by the London Gazette in the list of Inkermann casualties, as killed in the battle or dying of wounds very shortly afterwards, are three Scotts — John, Henry, and Peter. The detail of the shirt-sleeves cannot be pressed; but the sense of reality must have been strong, to prompt the writing of the name and date.]

(472) From Miss Weale, Nepaul, Croft Road, Torquay.

"January 26th, 1884.

" My mother was tired, and went to lie down, and fell asleep and dreamt that her younger half-brother, Godin Ellis, had died in India, and she heard in her dream hurried remarks about it, and heard some one speak the name of the officer standing by. She awoke with such a deep sense of its reality that, when my father came up to dress for dinner, she proceeded to ask him to kneel down and say the prayers from the Burial Service, for that Godin was dead. She proceeded to tell him

1 In connection with this case, I may quote a narrative which I refrained from giving as evidence in the last chapter, on account of the pre-occupation of the percipient's mind with her absent son. It was procured through the kindness of a Cambridge friend, Mrs. B., whose sister, Mrs. G-., is the narrator.

" The following narrative was told to me by my aunt, Mrs. B.; the son to whom it relates is F. G. B. (68th Regiment), who fell at Inkermann on Sunday, November 5th, 1854. The narrative was told to me on Sunday afternoon, September 2nd, 1883, and written down at the time. She had told me substantially the same narrative many years before, though she did not like talking of it. My son, who was also present when the story was told, read over my account, and pronounced it correct. I do not believe that my aunt ever experienced any similar impression. I have known her intimately all my life, and stayed with her for months together, and never heard her mention anything of the kind. She had always prayed that she might know at the moment if he were kUled or badly wounded. The 5th November was a Sunday. She was at E-uscombe Church, and early in the service (while kneeling in the Confession) she had a sudden sensation; she saw nothing, but felt sure something was by her, and that it was her son. Her husband asked her what was the matter, but she kept up, and did not leave the church. On returning home, she said she was sure they would hear bad news. When the news did arrive, some days later, they found he was shot at the very hour when she felt his presence in Ruscombe Church."

Professor Sidgwick writes on September 5th, 1883: —

"Mrs. B., who knew her aunt well, has just told me that she never heard of her having any similar impression."

It is probable, from Kinglake's and Russell's accounts, that Lieutenant B. was killed in the morning; but at what hour is not known. For the form of the experience, compare the subjective impressions described in Vol. i., p. 483. The case is eminently one where, after the receipt of the news, the impression would be likely to assume in memory a definiteness and uniqueness that did not really belong to it.

438 SUPPLEMENT, [chap.

the name o£ the place, and the hour, and the name of an officer standing by. She insisted on my father writing down the particulars, and he, to quiet her, complied, and also joined her in saying the prayers; but he would not allow her to go into mourning, and disbelieved that it would be found correct, because Godin had not intended going into the Madras Presidency.

" In due course of time the news came, and full written particulars from the officer whose name she had heard; and it had happened at the hour and day (allowing for reckoning), and in the little place, and as she described it — an accident with a gun. He had only known the officer for a few days, and the name was one unknown to my parents. My mother had been certain her dream was, as she termed it, a vision of the true. She was a very healthy, sensible, calm-minded woman.

In reply to inquiries, Miss Weale wrote: —

" My mother scarcely ever had a dream. The dream took place as far back as in 1837, I think, but that very day she told us. All were told in the house, and she was vexed because my father would not let her go into mourning. The relatives who know, with me, of my mother's true dream are foreigners, and scattered about the world, and I rarely write to them. But it was all written down, and given to the Rev. Dr. Neale at the time."

[Here, again, the occurrence is far too remote for certainty as to the details of the dream. But some of the collateral incidents, e.g., about the mourning, are such as would be likely to impress themselves on the daughter's mind. We have done our utmost to trace the exact date of the death, but without success.]

(473) From a lady who scruples for the present to allow the publication of her name, as a near relative has an abhorrence of the subject.

"May 26th, 1884.

" I cannot fix the date — it may have been about 18 years after my mother's marriage — one morning at breakfast my mother told us she had had a very strange dream. She had dreamed of Mrs. W., [a lady whose house had been a home to her in youth, but whom she had not heard of for years,] and Mrs. W. wanted to kiss her. My mother did her utmost to prevent it, using all her force to push Mrs. W. away, and the strangest thing of all was that she saw the inside of Mrs. W.'s throat, and saw it most distinctly, and it was as black as coal. That was the entire dream. About a week or 10 days after the dream (I cannot be sure of the interval), a mutual friend sent us news of Mrs. W.'s serious illness, told us that she was confined to bed, and sufiering from a very uncommon disease which had attacked her throat. After hearing this report there were many talks of Mrs. W., but no way of gaining further information about her was found.

" After another short interval, my mother told us she had dreamed again. Mrs. W. was dead, everything about her was white, and there was an immense amount of the colour somehow, but she was not in her own room, neither did my mother recognise the room she was in as like any of the bedrooms in the house. In two days the post brought us an

intimation of Mrs. W.'s death, which had happened during the night, on the precise date of my mother's dream.

" About three months afterwards, we had a visit from a niece of Mrs. W., a lady who had nursed her aunt during her last illness, and who called to deliver a message sent to my mother from her friend before her death. My mother told this lady of her two dreams, when the following explanations were given us: — Mrs. W.'s illness was entirely in her throat, and its most distressing symptom was an extreme difficulty of breathing, necessitating having both windows and door continually wide open, as the only means of alleviation, the weather at the time being bitterly cold. Immediately after Mrs. W.'s death, a daughter-in-law, a somewhat eccentric person, arranged all details herself. For some unexplained reason she caused the body to be moved immediately to a parlour downstairs. The table in the room was covered with a white linen tablecloth, and the body draped in white placed on it; a sofa in the room was covered with a white sheet, and every chair, and also every picture in the room was treated in a similar manner. My mother said, ' I know the room — that was the room I saw in my dream.' "

[This incident happened about 30 years ago, but the narrator has a very clear recollection of it. She says that her mother dreamt a good deal, and that many other singular coincidences had been noticed, but that most of them were of a more trivial nature. Of course the second dream can only be explained telepathically by supposing (in accordance with Chap. XVIII., § 7) that a common interest in the dead woman established a line of communication between persons who were strangers to one another; and it is not an example on which we should be disposed to lay any stress. The first experience is more striking, as the detail about the throat (both in the dream and in the reality) would be likely to be remembered, and not likely to be unconsciously imagined.]

(474) From Des Hallucinations, by Dr. Brierre de Boismont (Paris, 1862), pp. 285-6. It is to be presumed that he received the account from the dreamer herself, as otherwise his prefatory remark would have no force; and in an English translation of another edition of the work, the narrative is followed by the words, " This statement was made to us by the lady herself, in whom we place the most perfect confidence."

" Le fait suivant est un de ceux qui nous ont le plus frapp^ parceque la dame de qui nous le tenons etait un de ces esprits senses et respectables dont les paroles meritent toute confiance.

"Mile. R., douee d'un excellent jugement, religieuse sans bigoterie, habitait, avant d'etre marine, la maison de son oncle, Desessants, medecin celebre, membre de I'lnstitut. Elle dtait alors separee de sa mere, atteinte, en province, d'une maladie assez grave. Une nuit, cette jeune personne reva qu'elle I'apercevait devant elle, pale, defiguree, prete a rendre le dernier soupir, et temoignant surtout un vif chagrin de ne pas etre entouree de ses enfants, dont I'un, cure d'une des paroisses de Paris, avait emigre en Espagne, et dont I'autre etait a Paris. Bientot elle I'entendit I'appeler plusieurs f ois par son nom de bapteme; elle vit, dans son reve, les personnes qui entouraient sa mere, s'imaginant qu'elle demandait sa petitefille, portant le meme nom, aller la chercher dans la piece voisine; un signe de la malade leur apprit que ce n' etait point elle, mais sa fiUe qui

440 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

habitait Paris, qu'elle desirait voir. Sa figure exprimait la douleur qu'elle eprouvait de son absence; tout-a-coup ses traits se decomposerent, se couvrirent de la paleur de la mort, elle retomba sans vie sur son lit.

" Le lendemain Mile. R. parut fort triste devant Desessants, qui la pria de lui faire connaitre la cause de son chagrin; elle lui raconta dans tous ses details le songe qui I'avait si fortement tourmentee. Desessants, la trouvant dans cette disposition d'esprit, la pressa contre son coeur en lui avouant que la nouvelle n'etait que trop vraie, que sa mere venait de mourir; il n'entra point dans d'autres explications.

"Plusieurs mois apres. Mile. R. profitant de I'absence de son oncle pour mettre en ordre ses papiers auxquels il n'aimait pas qu'on touchat, trouva une lettre qui avait ete jetee dans un coin. Quelle ne fut pas sa surprise en y lisant toutes les particularites de son reve que Desessants avait passees sous silence, ne voulant pas produire une emotion trop forte sur un esprit deja si vivement impressionne."

(475) From Mrs. Hebert, 16, Monmouth Road, Bayswater, W.

"December 26th, 1883.

" I shall relate to you a dream which happened to me several years ago. I was then in Germany at Mayence, learning German in a school, where I was employed as a teacher of the French language.

" One night I went to bed, very tired but without any particular anxiety. I fell into a heavy slumber and dreamt of my mother. She was in bed, lying ill, and thin; her hands, almost transparent, were stretched convulsively as if seeking for some object, whilst she moaned most piteously in calling me by my name. In fact, she looked as if she were dying. I recognised perfectly her bedroom, the furniture, &c.; it was dimly lighted by a candle, and close to the head of the bed, in a green arm-chair, slept an old woman. I knew her also as a charwoman, who, as it seemed, was acting as nurse. My mother in her desperate motions succeeded in touching the shoulder of the old woman, who awoke with a start, and asked her crossly what she wanted.

" 'My scissors,' said my mother in a feeble voice.

'"What for r

" 'To cut some of my hair. You shall give it to my daughter in remembrance of me.'

" ' She does not want it, go to sleep,' answered the old woman, angry at being disturbed. She pushed back my mother on the pillow and went to sleep again, without noticing her agony, her prayer, to have some of her hair cut. I could hear distinctly the voice of my mother becoming weaker and weaker, but always plaintive, and supplicating the old woman for her scissors. At last I heard nothing. I awoke in a frightful agitation; it was 2 o'clock after midnight. I told my dream to some people. They advised me not to think of it, as they said that dreams generally go by contraries. But a few days after, I received the news of my mother's death; it had happened just at the time of my dream.

" Louise Hebeet."

Mrs. Hubert returned to France in a few weeks, and, on seeing the nurse, reproached her with her conduct, and was convinced by her manner that the charge was true; but there was no further evidence. In con-

versation, she told me that she had no idea of her mother being ill; that the dream was quite unique in her experience; and that the effect on her was so strong that the persons she was living with had great difficulty in persuading her not to start home at once. The incident happened more than 20 years ago, and she has lost connection with her native place in Lorraine.

[The case is first-hand, from a witness who, I am sure, desires to be accurate; but again the remoteness of date and lack of corroboration are most serious defects, and the correctness of the details in the dream is mere conjecture.]

(476) From Mrs. Drummond Smithers, Bridge House, Crookham, Farnham, Hants.

" November 22nd, 1884.

" My father [Mr. Thomas Pickerden] was an architect and builder, which obliged him to be about very early of mornings; and on Monday, the 19th January, 1857, at 7 a.m., whilst on his way to see some of his men, he fell, in a fit of some kind. That same morning I perfectly well remember not falling asleep until after 2 a.m., having counted the clock up till that hour, and wondering why I could not sleep, as I always slept well at that time. As we breakfasted at 10 a.m. in those days, we were not early risers, so probably it might have been 8 or 9 o'clock before I woke. I cannot make a nearer statement, as I am not positive as to the time; but my dream was between the hours mentioned. It was that my father had been taken suddenly ill in the streets of Hastings, that he was put into a fly by two men, and taken home — when I woke. The dream seemed to impress me very much. I tried not to think seriously of it; having dressed and breakfasted, still the dream haunted me. I could not shake it off. When I spoke to my sisters-in-law, with whom I was staying (my then husband was their brother), they advised me to tell him, which I did, and he at once granted my request of going on to Hastings. He left me at Etchingham Station, and going direct to our home. Hawkhurst, he found a telegram there to the effect that my father was ill, and that I was to go at once. I had by this time reached Hastings and found my dream verified.

" The event occurring so many years back, not one witness is living.

"Annie Smithers."

In the same letter Mrs. Smithers says, " The dream preceded my father's sudden illness some few hours; " but the account shows that there is no reason to suppose this.

In answer to inquiries, she adds: —

"29th December, 1884.

" In my dream I did not actually see my father fall, but was at the spot just as the fly was going off, and saw distinctly there were two persons inside the fly, but the back of one man who was holding my father prevented my recognising him; the man on the box I distinctly saw, and knew him as a flyman of Hastings, and he was the man who drove my father on that fatal morning — for so it proved, as he never rallied from that illness, never was out of his bed more than to have it made a few times. He died 5th March, 1857. I never knew him to have an illness

442 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

previous to that, nor fit of any kind; he always appeared a healthy strong man. I am generally so free from dreaming that this one made a great impression upon me at the time."

The Hastings News confirms March 5, 1857, as the date of the death.

[This case again is remote in date and uncorroborated; but the narrator is not likely to be wrong as to the fact of her taking a journey on the strength of her dream, and finding it confirmed.]

(477) From Miss Morse, Northfield, Vermont, U.S.A., who was the percipient in case 41.

"May, 1884.

" Often impressions of persons and places have come to me while asleep, or when I seemeo^ to be dreaming. For example: When our civil war was in progress I corresponded with several soldiers. One of my correspondents was Captain Fischer, a Dane, who had formerly been a sailor, and roamed the world over. While the army of the Potomac was lying idle, I dreamed of a strange place. The moon shone brightly on newly-made streets, dotted with small white houses, arranged to impart on the whole scene a picturesque daintiness. One of the little dwellings especially won my attention. I stopped before it, exclaiming, ' How beautiful! I never saw anything like it. I wonder what it can be.' A voice, which I did not recognise, replied, 'It is a Grecian temple.' ' Am I, then, in Greece 1 ' ' No, this is an imitation of such temples as one sees in Greece.' I awoke, and in a moment the clock struck 12. I could not rid myself of the feeling that I had been to a new place, and seen something real.

" A few days after, a letter came from Captain Fischer, in which he minutely described the place I saw in my dream, explaining that the soldiers, to pass the time, had laid out streets and avenues, and by many ingenious devices had contrived to make their tents resemble houses. His own tent, which was much admired, he had converted into quite a clever model of a Greek temple, &c. Near the close he alluded to the brilliant moonlight, and added: ' It is near midnight, and my men are asleep all around me.' Comparing dates, I found I dreamed of the scene while his pen was describing it."

In reply to inquiries. Miss Morse says: —

" The date of the dream was firmly fixed in my mind, because it came the one night that I passed at the house of Mrs. Paine's father. I well remember telling Mrs. Paine the dream in the morning. When I saw her again I told her of Captain Fischer's letter, which was received after I returned to W. H. Junction. Had the dream occurred at home I could not have been so sure of the time."

Mrs. Paine, Northfield, Vermont, writes as follows: —

"May 24th, 1884.

" My testimony in regard to Miss Morse's dream in connection with Captain Fischer, whom I know well, is a mere mite. I well recollect her telling me the dream, which occurred while she was on a visit at my father's, but whether she related it to me the next morning or later, I cannot remember. She says she told me the dream at the time, and its

singular verification afterwards, as she did not receive the letter from Captain Fischer until after she returned to her home at White River Junction — but so many years have elapsed that they are inseparably connected in my mind. I only remember it in connection with the letter, although I presume she is correct.

" Lucia A. Paine."

(478) From Mr. Latimer H. Saunders, St. Helens, near Hyde, who was concerned in case 44.

"April 26th, 1884.

" While at school, I had a remarkably vivid dream of a fire, in which it appeared my father's offices were destroyed, entailing upon him heavy loss. So realistic did it seem to me that I related it to one of my schoolfellows (George A.) before rising. [This gentleman, however, cannot recall the circumstance.] He told me in his quaint way that I was very fooKsh to repeat a dream before getting up unless I wished it to come true; at which superstitious fancy I laughed, and told him there was no fear of such happening in this case, as the fire I had seen in my dream was not at my father's offices, 16, Mincing Lane, to which I had been in the holidays, but at Messrs. Bailey and Co.'s offices, a large block of buildings, No. 1, Mincing Lane Buildings, situate some distance away, and the only thing connecting them with my father was that in my dream I saw his name-plate on the entrance instead of theirs. A few days after, I heard from my mother that my father's offices had been burnt to the ground, and that unfortunately he was not insured, having only just removed into new offices. I afterwards learnt that it was the block of buildings I had seen in my dream that was burnt down on the same night; and stranger still, that my father had taken the very offices occupied by the firm I mentioned, the only knowledge of whom that I could have had was from seeing their name on the building, in passing to my father's offices when I visited the City. u Latimee H. Saunders."

Mr. Saunders's father says, " The date [of the fire] was, I think, November, or early in December, 1862." We find from the Times that the fire took place on Dec. 9, 1862, breaking out shortly after midnight, in Mincing Lane Chambers, and thence extending to other buildings.

[Mr. Saunders tells me that one of his brothers (Mr. Harris Saunders, of Leacroft House, Staines) was, he believes, at the fire — which would be in favour of the telepathic explanation; but Mr. H. Saunders declines to tell us whether he actually was present. The case is too remote for any certainty as to the exact correspondence of date and detail.]

(479 and 480) Mr. Rowland Rowlands, of Bryncethin, Bridgend, has given us the following dream-cases out of many impressions which he believes to have been veridical. (See also Yol. I., pp. 252, 291.) He was until recently manager of the Pen-y-graig Collieries.

"July 2nd, 1884.

"About 23 years ago, when I was taking a little rest, about 40

or 50 miles distance from Pen-y-graig, I saw a man named Edwin Gay

falling down from a slope on the surface to an old pit, which was covered

with old timber and full of water. But the timber protected him. I

444 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

instantly wrote a letter to caution them to take care, but when the letter reached, it was too late, because the man had fallen, very likely at the very moment I saw him going. I met Mr. Gay [within] the last fortnight, and went over the facts with him.

" On one occasion, about 1868, when at the Pen-y-graig Collieries, I had come from the works to my house, about dinner-time, 1 p.m., and having been up all night had got into bed — when, just as I was dropping off to sleep, and still between sleeping and waking, I saw the roof of the stall belonging to a man named William Thomas moving, and the timbers which supported it bending and breaking. I got up at once and ran off to the colliery, just in time to meet William Thomas coming out of the works, the roof of his stall having fallen in, just as I had seen it. My vision must have taken place at the very moment of the accident. William Thomas is now dead.

" On another occasion, when in bed, between 1 and 2 a.m., I dreamed that I saw the colliers, who should have stayed in the works until 5 a.m., putting away their tools and making ready to go. I hurried on my clothes, told my wife what I had dreamed, and ran off to the works. I found that the men were just about to leave, but had hurried back on seeing the approach of my light. They wondered much how I had discovered the trick which they had intended to play."

[This last case may probably have been due to some latent idea in the dreamer's mind.]

I append some specimens of a rather numerous class in which letters are alleged to have been perceived shortly before their arrival. The following are instances which there is no difficulty in accounting for telepathically. (See also cases 409, 433, 447, above; and cases 136, 137.)

(481) From Mr. Conquest, Mead House, Biggleswade.

"December, 1884.

" It was, I think, in October, 1869, that I dreamed that I received a letter from an old friend. Rev. S. H. Ireson, then a curate of St. Thomas' Church, Liverpool, and residing in Birkenhead, from whom I had not heard for 12 months or more. His handwriting was very distinct, and it stood out very clearly before me, as I read that his wife had presented him with another little daughter. On reaching the bottom of the page, I tried to turn over the leaf, but could not, and the effort awoke me. The vividness of the dream was such that on coming down to breakfast in the morning, I said to my sister (now Mrs. Daniel, of The Elms, Biggleswade), ' I expect to hear from Ireson this morning, for I dreamed last night that I received one announcing the birth of a daughter.' In a few minutes the postman came, but there was no letter from Ireson, It came, however, the following day, and the first page seemed to be identical with the one I had read in my dream. Towards the end of December, in the same year, I think, I visited Ireson at Birkenhead, and, one day, happening to mention the above circumstance to him, he said, ' I distinctly remember writing you that letter — it was between 1 and 2 (or 2 and 3) o'clock in the morning, and after I had written the first page, I went to bed and

in.] DREAMS. 445

finished the letter next day.' Ireson afterwards became Vicar of Barnoldswick, and died a few years ago. u ^u^t,. W. Conquest."

Mrs. Daniel corroborates as follows: —

" The Elms, Biggleswade.

"December 17th, 1884. " I perfectly recollect Mr. F. Conquest telling me of his dream, respecting the birth of Mr. Ireson's daughter, previous to our receiving information of the event, and have pleasure in adding my testimony in confirmation of it. " T. F. Daniel."

