" May, 1886. "On Jan. 31, 1886, in Petersburg, in the lodging of M. Greshner, I, in 3 minutes, and at a distance of 4 feet, plunged into sleep M. Drobiazguin, an officer of the Russian navy. The experiment was made in the presence of M. Toumas, M.D. (now Professor at the University of Warsaw), and of many other witnesses. When the ' subject ' fell asleep, one of the witnesses wrote on a sheet of paper the (Russian) word ' Bog ' (God). Then I took this sheet of paper and put it on the forehead of my ' subject.' To my question whether he can read the word written on the paper, M. Drobiazguin gave an affirmative answer, and then proceeded to pronounce in a dead voice the letters. The first two were read correctly, but in lieu of ' g ' he said ' tch.' When I remarked to him that the last letter is guessed incorrectly, he immediately said the true letter. In my opinion this experiment cannot be explained by ' mental suggestion,' for those present expected that the ' subject ' would pronounce the right letter, 'g,' and he nevertheless pronounced 'tch.'"

[There is no Russian word " botch." As regards peculiarities of spelling, see Yol. I., pp. 76-8. The independent action of the percipient's

mind which such peculiarities indicate affords, according to the reasoning in this book, no ground at all for doubting that the idea was telepathically transferred from one mind to the other.]

We owe the following accounts of some experiments in hypnotic rapport to Mr. C. Kegan Paul, who states that he has known the phenomenon of " community of taste in the mesmeric sleep " to have occurred several times in the case of this " subject." Mr. Paul writes: —

"May 27th, 1884.

"I lived at Great Tew, in Oxfordshire, from March, 1851, to May, 1852. When there, the following circumstance occurred, but I am not able to fix the month, further than to say that I think it was in the late summer of 1851. (No. I am now convinced that it was in April, 1852.)

" I had been in the habit of mesmerising frequently Mr. Walter Francis Short, then an undergraduate scholar of New College, who was, without any single exception, the most ' sensitive ' person of either sex I have ever known. He usually became what is called clairvoyant, but this always tired him, and I seldom made protracted experiments in this direction. On several occasions I found that a community of taste was established between us, but only once made any experiment with more than one substance, such as a biscuit, or glass of water.

" At Great Tew, with his consent, my two sisters alone being present besides ourselves, I carried the matter further. We had dined in my only sitting-room, and the dessert was still on the table. (I think I am right, though my sister F. doubts.) I put Short to sleep in an arm-chair, which I turned with its back to the table, and Short's face to the wall. There was no mirror in the room. I asked Short, taking his hand, if he thought he could taste what I took in my mouth, and he said he thought that he could. I, still holding his hand, shut my own eyes, and my sisters put into my mouth various things which were on the table. I remember only raisins, but there were four or five various substances tasted. These were all quite correctly described, except that I think there was an uncertainty about the kind of wine. Short, however, had of course been aware of what was on the table, but he could not know, nor did I know, the order in which I was to be fed with these things.

" To carry the experiment further, one of my sisters left the room, bringing back various things wholly unknown to me, which she administered to me having my eyes shut. I remember spices, black pepper, salt, raw rice, and finally soap, all of which Short recognised, and the last of which he rejected with a splutter of great disgust. The experiment only ended when we could think of nothing more to taste.

" I had at that time already left Oxford; Short did so soon after, and our various occupations seldom allowed our meeting. His conviction of my power over him was such that he begged that I would never attempt to place him under mesmeric influence when I was at a distance from him, on the ground that, as he was rowing in the Oxford boat, I might do so when he was on the river. I had once afiected him at a distance, under rather singular circumstances, and of course willingly gave the promise.

" C. Kegan Paul.

'' My sister F. is right in remarking that our four selves were the only persons in the house. My only servant was a woman in the village, who lived close by, and came and went at fixed hours, like an Oxford scout."

This account was sent by Mr. Paul to his sister, Miss Paul, with the following letter: —

" In talking with my friend Henry Sidgwick over my experiments in mesmerism many years ago, I mentioned one with Short at Tew, when you and M. were present. He has asked me to write it down, and get if possible your recollections on it.

" The particular experiment was one in which Short, being in the mesmeric sleep, was able to taste what was put into my mouth. If you recollect the circumstance at all, I want you, before reading what I have said, enclosed in another envelope, to write down a statement of what you remember as much in detail as possible — time, place, persons present, things tasted, &c.; then to read my narrative, and to write also how far your recollection, thus refreshed, tallies with mine, and preserve both accounts, even if you find them contradictory; then to send my account and your account and remarks enclosed to M., together with this note, asking her to follow exactly the same plan, and return my statement, yours, and her own to me, together with this note.

" I should like you also to say that you have observed my order of proceeding as indicated above. «« C Kegan Paul."

Miss Paul replied as follows, on May 27: —

" On Thursday, April 29th, 1852, my sister and I went to stay with my brother at Great Tew, in Oxfordshire, and Mr. Short joined us at Oxford, and went with us to Tew. As he returned to Oxford on Saturday, May 1st, the mesmeric experiments, which I well remember, must have been on Friday, April 30th, and they were after dinner in the evening. My brother mesmerised Mr. Short, and when he was quite asleep he tried some experiments.

" My brother drank some wine (I think it was port), and we saw Mr. Short's lips and throat moving as if he was swallowing it, and on my brother asking him what he was drinking, he at once said what it was. The wine had been taken from a cupboard and poured out, where, even had he been awake, Mr. Short could not have seen what it was before tasting it."

" [I think my own account is the more correct. — C. K. P.] "

" My sister then got some black pepper from the kitchen and put it in my brother's hand, and on his putting some in his own mouth, Mr. Short at once tasted it, and on my brother asking him what he had in his mouth, he said it was very hot and unpleasant, but was not quite sure what it was. My brother held Mr. Short's hand all the time.

" The only other thing I remember is that on my brother removing his hand after, and substituting my sister's, Mr. Short looked as if in pain, and said the change was unpleasant.

" No one else was in the little cottage at the time.

"F. K. Paul.

" P.S. — Since writing my account I have read my brother's, and think it very accurate, as, now I am reminded of the soap, &c., I can faintly recollect it, but not clearly, as I do the things I have written down.

" Also I think the dessert had been put away, and the wine taken out again on purpose.

"I remember the date, as I have always written down very shortly the events of each day."

Mr. Paul's other sister, Mrs. P., writes, on May 29, 1884:—

"In the year 1852 or 1853, I believe at Bloxham [certainly Tew. — C. K. P.], I remember my brother trying experiments on a friend, Mr. Short, whom he was in the habit of mesmerising. One evening, I saw him mesmerise Mr. Short, and while he was in that state my brother asked for a glass of water or wine, and drank it. Mr. Short appeared as if he was drinking, and swallowed, and made a reply when asked what it was; but the experiment I remember best was, after my getting some pepper, and giving it to my brother, he put some into his mouth, and Mr. Short looked as if in pain, and said, ' Hot.' Then I took his hand, and his face changed, and I think he said, ' Nasty.' I know he seemed to dislike the change from my brother's touch; but although I know there were other experiments, it is so long ago that I cannot quite recall them.

"M. E. P.

" P.S. — Since writing the above I have read my brother's narrative, which is, I think, substantially correct."

The Rev. W. F. Short writes to Mr. Podmore: —

" The Rectory, Donhead St. Mary, Salisbury.

"June 12th, 1884.

"Dear Sir, — Stock tells me you would like my account of some mesmeric experiences of mine at Great Tew in the year '52. You are very welcome, but 32 years may have impaired my memory for the details, and I should like Kegan Paul to see the account before any use is made of it.

"I had come up to New College by accident a week before the time, and finding college empty accepted an invitation to pay Paul, then curate of Great Tew, a visit. One night, I think the Thursday following, he mesmerised me, and made, I believe, some successful experiments in the ' transference of taste '; but of these, as I was in a deep sleep, I can say nothing. When I was in due time awakened, he said, ' We tried to get you to visit New College, but you said it was all a guess, and would tell us nothing.' I answered, ' I seem to have dreamt of New College Junior Common-room, and to have seen B. and G. sitting at a small round table drawn near the fire, with the lamp on the large table near them, playing at cards.' It was agreed that I should test the truth of this on my return to Oxford on Friday (one day before men in general came up). On entering college I met B., and said, 'You up? Are there any other men come?' ' Oh, yes; half-a-dozen. G. and so-and-so,' &c. 'Were you in the Commonroom last night at 10 (?)? ' 'Yes.' 'Who else was there?' 'Oh, the whole lot of us. No, by 10 everyone was gone but I and G.' 'Where were you sitting? ' ' At a small table close to the fire, it was so cold.'

'With the lamp on the big table near you?' 'Yes, drawn close to us.' ' Then I will tell you what you were doing. You were playing cards.' 'How odd! We weren't playing cards, but Gr. was showing me tricks on the cards.'

" I have always thought this a thoroughly good case, too exact to be a mere coincidence, and I think tolerably accurate even in the words used, but those who do not, like myself, believe in clairvoyance ^ will probably set it down to a happy guess.

" I have not for many years had any experience of mesmerism, but after this, for some years, I saw a great deal of it, and have no more doubt of its reality, even in its higher phases of inducing clairvoyance, &c., than I have of my own existence.

" I doubt whether B. would remember this (I don't think G. ever heard of it), but I would write to him if you like it, only I am rather overworked just now. — Believe me, yours very truly,

"W. F. Short."

Mr. Short writes, on Feb. 18, 1886:—

" My friend B. remembered nothing of the circumstances (naturally enough), though I feel perfectly sure it took place."

Mr. C. Kegan Paul writes, on June 16, 1884: —

" I am sorry to say I do not remember much about the clairvoyance part of the experiment with Walter Short, though I remember the community of taste vividly, and have described it to Mr. Sidgwick.

" Short became clairvoyant on several occasions under my mesmerism, but I do not recall the details with certainty. On the evening in question I only remember that on trying some experiments Short said he was tired, and wished to be wakened. I do not remember his mentioning his ' dream ' or that I heard afterwards how nearly correct it had been. It is probable that he did mention the dream, but that I paid little attention to it, being full of the first experiment, and that as I only saw him occasionally, and we did not exchange letters, I never heard the verification."

In the following cases, though they are in a sense experimental, the experiment was not directed to the particular result obtained. They are parallel to those recorded in Vol. I., pp. 78 and 84; they illustrate thought-transference of the " underground " sort, both agent and percipient being unconscious of the idea which nevertheless is pretty clearly shown to have passed from one mind to the other otherwise than through the recognised sensory channels. We have reason to think that this form of transference is not extremely uncommon; and these specimens may serve to elicit further records.

Mrs. Wingfield (mother of the ladies mentioned above, p. 653) writes as follows: —

1 This may very probably have been a case of telepathic clairvoyance (Vol. i., pp. 368-9), conditioned by the hypnotic trance, but also by the pre-existing relation between Mr. Short and the friends whom he saw (p. 162).

"34, Ennismore Gardens, S.W.

"April 2nd, 1886.

"On the evening of Jan. 13, 1886, Mr. Tatham [of 2, Cambridge Gate, W.] was writing automatically, but not very legibly. He wrote a word twice, which some of us tried to read, but could not. He said he thought it was Phoebe, or something like it. Some minutes afterwards Miss Wingfield, who was sitting at the other side of the room, wrote automatically, ' Who is G. Norby 1 ' We none of us knew this name, and asked why the question was written. We were told ' because he wanted to tell something about an accident,' or words to that effect. The subject then dropped, and the writing was at an end.

" Some half-hour or more afterwards, Mr. M. W. took up Mr. Tatham's paper and looked at it, and said, ' Why! this is G. Norby.' And when we examined the letters carefully we found it was so. Therefore Mr. Tatham and Miss W. were both influenced to write the same name independently of each other, ^ as at the time Miss W. wrote, ' Who is G. Norby? ' she had not seen what Mr. Tatham wrote, and we none of us had any idea of such a name. There were six persons present beside Mr. T. and Miss W., none of whom had ever heard the name.

" E. A. Wingfield, "Percy Tatham."

The next record is from Miss Birrell and Mrs. Medley, near, relatives of the present writer, who entertains little doubt that the facts, though somewhat remote, are recorded with substantial

accuracy.

" 37, Addison Gardens, North Kensington, W.

"October, 1885. "I was playing at table-turning in the Christmas holidays of 1863, with a party of six or seven. At last the table rapped a name we none of us knew. We thought there was a mistake. A lady in the room, but not at the table, turned round and identified it as the name of some relation— I think her sister's son. We asked the table to rap three times if it wished her to come, which it did. She came and put her hands on the table but no distinct message followed. The name was new to me. I said, ' Was there really such a person? ' The lady, who was a good deal distressed, answered, ' Oh yes! ' and mentioned one or two facts about him, turning round to another lady of her own age, in the room hut not at the tahle^ for further confirmation. She did this as we were too young to remember the dead person.

'^ Olive Birrell."

" Walden House, All Saints Street, Nottingham.

" October 30th, 1886.

" I was seated with a party of six or eight round a table with our

hands placed upon it, and it rapped in reply to the letters of the alphabet.

Several names were spelt out and various broken sentences. The table

at length spelt the name 'William Smallshaw.' We replied, 'There

1 If this were certainly the case, the incident could not have been included in the present work. But it is quite conceivable that Miss Wingfield's production of the name was due to its latent existence in Mr. Tatham's mind.

never was such a person,' and one gentleman laughed and said, 'You have made a mistake, try again.' The table continued to rap and then a lady in another part of the room, away from our party altogether, said very nervously, ^ I had a brother, William Smallshaw.' The table continued to rap and we asked if Miss Smallshaw should join us. It replied, ' Fes,' and she came. No sentence of any value or sense was made out after this.

"Emily G. Medley."

Miss Birrell is tolerably confident that the surname was not Smallshaw, but Lyon, which was Miss Smallshaw's married sister's name.

Mr. Augustine Birrell, who was present, says that the expression of Miss Smallshaw's face, as she came across the room, is fixed in his memory; but he cannot recall what followed, when she put her hands on the table, or the reason of her being summoned to the table.

[The state of Miss Smallshaw's health has prevented us from applying for her recollections.]

§ 2. The following is a transitional case, akin to those recorded in Yol. I,, pp. 103-9; but it differs from that group in the fact that the agent remembers his own direct share in the occurrence, and appears to have been reciprocally affected. We owe the case to Mr. H. P. Sparks (of Overbeck Villa, Woodstone, near Southampton,) and Mr. A. H. W. Cleave (of 28, Vardens Road, New Wandsworth, S.W.,) who at the time were fellow-students of naval engineering at Portsmouth. Personal acquaintance has completely confirmed the impression made on me by the letters of these gentlemen, that they had observed the phenomena, which were a complete surprise to them, with intelligence and care. They were unaware of the remarkable interest of their results; and Mr. Sparks addressed me in the first instance, not so much to supply information which, for aught he knew, might be of a common enough type, as to ask for advice about hypnotic experimentation in general. He did not know to what address to write; but acting on a dim recollection of a newspaper notice of our objects, he boldly launched a letter into space, which by good luck reached me after a certain amount of peregrination. His account, received in January, 1886, is as follows: —

" H.M.S. ' Marlborough', Portsmouth. (685) " For the last year, or for about the last 15 months, I have been in the habit of mesmerising a fellow-student of mine. The way 1 did it was by simply looking into his eyes as he lay in an easy position on a bed. This produced sleep. After a few times I found that this sleep was deepened by making long passes after the patient was ofi". ^ Then comes

1 In conversation, I learnt (as I expected) that during the trance Mr. Cleave was to a considerable degree insensitive to pain, and that, on waking, he had no memory of any actions that he had been made to perform, or of what had passed around him.

the remarkable part of this sort of mesmerism. [Mr. Sparks then describes his ' subject's ' ability to see, in the trance, places in which he was interested, if he resolved to see them before he was hypnotised; but there is nothing to show that these visions were anything but purely subjective.] However, it has been during the last week or so I have been so surprised and startled by an extraordinary affair. Last Friday evening (January 15th, 1886) he expressed his wish to see a young lady living in Wandsworth, and he also said he would try to make himself seen by her. I accordingly mesmerised him, and continued the long passes for about 20 minutes, concentrating my will on his idea. When he came round (I brought him round by just touching his hand and willing him, after 1 hour and 20 minutes' trance) he said he had seen her in the dining-room, and that after a time she grew restless, and then suddenly looked straight at him and then covered her eyes with her hands. Just after this he came round. Last Monday evening (January 18th, 1886) we did the same thing, and this time he said he thought he had frightened her, as after she had looked at him for a few minutes she fell back in her chair in a sort of faint. Her little brother was in the room at the time. Of course, after this we expected a letter if the vision was real; and on Wednesday morning he received a letter from this young lady asking whether anything had happened to him, as on Friday evening she was startled by seeing him standing at the door of the room. After a minute he disappeared, and she thought that it might have been fancy; but on the Monday evening she was still more startled by seeing him again, and this time much clearer, and it so frightened her that she nearly fainted.

" This account I send you is perfectly true, I will vouch, for I have two independent witnesses who were in the dormitory at the time when he was mesmerised, and when he came round. My patient's name is Arthur H. W. Cleave, and his age is 18 years. My own is 19 years. A. 0. Darley and A. S. Thurgood, fellow-students, are the two witnesses I mentioned. "H. Percy Sparks."

Mr. Cleave writes, on March 15, 1886: —

"H.M.S. 'Marlborough,' Portsmouth.

"Sparks and myself have, for the past 18 months, been in the habit of holding mesmeric seances in our dormitories. For the first month or two we got no very satisfactory results, but after that we succeeded in sending one another to sleep. I could never get Sparks further than the sleeping state, but he could make me do anything he liked whilst I was under the influence; so I gave up trying to send him off, and all our efforts were made towards my being mesmerised. After a short time we got on so well that Sparks had three or four other fellows in the dormitory to witness what I did. I was quite insensible to all pain, as the fellows have repeatedly pinched my hands and legs without my feeling it. About 6 months ago I tried my power of will in order, while under the influence, to see persons to whom I was strongly attached. For some time I was entirely unsuccessful, although I once thought that I saw my brother (who is in Australia), but had no opportunity of verifying the vision.

" A short time ago, I tried to see a young lady whom I know very well, and was perfectly surprised at my success. I could see her as

plainly as I can see now, but I could not make myself seen by her, although I had often tried to. After I had done this several times, I determined to try and make myself seen by her, and told Sparks of my idea, which he approved. Well, we tried this for five nights running without any more success. We then suspended our endeavours for a night or two, as I was rather over-exerted by the continued efibrts and got severe headaches. We then tried again (on, I think it was, a Friday, but am not certain), and were, I thought, successful; but as the young lady did not write to me about it, I thought I must have been mistaken, so I told Sparks that we had better give up trying. But he begged me to try once more, which we did on the following Monday, when we were successful to such an extent that I felt rather alarmed. (I must tell you that I am in the habit of writing to the young lady every Sunday, but I did not write that week, in order to make her think about me.) This took place between 9.30 p.m. and 10 p.m. Monday night, and on the following Wednesday morning I got the letter which I have enclosed. I, of course, then knew I had been successful. I went home about a fortnight after this, when I saw the young lady, who seemed very frightened in spite of my explanations, and begged me never to try it again, and I promised her that I would not.

" I must now tell you our method of mesmerism. I lay on my bed, with my head raised on two pillows, and Sparks sat facing me about three feet olF on a chair. The lights were made low, and then I watched his eyes intently, thinking in the meantime of the young lady whom I wanted to see. After a short time (about 7 minutes) my sense of hearing left me, and I could see nothing but two eyes, which after a short time disappeared, and I then became senseless. (When we first experimented I could never get farther than this state, and it was only after repeatedly trying that I did so.) I then seemed to see (indistinctly at first) her face, which gradually became plainer and plainer until I seemed to be in another room altogether, and could detail minutely all the surroundings. I told Sparks, when I came round, what I saw, who was with the young lady, and what she was doing, all of which were verified in her letter.

"A. H. W. Cleave."

The two witnesses of the experiment last described write as follows: —

" I have seen Mr. Cleave's account of his mesmeric experiment, and can fully vouch for the truth thereof.

" A. C. Daeley."

" I have read Mr. Cleave's statement, and can vouch for the truth of it, as I was present when he was mesmerised and heard his statement after he revived.

"A. E. S. Thurgood."

The following is a copy, made by the present writer, of the letter in which the young lady. Miss A., described her side of the afiair.

The envelope bore the postmarks, "Wandsworth, Jan. 19, 1886," "Portsmouth, Jan. 20, 1886," and the address, " Mr. A. H. W. Cleave, H.M.S. ' Marlborough,' Portsmouth."

VOL n. 2 X

" Wandsworth.

"Tuesday morning.

" Dear Arthur, — Has anything happened to you? Please write and let me know at once, for I have been so frightened.

" Last Tuesday evening, I was sitting in the dining [room] reading, when I happened to look up, and could have declared I saw you standing at the door looking at me. I put my handkerchief to my eyes, and when I looked again, you were gone. I thought it must have been only my fancy, but last night (Monday), while I was at supper, I saw you again, just as before, and was so frightened that I nearly fainted. Luckily only my brother was there, or it would have attracted attention. Now do write at once and tell me how you are. I really cannot write any more now."

[Signature of Christian name.]

It will be seen that Miss mentions Tuesday as the day of

her first hallucination; whereas both Mr. Sparks and Mr. Cleave mention Friday as the day on which he first seemed to obtain a vision of the room where she was; and though, in a letter written on March 21st, Mr. Cleave expresses uncertainty on this point, and inclines to the view that his first vision of the room occurred on the Tuesday, " as I waited for a day or two to see if I should get a letter before I tried again " on the following Monday, it is impossible to set aside the earlier statement. But in conversation, both he and Mr. Sparks expressed their decided opinion — which accords with what would be naturally inferred from their letters — that Tuesday must at any rate have fallen within the five days running on which trials were made, before the break; and the first incident therefore gives valuable confirmation to the second. Mr. Cleave's omission to write as

usual to Miss on the Sunday was perhaps an error of judgment;

as it leaves it open to the objector to say that the non-receipt of a letter on Monday morning so wrought on her mind as to conjure up a spectral illusion, to which she had become predisposed by her experience of the previous week.

Mr. Cleave explains that though he might naturally enough have

imagined Miss to be in the dining-room at that hour, it

would have seemed to him more probable, had he made a guess at the scene, that other elder members of the family should also be present, than that she should have been alone with her little brother — which is so far an argument for supposing his vision to have been of the telepathically clairvoyant sort, and not a mere subjective picture. But the nature of his percipience is, of course,

a separate question; -^ the prime fact in the case is the halhicination

produced by his agency. Miss, it will be seen, was so seriously

disturbed by what occurred that she has requested him not to repeat the experiment. Her feeling is natural enough — it is just one of the natural conditions that " psychical research " has to reckon with. Every department in the exploration of Nature has difficulties of its own; and it would be strange if a study that deals with living human material were an exception. That the particular form of obstacle here again encountered (see Vol I., p. 109) may make the accumulation of evidence for the rarer psychical phenomena a slow process is probable enough; but that the prolongation of our search should have already brought us a single fresh instance of this rarest type is really a fact of the most hopeful significance, and one which would alone amply vindicate the plan of wide and public inquiry that we have adopted.

The next account is perhaps even more remarkable, as the agent was in a normal state. We owe it to Mrs. Russell, of Belgaum, India, wife of Mr. H. R Russell, Educational Inspector in the Bombay

Presidency.

"June 8th, 1886. (686) " As desired, I write down the following facts, as well as 1 can recall them. I was living in Scotland, my mother and sisters in Germany. I lived with a very dear friend of mine, and went to Germany every year to see my people. It had so happened that I could not go home as usual for two years, when on a sudden I made up my mind to go and see my family. They knew nothing of my intention; I had never gone in early spring before; and 1 had no time to let them know by letter that 1 was going to set off. I did not like to send a telegram, for fear of frightening my mother. The thought came to me to will with all my might to appear to one of my sisters, never mind which of them, in order to give them a warning of my coming. I only thought most intensely for a few minutes of them, wishing with all my might to be seen by one of them — half present myself, in vision, at home.^ I did not take more than ten minutes, 1 think. I started by Leith steamer on a Saturday night, end of April, 1859. I wished to appear at home about 6 o'clock p.m. that same Saturday. I arrived at home about 6 o'clock on the Tuesday morning following. I entered the house without anyone seeing me, the hall being cleaned and the front door open. I walked into the room. One of my sisters stood with her back to the door; she turned round when she heard the door opening, and, on seeing me, stared at me, turning deadly pale and letting what she had in her hand fall. 1 had been silent. Then I spoke, and said, ' It is I. Why do you look so frightened? ' when she answered, ' I thought I saw you again as Stinchen ' (another sister) ' saw you on Saturday.'

1 If the case was truly reciprocal, it seems clearly to exemplify the connection of the power to act telepathically with an abnormal extension of the agent's own susceptibility. See pp. 161-2 and 309-10.

2 Note by Mr. Russell: — "I.e., she was at home, and saw her people, in thought."

VOL. II. 2x2

" "When I inquired, she told me that on the Saturday evening, about 6 o'clock, ray sister saw me quite clearly entering the room in which she was by one door, passing through it, opening the door of another room where my mother was, and shutting the door behind me. She rushed after what she thought was I, calling out my name, and was quite stupefied when she did not see me with my mother. My mother could not understand my sister's excitement. They looked everywhere for me, but of course did not find me. My mother was very miserable; she thought I might be dying.

" My sister who had seen me {i.e., my apparition) was out that morning when I arrived. I sat down on the stairs, to watch, when she came in, the effect of my real appearance on her. When she looked up and saw me, sitting motionless, she called out my name, and nearly fainted. My sister has never seen anything unearthly either before that or afterwards; and I have never made any such experiments again — nor will I, as the sister that saw me first when I really came home had a very severe illness afterwards, caused by the shock to her nerves. " J. M. Russell."

Mrs. Russell wrote to ask her sister (Fraulein Hoist, of 7, Wohler's Allee, Altona, Holstein) if she recollected the occurrence, and has copied an extract from her sister's reply, of which the following is a translation: —

" Of course I remember the matter as well as if it had happened to-day. Pray don't come appearing to me again! " Fraulein Hoist declines, however, to give an independent account, on the ground of dislike to the subject.

I proceed to some more hypnotic cases. The following is an apparently genuine, though isolated, case of the telepathic influence of will on a hypnotic " subject," who however was at the time in a normal state. {Gf. Vol. I., pp. 89-94.) The further experiment with the same "subject" recalls the cases in Vol. I., p. 96, and above, pp. 334-6. We received the account in May, 1886, from Mr. E. M.

Clissold, of 3, Oxford Square, W.

" United University Club,

" Pall Mall East, S.W. c (687) " In the year 1878 (I believe), there was a carpenter (Gannaway)

''^ ^ employed by me to mend a gate in my kitchen garden, when a friend of mine (Moens) called upon me, and the conversation turning on mesmerism, he asked me if I knew anything about it myself. On my replying in the affirmative, he said, ' Can you mesmerise anyone at a distance? ' I said that I had never tried to do so, but that there was a man now in the garden upon whom I could easily operate, and that I would try the experiment with this man, if he (Moens) would tell me what to do. He then said, ' Form an impression of the man whom you intend mesmerising in your mind, and then wish him strongly to come to you.' I very much doubted the success of the enterprise, but I followed out the suggestion of my friend, and 1 was extremely astonished to hear the steps of the man, whom I wished to appear, running after me; he came right up to me and asked me what 1 wanted with him. I must explain that my friend was walking with me previously in the garden, and that we had seen and talked to the

man whom I subsequently mesmerised, but that when I wished him to come to me I was out of his sight, behind the garden wall, some 100 yards distant, and that I had neither by conversation nor otherwise led him to believe that I proposed to mesmerise him.

" My friend (Moens) is dead; the man Gannaway I have not heard of for more than seven years; but I have this day written to him, and asked him, if he remembers the incident alluded to, to write to me, and in his own language describe the scene. I may tell you that I have not supplied him with any of the above details, but have left him (if he can) to tell his own story.

"E. M. Olissold."

Mr. Gannaway writes back, in a letter which Mr. Clissold has forwarded to us, that he remembers being often mesmerised by Mr. Clissold, and he recalls some incidents of his experiences; but he does not recollect this particular occasion. One sentence of his letter is as follows: — " I remember, in the dining-room, when you made me think the same as you were thinking about, and I told you what you were thinking of." Mr. Olissold explains that this was an occasion when the Hon. Auberon Herbert was present, and he thus describes it: —

"June 1, 1886.

" Gannaway was mesmerised, and stood in one corner of my diningroom. Herbert sat at the table, and wrote on a paper a subject on which he wished me to think. Gannaway instantly told me, when I asked him, what the thought was about. Herbert wrote; —

" ' 1. I see a house in flames.

" ' 2. I see a woman looking out of a window.

" ' 3. She has a child in her arms.

" ' 4. She throws it out of the window.

" ' 5. Is it hurt? ' &c., &c.

" Gannaway became much excited, as he appeared to witness these scenes acted before him. I am conscious that if there had been mala fides on my part, there was nothing in the experiment; but it was quite honestly conducted, and we were all of us very much surprised at the wonderful accuracy with which Gannaway interpreted my thoughts."

I wrote to Mr. Auberon Herbert, asking him if he remembered participating in an experiment in thought-transference, made with Mr. Clissold's " subject," Gannaway, in which the ideas transferred related to a conflagration. He replied: —

" Ashley Arnewood Farm, Lymington.

"June 22nd, 1886.

" My recollection is as follows; some of the details have escaped me. I thought of a house on fire. Gannaway (a carpenter, I think), on my asking him what I saw, answered quite rightly. I then asked him again what I saw, and he answered quite rightly, ' Fire-engine coming up.' Then the conversation went on (I have shortened it). I. ' Ah! something has happened! what is it? ' G. ' A horse, belonging to the fireengine, has fallen down.' (Quite right.) My memory is quite distinct up to this point as to the questions and answers, though I cannot exactly remember the part Gannaway and Mr. Olissold took respectively. I

remember very distinctly I thought of and asked these questions, and I believe it was Gannaway himself who answered them directly to me. The next point was that, in answer to what I saw, he said they were throwing feather-beds out of a top-storey window — this also was perfectly right — but on this point my memory is not so clear as on the first three points. I have as clear and positive a memory as a man could have about the three first points, (1) fire, (2) fire-engine, (3) horse falling down. They were all quite fairly asked, and quite fairly answered; and I believe I might add to them the fourth point, ' the feather bed,' but I cannot speak positively on this. Then comes a curious point. I imagined an entirely difierent scene — I cannot recall it, but it was to do with a wood^ — and his power seemed to fail entirely. He made quite wrong answers. I have no doubt about the truthfulness of the whole proceedings. One night I had mesmerised him, and told him he was in a boat, and attacked by a shark. If I had allowed it, he would have almost battered himself to pieces in striking with both arms upon the floor, where he thought the shark was.^ He was an extraordinary man. It was enough, when you knew him, to look in his eyes to have influence over him. Kindly tell Mr. Clissold I most fully corroborate his statement as far as I know it.

" AuBERON Herbert."

Another gentleman who was present on this occasion was Mr. A. T. T. Peterson, of Arnewood Towers, Lymington, who believes that it was he who drew up the programme of the experiment. His account is as follows: —

"June 24th, 1886.

"I drew out a programme in writing of what I wished the operator to think without speaking, in order to try the mere power of the operator over the patient. On this occasion Herbert was the operator, Gannaway the patient. Programme. — A fire-engine with two horses galloping on a public road. One of the horses falls down; gets up again, and on they go. A house on a rising ground on the left on fire. A woman in her nightdress, with a baby in her arms, imploring for help from the first floor. People are throwing beds out of some of the windows of the rooms, which are taken to opposite where the lady was. The child is thrown out and caught all right. The woman jumps out, and is caught and saved.

" This paper I handed to Herbert, requesting him not to say a word, which request he obeyed. He put Gannaway into trance, and Gannaway acted the part [of spectator, presumably,] to the very letter.

" A. T. T. Peterson."

[Mr. Peterson goes on to describe another equally successful experiment where the picture transferred was a fishing-scene. Possibly this preceded the failure which Mr. Herbert mentions.]

It is in connection with hypnotism that the most striking telepathic results have been obtained, in the recent rapid development of " psychical research " among French men of science. The

1 It is of course important to distinguish this phenomenon (which is of a very ordinary type, and is merely of interest here as indicating the reality of the hypnotic state, ) from the telepathic result before described.

cases here given were reported to the Societe de Psychologie Physiologique towards the close of last year, and were published in the Revue Philosophique for February and for April, 1886. The observations themselves, and the circumstances of their publication, mark a distinct step in the scientific recognition of telepathic phenomena on the Continent. The first report — Note sur quelques Phenomenes de Somnambulisme — is from Professor Pierre Janet, of Havre, a Corresponding Member of the S.P.P.

(688) " Grace a I'obligeance d'un medecin bien connu de la ville du Havre, M. le docteur Gibert, j'ai pu pendant une quinzaine de jours observer certains phenomenes curieux de somnambulisme...

" Le sujet sur lequel ces experiences ont ete faites est une brave femme de la campagne, que nous designerons sous le nom de Mme. B. Elle a toujours eu, autant du moins que Ton pent le savoir, une tres bonne sante, et en particulier elle ne presents a I'etat normal aucun des signes de I'hysterie. Elle est seulement sujette depuis son enfance a des acces de somnambulisme naturel, pendant lesquels elle pent parler et decrire les singuli^res hallucinations qu'elle parait eprouver. Son caractere pendant sa vie ordinaire est tres honnete, tres simple et surtout tres timide; quoique son intelligence paraisse fort juste, Mme. B. n'a re^u aucune instruction, elle ne salt pas ecrire et epelle k peine quelques lettres. Plusieurs medecins ont deja, parait-il, voulu faire sur elle quelques experiences, mais elle a toujours refuse leurs propositions. Ce n'est que sur la demande de M. Gibert qu'elle a consent! a venir passer quelques jours au Havre, du 24 septembre au 14 octobre 1885, et c'est pendant ce court sejour que nous avons eu I'occasion de I'observer.

" II est assez facile de mettre Mme. B. en etat de somnambulisme artificiel; il suffit pour cela de lui tenir la main en la serrant legerement pendant quelques instants."

The usual symptoms of deep hypnotic trance presented themselves, including complete insensibility to light, sound, and pain.

" Neanmoins il est un genre d'excitation auquel Mme. B. reste sensible pendant ce sommeil. Celui qui I'a endormie, et celui-la seul, a le pouvoir de provoquer a volonte une contracture partielle ou generale. II suifit, par exemple, qu'il place un doigt dans I'extension forcee pour qu'il reste raide comme un morceau de bois, et une personne etrangere ne parvient pas a le flechir. Si a ce moment le magnetiseur touche meme legerement le doigt contracture, il s'assouplit instantanement. Pour provoquer la contracture generale, il suffit que le magnetiseur place sa main etendue k une petite distance au-devant du corps."

Other persons could not produce these effects in the slightest degree; and in several other ways the person who had hypnotised the subject retained, during her trance, a quite peculiar influence over her.

After about 10 minutes of deep sleep, Mme. B. would wake into a somnambulic state, in which she was completely sensible to impressions, and could answer questions.

" Mais le caractere, ainsi qu'on I'a frequemment remarque, n'est plus du tout le meme qu'a I'etat de veille. Au lieu d'etre simple et timide, Mme. B. est devenue subitement tres hardie, tres vive, pleine de caprices et toute disposee a se moquer de tout le monde, quelquefois avec esprit."

From this stage she could be wakened to the normal state by the person who had hypnotised her, but hy no one else (see "Vol. I., p. 88, note); if not wakened she soon relapsed again into the state of deep sleep.

The first phenomena suggestive of " psychical " influence presented themselves in the process of hypnotisation.

" M. Gibert tenait un jour la main de Mme. B. pour I'endormir; mais il etait visiblement preoccupe et songeait a autre chose qu'a ce qu'il faisait: le sommeil ne se produisit pas du tout. Cette experience repetee par moi de diverses manieres nous a prouve que pour endormir Mme. B. il fallait concentrer fortement sa pensee sur I'ordre du sommeil qu'on lui donnait, et que plus la pensee de I'operateur etait distraite, plus le sommeil etait difiicile a provoquer. Cette influence de la pensee de I'operateur, quelque extraordinaire que cela paraisse, est ici tout k fait preponderante, a un tel point qu'elle peut remplacer toutes les autres. Si on presse la main de Mme. B. sans songer a I'endormir, on n'arrive pas a provoquer le sommeil; au contraire, si Ton songe a I'endormir sans lui presser la main, on y reussit parfaitement."

Experiments of this sort were often repeated; but it is impossible, as M, Janet fully recognises, absolutely to exclude the hypothesis that the hypnotisation was due to some suggestion of the purpose in view, unconsciously conveyed by gesture, or attitude, or mere silence and appearance of expectation. This objection would not apply to other cases in which M. Gibert, without warning, and at a moment then and there fixed on by M. Janet or another friend, produced a distinct effect on the subject from another part of the town — the fact being immediately verified by M. Janet; who on one occasion found that the " subject," on feeling the impulse to sleep, had only prevented herself from yielding to it by putting her hands in cold water; and on two others, found her in a deep trance from which only M. Gibert could wake her. On the last of these occasions, M. Gibert, at a distance, further willed three times, at intervals of 5 minutes, the performance of certain actions during the trance, which the entranced " subject" began to execute, though obviously rebelling against the impulse, and ending with a laugh, " Vous ne pouvez pas. si peu, si peu que vous soyez distrait, je me rattrape."

" Mais les suggestions mentales, car ce mot me parait ici bien a sa place, peuvent etre faites sur Mme. B. d'une autre maniere et avoir un tout autre succes. On reussit peu, comme nous I'avons dit, quand on lui commande d'executer I'ordre immddiatement pendant le sommeil; on reussit beaucoup mieux quand on lui commande mentalement une action a executer plus tard quelque temps apres le reveil. Le 8 octobre M. Gibert fit une suggestion de ce genre: sans prononcer aucun mot il approcha son front de celui de Mme. B. pendant le sommeil lethargique, et pendant quelques instants concentra sa pensee sur I'ordre qu'il lui donnait. Mme. B. parut ressentir une impression penible et poussa un gemissement; d'ailleurs le sommeil ne parut pas du tout §tre derange. M. Gibert ne dit

a personne I'ordre qu'il avait donn^ et se contenta de I'ecrire sur un papier qu'il mit sous enveloppe. Le lendemain je revins aupres de Mme. B. pour voir I'effet de cette suggestion qui devait s'executer entre 11 heures et midi. All heures 1/2 cette femme manifeste la plus grande agitation, quitte la cuisine ou elle etait, et va dans une chambre prendre un verre qu'elle emporte; puis, surmontant sa timidite, se decide a entrer dans le salon ou je me trouvais, et toute emue demande si on ne I'a pas appelee; sur ma reponse negative elle sort et continue plusieurs fois a monter de la cuisine au salon sans rien apporter d'ailleurs. Elle ne fit rien de plus ce jour-la, car bientot elle tomba endormie a distance par M. Gibert. Yoici ce qu'elle raconta pendant son sommeil: ' Je tremblais quand je suis venue vous demander si on m'avait appelee — il fallaitqueje vienne — c'etait pas commode de venir avec ce plateau — pourquoi veut-on me faire porter des verres — qu'est-ce que j'allais dire, n'est-ce pas — je ne veux pas que vous fassiez cela — ^il fallait bien que je dise quelque chose en venant.' En ouvrant I'enveloppe, je vis que M. Gibert avait commande hier a Mme. B. 'd'ofirir un verre d'eau a chacun de ces messieurs.' Ici encore il faut reconnaitre que I'experience n'avait pas entierement reussi, la suggestion n'avait pas ete executee; peut-on nier du moins qu'elle n'ait ete comprise 1

" Voici maintenant une experience plus significative. Le 10 octobre, nous convenons, M. Gibert et moi, de faire la suggestion suivante: ' Demain a midi fermer a clef les portes de la maison.' J'inscrivis la suggestion sur un papier que je gardais sur moi et que je ne voulus communiquer a personne. M. Gibert fit la suggestion comme precedemment en approchant son front de celui de Mme. B. Le lendemain quand j'arrivai a midi moins un quart je trouvai la maison barricad^e et la porte fermee a clef. Renseignements pris, c'etait Mme. B. qui venait de la fermer; quand je lui demandai pourquoi elle avait fait cet acte singulier, elle me repondit: ' Je me sentais tres fatiguee, et je ne voulais pas que vous puissiez entrer pour m'endormir.' M. Bernheim et M. Richet ont deja parle de ces personnes qui inventent des raisons pour s'expliquer a elles-memes un acte qu'elles font ne'cessairement sous I'influence d'une suggestion. Mme. B. etait a ce moment tres agitee; elle continua a errer dans le jardin, et je la vis cueillir une rose et aller visiter la bolte aux lettres placee pres de la porte d'entree. Ces actes sont sans importance, mais il est curieux de remarquer que c'etait precisement les actes que nous avions un moment songe a lui commander la veille. Nous nous etions decides a en ordonner un autre, celui de fermer les portes, mais la pensee des premiers avait sans doute occupe I'esprit de M. Gibert pendant qu'il commandait, et elle avait eu aussi son influence.

" Voici une troisieme experience qui ne meriterait pas d'etre racontee, car elle reussit moins bien que la precedente, mais elle est interessante cependant, car elle montre combien le sujet peut resister a ces suggestions mentales. Le 13 octobre, M. Gibert lui ordonne toujours par la pensee d'ouvrir un parapluie le lendemain a midi et de faire deux fois le tour du jardin. Le lendemain elle fut tres agitde a midi, fit deux fois le tour du jardin, mais n'ouvrit pas de parapluie. Je I'endormis peu de temps apres pour calmer une agitation qui devenait de plus en plus grande. Ses premiers mots furent ceux-ci: ' Pourquoi m'avez-vous fait marcher tout

autour du jardin — j'avais I'air bete — encore s'il avait fait le temps d'hier par example — mais aujourd'hui j'aurais ete tout a fait ridicule.' Ce jour-la il faisait fort beau et la veille ii pleuvait beaucoup: elle n'avait pas voulu ouvrir un parapluie par un beau temps de peur de paraitre ridicule. La suggestion avait au moins ete comprise si elle n'avait pas ete ex^cutee entierement."

In April, 1886, Mr. Myers and Dr. A. T. Myers had the opportunity of witnessing some further experiments made with this " subject." ^ The times at which the trials were made were always chosen without premeditation. It is true that Mme. B. had come to Havre for a few weeks for the purpose of hypnotic experiments, and may therefore have had a general idea that attempts to influence her from a distance were likely to be made; but the closeness of the coincidences, coupled with the fact that she is not liable to go into spontaneous trances at other times, makes it in the highest degree improbable that the results were due to accident.

(1) " In the evening of April 22, 1886," says Mr. Myers, " we dined at M. Gibert's, and in the evening M. Gibert made an attempt to put Mme. B. to sleep at a distance (from his house in the Rue Sery to the Pavilion, Rue de la Ferme), and to bring her to his own house by force of will. At 8.55 he retired to his study; and MM. Ochorowicz, Marillier, Janet, and A. T. Myers went to the Pavilion, where Mme. B. was staying, and waited outside in the street. At 9.22 Dr. Myers observed Mme. B. coming half-way out of the garden-gate, and again retreating. Those who saw her more closely observed that she was plainly in the somnambulic state, and was wandering about and muttering. At 9.25 she came out (with eyes persistently closed, so far as could be seen), walked quickly past MM. Janet and Marillier, without noticing them, and made for M. Gibert's house, though not by the usual or shortest route. (It appeared afterwards that the honne had seen her go into the salon at 8.45, and issue thence asleep at 9.15: had not looked in between those times.) She avoided lamp-posts, vehicles, &c., but crossed and re-crossed the street repeatedly. No one went in front of her or spoke to her. After eight or ten minutes she grew much more uncertain in gait, and paused as though she would fall. Dr. Myers noted the moment in the Rue Paure; it was 9.35. At about 9.40 she grew bolder, at 9.45 reached the street in front of M. Gibert's house. There she met him, but did not notice him, and walked into his house, where she rushed hurriedly from room to room on the ground-floor. M. Gibert had to take her hand before she recognised him. She then grew calm.

" M. Gibert, before hearing Dr. Myers' statement, said that from 8.55 to 9.20 he thought intently about her; from 9.20 to 9.35 he thought more feebly; at 9.35 he gave the experiment up, and began to play billiards; but in a few minutes began to will her again. It thus appeared that his visit to the billiard-room had coincided with her hesitation and stumbling

1 A fuller account of these experiments will be found in Part X. of the Proceedings of the S.P.R.

in the street. She may, however, have hesitated merely because she was not sure of the way.

(2) " On April 23, M. Janet lunched in our company, and retired to his own house at 4.30 (a time chosen by lot) to try to put her to sleep from thence. At 5.5 we all entered the salon of the Pavilion, and found her asleep with shut eyes, but sewing vigorously (being in that stage in which movements once suggested are automatically continued). Passing into the talkative state, she said to M. Janet, ' C'est vous qui m'avez fait dormir a quatre heures et demi.' The impression as to the hour may have been a suggestion received from M. Janet's mind. We tried to make her believe that it was M. Gibert who had sent her to sleep, but she maintained that she had felt that it was M. Janet.

(3) "On April 24 the whole party chanced to meet at M. Janet's house at 3 p.m., and he then, at my suggestion, entered his study to will that Mme. B. should sleep. We waited in his garden, and at 3.20 proceeded together to the Pavilion, which I entered first at 3.30, and found Mme. B. profoundly asleep over her sewing, having ceased to sew. Becoming talkative, she said to M. Janet, ' C'est vous qui m'avez commandee.' She said that she fell asleep at 3.5 p.m."

Writing from Havre on June 18, 1886, M. Janet gives the following brief summary of the results obtained in the particular experiment of inducing " sommeil a distance," during this visit of Mme. B. to Havre: —

" ISTe parlons pas des suggestions de sommeil faites par la pensee en se tenant devant le sujet, ou meme dans une autre piece de la maison; on n'est jamais assez certain que le sujet ne soit pas du tout prevenu. II ne s'agit ici que des experiences tenfcees de loin, de chez M. Gibert ou de chez moi, c'est-a-dire, a 500 metres au moins du pavilion ou se trouvait Mme. B. Les experiences faites dans ces conditions, soit par M. Gibert, soit par moi, sont aii nombre de 21 pendant ce second sejour de Mme. B. au Havre. Je ne compte pas un essai fait au milieu de la nuit dans des conditions deplorables. Considerons comme echecs toutes les experiences dans lesquelles le sujet n'a pas ete trouve endormi quand on entrait dans le pavilion, ou meme celles dans lesquelles le sujet a mis plus d'un quart d'heure a s'endormir apres I'instant de la suggestion mentale. Le nombre de ces insucces a ete de 6, et chacun d'eux peut avoir une explication precise. II reste a retenir 15 succes precis et complets, ou 15 coincidences extraordinaires, suivant que I'on voudra les comprendre d'une maniere ou d'une autre."

The next record is from M. J. Hericourt, of 50, Rue de Miromenil, Paris.

(689) " L'observation que je rapporte ici date de I'annee 1878, epoque a laquelle je I'ai communiquee a mon ami M. Charles Richet, qui I'a gardee fidelement et prudemment dans ses cartons, pour des raisons faciles a comprendre.

" II s'agit d'une jeune femme de vingt-quatre ans, d'origine espagnole, veuve et mere d'une petite fille de cinq ans.... L'examen le plus minutieux n'a pu faire decouvrir chez elle aucune tare hysterique, personnelle ou hereditaire."

M. Hericourt easily succeeded in hypnotising Mme. D. on the first trial.

" J'endormais Mme. D. avec une facilite chaque jour plus grande. En efFet, apres quinze jours environ de cet entrainement special, je n'avais plus besoin pour obtenir ce resultat ni du contact ni du regard: il me sufiisait de vouloir, tout en m'abstenant de toute espece de geste qui put traliir mon intention. Etait-elle en conversation animee au milieu de plusieurs personnes, tandis que je me tenais dans quelque coin dans Tattitude de la plus complete indifference, que je la voyais bientot, a mon gre, lutter contre le sommeil qui I'envahissait, et le subir d^finitivement, ou reprendre le cours de ses idees, selon que moi-meme je continuais ou cessais d'appliquer ma pensee au resultat a obtenir.

" Et meme je pouvais regarder fixement mon sujet, lui serrer les pouces ou les poignets, et faire toutes les passes imaginables des magnetiseurs de profession; si ma volonte n'etait pas de I'endormir, il restait parfaitement ^veille, et convaincu de mon impuissance.

" Mais bientot, ce ne fut plus seulement d'une extremite a I'autre d'une chambre que je songeai a exercer mon action; d'une piece a une autre, d'une maison a une autre maison, situee dans une rue plus ou moins <^loignee, le meme resultat fut encore obtenu.

" Les circonstances dans lesquelles j'exergai ainsi pour la premiere fois cette action a longue distance meritent d'etre rapportees avec quelques details. Etant un jour dans mon cabinet (j'habitais alors Perpignan), I'idee me vint d'essayer d'endormir Mme. D., que j'avais tout lieu de croire chez elle, et qui habitait dans une rue distante environ de 300 metres de la mienne. J'etais d'ailleurs Men eloigne de croire au succes d'une pareille experience. II dtait trois heures de I'apres-midi, je me mis a me promener de long en large, en pensant tres vivement au resultat que je voulais obtenir; et j'etais absorbe par cet exercice, quand on vint me chercher pour voir des malades. Les cas etant pressants, j'oubliai momentanement Mme. D. que je devais d'ailleurs rencontrer vers quatre heures et demie sur une promenade publique. M'y etant rendu a cette heure, je fus tres etonne de ne I'y point voir, mais je pensai qu'apres tout, mon experience avait bien pu reussir; aussi, vers cinq heures, pour ne rien compromettre et retablir les choses en leur etat normal, dans le cas ou cet etat eut et^ eifectivement trouble, par acquit de conscience, je songeai a reveiller mon sujet, aussi vigoureusement que tout a I'heure j'avais songe a I'endormir.

" Or, ayant eu I'occasion de voir Mme. D. dans la soiree, voici ce qu'elle me raconta, d'une maniere absolument spontanee, et sans que j'eusse fait la moindre allusion a son absence de la promenade. Vers trois heures, comme elle etait dans sa chambre a coucher, elle avait ete prise subitement d'une envie invincible de dormir; ses paupieres se faisaient de plomb, et ses jambes se d^robaient — jamais elle ne dormait dans la journee — au point qu'elle avait eu a peine la force de passer dans son salon, pour s'y laisser tomber sur un canape. Sa domestique etant alors entree pour lui parler, I'avait trouvee, comme elle le lui raconta plus tard, pale, la peau froide, sans mouvement, comme morte, selon ses expressions. Justement effray^e, elle s'etait mise a la secouer vigoureusement, mais sans parvenir cependant a autre chose qu'a lui faire ouvrir les yeux. A ce moment, Mme. D. me dit qu'elle n'avait eu conscience que d'eprouver un violent mal de tete qui, parait-il, avait disparu subitement vers cinq heures. O'etait pr^cisement le moment ou j'avais pense a la reveiller.

" Oe recit ay ant ete spontane, je le repete, il n'y avait plus de doute a conserver: ma tentative avait certainement reussi. Afin de pouvoir la renouveler dans des conditions aussi probantes que possible, je ne mis pas Mme. D. au courant de ce que j 'avals fait, et j'entrepris toute une serie d'experiences dont je rendis temoins nombre de personnes, qui voulurent bien en fixer les conditions et contrdler les resultats. Parmi ces personnes, je citerai le medecin-major et un capitaine du bataillon de chasseurs dont j'etais alors I'aide-major. Toutes ces experiences se ramenent en somme au type suivant.

" Etant dans un salon avec Mme. D., je lui disais que j'allais essayer de I'endormir d'une piece voisine, les portes etant fermees. Je passais alors dans cette piece, ou je restais quelques minutes avec la pensee bien nette de la laisser eveillee. Quand je revenais, je trouvais en efiet Mme. D. dans son etat normal, et se moquant de mon insucces. Un instant plus tard, ou un autre jour, je passais dans la meme piece voisine sous un pretexte quelconque, mais cette fois avec I'intention bien arretee de produire le sommeil, et apres une minute a peine, le resultat le plus complet etait obtenu. On n'invoquera ici aucune suggestion autre que la suggestion mentale, puisque V attention expectante, mise en jeu dans toute sa force, lors de I'experience precedente, avait ete absolument sans action. Les conditions de ces experiences, qui se contr61ent reciproquement, sont d'une simplicite et d'une valeur sur lesquelles j 'attire I'attention, parce qu'elles constituent une sorte de schema a suivre pour la demonstration.

" Mme. D. pretendait que, toutes les fois que je pensais a elle, elle ressentait une vive douleur dans la region precordiale; c'etait d'ailleurs cette meme douleur qu'elle eprouvait encore quand les seances de somnambulisme se prolongeaient, et qui me determinait a y mettre fin. De fait, apres convention prealable, si je voulais que Mme. D. descendit de chez elle, je n'avais qu'a m'arreter dans une rue voisine de la sienne, et a lui en donner I'ordre mentalement. Je ne tardais pas a la voir arriver, et toujours elle me disait que sa dotdeur au coeur lui avait indique ma presence."

The next account, from Dr. E. Gley, of 37, Rue Claude Bernard, Paris, records some observations of his friend, Dr. Dusart, (published in the Tribune Medicate in May, 1875), on a girl of 14, whom he found suffering from obstinate hysterical attacks, and for whom he easily procured sleep by a simple hypnotic process.

(690) " J'avais observe que, quand, en faisant des passes, je me laissais distraire par la conversation des parents, je ne parvenais jamais a produire un sommeil suffisant, meme apres un long espace de temps. II fallait done faire une large part a I'intervention de ma volonte. Mais celle-ci suffirait-elle sans le secours d'aucune manifestation exterieure? Voila ce que je voulus savoir.

" A cet efiet j'arrive un jour avant I'heure fixee la veille pour le reveil, et, sans regarder la malade, sans faire un geste, je lui donne mentalement I'ordre de s'eveiller: je suis aussitdt obei. A ma volonte, le delire et les cris eommencent. Je m'assieds alors devant le feu, le dos au lit de la malade, laquclle avait la face tournee vers la porte de la chambre,

je cause avec les personnes presentes, sans paraitre m'occuper des cris de Mile. J., puis, a un moment donne, sans que personne se fut apergu de ce qui se passait en moi, je donne Yordre mental du sommeil, et celui-ci se produit. Plus de cent fois I'experience fut faite et variee de diverses faQons: I'ordre mental ^tait donne sur un signe que me faisait le Dr. X., et toujours I'effet se produisait. Un jour, j 'arrive lorsque la malade etait eveillee et en plein delire; elle continue, malgre ma presence, a crier et s'agiter, je m'assieds et j 'attends que le Dr. X. me donne le signal. Aussitdt celui-ci donne et I'ordre mental formule, la malade se tait et s'endort. 'Yous saviez que j'etais la depuis quelque temps?' 'Non, monsieur; je ne me suis apergue de votre presence qu'en sentant le sommeil me gagner; j'ai eu alors conscience que vous ^tiez assis devant le feu.'

" Je donnais chaque jour, avant de partir, I'ordre de dormir jusqu' au lendemain a une heure determin^e. tin jour, je pars, oubliant cette precaution; j'etais a 700 metres quand je m'en apergus. Ne pouvant retourner sur mes pas, je me dis que peut-etre mon ordre serait entendu, malgre la distance, puisque a 1 ou a 2 metres un ordre mental etait execute. En consequence, je formule I'ordre de dormir jusqu'au lendemain 8 heures, et je poursuis mon chemin. Le lendemain, j'arrive a 7 heures et demie; la malade dormait. ' Comment se fait-il que vous dormiez encore?' 'Mais, monsieur, je vous obeis.' 'Vous vous trompez; je suis parti sans vous donner aucun ordre.' ' C'est vrai; mais cinq minutes apres, je vous ai parfaitement entendu me dire de dormir jusqu'a 8 heures. Or il n'est pas encore 8 heures.' Oette derniere heure etant celle que j'indiquais ordinairement, il etait possible que I'habitude fut la cause d'une illusion et qu'il n'y eut ici qu'une simple coincidence. Pour en avoir le coeur net et ne laisser prise a aucun doute, je commandai a la malade de dormir jusqu'a ce qu'elle regut I'ordre de s'eveiller.

" Dans la journee, ayant trouvd un intervalle libre, je resolus de completer I'experience. Je pars de chez moi (7 kilometres de distance), en donnant I'ordre du reveil. Je constate qu'il est 2 heures. J'arrive et trouve la malade eveillee: les parents, sur ma recommandation, avaient note I'heure exacte du reveil. C'etait rigour eusement celle a laquelle j 'avals donn^ I'ordre. Cette experience, plusieurs fois renouvelee, a des heures difFe rentes, eut toujours le meme resultat.

" Mais voici qui paraitra plus concluant encore.

" Le 1^^ Janvier, je suspendis mes visites et cessai toute relation avec la famille. Je n'en avals plus entendu parler, lorsque le 12, faisant des courses dans une direction opposee et me trouvant a 10 kilometres de la malade, je me demandai si, malgre la distance, la cessation de tous rapports et I'intervention d'une tierce personne (le pere magn^tisant desormais sa fille), il me serait encore possible de me faire obeir. Je defends a la malade de se laisser endormir; puis, une demi-heure apres, reflechissant que si, par extraordinaire, j'etais obdi, cela pourrait causer prejudice a cette malheureuse jeune fille, je leve la defense et cesse d'y penser.

" Je fus fort surpris, lorsque le lendemain, a 6 heures du matin, je vis arriver chez moi un expres portant une lettre du p^re de Mile. J. Celui-ci me disait que la veille, 12, a 10 heures du matin, il n'etait

arrive a endormir sa fille qu'apres une lutte prolongee et tres douloureuse. La malade, une fois endormie, avait declare que, si elle avait resiste, c'etait sur mon ordre, et qu'elle ne s'etait endormie que quand je I'avais permis.

"Oes declarations avaient ^te faites vis-a-vis de temoins auxquels le pere avait fait signer les notes qui les contenaient. J'ai conserve cette lettre,

dont M. me confirma plus tard le contenu, en ajoutant quelques details

circonstancies."

I 3. I come now to the spontaneous cases. The following seems

to be an instance of casual spontaneous transference of an idea; and

strikingly exemplifies the latency of the impression, and its emergence

after several hours, which has been so frequently noted in the course

of this work. Mrs. Lethbridge, of Tregeare, Launceston, Cornwall,

writes: —

" Bella Yista, Corsier, Yevey, Switzerland.

" April 10th, 1886.

(691) "In December, 1881, my husband was slowly recovering from a severe illness: and one afternoon, about 5 o'clock, I went into his study, where he had gone for 2 or 3 hours, to see if he wanted anything. Finding him asleep in his armchair, I left him, and having some village lending-library books to sort, I went into the small room where they were kept, called the ' box-room ' (in a distant part of the house), to do so. There, to my surprise, I saw our gamekeeper's dog, Vic, curled up. On seeing me she rose, wagged her tail, turned half round and lay down again. This dog had never been inside the house before, which was the reason of my surprise at seeing her where she was. However, I turned her out of doors, and there I thought the matter ended. I am quite sure I did not mention the matter to my husband.

" He went to bed very early that evening, and had a most restless night, talking a great deal in his sleep. While fast asleep he related the whole occurrence of ' Hawke's dog, Yic,' actually being found in the box-room, even describing the animal's behaviour, rising, turning half round and lying down again. Next morning I asked my husband if he had dreamt 1 ' No, not that he knew of.' If he had not dreamt of Vic? ' No, why of Vic 1 ' Then I asked him if by any chance he had heard where Vic had been found the previous evening? ' No. Where? ' And when I told him, he was extremely astonished, just because the dog had never been known inside the house before, and the box-room was on an upper landing. Subsequently I related to him what he had said in his sleep, but he evidently had not the slightest recollection of it.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Lethbridge adds: —

"I am glad my account interested you, and regret extremely that it cannot be corroborated, for I ftdly understand the necessity in investigations such as yours to obtain perfectly trustworthy evidence, and free from intentional or unintentional exaggerations or inaccuracies. My dear husband died about 16 months ago. On receiving your letter I tried to find out whether he mentioned the occurrence in his diary, but unfortunately the diary of that year (1881) was left behind in England.

" From mine, which I succeeded in finding, written at the time, I copy out the following brief notice, dated Dec. 14th, 1881. 'Baron talked a great deal in his sleep last night, and curiously enough he described how the terrier was found curled up on the mat in the box-room, which actually happened yesterday, probably for the first time in the terrier's life, for I was so amazed at finding the dog in so unusual a place that I called the children to see it. But the strange part is this. Baron was asleep in the study at the time, and no one had told him of the occurrence. Of this I am quite sure.^

" I mentioned the occurrence to several people at the time, but as it happened 5 years ago, I doubt if any of them would recall it quite accurately."

[Mr. Lethbridge's complete forgetfulness is clearly a strong indication that the news of the occurrence had not reached him in any normal way — e.g., by overhearing the children speaking of it.]

The following experiences belong to a class whose force, in the cumulative proof of telepathy, is comparatively small — the class of mere impressions, without any sensory affection; but they are in themselves well-evidenced cases, the records of the impressions having been carefully written down before the news of the corresponding event arrived. The narrator is Mr. J. C. Grant, of 98, Cornwall Gardens, S.W.; from whose very full journal they were copied by the present writer. Mr. Grant desires that the names of the persons mentioned shall not be printed; but says that "the fullest information is open to private inquiry." The instance which was second in date is given before the earlier one, as being more complete, and is the only one to which I have attached an evidential number.

(692) Entry in diary for April 11, 1882.

" A very strange thing happened to me last night. It has happened once before. After being asleep some little time, I was wakened up, quite quietly and with no dread or horror, but with the absolute and certain knowledge that there was a ' presence ' in my room. I looked everywhere into the darkness, implored it to appear, but to no efiect; for though I have the gift of ' feeling,' I have not that of ' sight.' I felt certain, in fact was told by it, that it was to do with Bruce [Christian name]. I thought it was his father — I was sure it was: I thought he must be dead. ^ All this took place in about a couple of minutes or so; and as I saw I could see nothing, I got up, struck a match, lighted the candle at my bedside, and looked at my watch. It was just 14 minutes past 12 o'clock. I then put out the candle; but all feeling of the presence had gone. It had spoken as only a spirit 2 can speak, and then had passed away. I did not get to sleep for a long time, and was very unhappy for poor Bruce.... I

1 Mr. Grant explains this sentence as follows: — "I knew his father to be very seriously ill, which no doubt was the reason why my thoughts took this direction."

2 See p. 48, note.

have been quite out of sorts all day for poor old Bruce, to whom I wrote this morning. Told M. and R. of my feeling and experiences of the night."

[The entry for April 12 mentions a conversation with Mr. and Mrs. M., in which Mr. Grant remembers that he described the occurrence.]

Entry for April 13.

" In afternoon went over to my aunt M.'s, had a long talk with her, told her and J. and others all about my presentiment. I have not heard from poor Bruce yet."

Entry for April 14.

" Up early, at half -past seven — expecting a letter. The letter has come, as I expected — deep black edge; but it is not his father, but his brother, that has died, poor old E., date and all, on Tuesday.... I wrote to him this morning. I will not tell him of my strange meeting of Tuesday morning or Monday night.... Witnesses to this strange pre-knowledge of mine: Mrs. R., my housekeeper; Mrs. C, my aunt; J., my cousin (Captain C.); other cousins, Mrs. M. and Mr. M., Mr. H. R., and Mme. G. So you see ^ I am not without my authorities, besides my written journal."

Entry for April 15.

" Wrote a long letter to my father, giving him what news there was, and telling him about my queer experience."

The following is a copy, made by the present writer, of a letter written to Mr. Grant by Mr. M., on June 3, 1886:—

" We distinctly remember your telling us about the strange circumstance that took place before ^ the death of one of your friends. The details have escaped our memory, but we remember that it was a case of premonition, which was afterwards verified. " C W. M."

The date of death appears in the Times obituary as April 10, 1882. This was Monday, not Tuesday; and probably Mr. Grant assumed that the day on which his friend heard of the death was the day of the death itself. The death, which took place in China, can only have fallen within 12 hours of his experience if it occurred in the few hours preceding midnight.

Mr. E. T. R., who died, was an intimate friend of Mr. Grant's, but not so intimate as his brother Bruce.

Entry in diary for Wednesday, Dec. 10, 1879. (Mr. Grant was at the time in Southern India.)

" Yesterday I had a peculiar sensation. When I say yesterday, I mean last night.... I have as it were an inner eye opened. I had a sort of unconscious feeling that, if I were to wish it, I could see some strange visitant in the chamber with me — someone disembodied. [Here

1 The journal, though a private one, is in many parts WTitten as if addressed to an imaginary reader.

2 The wording of this letter, and Mr. Grant's expressions above, illustrate what I have more than once remarked on — the common tendency to describe what are really telepathic impressions, coinciding with or closely following real events, as prophetic and premonitory. See p. 535, note, and p. 569.

VOL. II, 2 Y

follow some words of description which, though general and not distinctive, apply perfectly to the particular person who, as it turned out, died at the time, and would have applied equally naturally to only a small group of persons. Mr. G-rant has what appear to me valid reasons for withholding the clause from publication.] I forced the idea from me, and fell into a troubled sleep."

Entry for Dec. 11.

" Went in afternoon to the library; thence to C.'s. Hear by telegram, while there, of the death of my uncle, Mr. C, on Tuesday. Wonder if that had anything to do with my feelings the night before last."

We find in the obituary of a leading newspaper that the death took place on Dec. 9, 1879.

Mr. Grant states that he had had no idea that anything was the matter with his uncle.

I have studied in Mr. Grant's diary the full record of a third case, Tvhich was even more remarkable than the first, as it included the peculiarity that, for some time after his first impression, he felt forcibly impelled to draw the figure of the person who died. The case was made the more striking to me by the fact that Mr. Grant was so certain that the death (the time of which he had only very vaguely learnt) must have coincided in date with his impression, that he had actually not taken the trouble to verify the coincidence. He left it to me to find in the Times obituary — as he confidently foretold that I would — that the death (which was quite unexpected) occurred, thousands of miles from the place where he was, on the day preceding that on which the entry in his diary, relating his impression of the previous night, was written. The impression of that night did not, however, bear distinct reference to the particular person who died, but was a more general sense of calamity in the family. Certain reasons which at present make it desirable not to publish the details of this case may in time cease to exist.

Mr. Grant writes, on May 31, 1886:—

" Except on these three occasions, I have never, to the best of my recollection, had any feeling in the least resembling those described."

To pass now to examples where the senses were concerned — the following is an auditory death-case of the ordinary type. The narrator is Mrs. Evens, mentioned above (pp. 176 and 344).

(693) In 1885, Mrs. Evens filled up a census-form (p. 7) with the information that about September, 1858, in the early hours of the night, she experienced an auditory hallucination representing the voice of a " most intimate and deeply attached friend. She died suddenly that night. The lady was French. We had been very intimate, and she had frequently mesmerised me for neuralgia. We had been parted for more than a year — she in France and I in England. I had been to sleep, but woke as if I were called. I sat up, saw nothing, but heard distinctly, in the well-known and beloved voice, ' Adieu, ma cherie ' (her name for me).

It was not till a week after that I heard of her sudden and quite unexpected death (she not having been ill) on that night. At the time, I had no feeling of surprise or fear. I may mention that only during the last year I heard, in an indirect manner, that, under the pressure of great horror, she was supposed to have committed suicide."

In reply to inquiries, Mrs. Evens writes: —

" Oldbank, Enniskillen.

"December, 1885.

" I was staying in a country house, but not with (at that time) very intimate freinds, and 1 cannot feel sure that I mentioned the circumstance. I shall be writing to one of them soon, and will ask if she remembers my speaking of it at all. The recollection, except as to precise date, is as vivid in my mind as ever — the tone of the voice, as of one not stationary, but leaving the room by the door,i which was on the left side and near the head of my bed; and likewise the words, distinctly spoken. I left France in 1857, and my friend died in 1858. It was the year before my marriage, and I was then a girl of 20. I had no terror, or even surprise; but equally little when I heard of her sudden death, which I seemed to have foreknown. As to the hour, I gathered that it must have been tolerably simultaneous with the death. We did not go to our rooms till 11 ever in that house. I had the sensation of being awoke out of my first sleep. My friend was found dead and cold (in her house in Alsace) between 4 and 5 in the morning. Having led a wandering life since my marriage, I have kept no letters of so long ago. The circumstances of the loss of my beloved friend, and my jirin belief in her desire to take leave of me, are both indelibly impressed on my memory. I wish, for the sake of science, my details were more satisfactory.

" I was a parlour boarder from '55 to '57 (inclusive) at the Chateau Giron, then a large and well-known school. Mme. H. was one of the principals; the friendship between us was of a very close and unusual kind. She was just the sort of woman whose ' will ' once more to see a dear friend would triumph over almost any difficulties, as I always believe it did. a Agnes Evens."

In reply to further inquiries, Mrs. Evens adds: —

" In my own mind I always associate the hearing of the voice with a Sunday night. You will say this is unreliable, and so it is, but I find that in the recollection of my domestic events, births, deaths, &c., my recollection of the day of the week, with its associations, is more reliable than that of the date.

" As to any other [auditory] hallucinations, the only one I can remember is the sound of music unusual in character, &c., but it took place when I was worn out with nursing and grief, and I have always assigned it to an abnormal condition of the nervous system, associated with a time of such sorrow that I can hardly bear to go back upon it.

" I seemed not so much to be awoke hy the voice as to wake to hear it. I had no doubt as to whose it was; it produced the effect of a passing, not stationary, voice; the words, distinctly uttered, were ' adieu, ma cherie.' I heard yesterday from the friend with whom I was staying at

1 I have mentioned (Vol. i., p. 573) how frequently visual hallucinations, alike of t subjective and the telepathic class, present this feature of movement.

the time. She says, ' We both' (herself and sister) ' well remember about your friend Mme H., and what a terrible attack of neuralgia you had just at the time when she died.' I had forgotten this latter circumstance. It would account in some measure for the want of distinctness in my recollections."

We have procured from the Registrar at Rappoltsweiler an official certificate of the death, which states that it occurred at 2 p.m., on Sept. 5th, 1858. This was a Sunday — which confirms Mrs. Evens' recollection. The death must have preceded her experience by at least 10 hours.

The next case, also auditory, is apparently one of direct reproduction of the agent's sensation. (See cases 267-270.) It is from Mr. J. G, F. Russell, of Aden, Aberdeenshire (the narrator of case 196). The agent was a near relative who had been making a long stay with Mr. and Mrs. Russell.

" 32, Upper Brook Street, Grosvenor Square, W.

"December 18th, 1885.

(694) " On Wednesday, December 2nd, 1885, I was woke up at night, between 12 p.m. and 2 a.m. (as far as I can recollect), by hearing myself distinctly called from a small passage outside my bedroom door; the voice seemed to come from just outside the door itself. I got up, fearing Mrs. Waller, in the adjoining room, was ill, but, as the calling of my name was no longer repeated, I did not then disturb her. (There is no door of communication between the rooms, the wall is solid, and a gigantic wardrobe is against it.) Next morning I asked her if she had called me during the night; but she declared she had slept ' like a top,' and had never thought of me or anyone else. I did not mention the incident to her sister (who had just left us after a long visit), but she (Mrs. Waller) did, on returning to the country. I enclose what Miss Young wrote to me, solely from her sister mentioning to her my having questioned her. The dates correspond exactly; it was the first night of Mrs. W^aller's visit.

" J. G. F. Russell."

The following is the extract from Miss Young's letter to Mr. Russell: —

" I will tell you something that has struck me rather. The two nights my sister was with you in London were very disturbed nights to me; you were continually in my dreams, and one of those nights I found myself sitting up in bed, having woke myself up by calling you loudly by name. When she came back she told me you had asked her one morning whether she had called you in the night, as you had distinctly heard your name. I wish I could remember which night it was. I have an impression it was the first. u Blanche Young."

Mr. Russell (who gave me the account viva voce on December 16th, a fortnight after the occurrence,) has explained that the wall between his room and the next is so thick that even a very loud cry in one would be almost inaudible in the other. He has never had such a hallucination on any other occasion.

The following cases are visual. The first is from Mr. Teale, of

50, Hawley Road, Kentish Town, N.W.

"June, 1886.

(695) " In 1884, my son Walter was serving in the 3rd. King's Royal Rifles Regiment, in the Soudan. The last we had heard from him was a letter informing us that he was about to return to England, which he expected would be about Christmas time. Things were in this position on the 24th October, 1884, when on returning home in the evening, I said, (noticing my wife looking very white,) ' Whatever is the matter with you 1 ' and she said she had seen Walter, and he had stooped down to kiss her, but owing to her starting he — like — was gone, so she did not receive the kiss.

" After that we had a letter from the lady nurse at Raraleh Hospital to say that the poor boy had a third relapse of enteric fever; they thought he would have pulled through, but he had been taken, and when we had that letter, it was a week after he died. But the date when the letter was written corresponded with the date of the day when Walter appeared, which was on the 24th October, 1884.

[When Mr. Teale used these words, he had not referred to the letter, and was under the impression that it had been written on the very day of the death, which (as will be seen below) was October 24.]

" My son Frederick, Selina, and Nelly were in the room, but none of them saw Walter; only Fred heard his mother scream, ' Oh! ' and Fred asked her what was the matter. I thought, having heard many tales of this kind, I would set it down; so I put the date on a slip of paper. He was in his regimentals, and she thought he had come on furlough to take her by surprise — knowing the back way; but when she saw he was gone, and the door not open, she got dreadfully frightened.

"Feed. J. Teale."

Mrs. Teale herself died in April, 1886, after an illness due in great measure to the shock of the bereavement.

Mr. Teale has shown me the letters which were received during August, September and October, 1884, respecting his son's condition. A letter, dated August 20, which the son dictated and signed, states that he is in hospital, down with enteric fever. The next letter, dated September 7, which was similarly dictated and signed, states that he has had a very serious illness, but is much better, and hopes soon to be home. The next letter, dated October 12, from Sister Thomas, states that he had had a bad relapse a fortnight previously, but " is getting on very nicely now." This was the last letter received before October 24. In a letter dated October 52, Lieutenant W. H. Kennedy states that the death had taken place on the preceding day; and in a letter dated October 28, Sister Thomas states that the death occurred about 2 o'clock p.m., on Friday, October 24. This date has been confirmed to us by an ofiicial communication from the Depot at Winchester.

In conversation, Mr. Teale explained to me that his wife's experience took place between 7 and 8 in the evening — which would be between 7 and 8 hours after the death. She was at the time sitting at the table, talking. The son who was present is at a distance; but Miss Teale

showed me how the persons in the room were placed, and described to me how she saw her mother start, and heard her exclamation. Mr. Teale is certain that his wife never experienced any other visual hallucination; and he says that she was of anything but a brooding temperament, and was not at the time anxious about her son. His note of the date of the vision was on the back of an envelope, which he carried in his pocket-book. He thought that this envelope was lost; but was kind enough, at my request, to make a search, which brought it to light. The envelope, which lies before me, bears his address, and the post-mark London, N., Feb. 22, 84; the pencil note on the back of it is 24-10-84.

The next case is from the Erev. R. Markham Hill, of St.

Catherine's, Lincoln.

"June 17, 1886.

(696) " On the evening of Easter Sunday, about 8 or 9 years ago, I think, I was just beginning my supper, feeling very tired after the day's work, when I saw the door opening behind me.^ I was sitting with my back to the door, but could just see it over my shoulder. I may also have heard the opening, but cannot speak with certainty upon this point. I turned half round, and just had time to see the figure of a tall man rushing hastily into the room, as if to attack me. I sprang up at once, turned round, and threw the glass, which I held in my hand, at the spot where I had seen the figure, which had disappeared in the act of my rising. The disappearance had, however, been too sudden to arrest the act of throwing. I then realised that I had seen an apparition, and I immediately connected it with one of my uncles, whom I knew to be seriously ill. Moreover, the figure which I saw resembled my uncle in stature. Mr. Adcock came in, and found me quite unnerved by the occurrence; and to him I related the circumstances. I don't remember telling him that I connected the vision with my uncle. The next day a telegram came announcing my uncle's death on the Sunday. My father was summoned to my uncle's death-bed unexpectedly, on the Sunday evening as he was sitting at supper, and the death must have coincided in time with what I saw. u ^ Maekham Hill."

The E,ev. H. Adcock, of Lincoln, writes: — u j^j^g \Q 1886

" I called on my friend, the Rev. Markham Hill, one evening, and found him apparently in an exhausted condition in an arm-chair; he told me, before I could ask for any explanation, that he had just seen the figure of his uncle standing opposite to him against the wall, behind a piano; that he lifted up a glass from the table, and was about to throw it at him, when the figure vanished. He said he felt convinced that he should very shortly hear of his uncle's death. It was only the following day, or the day after, that he showed me a letter received that morning informing him that his uncle had died on the day when the appearance took place."

In conversation, Mr. Podmore learnt from Mr. Hill that he was alone at the time. He has had no other visual hallucination in his life, unless it were an experience which impressed him in somewhat the same way as this one, but which may well have been merely a case of mistaken identity.

^ See p. 612, note.

Mr. Adcock explained that the above incident must have occurred about 12 years ago., He cannot remember whether it was a Sundayevening.

We find from the Register of Deaths that Mr. Hill's uncle died on April 5, 1874, which was Easter Sunday.

[It would be diificult to account for the hallucination here as due to anxiety respecting the uncle's condition. If a person's mind, from brooding over the condition of a sick relative, is led to evolve a phantasm of that relative, we should certainly expect the appearance to be recognised; and we should not expect its character to be at once unfamiliar and formidable.

It will be seen that the two accounts difier as to whether the glass was actually thrown.]

The next example belongs to the " borderland" class. It is one of the cases where the agent's bond of connection has apparently been with someone who was in the percipient's company at the time of the experience, rather than with the actual percipient. {Cf. Nos. 242 and 355.) The narrator desires that his name may not appear, as the family of the agent, whom he has already assisted liberally, might base on the incident described a sentimental claim to further favours.

"June 12, 1886. (697) " There can be no doubt whatever that there is some transmission for which no explanation has yet been given by the savants.

" I am a practical business man, and look upon all theories of Spiritualism, tfec, as so much humbug that only deludes weak-minded people. But at the same time, I recently had an experience of a most extraordinary character, which I should scarcely have believed if related to me of anyone else, and the plain facts of which I will give as they actually occurred.

" I had in my employ a clerk who contracted an illness which incapacitated him from regular attendance at his duties. He was absent about six months in 1884, and, on leaving the hospital, as I found that he was unable to resume his regular work, I agreed with him that he should come to the office whenever he felt able to do so, and that I would pay him for the work so done. This arrangement continued for some months; then, at the beginning of April, 1885, he had to stay away altogether for two or three weeks. He seemed in fair general health, but he was troubled with a diseased ankle-joint, which prevented him from getting about. I was in no anxiety on his account, however, and had no apprehension of any serious illness. My wife, who knew Mr. Z. from seeing him occasionally at my private house, did not even know that he was absent from the office at this time.

" On the night of the 27th-28th April, I was wakened by my wife calling out convulsively, ' There is someone looking at you.' Though by no means timid as a rule — a practical woman, not subject to nervous fancies of any kind — she was much disturbed and terrified. She jumped out of bed, and turned up the gas. Finding no intruder in the room, and all the doors locked, she got back into bed; but she was shivering all over.

and it was some time before I succeeded, in quieting her. The clock in the hall struck 1 during this disturbance.

" In the morning we referred to the incident, and I told my wife she must have been suffering from nightmare.

" Later on that day, news was brought to my office that poor Z. had passed away in the night. When I got home in the evening, my wife met me as usual at the door, and I said to her, ' I have some sad news to tell you.' Before I could say more she replied, ' I know what it is; poor Z. is dead. It was his face which I saw looking at you last night.'

" I afterwards learnt, from a man who lodged in Mrs. Z.'s house, that he had died just at 1 o'clock in the morning of the 28th, and that in the delirium which preceded his death, he called upon me to look after his wife and children when he was gone."

Mrs. B., the percipient, writes: —

