§ 1. In the chapter on " borderland " cases, and again in Chapter XII., when illustrating the development of hallucinations by the percipient's own imagination under the stimulus of a telepathic impulse, I quoted several instances in which two of his senses played a part — as where an impression of sound preceded and led up to the visible phantasm. And I have mentioned (pp. 23-4) that the proportion of the telepathic cases in which the experience assumes such a complex or multiple form seems decidedly larger than obtains among the purely subjective hallucinations of the sane. The present chapter will contain those remaining telepathic instances which belong to seasons of complete waking consciousness. In some of these, as it happens, the sense of touch is involved; and I may take the opportunity of saying a necessary word or two on affections of that sense. Among purely subjective hallucinations of the sane, those of touch seem to be rarer even than those of sight, and much rarer than those of hearing. My large collection includes only 68 examples (a few being cases of repeated experiences), of which 43 were of touch only, 8 were associated with a visual hallucination, 13 with an auditory hallucination, while 4 concerned all three senses. The canvassed group of 5705 persons (pp. 7, 8) yielded only 23 distinct experiences of the sort; and of these 23, one occurred to a person who was out of health, one in association with a visual, and two in association with an auditory hallucination. Moreover, in many of the cases where touch alone has been concerned, it is easy to suppose that the sensation was caused by an involuntary muscular twitch — an instance is even on record where a hallucination of sight and sound took its origin in an objective sensation, caused by the momentary cramp of a muscle^ —

1 Paterson's paper in the Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal for Jan., 1843.

134 TACTILE CASES AND CASES AFFECTING [chap.

so that the number of genuine tactile hallucinations would be even smaller than appears. It will not surprise us, then, to find that telepathic affections of this sense — or what might reasonably be adduced as such — are also rare. A couple of cases have been already quoted; in neither of which did the touch suggest any human contact, while each included a peculiarity beyond the mere touch — the first that of pain (Vol. I., p. 188), and the second probably that of sound (p. 132, above). We have, however, a few cases where the mere touch is alleged to have been more or less distinctive,^ of which I will quote here one specimen. Mr. J. C. Harris, of Wellington, New Zealand, proprietor of the New Zealand Times and New

Zealand Mail, writes:—

"July 6th, 1885.

(292) "My wife had an uncle, a sea captain, who was very fond of her as a child, and often, when at home at London, used to take her on his knee and stroke down her long thick hair. She, with her parents, went from London to Sydney, and her uncle pursued his avocation in other parts of the world. Some 3 or 4 years afterwards, she was upstairs, dressing for dinner, and had her hair loose upon her shoulders; suddenly she felt a hand placed on the top of her head, and brought down smartly along her hair on to her shoulders. Startled, she turned round and exclaimed, ' Why, mother, how could you frighten me so 1 ' for she assumed her mother had played a little joke on her. There was no one there however. When she related the circumstance at the dinner-table, a superstitious^ friend present advised them to make a note of the day and date. This was done. In due course came the news of the death of her uncle, William, on that day — allowing for difference of longitude at about the time she felt the hand on her head.

"J. Chantrey Harris."

The following is Mrs. Harris's own account of her experience: —

" Hill Street, Wellington, New Zealand.

"December 5th, 1885.

" I regret extremely that, anxious as we are to assist, in however small a degree, the cause of science, it is not in my power to give confirmatory evidence of my own little experience. Of the friends who were associated with me at the time, but one is living, and she lives away in Queensland. The notes were not considered of sufficient consequence to be kept; and neither mourning card nor obituary notice are available. Consequently my account cannot, as I quite understand, have much value, uncorroborated as it is. However, as a matter of courtesy, I will make my statement, feeling well assured that you will accept it as authentic.

1 In 11 out of the 43 cases just mentioned, the touch is alleged to have been recognised, and in 7 of these the person whose presence was suggested was dead. There is no difficulty in regarding such cases as " after-images "; but see Vol. i., p. 512, note.

2 We are bound to accept Mr. Harris's description; and can only wish that superstition oftener took the form, as here, of prompting the only scientific course.

" The occurrence happened so long ago that, while the incident is fresh enough to my memory, the precise date (never carefully noted) has ^..4^1 escaped it. The year was 1860, the month April. I was a young girl, standing before the dressing-table in my bedroom, arranging some detail of my toilet. It was about 6 p.m., at that time of year, twilight, when suddenly a hand was placed upon my head, passed down my hair, and fell heavily on my left shoulder. Startled at the unexpected touch, I turned quickly to remonstrate with my mother for entering so quietly, when, to my surprise, I found no one there. On the instant my mind flew to England, whither my father had gone the preceding January, and I thought ' something has happened,' though what I could not define.

" I went downstairs, and related my fright to the family. In the course of the evening, Mrs. and Miss W. came in, and, on commenting upon my paleness, were told about the matter. Mrs. W. immediately said, ' Put down the date, and see what comes of it.' This was done; and the incident soon ceased to trouble us, though the family awaited with some anxiety my father's first letter from home. It came in due time, and told how, when he reached England, he found his brother Henry seriously ill — dying, in fact. As a child I had been his little favourite, and in death my name was the last word he uttered.

" Upon comparing dates, and allowing for difierence in longitude, we found that the time of my uncle's death coincided exactly with that of my strange experience. I recollected, too, that it was a familiar habit of my uncle to stroke my hair with a caressing touch. My mother, who resides with me, is the only person who can confirm the story, and she appends her signature to this, in confirmation thereof.

"Elizabeth Harris." (Attesting signature) " Elizabeth Bradford."

In answer to the question whether she has ever had a hallucination of the senses on any other occasion, Mrs. Harris replies: — '

" This is the only experience of the kind in my life."

We find from the Thame Gazette and the Oxford Chronicle that Mrs. Harris's uncle died on May 12, (not in April,) 1860, aged 51.

[The coincidence here seems to have been very close, if we can trust Mrs. Harris's memory that a written note of the date of her impression was compared with the date of the death. But it will be seen that she did not at the time associate her experience with her uncle's former mode of touching her.]

But the more conclusive cases of recognition are naturally those

where a second sense has been concerned; the element of touch being

then a natural enough feature in a highly developed phantasmal

impression. In the following case the second sense involved is that

of hearing. The account is in the words of Mrs. Stone, of Shute Haye,

Walditch, Bridport; it is attested, as will be seen, by the percipient.

(293) "A well-known inhabitant of Walditch, a little village near Bridport, Dorset, died suddenly last May, 1881. We were all very sorry, and felt much for those she had left. She was an honest, industrious woman, a good, affectionate wife and mother. She had been somewhat ailing for

^.c^ «->'«'-

136 TACTILE CASES AND CASES AFFECTING [chap.

some time past, but there was no special cause for alarm, and my daughter saw her engaged (she was a washerwoman) in her usual occupation the day before her death. From her husband I heard the following narrative of facts, which he received from his son, when the latter came down to his mother's funeral: —

" ' My wife latterly was uneasy about one of her sons, Joseph G-undry, who is a pointsman on the Midland Railway, and had risen to an office of much responsibility. Not hearing from him for some time, she feared that he had fallen ill, and did not like to write till there should be no longer any cause for alarm. There was, in fact, such a press of business that he could not find time to write. On the night, or rather morning, of his mother's death, he had the night-duties, and, there being no train about, he sat down for a short time, leaning his arms on a table. He was not asleep and had hardly settled himself, when a hand was placed on his shoulder, and a voice said distinctly: ' Joe, your mother wants you.' As far as we can ascertain this was about the time that his mother passed away. He did not recognise the voice, and saw no one. As there is no post from Bridport that could reach him under two days, his father telegraphed. When the telegram was brought to him, he said, " I know what it is, my mother is dead." ' "

The percipient writes: —

" Hay Street, Sawley, Derby.

"February 16th, 1883. " I have perused the attached, [i.e., the above account] and find it to be substantially correct. I attest the accuracy of the report as printed, and I am prepared to bear it out. " Joseph Gundry."

Mr. Gundry further informs us that he has never on any other occasion experienced any sort of hallucination of the senses.

In the next example the sense of sound is again concerned. The case might be added to those quoted in Chapter XII., § 3, of the gradual development of telepathic hallucinations, leading finally to recognition. The narrator is the Eev. P. H. Newnham, late Vicar of Maker, Devonport, already so often mentioned.

(294) "In July, 1867, 1 was living at Bournemouth, and was temporarily acting as chaplain to the Sanatorium there. A very sad case came in unexpectedly of a young man in the last stage of consumption. He was so ill that we could not take him into the institution, but accommodated him in lodgings. I visited him for some time, as his clergyman. Then the chaplain returned home; and I myself left for my holiday. I did not expect to see the young man again; but, to my surprise, on my return home, on September 21st, I found he was still alive; and the doctors said he might yet live some weeks.

" On Sunday, September 29th, I had been reading prayers at the chapel in the Sanatorium, and the chaplain preached at the evening service. It was near the end of the sermon, and about 8 o'clock, not later, but I cannot tell to five minutes. I suddenly felt a firm, but gentle touch on my right shoulder. So impressed was I with the instinct

that this indicated the presence of some unseen being, that I at once asked ' Is it S.? ' (the Christian name of a pupil of mine, who died in 1860). The answer came back at once, in the clear tones of the inner voice,^ ' No, it's William.' I have no recollection of anything more.

" After service was over, I inquired about my young friend, and was told that the matron had been sent for to him, as he was suddenly taken much worse. Next morning I heard that he died about 8.10. It was, therefore, about 10 minutes before his actual death that I experienced the communication. I may add that I had not been thinking specially about him, that I had not visited him, or received any message from him since my return, and that I had no reason whatever to expect his speedy decease.

"P. H. Newnham."

An obituary notice in the Lyniington and Isle of Wight Chronicle confirms the fact that William Bryer died on September 29, 1867.

Mrs. Newnham corroborates as follows: —

" I perfectly remember my husband telling me, on his return home from the service at the Sanatorium Chapel, of the touch and voice, and saying he felt sure William was dead. He did not hear of his death till the next morning. '' M. Newnham."

[Mr. Newnham seems to have a slight predisposition to subjective iUi^ ^ auditory phantasms, but has never experienced a similar vivid hallucina-,,^(.£1:^ tion of touch.].i-«it.^6

This can hardly be regarded as a subjective experience due to W**^ Uanxiety. Mr. Newnham had, no doubt, a certain emotional interest cv^-Vu in the young man who died, and was aware of his critical condition. ^ But if his hallucination had been a purely subjective one, caused by the latent emotional idea, one would certainly have expected that it would have taken a form suggestive of William; whereas Mr. Newnham actually connected it at first with a different person. So that the non-recognition in this case tends to increase the probability of the telepathic explanation (c/. case 282 above).

In the next case, the second sense involved is that of sight. The narrator is Mrs. Randolph Lichfield, of Cross Deeps, Twickenham. Her husband was precluded from attesting the account in writing, by a painful affection of the hand.

" 1883.

(295) " I was sitting in my room one night, before I was married, close before a toilet-table, on which the book I was reading rested; the table fitted into the corner of the room, and the wide glass on it reached nearly to the ceiling, so that any one in the room could be seen full length. The book I was reading was not at all calculated to affect my nerves, or excite

1 See Vol. i., pp. 480-1.

« t-*

138 TACTILE CASES AND CASES AFFECTING [chap.

my imagination in any way. I was perfectly well, in good spirits, and nothing had occurred since receiving my morning's letters, to remind me of the person concerned in the strange experience you have asked me to relate.

"My eyes were fixed on my book, when suddenly \feU} but did not see, some one come into my room. I looked straight before me into the glass to see who it was, but no one was visible. I naturally thought that my visitor, seeing me deep in my book, had gone out again, when, to my astonishment, I felt a kiss on my forehead — a lingering, loving pressure. I looked up, without the least sensation of fear, and saw my lover standing behind my chair, stooping as if to kiss me again. His face was very white and inexpressibly sad. As I rose from my chair in great surprise, before I could speak, he had gone, how I do not know; I only know that, one moment I saw him, saw distinctly every feature of his face, saw the tall figure and broad shoulders as clearly as I ever saw them in my life, and the next moment there was no sign of him. For the first minute I felt nothing but surprise; perplexity expresses better what I mean; fear, or the idea I had seen a spirit, never entered my mind; the next sensation was that there must be something the matter with my brain, and a feeling of thankfulness that it had not conjured up some terrific vision, instead of an agreeable one. I remember praying that I might not fancy anything that would frighten me.

" The next day, to my great surprise, there was not my usual morning's letter from him; four posts came in and no letter; all the next day, no letter. I naturally objected to the novel feeling of finding myself neglected, but should not have thought of letting theneglector know it, so would not write to inquire the cause of his silence. On the third night — still no letter all day — as T was going upstairs to bed, thinking of something totally unconnected with R., as I put my foot on the top stair, I felt, suddenly, but most intensely, that he was in my room, and that I could see him just as I had done before. For the first time came the fear that something had happened to him. I knew well how intense his desire to see me would be, and thought — ' Could it have been really that I saw him the other night? '

" I went straight to my room, convinced I should see him; there was nothing to be seen. I sat down and waited, and the sensation that he was there, and striving to speak to me, and to make me see him, became stronger and stronger. I waited till I became so sleepy I could not sit up any longer, and went to bed and to sleep. By the first morning's post I wrote and told him I feared he must be ill, as I had not had a letter for three days. I said not one word of what I have told you in this. Two mornings after, I had a few lines, shockingly written, to tell me he had hurt his hand out hunting, and could not hold a pen till that day, but was in ' no danger.' It was not till a few days after, when he could write distinctly, that I knew the whole truth.

" This is it. He had been riding an Irish hunter, a splendid horse across country, but a most vicious creature. This horse was so used to getting rid of any one he found on his back, if he objected to their presence there, and had such a variety of methods of doing so, throwing

1 If, as is probable, this feeling was due to a faint auditory hallucination (Vol. i., p. 528, second note), the case would be one of the rare instances of hallucination of three senses. Compare Nos. 185, 306, 313, 504,.513 (1), 569.

grooms, huntsmen, any one, when the fit seized him, and when he found no amount of rearing, kicking, no bolting, and stopping suddenly, no 'buck-jumping ' would unseat najjiance, and that he had at last found his master, he became desperate. He stood still for an instant, then rushed across the road backwards, reared perfectly straight, and pressed his rider's back against the wall. The crush and pain were so intense, R. thought it must be death, and remembered saying, as he lost consciousness, ' May, my little May! don't let me die without seeing her again.' It was that night he had bent over and kissed me. He turned out not to be really injured, though, of course, in frightful pain, and his hand could not possibly hold a pen. The night I felt so suddenly and so certainly that I should see him, and, when I did not, felt so thoroughly he was there and trying to let me know it, he was at the time worrying himself about not writing to me, and wishing intensely that I might feel there was some reason for his silence.

" I told my mother [since deceased] all, just as I have told you, and she advised me to say nothing about his supposed visit to me till he was quite strong and well again, and I could do so personally. When he came to see me afterwards, I made him tell the whole of his account before I mentioned one word of my strange experience of those two nights.

" 1 have just read this over to him, and he vouches for my having exactly described his share of this strange experience."

§ 2. The remaining cases involve the senses of sight and hearing.

The following account is from the Rev. J. A. Haydn, LL.D., Rector of

Nantenan, Co. Limerick, and was first communicated by him to the

Oxford Phasmatological Society.

" Nantenan Glebe, Askeaton.

"June 18th, 1883.

(296) " I beg to submit to your Society the following brief narrative, extracted from my diary.

" Nine miles from my residence, in the town of Adare, Co. Limerick, lived a gentleman, named Phillips, and his wife. They were on terms of unusually close and affectionate intercourse with myself and my family; they frequently driving over to spend the day here, and we as frequently returning the visit.

"On Thursday, October 16th, 1879, the accouchement of Mrs. Phillips took place; it had been anticipated with some anxiety by her medical attendant; but we were gratified to learn by a letter from Mr. Phillips that the event had passed without evil consequences, and that his wife was rapidly recovering.

"Matters were in this condition when, at 10 o'clock on the night of the ensuing Wednesday, October 22nd, I went to bed as usual. I slept in a little bedstead in an angle of my study downstairs; all the members of the household sleeping in the upper story. I had seen the doors fastened, and the children and servants were all in bed. As is my custom, I was reading in bed, when, in the midst of the hitherto unbroken silence, I heard quick, light footsteps, evidently those of a female, proceeding along the hall, as if entering from the front door, and then traversing the passage that leads to my study door.

140 TACTILE GASES AND CASES AFFECTING [chap.

.,.^*r «« Arrived immediately outside, they seemed to me to resemble those of U^< a person in the dark, vaguely trying to find where the door was. Under the full impression that my wife had come downstairs, I called her name loudly, and asked what was the matter. While I spoke, the noise ceased, but it recommenced immediately; and while I stared at the door, I both heard and saw the handle turned halfway round, ^ and then let go, as if the person entering had changed her mind. Surprised and alarmed, I sprang up with the lamp in my hand and opened the door. All was perfectly still and silent without. None of the household had stirred, nor was any door opened that had been closed.

" I returned to bed, and some few minutes after I heard the clock strike 11. No further disturbance occurred.:7^A'is happened, observe, on Wednesday night, October 22nd, at a little before 11 o'clock.

" On Friday morning I got a letter from Canon O'Brien, the rector of Adare, to say that Mrs. Phillips had died on Thursday morning. I immediately set out to Adare to see my bereaved friend, and found him almost beside himself with grief. Mrs. Phillips, while in other respects advancing to convalescence, had suddenly been seized with scarlatina, which had proved fatal. Thinking it might ease my poor friend to tell me the sad details, I encouraged him to speak on the subject. He complained, as one of his bitterest griefs, that for the last night of her life his wife was delirious, and did not know him or her mother, who was present. ' She sank gradually on Wednesday,' he said, ' and lost her senses on that night — raving about persons and places that had been familiar to her, and evidently fancying herself actually present in distant spots. You were one of the first-mentioned; she imagined that she was in your house speaking to you. I quietly asked whether he happened to have any idea as to what hour this was at, when he answered, ' A few minutes before 11, as I distinctly remember looking at my watch.'

"Thus, at the very time that I, nine miles away, heard the unaccountable noises, my dying friend was speaking and acting as if she were in my presence. It seems impossible not to connect the circumstances.

"John Armoue Haydn."

In answer to our inquiry whether he had ever experienced any other hallucination, Mr. Haydn replies, "My senses have never on any occasion played me false." He further explains: —

"The facts of the narrative and its dates are extracted from the diary, but not the actual language. Those facts were written by me in my diary immediately after their occurrence; my custom, as a general rule, being to record the events of any given day on the following morning. The actual extracts I can give, if required, and should be happy to do so. The story, as told in the printed slip [i.e., the above account], is accurate in all particulars, and most utterly reliable. I may add, and deeply regret to do so, that poor Phillips himself has since died."

The following are the verbatim extracts from the diary: —

" Thursday, October 16th, 1879. Birth Phillips. On the 16th inst., the wife of John D. Phillips, S. I. Adare, Royal Irish Constabulary, of a son."

"Thursday, October 23rd, 1879. A most singular thing occurred last night. Just after going to bed, while I was reading, I heard steps

1 See p. 612 note, and compare cases 696 and 698.

outside my door and in the passage, as of a female walking aimlessly. Thinking it might be Louey, I called, but there was no answer. Immediately after the sounds ceased, the clock struck 11."

"Friday, October 24th, 1879. Letter from Lucius O'Brien, to say — and it was appalling news — that Mrs. Phillips is dead! She died yesterday morning, of fever and scarlatina. I at once determined on going over to Adare, although the roads were knee-deep and the day savagely showery. I can never forget the agony of poor Phillips. He told me that she was getting rapidly worse all day on Wednesday, and that at about half -past \Q on Wednesday night she became delirious, and raved of places where she had been."

The Limerick Daily Chronicle confirms Oct. 23, 1879, as the date of death.

The hallucination here, if telepathic, well illustrates the manner in which the impression received may be developed by the percipient (Vol. I., pp. 539-40). The dying woman's thoughts, in turning to her friend, would naturally be of seeing him and speaking to him, not of an ineffectual attempt to enter his room. But the impression which the brain externalised seems to have got no further than the suggestion of a strange and unexpected visit.

The next account is from Miss Paget, of 130, Fulham Road, S.W. It will be seen that the words which the percipient heard may not unnaturally be referred to the sudden idea in the agent's mind that his unforeseen accident would probably get him into a scrape.

"July 17th, 1885. (297) " The following is the exact account of the curious appearance to me of my brother. It was either in 1874 or 1875. My brother was third mate on board one of Wigram's large ships. I knew he was somewhere on the coast of Australia, but I have no recollection of my having been thinking of him in any special way; though as he was my only brother, and we were great friends, there was a very close bond always between us. My father was living in the country, and one evening I went into the kitchen by myself, soon after 10, to get some hot water from the boiler. There was a large Duplex lamp in the kitchen, so it was quite light; the servants had gone to bed, and I was to turn out the lamp. As I was drawing the water, I looked up, and, to my astonishment, saw my brother coming towards me from the outside door of the kitchen. I did not see the door open, as it was in a deep recess, and he was crossing the kitchen. The table was between us, and he sat down on the corner of the table furthest away from me. I noticed he was in his sailor uniform with a monkey jacket on, and the wet was shining on his jacket and cap.i I exclaimed, ' Miles! Where have you come from 1 ' He answered in his natural voice, though very quickly, ' For Grod's sake, don't say I'm here.' This was all over in a few seconds and as I jumped towards him he was gone. I was very much

1 Compare cases 513, 520, 535, 537.

142 TACTILE CASES AND CASES AFFECTING [chap.

frightened, for I had really thought it was my brother himself; and it was only when he vanished that I realised it was only an appearance. I went up to my room and wrote down the date on a sheet of paper, which I put away in my writing-table, and did not mention the circumstance to any one.

" About three months afterwards my brother came home, and the night of his arrival I sat with him in the kitchen, while he smoked. I asked him in a casual manner if he had had any adventures, and he said, ' I was nearly drowned at Melbourne.' He then told me he was ashore without leave, and on returning to the ship, after midnight, he slipped oflE" the gangway between the side of the ship and the dock. There was very little space, and if he had not been hauled up at once, he must have been drowned. He remembered thinking he was drowning, and then became unconscious. ^ His absence without leave was not found out, so he escaped the punishment he expected. I then told him of how he had appeared to me, and I asked him the date. He was able to fix it exactly, as the ship sailed from Melbourne the same morning, which was the reason of his fear of being punished, as all hands were due to be on board the evening before. The date was the same as the date of his appearance to me, but the hours did not agree, as I saw him soon after 10 p.m., and his accident was after midnight. He had no recollection of thinking specially of me at the time, but he was much struck by the coincidence, and often referred to it. He did not like it, and often when he went away said, ' Well, I hope I shan't go dodging about as I did that time.'

" I was about 22 at the time, and he was 20. I was always rather afraid I might see him or others after this, but I have never, before or since, had any hallucination of the sense of sight. My brother died abroad three years ago, and I had no warning then, nor do I imagine I shall ever see anything again. I am never on the look out for things of that kind, but if I ever saw anything again I would make a note of it. I destroyed the note I made of the date as soon as I had verified it, not thinking it could interest or concern anyone else. a g,uTH Paget "

[I received a third-hand account of this incident two years before the above was written, and this older account completely agreed with the present more recent one; which shows, at any rate, that the incidents stand out with distinctness in Miss Paget's memory. In conversation, Miss Paget told me that at the moment when she mistook the apparition for her brother himself, she accounted for the wetness, which she so distinctly remarked, by supposing that he had got wet through with rain. She is quite sure that the coincidence of night was clearly made out, when she and her brother talked the matter over — which of course makes her statement as to the coincidence of date technically incorrect, as the accident occurred after midnight. If longitude be allowed for, the impression must have followed the accident by about 10 hours.]

The next case is from Marian Hughes, confidential maid and secretary to Miss Julia Wedgwood, of 31, Queen Anne Street, W.

1 See p. 26.

"December, 188:^.

(298) " In the winter of 1878, my sister, Mrs. Barnes, was much pressed to marry a man named Benson, who was much attached to her; and not succeeding in his suit, he told her if she would not marry him, he would take employment in India. He obtained a situation to go out to Madras.

" One Saturday night, about 9 o'clock, I, in the following spring, went to see my sister; she was much agitated, and told me that, just before I came in, she had been on her knees scrubbing the floor of a room on the ground floor (with a window that anyone could stand at and look in), when she heard herself called twice, ' Annie, Annie,' and looking up at the window, she saw what looked to her like the face of the friend who had wanted to marry her. She at once got up and rushed out, but finding no one there became convinced she had seen an apparition announcing the death of her friend. On the following Monday, she sent to the firm in the City with which he was connected, and was informed that he had been ill, but was better when last heard of. Shortly afterwards, knowing Mr. H. Wedgwood's interest in this kind of story, I informed him of the occurrence, before it was known how it fared with my sister's friend in India.

" My sister, some weeks afterwards, told me that she had learnt from his employers in the City that he had died on the evening of the day she had seen the apparition in London. " Marian Hughes."

The Registrar of the Diocese of Madras writes to us that he can find no record of Benson's burial; and an exhaustive search in the records of the India Oflice has been equally unsuccessful. We learn, howevei', from the India Ofi&ce that the returns do not profess to be absolutely complete.

Writing on the case on March 4, 1883, Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood says: —

" The story was told me by Marian Hughes, my daughter's confidential maid and attached friend, whose truthfulness may be entirely relied on. I wanted to hear it from her sister herself, but found that she considered it too solemn a subject to speak about. I was told of the apparition of the friend in India shortly after it occurred, and requested Marian to inform me as soon as they had news of the result." He adds: —

" My note of the case [i.e., the original note made when he first heard Marian Hughes' account] was dated May 16th, 1878. I say, 'One Saturday evening about six weeks ago,' &c. On July 19th, in an article, I say, ' By the end of June it was known that Annie's friend had died suddenly on the evening of Saturday, 30th March, the day noted by Annie as the day of the apparition.' "

[Mrs. Barnes has had an auditory hallucination on one other occasion, when she heard herself called by the voice of her husband, who, it turned out, had died at a distance two days before.]

It is rare for nautical stories to reach the level of evidence. The following, however, is a case where the testimony seems hardly to leave room for a doubt that a hallucination of a particular kind was experienced at a particular crisis; and the question of its interpretation is a matter not of nautical but of scientific judgment. The statement (which was first published in the Spiritualist) was drawn up sixteen

144 TACTILE CASES AND CASES AFFECTING [chap.

days after the incident occurred, through the prompt energy of Mr. W. H. Harrison, and on the suggestion of the late Mr. Cromwell F. Yarley, r F.R.S., who had questioned Captain Blacklock on the subject.

y\ y (299) " The steamship ' Robert Lowe ' returned to the Thames on Tues-

^ - day, October 1 1 th, 1 870, from St. Pierre, Newfoundland, where she had been

'^ \ repairing one of the French Atlantic Telegraph Company's cables. An

^ engineer on board, Mr. W. H. Pearce, of 37, Augusta Street, East India

Road, Poplar, was taken ill with the typhus fever, and on the 4th of

October last he died. One of his mates, Mr. D. Brown, of 1, Edward

Street, Hudson's Road, Canning Town, Plaistow, a strong, healthy man,

a stoker, not likely to be led astray by imagination, attended him till the

day before he died. [Brown, it appears, bore the best of characters, and

had a strong friendship for Pearce.] On the afternoon before his death,

at 3 o'clock, in broad daylight, Brown was attending the sick man, who

wanted to get out of bed, but his companion prevented him. And this is

what the witness says he saw: —

" ' I was standing on one side of the bunk, and while trying to prevent Pearce from rising, I saw on the other side of the bunk, the wife, two children, and the mother of the dying man, all of whom I knew very well, and they are all still living. They appeared to be very sorrowful, but in all other respects were the same as ordinary human beings. I could not see through them; they were not at all transparent. They had on their ordinary clothes, and, perhaps, looked rather paler than usual. The mother said to me in a clearly audible voice, " He will be buried on Thursday, at 12 o'clock, in about fourteeen hundred fathoms of water." They all then vanished instantly, and I saw them no more. Pearce did not see them, as he was delirious, and had been so for two days previously. I ran out of the berth in a state of great excitement, and did not enter it again while he was alive. He died on Tuesday, not Thursday, and was buried at 4 o'clock, not 12.^ It was a sudden surprise to me to see the apparitions. I expected nothing of the kind, and when I saw them I was perfectly cool and collected. I had never before seen anything of the kind in my life, and my health is, and always has been, good. About five minutes afterwards I told Captain Blacklock I would stop with the sick man no longer, but would not tell him why, thinking that if I did, nobody else would take my place. About an hour later, I told Captain Blacklock and Mr. Dunbar, the chief engineer, whose address is Old Mill, near Port William, Wigtownshire, Scotland.'

" The other sailors on board say that they saw that Mr. Brown was greatly agitated from some cause, and they gradually drew this narrative out of him." Captain Blacklock says: —

" Brown came down into the cabin, looking very pale and frightened, and declared in a strong and decided way that he would not attend the sick man any more on any conditions — not for a thousand pounds. I told

1 This markedly illustrates the absence, from first-hand and immediate accounts, of the spurious marvels which have done so much to mask the facts of telepathy. It would be a tolerably safe prophecy that in any third-hand version of this occurrence the great point would be that the death and burial took place on the (^ay and at the hour predicted.

him that he ought to attend a sick and dying comrade, especially as a storm was raging, and he needed kind and considerate help, such as any of us might need one day. I pressed him all the more, as I wanted a strong steady man to attend the delirious invalid; besides, it being bad weather, the other men were fagged and over-worked. Brown would not go back, and he left the cabin, as I think, crying, so I sent him out a glass of brandy. Shortly after that, I heard he was very ill, and that his mates had some trouble in soothing and calming him.

" We the undersigned, officials on board the ' Robert Lowe,' declare the above statements to be true, so far as each of the circumstances came under our personal notice, but we none of us commit ourselves to any opinion as to the cause of the phenomenon. We give the statement simply because we have been requested to do so, rumours of the occurrence having gone abroad and caused inquiries to be made.

(Signed) "J. Blacklock, Commander."

" Andrew Dunbar, First Engineer.

(Signatures of six other members of the crew.)

"Witness, W. H. Harrison.

" October 20th, 1870."

[Captain Blacklock is dead. The " Robert Lowe " was lost in 1872, and only one or two of the crew escaped. The account included a description of some distressing experiences of Mrs. Pearce's, which had occurred in London during the few days before her husband's death, and filled her with anxiety on his account; but this anxiety cannot be safely assumed to have been in any way a condition of Brown's experience.]

It cannot, of course, be proved that this was not a case of purely subjective hallucination, as Brown knew the Pearce family by sight. But the vision, both in its character and its effects, was unlike any of those which were treated above (Vol. I., Chap. XI.) as due to expectancy or anxiety. And we at any rate have the coincidence that a healthy man experienced the one hallucination of his life — and an extremely vivid and highly-developed specimen — in broad daylight, at a time when the friend in whose beclouded mind the very scene evoked may well have been dominant, was dying in close proximity to him.^

The following is another nautical case, as to which it is not easy to form an opinion. The points against it are that it is from an uneducated witness; and that it contains an account of an experience which in one respect — the length of its duration — has scarcely a parallel, as far as I know, among hallucinations of sane and healthy persons.^ Nevertheless, unless the account is an absolute fabrication,

i_Asregards the supposition that the agent was the sick man himself, c/. case 30, Vol. i., pp. 214-6. As to the appearance of more figures than one, see the remarks on case 202.

^ See however cases 590 and 621.



Vol. Ii. L

146 TACTILE CASES AND CASES AFFECTING [chap.

which seems very unlikely, the reasonable conclusion, I think, would be that a telepathic hallucination was produced, though its details may have been exaggerated. Mr. Louis Lyons, of 3, Bouverie Square, Folkestone, wrote, on October 21st, 1882: —

(300) " Some time ago, my son told me that a friend of his, a rough and simple-minded fellow, had returned from Shields, and told him a curious tale. The man is a sailor, and had served with his father ever since he was a boy, in a collier which trades between this port and the North. The youth, having become very proficient in his calling, went on his voyages, leaving his father, now an elderly man, at home. During a stormy voyage, and not far ofi" the Humber, the young sailor saw his father, whom he had left in excellent health, pacing the deck, and calling out several times, as he was wont to do, ' Mind your helm, Joe! ' The young man wished to speak to his father, but could not; some occult power prevented him. At the end of the voyage a letter awaited the young sailor, announcing the death of the father at the precise time when he appeared to his son; but please to remark (a matter of some importance, I think,) that the apparition remained on deck some three hours, until the vessel got to Grimsby. [This differs from the first-hand account.]

" I disbelieved my son's story, and requested him to ask his friend to come and take tea with me, that I might hear the account from his own mouth. He came. The simplicity of his manner, his plain, open-hearted account, and I may even say his stupidity, manifested in his peculiar diction, imparted an impress to his tale."

At our request Mr. Lyons interrogated Edward Sings more formally, the next time that the latter visited Folkestone. The following is Sings' own account: —

" Folkestone.

"December 29th, 1882.

" I left my father last about six years ago, on a Good Friday. He was in good healtla when I left him. We were in a gale of wind, and we were running in the Humber; we carried the main gaff" away; I was at the wheel steering her in. He came to me 3 or 4 times, tapped me on the shoulder, and told me to mind the helm, and I told the captain my father was drowned, or something happened to him. After we got in, when it was my watch, he was walking to and fro with me, and I went down below and told my mate I could not stop up, and I did not like to. My mate took my watch. I never could speak to my father, for something kept me from doing so. I heard of my father's death a week afterwards. No one else saw my father's spirit.^ My father stopped on deck with me an hour, and as I could not stand it any longer I went below, and my mate took my place. We cast both anchors, and were towed into Grimsby. My mother and sister were at my father's death-bed, and they told me that my father asked several times whether I was in the harbour.

" I certify this to be a true account. " Edwaed Sings."

We find from the Register of Deaths that E. Sings' father died on

1 See p. 48, note.

April 7, 1877, aged 53. Good Friday fell on March 30; and this, it will be seen, corresponds very well with the above statement.

Mr. Lyons has kindly visited Sings' mother and sister, at 67, Tontine Street, Folkestone, and received a similar account from them.

The next case is from a lady whose name may be given privately.

She herself would have been perfectly willing that it should be

published, because the incident " is as natural and real to me as any

other event in my life "; but she thinks that the publication might

give annoyance to some of her relatives. c„>-vc'^'"^^

"C Rectory. ^"^"^

" May 23rd, 1884. (301) " In June, 1878, when nursing a brother who was ill, I woke up suddenly about 2 o'clock on the night of the 24th, calling him, and feeling strongly that he wanted me. I jumped up and went to the table, intending to get his medicine, as I was in the habit of doing by day, but the touch of the table brought me to my senses, and I went back to bed, thinking it was merely fancy. I was 17 then, quite strong and well, and had never been conscious of any such impression before. My sister, who slept in a room opening off mine, heard me call my brother's name, and came in to see what I was doing, and stayed with me for some time.

" On asking my brother the next morning what sort of night he had had, he said, ' Very wakeful at first, but after you came in at 2 o'clock I went to sleep all right.' I said nothing to him of my experience at that hour, but told him I had never been in his room all night. He answered, ' Of course you were; you came in and gave me my drops, and settled my pillows, and then I got up and did what you told me,' which was opening the window. I assured him I had done nothing of the kind, when he said quite impatiently, ' I couldn't have imagined it unless you had; but you mustn't do it again or you will catch cold, running about the house at night.'

" I said no more about it for fear of alarming him, and I never told anyone of it, lest they should think the nursing was making me ill, but I was quite strong and well at the time. I put it down in my note-book that day, and a year later I have another reference there to this same event.

" Two months later, in August, 1878, I was in Hampshire, my brother in Sussex. I knew he was dying, but had no reason for thinking him in any more immediate danger on that day. About 9 o'clock, during breakfast, a sudden feeling of great depression came over me, which increased and I could not shake it off all the morning, though I did not particularly connect it with my brother. One of my sisters noticed it, and asked if I felt ill. Later on, a telegram came to say that my brother had died quite suddenly, a few minutes past 9 o'clock. I only mention this because it was the only other occasion on which I ever remember being conscious of such a sensation.

[This last coincidence may easily, of course, have been accidental.]



Vol. Ii. 1-2

148 TACTILE CASES AND CASES AFFECTING [chap.

Miss 0. adds: —

" My sister is away from home, so I wrote to her without giving any reason for wanting her evidence, and tried to say nothing that would recall this occurrence to her mind. I simply asked her, ' Do you remember your coming into my room one night during H.'s illness 1 If you do, I want a written statement of what you remember.'

" I enclose her reply. She mentions that 1 called his name, and that she found me crying, which was true, as the impression that he wanted me was so strongly upon me, and yet I believed it to be fancy. She knows that I never left my room, otherwise I might have thought that I had really gone down the passage to my brother's room, which was at the other end, but I never walked in my sleep in my life.

" My brother was so positive about it that I felt certain he believed I had actually done what I had tried to do in my own room. It seemed perfectly natural to me, but I said nothing to my people, for fear they should think the strain of nursing would make me ill.

"These are the references in my note-book: On June 25th, 1878, among other things about my brother, ' He said that in the night he woke up, firmly persuaded that I had been in his room, and was talking to him, and he got up at once, and did exactly as I told him.' On June 24th, 1879: 'It was this night last year that I woke up in the middle of the night calling H., and then E. came in. And the next morning he told me that just at that moment he thought I came into his room, and he got up to do as I told him.'

"I can't account for his thinking I told him to open the window, unless from the fact that I got up and went over to the window in my room where the table was.

" My brother was several years older than myself, and I was extremely attached to him; he was accustomed to my doing this sort of thing for him by day.

"This happened at Salehurst Vicarage, in Sussex, two months before my father came here. I never spoke of it to them until this week, when I told my brothers and sisters."

The following is the enclosure mentioned: —

"May 21st, 1884.

" I remember well the event you allude to, of how you awoke one night, calling for Herbert, and I went into your room, found you crying, and tried to comfort you. I have often thought of it since.

"Emily C. O."

In answer to inquiries, Miss K. A. O. says: —

"You ask if this experience was unique in my brother's case, and I believe it to be so. He would have treated anything of the kind merely as a joke, and the idea that such a thing as thought-transference was possible would never have crossed his mind. Nothing that I had done before could have made him expect me at night, for I had never done any night nursing, and he himself scolded me for what he imagined the imprudence of my proceeding. If I had been in the habit of going to his room, then I should have gone at once when I felt he wanted me, but as I

had never done so, I was afraid of alarming him by going in at night. I have never had any similar experience."

This case resembles No. 271 above, in the point that the " agency" was apparently exercised at the moment of startled waking from sleep; but considering the circumstances, the present coincidence could more easily than the other be regarded as accidental. Had the brother's experience been a dream, or even a vision between sleeping and waking, we should feel that to be the reasonable view. There is one feature in the account, no doubt, which looks very like dreaming — the brother's remark, " You gave me my drops." But it will be observed that this is not mentioned in the entry in the note-book; it seems therefore very probable that it was an unconscious addition on Miss O.'s part. On the other side we have her brother's recorded testimony that the phantasmal visit took place at a time when he was " very wakeful "; and it would be at least noteworthy that he should have had what we are led to suppose was the one w^aking hallucination of his life, at the very time that his sister was? ^ also experiencing a unique and closely corresponding impression.

§ 3. The next case is of a rarer type; as, though the senses of sight and hearing were both affected, the two impressions were not combined in the same incident, but were separated by several hours interval. The account is from Mr. Garling, of 12, Westbourne Gardens, Folkestone, a witness as free from credulity and superstitious fancies as can well be imagined.

"February, 1883. //^'^"'^

(302) " One Thursday evening, about the middle of August in 1849, I -'<- •'^ went, as I often did, to pass the evening with the Rev. — Harrison and his family, with whom I had for many years lived on terms of the closest intimacy. The weather being very fine, we made up a party with the neighbours, and went to the Surrey Zoological Gardens, and spent the evening there. I note this particularly, because it proves that he and his family were in good health incontestably on that day, and that no suspicion of what was to follow so soon existed with anyone. The next day I went down on a visit to some relatives in Hertfordshire, who lived at a house called Flamstead Lodge, about 26 miles from London, on the high road. We usually dined at 2 o'clock, and on Monday afternoon following, after their early dinner, I left the ladies in the drawing-room, and sauntered through the paddock down to the high road. You will note the time was in the middle of a sunny August day, in a wide, public, commonplace high road, not a hundred yards from a roadside public-house — I myself in a perfectly cheerful, healthy frame of mind — no surroundings of any kind to excite the imagination, some country people not far off,

150, TACTILE CASES AND CASES AFFECTING [chap.

indeed, at the time I speak of. Suddenly a ' phantom ' stood before me, so close that had it been a human being it must have touched me; blotting out for a moment the landscape and surrounding objects; itself indistinct in outline, but with lips that seemed to move and murmur something, and with eyes fearfully distinct that fixed and followed and glared into mine, with a look so intense and deeply earnest that I fairly recoiled from the spot and started backwards. I said to myself instinctively and probably uttered it aloud, ' Good God, it is Harrison! ' though not thinking of him or having reason to think of him in the remotest degree at the ■cnonient. In probably a few seconds, which seemed to me far longer, it /■anished, leaving me rooted to the spot for a few moments, and sensible of the reality of the vision by the curious physical effect it left upon me. This was as if the blood was like ice in my veins •} no flutter of the nerves, but a deadly chill feeling that lasted more or less for nearly an hour, and only gradually wore off as the circulation returned. I have never felt any similar sensation before or since. I said nothing to the ladies when I returned, as I should have frightened them out of their wits, and the impression made upon me gradually became fainter as the day wore out.

" I have said that the house was near the high road; it stood in its own grounds by the side of a country lane leading up to the village, 200 or 300 yards or more from any other habitation, with a seven-foot iron railing in front to keep out tramps; gates always locked at night; about 30 feet of hard gravel and paved pathway from front door to lane. A beautiful quiet summer evening followed. Placed as the house was, with hard gravel and high iron palisade and paving, no one could have approached the house in the deep silence of that summer evening without being heard a long way off. There was, moreover, a large dog in a kennel, placed so as to command the front entrance, especially to warn off intruders; and a little terrier inside that barked at everybody and at every noise. We were just retiring to bed, and were sitting in the drawing-room, which was on the ground floor, close by the front door, the terrier within. The servants had already gone to bed in a room quite at the back, 60 feet away. They, when they came down, told us they were asleep, and were roused by the noise. Suddenly there came to the front door a noise so loud and continuous (the door seeming to shake in the frame and to vibrate under some tremendous blows), that we started to our feet in amazement, and the servants came in a moment after, halfdressed, running downstairs from their room at the back to know what it was. We went at once to the door, but could neither hear nor see anything or anybody. And the dogs gave no tongue whatever. The terrier, contrary to its nature, slunk shivering under the sofa, and would not stop even at the door, and nothing could induce him to go into the darkness. There was no knocker on the door, nothing to fall down, and no possibility of anyone approaching or leaving the house, so situated, in that profound silence, wii-hout discovery. They were all horribly frightened, and I found it very diflicult to get them to go to bed, but I was myself in so unimpressionable a frame of mind that I did not at the time connect it with the ' phantom ' in the afternoon; but still went to

1 See p. 37, note.

bed myself, pondering upon it and seeking some obvious explanation to satisfy the members of the household, but without success.

"I stopped there till Wednesday morning, having no suspicion of what had happened in my absence. On that morning I returned to town to my chambers, then at No. 11, King's Road, Grays Inn. My clerk met me at the door with, ' Sir, a gentleman has been here two or three times; is most anxious to see you; says he must see you immediately; he is gone out for a few minutes to get a biscuit, and he will be back directly.' In a few minutes the gentleman returned, and I recognised at once a Mr. Chadwick, also an intimate friend of Harrison and his family. He then told me, to my amazement, ' There has been a fearful visitation of cholera in the Wandsworth Road,' meaning at Mr. Harrison's; ' all are gone.' Mrs. Rosco was attacked on Friday, and died; her maid the same evening, and died. Mrs. Harrison was attacked on Saturday morning, and died that evening. The housemaid died on Sunday. The cook also was taken ill, was carried away, and escaped very narrowly. Poor Harrison was attacked himself on Sunday night, was fearfully ill all Monday and yesterday, and has been taken away from the Pest-house in the Wandsworth Road to Jack Straw's Castle at Hampstead, to get into a better air; he was begging and praying for the people about him, all Monday and yesterday, to send for you, but nobody knew where you were gone to. You must take a cab at once and come with me, or you will not see him alive.' I went with Chadwick at once, but he was dead before I reached the place.

" H. B. Gaeling."

The obituary in the Watchman, for August 15th, 1849, shows that Mrs. Rosco died from cholera on August 4th, Mrs. Harrison on August 8th, and the Rev. T. Harrison on Thursday (not Wednesday), the 9th, at Hampstead.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Garling says: —

" The ladies were old, and have been dead some 25 years. Of the servants at the house all trace has been lost."

Mr. Garling added a few details in conversation with the present writer. The figure met him on the high road, so close to his face that he hardly observed anything in detail except the face. He has had one other hallucination, when he seemed to see the figure of a friend at the foot of his bed. But the friend was one whose funeral he had just been attending, and who, moreover, had been accustomed, in life, to sit where the figure was seen; and Mr. Garling himself was going to sleep at the time. The experience, therefore, cannot be argued to show any special proclivity to subjective hallucination.

The auditory experience here is a good specimen of what I have L^j-"-''^"^'^^ called the rudiTnentarv type — a class of which the inconclusiveness ^ ''^"^ ^*^ has been sufficiently dwelt on. But clearly the presumption that the ■ sound was telepathic in origin is strengthened by the fact of the visual '''*^ experience which preceded it. Telepathy having (as we may reason-

152 CASES AFFECTING MORE THAN ONE SENSE. [chap.

ably suppose) produced the first phenomenon, it is not unreasonable to credit it with the second; especially since the second, though it affected so many persons, seems in itself particularly hard to account for by any objective cause in the vicinity. It may appear, no doubt, extremely strange that the conditions which first flashed an impression to the one person directly interested should afterwards involve the whole household in a psychic storm; but this topic belongs to the concluding chapter, on " Collective Cases."

CHAPTER XYII.

RECIPROCAL CASES.

§ 1. We have now to consider a quite new type of telepathic action. In the classes which have so far been passed in review, whether experimental or spontaneous, the parts of the agent and the percipient have been well defined, and the current of influence has set from the one to the other in an unmistakeable fashion. But in several cases, it may be remembered, (especially Nos. 35 and 94,) we have had indications that the influence might be a reciprocal one — that each of the parties might receive a telepathic impulse from the other, and so each be at once agent and percipient. The cases referred to were doubtful, because the experience at one end of the line was a dream; and dreams having an almost limitless scope, it was conceivable enough that that of Mr. Newnham, for instance, though it curiously corresponded with his fiancees actions and surroundings at the time, did so by accident; and that therefore his mental condition, while it afi'ected her, was not affected by her. But had he had a waking vision of her, as she had of him, we should have considered it probable that the influence was mutual; since if two rare or unique events, which present so obvious a 'prima facie connection as A's vision of B and B's vision of A, fall at the same time, we cannot readily assume the coincidence to be accidental. And if there are further and more distinct grounds for attributing B's vision to telepathy — say because A is dying at the time — it will be only reasonable to regard A's vision as part of the same complex phenomenon, rather than to suppose that A has an accidental vision at the same time as B has a telepathic one. But of course the proof of a reciprocal influence would be stronger still if, at the tite time of B's impression of A, A expressed in words some piece of knowledge as to B's condition which could not have been acquired in a normal manner. We thus see that a group of cases which have all the same claim to be considered

154 RECIPROCAL CASES. [chap.

telepathic, may have different claims, ranging from the very doubtful to the very conclusive, to be considered reciprocally telepathic.^

I will begin with a couple of the more doubtful cases. The following account was received through the kindness of Mr. G. J. Romanes, F.R.S., who is well acquainted with the narrator.

y

"March 18th, 1883.

(303) " On the night of the 26th of October, 1872, I suddenly felt very unwell, and went to bed about half-past 9, an hour earlier than usual, and fell asleep almost immediately, when I had a very vivid dream, which impressed me greatly; so much so, that I remarked to my wife, on waking, that I feared we should shortly receive bad news. I imagined I was sitting in the drawing-room near a table, reading, when an old lady suddenly appeared seated on the opposite side, close to the table. She neither spoke nor moved much, but gazed very intently on me, and I on her, for at least 20 minutes. I was much struck by her appearance, she having white hair, very dark eyebrows, and penetrating eyes. I did not recognise her at all, but thought she was a stranger. My attention was then directed to the door, which opened, and my aunt entering and seeing me and the old lady staring at each other in this extraordinary way, with much surprise and in a tone of reproach exclaimed, ' John! don't you know who this is? ' and without giving me time to reply said, ' Why, this is your grandmother,' whereupon my ghostly visitor suddenly rose from her chair, embraced me, and vanished.

1 The numerous cases where two friends in different places prove to have been each exceptionally engrossed with the idea of the other at the same moment, must not be put forward as instances of telepathic, much less of reciprocal, action; for we may always suppose that the impressions only appeared to have been exceptionally vivid after the fact of the coincidence had given them a certain exceptional interest. The undue importance often attached to such incidents is to be regretted, since it confuses the subject, and to some extent excuses a similar confusion on the part of opponents — as, e.g., when an eminent man of science thinks telepathy sufficiently refuted by this very consideration, that by accident friends sometimes think of one another, and even write to one another, simultaneously (Z'ewtec/ie jBu»rfsc/i«M for Jan., 1886, p. 45). Nor will it suffice for the exceptional character of one of the impressions to be established beyond doubt. Tor example. Miss Edith Taylor, of 9, Endsleigh Gardens, N.W., tells us of the following experience of herself and a friend.

"June 25th, 1884.

" I was living at the time in Germany, and my friend in Holland. She had been visiting at the house where I was staying, but had returned home some weeks before the ' illusion ' occurred. One evening in the autumn of 1880, I was walking alone in the garden, trying to learn some German poetry, and not succeeding very well, when I heard some one step on to the gravel walk behind me. I then felt the touch of a hand on my arm, and my friend's voice said pretty distinctly, ' Edith, Edith.' I turned round very quickly, and I believe I said, ' Why, what is it? ' I certainly expected to find some one behind me, and had a sort of wild idea that it must be my friend, from the curious way in which my name was spoken, the foreign accent in the word. Seeing nobody I was frightened, and went in. In answer to the letter in which I told her what had jjassed, my friend wrote back that it was curious that I should have fancied her so near me just then. She had been reading Italian, which we had studied together for a while, and had very much wished to speak to me about some passage that had struck her in the lesson. My friend had not heard or imagined that she heard me, but she said she felt as if the air were full of me."

Miss Taylor's hallucination was quite unique in her life; but we cannot tell that her friend's thoughts were not pretty constantly directed to her at this period; and there is, therefore, no reason why the coincidence, such as it was, should not have been a pure accident.

xvil] reciprocal CASES. 155

At that moment I awoke. Such was the impression it made on my mind, that I got my note-book and made a note of this strange dream, believing that it foreboded bad tidings. However, several days passed without bringing any dreaded intelligence, when one night I received a letter from my father, announcing the rather sudden death of my grandmother, which took place on the very night and hour of my dream, half -past 10.

" About four months after her death, I went to the Isle of Wight, where she lived, to get information from my relatives as to what my grandmother was really like. My aunt and cousin described her in every particular, and their descriptions of her coincided most marvellously with the figure and face that appeared to me, the white hair and dark eyebrows being a peculiarity in her. This I particularly observed in my dream. I learnt, too, that she was extremely fussy in the arrangement of her cap, always being anxious that no part, even the strings, should be out of place, and curious to relate, I noticed in my dream that she was nervously touching her cap strings, now and again, for fear they should be out of place. My cousin, who was with her when she died, told me that my grandmother had been delirious for some time previous to her departure; and for a moment, when in that state, she suddenly put her arms round my cousin's neck, and on opening her eyes and regaining consciousness, she said with a look of surprise, ' Oh, Polly, is it you 1 I thought it was some body else.' This seems to me very curious, as it was just what she did before she vanished from me in the drawing-room. T must add that I had not seen my grandparent for at least 14 years, and the last time I saw her she had dark hair, bnt this had gradually changed to white, leaving her eyebrows dark, and I am positive that nobody ever mentioned this peculiarity to me." ^ " J. H. W."

Mrs. W. says: —

" July 1st, 1885.

" I quite remember my husband telling me, on my going to my room on the evening of the 26th October, of a remarkable dream he had just had, and also his making an entry in the pocket book on the following morning.

" F. W."

We find from the Register of Deaths that Jane W. died at the age of 72, on Oct. 26, 1870 [see below], at Brixton, Isle of Wight.

Mr. Podmore says: —

"I called on Mr. J. H. W. to-day (July 4th, 1884), and heard the account from him viva voce. His cousin's corroboration, for a reason which K. (^. he explained to me, cannot be obtained. But he explained to me that he went to see his cousin within three months of the death, and received full particulars of the death-scene from her then. I asked him if he stood by the phrase ' at least 20 minutes,' pointing out that it was difficult to attach any precise meaning to these words; if they were a correct description of his impressions, a grotesque incident must have been interpolated

1 In respect of this last feature, the case may be classed with those of Chap, xii., § 8. The nervous fidgeting with the cap-strings may possibly be regarded as a distinctive habit, sufficiently deeply organised to be a feature in the person's latent representation of her own physique. See the remarks at the end of the section referred to.

156 RECIPROCAL CASES. [chap.

in the midst of an otherwise realistic dream. He maintains that the words are correct; it seemed to him that he and the old lady sat staring at each other across the table for a very long time. Mr. W. told me that he dreams very little; and that he has never had another dream which he thought worth noting. He has never dreamt of death."

After a second call, Mr. Podmore writes: —

" I received an account from Mrs. W. of her husband's dream, as she remembered to have heard it within an hour of its occurrence and subsequently, which tallied precisely with the account here given. I saw also the note made on the following morning. It occurs at the head of the first page of a small pocket sketch-book, the rest of the page being occupied with pen or pencil memoranda of accounts, &c. The entry is 'Odd dream, night of October 26th, 1870.' The last numeral, which is very indistinct, is apparently 0. Mr. W., in writing his original account in March, 1883, had referred to this note and read the final numeral as 2. Hence the discrepancy. He has no other memorandum of the death.

" I pressed him as far as I could, but he still declines to give his name, fearing that he might acquire the reputation of being ' ghostly ' and fanciful, and thus injure his professional prospects."

Clearly the dream here is far less likely to have been accidental than Mr. Newnham's. But the inference from the dying woman's ^^^^ words, that she may have been in some way affected with a sense y^,^ ■ of her grandson's presence, is, of course not one that can be pressed. And the same remark applies to several cases where A, who is in the crisis of illness, professes actually to have seen, as though by some clairvoyant flash, an absent relative, B, who turns out to have had at the same time a telepathic impression of A; for unless special details of B's aspect or surroundings are described, A's alleged perception of him may always be supposed to have been a mere subjective dream or vision, and the percipience is not demonstrably reciprocal. -^

The next example — from Mr. J. T. Milward Pierce, of Bow Ranche, Knox County, Nebraska, U.S.A., — stands somewhat apart.

^„. " Frettons, Danbury, Chelmsford.

Hi.t»^f, "January 5th, 1885.

^^ (304) " I live in Nebraska, U.S., where I have a cattle ranche, &c.

". ^ ' I am engaged to be married to a young lady living in Yankton, Dakota, 25 miles north.

"About the end of October, 1884, while trying to catch a horse, I was kicked in the face, and only escaped being brained by an inch or two;

1 For instances of the sort, see cases 245 and 354; also 612, and Mrs. Fox's account, given in a note to that case.

XVII.] RECIPROCAL CASES, 157

as it was I 'had two teeth split and a severe rap on the chest. There were several men standing near. I did not faint, nor was I insensible for a moment, as I had to get out of the way of the next kick. There was a moment's pause hefore anyone spoke. I was standing leaning against the stable wall, when I saw on my left, apparently quite close, the younglady I have mentioned. She looked pale. I did not notice what she wore; but I distinctly noticed her eyes, which appeared troubled and anxious. There was not merely a face, but the whole form, looking perfectly material and natural. At that moment my bailiff asked me if I was hurt. 1 turned my head to answer him, and when I looked again she had gone. I was not much hurt by the horse; my mind was perfectly clear, for directly afterwards I went to my office and drew the plans and prepared specifications for a new house, a work which requires a clear and concentrated mind.

" I was so haunted by the appearance that next morning I started for Yankton. The first words the young lady said when I met her were, ' Why, I expected you all yesterday afternoon. I thought I saw you looking so pale, and your face all bleeding.' (I may say the injuries had made no visible scars.) I was very much struck by this and asked her when this was. She said, ' Immediately after lunch.' It was just after my lunch that the accident occurred. I took the particulars down at the time. I may say that before I went into Yankton, I was afraid that something had happened to the young lady. I shall be happy to send you any further particulars you may desire.

" Jno. T. Milwaed Pierce."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Pierce says: —

" I think the vision lasted as long as a quarter of a minute." He has had no other visual hallucination, except that once, when lying shot through the jaw by an Indian, he thought he saw an Indian standing over him, and infers that it was not a real one, or he would have been scalped.

Mr. Pierce wrote on May 27th, 1885:—

" I sent your letter to the lady, but did not get an answer before leaving England, and upon arriving here found her very ill, and it is only recently I have been able to get the information you wished for. She now wishes me to say that she recollects the afternoon in question, and remembers expecting me, and being afraid something had happened, though it was not my usual day for coming; but although at the time she told me that she saw me with a face bleeding, she does not now appear to recollect this, and I have not suggested it, not wishing to prompt her in any way."

In another letter of July 13th, 1885, Mr. Pierce says: —

" I am sorry I can do no better for you than the enclosed letter. The fact seems to be that events of absorbing interest, and illness, appear to have driven nearly all remembrance of the incident from Miss MacGregor's mind, attachiiig no particular importance to it at first. I have prompted her memory, but she only says, no doubt I am right, but that she can't now recollect it."

.C

158 RECIPROCAL CASES. [chap.

The letter enclosed from Miss Macgregor is as follows: —

" Yankton, D.T.

"July ISth, 1885.

" I have read the letter you sent to Mr Pierce. I am afraid I cannot now recall the time you mention clearly enough to give you any distinct recollection.

" I remember feeling sure some accident had happened, but I told Mr. Pierce at the time everything unusual I felt, and events that have since occurred have, I am afraid, completely efiaced all clear recollections of the facts. " Annie MacGregor."

Knowing Mr. Pierce, I have no doubt that his recollection of what Miss MacGregor told him at the time is substantially accurate, and if so, it would be natural to interpret her experience as telepathic. But his vision may have been purely subjective. I am not aware, it is true, of any precisely parallel case, unless indeed it be Mr. Pierce's other experience, with the Indian. In my collection of purely subjective cases, I have one from a lady who was troubled by hallucinations for some time after a concussion of the brain; but the blow which Mr. Pierce received was a comparatively slight one. Still, seeing that on the one hand his faculties may have been momentarily disordered by it, and that on the other the person whose form he saw was in a completely normal state at the time, it is safer not to lay stress on the reciprocal aspect of the case.

I 2. The remaining cases are, I think, less doubtful. The following account is extracted from the evidence given by the late Mr. Cromwell F. Varley, F.RS., before a Committee of the Dialectical Society, on May 25, 1869 {Report, p. 161. Another case of Mr. Yarley's will be found in Vol. I., p. 288).

(305) " In a second case my sister-in-law had heart disease. Mrs. Yarley and I went into the country to see her, as we feared, for the last time. I had a nightmare and could not move a muscle, While in this state, I saw the spirit^ of my sister-in-law in the room. I knew that she was confined to her bedroom. She said, ' If you do not move you will die '; but I could not move, and she said, ' If you submit yourself to me, I will frighten you, and you will then be able to move.' At first I objected, wishing to ascertain more about her spirit-presence. When at last I consented, my heart had ceased beating. I think at first her efibrts to terrify me did not succeed, but when she suddenly exclaimed, ' Oh, Cromwell! I am dyino-,' that frightened me exceedingly, and threw me out of the torpid state, and I awoke in the ordinary way. My shouting had aroused Mrs. Varley; we examined the door, and it was still locked and bolted, and I told my wife what had happened, having noted the hour, 3.45 a.m., and

1 See p. 48, note.

cautioned her not to mention the matter to anybody, but to hear what was her sister's version, if she alluded to the subject. In the morning she told us that she had passed a dreadful night; that she had been in our room, and greatly troubled on my account, and that I had been nearly dying. It was between 3.30 and 4 a.m. when she saw I was in danger. She only succeeded in arousing me by exclaiming, ' Oh, Cromwell! I am dying.' I appeared to her to be in a state which otherwise would have ended fatally."

Even this incident might possibly be explained (like case 94) as an instance of simultaneous dreams ^ — an independent and original nightmare of one of the two parties concerned inducing that of the other, without being reciprocally influenced by it. The next case, if correctly recorded, could not be so regarded. The account is contained in a letter from Mr. T. W. Smith, late of Leslie Lodge, Ealing, to the Psychological Society, dated February 26th, 1876, and kindly lent to us by Mr. F. K. Munton, who was secretary of that Society. Mr. Smith, who was known to Prof. Barrett, left Ealing early in 1877, and his present address cannot be ascertained.

(306) " I found the lady who is now my wife at a large public institution to which I was appointed headmaster, in 1872. On leaving her situation, I induced her, for certain reasons, to conceal the fact of our intended marriage from those of her friends whom she had left behind at the school, and the only way to do this was not to write to any of them.

" Some six months after our marriage, I was reading in bed, according to a habit of mine, my wife asleep at my side, when she awoke suddenly,

sat up, and exclaimed, in very earnest tones, ' Oh, I have been to.'

I, of course, treated what she forthwith began to relate to me as a more than usually vivid dream, and the next day ceased to think of it. She, however, recurred to her dream from time to time, and I remember the circumstantial way in which she dwelt upon each point of it, especially a peculiar expression which I did not forget, though I made no written note of it at the time. Three months later my wife went to visit her mother, and found there a letter from one of her friends, urgently entreating

some one to write and say whether Miss (my wife) was alive or dead.

I was induced to go and see the writer, and then ascertained the cause of her hastily-written and strangely-worded epistle. The two occurrences on the same day — as well as I could fix the date, for neither of us were quite ' certain as to that essential particular — present a coincidence which I have ' never been able satisfactorily to explain on any hypothesis consistent with what is at present known of nature's laws.

" My wife dreamt that she was in a well-remembered room, at the base \ of the building, in company with four females — two of whom were old friends and two strangers to her. They were talking and laughing and preparing to retire to their several sleeping apartments. She saw one of them turn off the gas. She followed them upstairs, entered with two of

1 See Vol. i., pp. 314-20, and the opening cases in Chap, iii. of the Supplement.

160 RECIPROCAL CASES. [chap.

them into a bedroom, saw ' Bessie ' place some things in a box, undress, and get into bed; then she went to her, took her by the hand, and said, ' Bessie, let us be friends.' So much for the dream.

" The writer of the letter gave me this account of what had occasioned her writing; and I need scarcely say that I did not first mention what my wife had dreamt, for in that case it might be supposed that I had myself assisted in suggesting the remarkable expression, which, in my opinion, removes the occurrence from the category of 'remarkable coincidences.' She and her friend, ' Bessie,' had gone to bed one Sunday night, when an alarming cry from the latter brought the other to her bedside: ' I have just seen ' (my wife); ' she touched me and said, " Let us be friends." '

" The next day, on discussing the matter, though some of them thought that Bessie had been dreaming, and imagined what she declared she saw, others thought it a ' sign ' that my wife was dead. And the one who was the best scribe amongst them undertook to write to the only address they possessed, in order to ascertain the truth. The letter had not been forwarded to us because my wife had, it seems, told her mother my wish that no communication with her former friends should take place.

" The odd thing about the dream is that my wife had always been on good terms with ' Bessie,' and was so on parting with her.

"In the foregoing account of the dream, and what I may call its complement, I omit many minor points, such as the fact that two new comers had taken the place of two former friends of my wife; that the effect on both my wife and Bessie was beyond what any ordinary dream would have produced; and that the two females, whom my wife in her dream saw enter the bedroom, did really occupy the same room."

[It is much to be regretted that we have had no opportunity of examining the letter; ^ but the correspondence of the two experiences would hardly have impressed Mr. Smith as it did, if it had not included a very striking detail.]

1 The importance, in these apparently reciprocal cases, of obtaining independent evidence from both sides, is well shown in the following example, A lady of good sense, occupying a responsible position— whose name is suppressed not by her wish, but because our view of the case differs considerably from hers— wrote to us on November 29, 1884:—

"In the summer of 1864, I had cause for grave anxiety concerning the moral condition of a very dear friend. I knew that W. had formed a connection which, if persisted in, would lead to his ruin, present and eternal. On the 30th of August, 1864, I retired to rest about half-past 10. As the clock struck 11 my husband was alarmed by my violent sobbing, which caused me to awake, on which I exclaimed, ' Oh, husband! it is all over with poor W. I have seen him, in my dream, brought under great temptation by the wicked words of that woman. In a passion of tears I implored him to have mercy on himself. At first he seemed to hesitate, then, at a sign from her, he motioned me angrily away, saying, " I will have none of your restrictions. I have been held back by them too long already." With these bitter words I awoke, to find myself bathed in tears.'

" For three days this vision haunted me with a tenacity I could not shake off. Judge then my surprise at receiving the following narrative from W,:—

" ' On the night of August 20th, while sitting smoking my cigar (after 10 p.m.), the last person on earth I wished to see was announced. She came forward to me with words of bitter reproach, followed by tender persuasion, in the midst of which the door of my dining-room again opened, and you appeared, in a long white gown, your hair floating over your shoulders. With a wild burst of weeping you implored me not to listen to another word she uttered, and when I angrily replied, " I will have none of your restrictions," with a look of anguish unutterable you slowly faded from my sight. Not so the impression produced on my mind. I felt God had sent you as my guardia,n angel, and, like one of old, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision. I was saved in a moment

XVII.] RECIPROCAL CASES, 161

The evidential weakness of this narrative is, of course, the doubt as to the exactitude of the coincidence. Supposing the two experiences to have fallen on the same night, we can hardly help connecting " Bessie's " impression (which seems to have been a hallucination and not a dream) with Mrs. Smith's remarkable vision; which latter is again, apparently, an instance of thought-transference of that extreme form which I have described as telepathic clairvoyance.^

That this last word is the appropriate one for describing (it is far enough of course from explaining) the process appears from other examples; and a glance at the condition of these reciprocal cases will show that it would naturally be so. There is, as a rule, no difficulty in deciding to which of the two persons concerned the origin of the complex phenomenon should be traced; since one of the two is in a more or less abnormal condition, as compared to the other. In Mrs. Smith's case, the abnormality (outwardly at any rate) was nothing beyond sleep; but in other examples it is far more pronounced. If, then, it is A who is in the abnormal state — dying, or whatever it may be — we attribute B's vision of him to that state. But we cannot inversely attribute A's vision of B to B's state, if B's state is completely normal. It may, no doubt, be said that B's state ceases

of supreme danger, and desire to give God the glory for so evident an interposition on my behalf. '

"I did not keep the letter, but am absolutely positive of its date and its corroboration of the remarkable vision.

Mrs. A. 's husband corroborates as follows: —

"January 29th, 1885.

" I can distinctly recollect the night on vi^hich my wife had the remarkable dream referred to, the particulars of which she related to me directly she awoke. She was greatly excited and much troubled, and repeated several times, ' I hope nothing has happened to W. G.'

" A day or two afterwards — it may have been the second or third day; of this I am uncertain — she received a letter from our friend, which I saw and read, and which confirmed in an extraordinary manner the connection with her dream. Mrs. A., I think, has already told you the particulars, which I need not enter into further.

"J. A."

Now though this account was undoubtedly given in good faith, it contains some very suspicious points. The conversational style of interview between the gentleman (whose previous excited state naturally marks him as the "agent") and the apparition, finds hardly any parallel in our first-hand records; and it is rendered doubly strange by his accepting his friend's intrusion — at that hour and in that guise — as a quite natural incident. We might surmise that possibly something of a telepathic nature took place; but that it was exactly, or even approximately, what is reported could not be assumed without independent corroboration. I therefore „wrote to the gentleman concerned, and asked him whether he remembered having ever seen the phantasmal figure of a friend, whose visit was apparently intended to warn him at a critical juncture. He replied: "l remember the circumstance you refer to distinctly; " adding that he was at the time overwrought in body and mind. But on my asking him whether any one else was present at the time, and what were the words spoken, he replied, " There was no one present, nor any words spoken, to the best of my recollection; had there been, I don't think I should have forgotten." Clearly a case where there is this amount of discrepancy between the two principal witnesses cannot be quoted as evidence.

1 Compare Mr. Moule's case. Vol. i., p. 110, note.



Vol. Ii. M

162 RECIPROCAL CASES. [chap.

to be normal at the moment when A affects him; and that possibly the power to react telepathically on the impression is started by the mere fact of receiving it. But the more natural account of the matter would surely trace A's impression, no less than B's, to the peculiarity of A's state — by supposing either that A's power to act abnormally in a certain direction has involved an abnormal extension of his own susceptibility in the same direction; or else that some independently-caused extension of his own susceptibility has involved the power to act abnormally.^ In either case, his reception of the impression would be active rather than passive; of the sort that partly seems (as I tried to express it before) like the momentary using of B's faculties — although B's state is not now, as in the former clairvoyant pictures and dreams,^ supplying any exceptional telepathic stimulus. Still, though A's percipience may not be conditioned by B's state, it must, I conceive, be conditioned by B's existence and relation to A; and the distinction again stands clear between telepathic clairvoyance, and that alleged independent clairvoyance where what is discerned cannot be traced in any natural way to the contents of any other human mind.

The next example is from the Hon. Mrs. Parker, of 60, Elm Park Gardens, S.W., who wrote to us on May 24th, 1883: —

(307) " The following experience happened in the month of November, 1877, in Regency Square, Brighton. My husband [since deceased] was undergoing a course of magnetism from Mr. L., an American. The treatment consisted of rubbing by mesmeric passes down the back and arms and legs, but in all this there was no intention of putting my husband to sleep. The passes were intended to give strength. Mr. L. called himself, I believe, a professional mesmerist, but at the time we employed him he was not practising as such. He had come to Brighton for rest.

" After the treatment my husband was in the habit of sitting, for some hours, in his wheel-chair, at the top of the Square garden, and on the day

1 This latter hypothesis seems specially applicable to cases where A's condition has "been one of mere sleep or trance, and not abnormal in any more serious way. For, considering that nearly all the evidence that exists for the reality of clairvoyance goes furtlier to show that sleep and trance are the conditions most favourable to it, we should certainly rather conceive that what enables A to affect B is the clairvoyant perception itself of B or B's surroundings, than that this perception is a secondary result, dependent on the fact that A has impressed B by dint merely of being asleep or entranced. Case 271, above, may possibly be an instance of what is meant. We should naturally expect that where the conditions are much the same on both sides, A's and B's parts in the phenomenon might be exactly equal and parallel — each being perceived by the other in the other's own environment; and case 644 seems to be an example of this.

1 may note here that the evidence for a heightening of telepathic susceptibility at the time of death, and in seasons of illness, is not confined to the class of cases now in question. See for instance cases 126, 147, 167, 303, 308, 311, 416; and the opening cases of Chap. ii. of the Supplement, which are of the more ordinary thought-transference type.

2 Vol. i., pp. 258-67, 338-40, and 868-88.

of which I am writing he had expressed a wish to stay out rather later than usual. I went into the house for luncheon, leaving him alone, but on looking out of the window a little later, at 2 o'clock, I saw a man standing in front of his chair, and apparently talking to him. I wondered who it was, and concluded it must be a stranger, as I did not recognise the figure, or the wide-awake hat and rather oddly-cut Inverness cape which he wore. However, as it very often happened that strangers did stop and speak to him, I was not surprised. I turned away my eyes for a moment, and when I again looked up the garden, the man had disappeared. I could not see him leaving the garden by any of the numerous gates, and remarked to myself how very quickly he must have walked to be so soon out of sight. B-egency Square does not possess a tree and scarcely a shrub, so that there was nothing to impede my view.

•'' When my husband came in a little later, I said to him, carelessly, ' Oh, who was that talking to you in the square just now? '

" He replied, ' No one has spoken to me since you left. No one has even passed near me.'

" ' But I saw a man standing in front of you and — as I thought — talking to you about a quarter-of-an-hour ago. His dress was so odd, I couldn't at all tell who it could be.'

" At this my husband laughed, saying, ' I should think not, for there was no one to recognise. I assure you not a soul has been near me since you left.'

" ' Have you been asleep? ' I asked, though I did not think it very likely. He assured me he had not. So the subject dropped; still in my own mind I knew I had seen the mysterious figure.

" Two days afterwards, Mr. L., after giving my husband his treatment, came, as was his usual habit, to speak to me before leaving the house. After a few words and directions, he said, ' It is a very odd thing, but the same experience has happened to me twice since I have attended your husband, that, when in quite another place, I have suddenly felt as if I were standing by his side, either in your drawing-room or out there in the garden.'

" I looked at him, and for the first time noticed his overcoat which he had put on before coming into the room, and the wide-awake in his hand. It struck me that these articles were very similar to those worn by the figure I had seen, and that in every way Mr. L. resembled this same figure. I asked him when, and at what time, he had had the last experience spoken of? 'The day before yesterday,' was the reply. 'I had just finished an early dinner, and was sitting in front of the fire with a newspaper. It was about 2 o'clock; I remember the time perfectly. Suddenly I felt I was no longer there, but standing near your husband in the Square garden.'

" I then told him of the figure I had seen at the same time and place, and how I now recognised it to be his. Afterwards I asked my husband if he had mentioned the circumstance to Mr. L., but he had not done so, and had indeed forgotten all about it. My husband was the only person to whom I had mentioned the fact of my vision. It could not by any possibility have got round to Mr. L. c« Augusta Parker."

[In answer to the inquiry whether she had ever had any other halluci-

cXo

164 RECIPROCAL CASES. [chap.

nation of the senses, Mrs. Parker replied that she had had one other. It seems likely, however, that this was merely a case of mistaken identity, the figure being seen at the end of a long hotel-passage; and this was her own impression at the time.]

