2 For instance, Mr. Paul Bird, of 39, Strand, Calcutta, tells me that some years ago he woke, and saw a native standing against the wall, who on being regarded sank into a squatting posture. "I jumped out of bed, caught the intruder by the throat, and found he was a dirty linen bag, with the neck tied. Not till I actually clutched the neck was I convinced." Mr. Merrifield, of 24, Vernon Terrace, Brighton — with whom figures seen on waking last long enough for him " to reason that though I have been mistaken before, there can be no mistake this time, and to insist upon this to my wife, who remonstrates "— says, " If there is any light object in the room, or any dress or polished piece of furniture on which the light falls, my figure generally shapes itself about that. " Even a persistent dream-image may attach itself to an external basis. Thus Miss I. Bidder, of Ravensbury Park, Mitcham, tells me of a nightmare from which a most distinct demon survived after she woke. She sat up to inspect its hand, which was clutching the bed-rail; but " it faded into the ornaments over the mantel-piece."

We may regard as the lowest grade of such illusion the impression of waking among unknown surroundings. Thus one correspondent tells me that she has " watched the room gradually take its usual form, which on first waking had been some place quite different." And another informant writes: "The room I apparently woke in was a large room, with the chief space between the foot of the bed and the opposite boundary wall, which looked an immense way off, and the light did not appear to come in

392 " BORDERLAND " CASES. [chap.

its own creation from within on what met the eye from without; and such cases, therefore, still bear out my point, that the tendency to externalise and objectify mental images is strongest at one special season of waking life. Of 302 cases of hallucinations of sight (exclusive of those given as telepathic evidence in this book), of which I have collected first-hand accounts during the last three years, as many as 43 — that is, a seventh of the whole number — have taken place during the first few moments after waking. It is equally noteworthy that of the remainder, 6Q, making in all more than a third of the whole number, occurred to persons who were in bed — a proportion far in excess of that which the number of waking minutes spent in bed bears to the total number of waking minutes. Few of these cases, moreover, were of a character that would allow us to class them as illusions hypnagogiques. They did not visit persons who were familiar with such visions as sleep approached; nor did they originate or develop in any way that suggests an unusual or fatigued condition of the retina. Nor again could by any means all of them be explained, like M. Maury's beefsteak, as " after-images " — revivals of past impressions; for out of the 43 cases first mentioned only 23, out of the 66 other cases only 26, represented a face, form, or object that was recognised; while in several even of these cases the person whose figure appeared was a deceased friend or relative who had not been actually seen for months or years. Similarly, of 187 first-hand cases of auditory hallucination in my collection, 63, or more than one third of the whole number, took place in bed. Of these, 19 are described as either awakening the person, or occurring in the very first moment of waking, and in 10 of the 19 the sound was a recognised voice; of the remaining 44, 17 were unrecognised voices, 11 were non- vocal sounds such as ringings and knocks, and only 16 represented recognised voices. It would seem, then, that the reasons which make bed a specially favourable place for such experiences are to be sought, not only in peculiarities of the sense-organs at the moments immediately contiguous to sleep, but in the more general conditions of quiet and passivity, of a comparatively anaemic brain, and of the partial lapse of the higher directive psychical activities. We cannot, I think, safely reckon

at the right place, though on the same side of the room as the window really was. I lay and pondered, feeling as if there was something inexplicable in the place, sure that I was wideawake. As I wondered, all the strangeness of the room and the added space vanished, and I found myself again in a small, narrow room, with the wall almost close to the bottom of the bed."

darkness as among these conditions, as a large proportion of the cases have occurred when the room was light — for instance, in the early hours of a summer morning.

§ 2. At any rate, bed being — from whatever causes — a place favourable to phantasms, it is reasonable to surmise that it may be a place favourable to the phenomena with which we are concerned in this book — the phantasms that coincide with reality. And such, in fact, it proves to be. Considering how small a portion of our waking life is included in the few moments after waking from sleep, or even in the short periods of wakefulness that normal healthy persons pass in bed, it is remarkable how large a proportion of our veridical examples (a number little less than the total of dreams, and amounting to about a fourth of the externalised waking cases,) fall within these seasons. And regarded as evidence of telepathy, it will be seen that these cases stand on an altogether different footing from the dream-cases proper with which they have seemed in one way so closely allied. Dreams, as we saw, are so frequent and various as to afford an immense scope for accidental coincidences; it is far otherwise with these borderland impressions, or at any rate with those of them which the perceiver himself is able clearly to differentiate from dreams. If I have called them the commonest form of waking hallucination among sane and healthy people, this is not to be understood as meaning that they are absolutely common; on the contrary, they are decidedly exceptional. Out of 5569 persons, taken at random, I find that only 18 are able to recall having within the last twelve years had a visual experience, and only 23 an auditory experience, of this kind.1 If then we find a considerable number of cases where an experience of the sort has coincided with the death (or some distinct crisis in the life) of the person whose presence the hallucination suggested, the fact is at once noteworthy; and the

1 I may explain that the statistics about hallucinations, of which use was made on the preceding page, were not the result of inquiries addressed to a known and limited number of persons, but of testimony which has reached me in the more general course of psychological investigation. For the purpose then in view -namely, to ascertain the proportion which " borderland " hallucinations bear to hallucinations in general — statistics thus drawn from an unlimited circle are of course in place. But it is quite a different matter when we wish to discover how common the phenomena are, in the sense of discovering what proportion of people have had experience of them. The only way, then, is to make a definite inquiry on the subject, of a certain number of persons, large enough to be accepted as a fair sample of the population. This method of' numerical inquiry was exemplified to some extent in the discussion on dreams; but I am reserving for a separate chapter (Chap, xiii., at the beginning of Vol. ii.) the more detailed account of it, and of its bearing on the theory that the coincidences on which stress is laid in this book were due not to telepathy but to chance.

394 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

number of such coincidences that we can adduce forms a strong and independent proof — far stronger, at any rate, than was afforded by our list of coincident dreams — that telepathy and not accident is the explanation of them. Nor is the comparatively small number of persons who have experience of distinct " borderland " hallucinations the only point wherein this class is superior in evidential force to dreams. We can here, as a rule, be far more certain that the particular impression recorded was really of a sort unique or highly exceptional in the particular percipient's experience. This unique character is, no doubt, as we have seen, often asserted of dreams proper which afterwards prove to have coincided with reality. But there we lacked complete assurance that similar dreams which did not coincide with reality had not slipped out of memory. The impressions to be described in this chapter, on the other hand, have a character and an intensity which would ordinarily ensure their being remembered, even if no coincidence were established. Many of them, indeed, seem to have been distinctly waking impressions, belonging to a state of open eyes and alert senses, which was continued into normal waking life without any break or any feeling of change whatever. Still, as they occurred to persons who were in bed, and at seasons when the faculties are apt to be in an unstable condition, and when the stages of consciousness from moment to moment may be hard to define, it is safest to distinguish them from similar phenomena occurring during active waking hours, no less than from those of sleep.1

I may quote at once a case which illustrates the immense importance to the argument of distinguishing the experiences of the " borderland " from those of sleep. The following passage occurs in the Life and Times of Lord Brougham, written by himself (1871), pp. 201-3, and was originally an entry in his journal. The entry must apparently have been made very soon after the occurrence which it describes; as we can scarcely doubt that had the fact of his friend's death, which he learnt soon afterwards, been known to him at the time of writing, he would have included it in the account.

1 Since we make so broad an evidential distinction between these "borderland" impressions and dreams, it is clearly incumbent on us to treat doubtful cases in the way least favourable to our argument, and to refer them to the dream-class. Thus in the well-known apparition-case recorded in Tsaak Walton's Life of Dr. Donne, it is very probable that Dr. Donne, who had been left alone after dinner, was dozing. So, when the word vision is used, without special mention that the percipient was awake, we are bound to assume that he was asleep. This woidd exclude such a case as Ben Jonson's "vision " of his son, "with a bloodie cross upon his forehead," which synchronised with the child's death at a distance by the plague, as narrated by Drummond of Hawthornden. For taken as a dream, the experience, occurring at what was very possibly a time of anxiety, would not afford a sufficiently remarkable coincidence.

In December, 1799, Lord Brougham was travelling in Sweden with friends.

(146) "We set out for Gothenburg, [apparently on December 18th] determining to make for Norway. About 1 in the morning, arriving at a decent inn, we decided to stop for the night. Tired with the cold of yesterday, I was glad to take advantage of a hot bath before I turned in, and here a most remarkable thing happened to me — so remarkable that I must tell the story from the beginning.

" After I left the High School, I went with G., my most intimate friend, to attend the classes in the University. There was no divinity class, but we frequently in our walks discussed and speculated upon many grave subjects — among others, on the immortality of the soul, and on a future state. This question, and the possibility, I will not say of ghosts walking, but of the dead appearing to the living, were subjects of much speculation: and we actually committed the folly of drawing up an agreement, written with our blood, to the effect that whichever of us died the first should appear to the other, and thus solve any doubts we had entertained of the '• life after death.' 1 After we had finished our classes at the college, G. went to India, having got an appointment there in the Civil Service. He seldom wrote to me, and after the lapse of a few years I had almost forgotten him; moreover, his family having little connection with Edinburgh, I seldom saw or heard anything of them, or of him through them, so that all his schoolboy intimacy had died out, and I had nearly forgotten his existence. I had taken, as I have said, a warm bath, and while lying in it and enjoying the comfort of the heat, after the late freezing I had undergone, I turned my head round, looking towards the chair on which I had deposited my clothes, as I was about to get out of the bath. On the chair sat G., looking calmly at me. How I got out of the bath I know not, but on recovering my senses I found myself sprawling on the floor. The apparition, or whatever it was, that had taken the likeness of G., had disappeared.

" This vision produced such a shock that I had no inclination to talk about it or to speak about it even to Stuart; but the impression it made upon me was too vivid to be easily forgotten; and so strongly was I affected by it that I have here written down the whole history, with the date, 19th December, and all the particulars, as they are now fresh before me. No doubt I had fallen asleep; and that the appearance presented so distinctly to my eyes was a dream, I cannot for a moment doubt; yet for years I had had no communication with G., nor had there been anything to recall him to my recollection; nothinghad taken place during our Swedish travels either connected with G. or with India, or with anything relating to him or to any member of his family. I recollected quickly enough our old discussion and the bargain we had made. I could not discharge from my mind the impression that G. must have died, and that his appearance to me was to be received by me as a proof of a future state, yet all the while I felt convinced that the whole was a dream; and so painfully vivid, so

1 As to compacts of this sort see Vol. ii., p. 66.

396 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

unfading was the impression, that I could not bring myself to talk of it, or to make the slightest allusion to it."

In October, 1862, Lord Brougham added as a postcript: —

"I have just been copying out from my journal the account of this strange dream: Certissima mortis imago! And now to finish the story, begun about 60 years since. Soon after my return to Edinburgh, there arrived a letter from India, announcing G.'s death, and stating that he had died on the 19th of December!

" Singular coincidence! yet when one reflects on the vast numbers of dreams which night after night pass through our brains, the number of coincidences between the vision and the event are perhaps fewer and less remarkable than a fair calculation of chances would warrant us to expect. Nor is it surprising, considering the variety of our thoughts in sleep, and that they all bear some analogy to the affairs of life, that a dream should sometimes coincide with a contemporaneous or even with a future event. This is not much more wonderful than that a person, whom we had no reason to expect, should appear to us at the very moment we have been thinking or speaking of him. So common is this, that it has for ages grown into the proverb, ' Speak of the devil.' I believe every such seeming miracle is, like every ghost story, capable of explanation."

Lord Brougham's evidence in a matter of this kind cannot be fairly impugned on the ground that his character for public veracity was not always above suspicion. He clearly took no special pride or pleasure in the incident, and he advances a thoroughly rationalistic explanation of it. But of course the long interval which elapsed between his hearing of the date of the death and his recording it in writing greatly diminishes the evidential value of the case. I quote it rather for the sake of the important fallacy in the concluding remarks.

Lord Brougham, we see, rests his view that the coincidence in his case was accidental on the " vast number of dreams." But was his experience a dream? This is no mere question of a name. Let us make the supposition that no death had occurred, and that the experience remained one which there is not even a, prima facie excuse for surmising to be anything but purely subjective: does it thereby subside at once into the general ruck of dream-experiences? Is it indistinguishable in intensity and character from those countless multitudes, of which it would be true and relevant to say that the scope afforded by them for chance-coincidences is practically unlimited? We can but accept what Lord Brougham himself has told us, and answer these questions by an emphatic negative. The complete consciousness of the real place and time, the intention to get out of the bath, the percipient's sense of his own actual posture

when ho caught sight of the figure, and the whole detail of the account, are all very unlike ordinary dreaming. But apart from such points as these, is it a well-known result of an ordinary dream that the dreamer, on recovering his senses, finds himself " sprawling on the floor "? On waking from an ordinary dream, are we wont to remark, as a point of interest, that " the apparition has disappeared "? Is it characteristic of an ordinary dream to be so painfully vivid and unfading that the dreamer cannot bring himself to make the slightest allusion to it? Call such an experience a dream, or call it (as we should do) a " borderland " hallucination — the only relevant question is, how often does its like occur? In Lord Brougham's own long life, at any rate, it was unique and unparalleled. In arguing, therefore, H{ that the coincidence was not so very remarkable after all, because " dreams " are so numerous and various that one of them here and there is likely by chance to strike on truth, he makes himself the slave of a word. The instance is instructive, as showing the tendency of prepossessions, however legitimate and scientific in themselves, to lead on to illegitimacies of procedure. Lord Brougham is rightly certain that his experience is not supernatural — is " capable of explanation "; and then, as the only natural explanation that occurs to him is chance, he becomes equally certain that that must be the right one, wrests facts into conformity with it, and refers a very uncommon thing to a class of very common things.

§ 3. To come, however, to our own collection — before introducing the characteristic sensory cases, I will quote a couple of " borderland " examples of the more ideal type which has been prominent in the preceding chapters. In the first case, the transferred impression (if such it was) did not even suggest an idea to the percipient until it actually took shape in an exclamation of her own. The narrator's family dislike the subject, and her name is accordingly suppressed.

"December 22nd, 1883. (147) "Two years ago my son was ill in Durban, Natal. I was told by '' '_ his'medical attendant, who is also my son-in-law, that the illness was serious, but I had no reason to suppose it was expected to end fatally. Of course, I, his mother, was anxious; but there came better accounts, and at last a letter from my son himself. He spoke of being really stronger, expressed regret at his enforced long silence, and added he hoped now to write regularly again. The load was lifted from my mind, and I remarked I felt happier than I had done for months. At this time I too was ill, and I had a trained nurse with me. A few nights after the receipt of the letter, I I thought I had been lying awake, and requiring to call my nurse who

398 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

was in my room, I sat up in bed and called loudly, ' Edward, Edward.' I was roused by nurse answering, ' I fear, ma'am, your son will not be able to come to you.' I tried to laugh it off, but a chill struck to my heart. I noted the hour, 3.40 on Sunday morning. Without mentioning my fears, I recounted the incident to my daughters, but I looked for the bad news to come, and on Monday received the cable message, ' Edward died last night.' Subsequently letters named the hour as being identical with that in which I had involuntarily sent forth my cry for my loved son. [This is not quite correct.] His sister, Mrs. C, in writing to me, said, ' O! mother, his one crave was for you, and to the last moment the yearning he had for you seemed to dwell in his eyes.' I may add we were more than even mother and son usually are to one another. I believe in that one moment our souls were permitted to meet, and I thank God for the memory of that hour. << q j] j£ »

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. K. says that her son had had delicate health, and " for years I used to get up through the night and listen to his breathing, and lived in the constant apprehension of learning sudden bad news if he were out of my sight." She adds, " No doubt I was thinking of him, but not painfully, for I had had his letter, and I thought he was getting well. It certainly was not a dream — I sat up in bed to call my nurse, when, to my surprise 1 and, for an instant, amusement, I uttered the cry, ' Edward, Edward.' The great point is, of course, whether the hour was exactly that of his death. My son died during the night, or rather, early in the morning, of Sunday, August 28th, 1881. During that same night I uttered my cry to him. It was the only time in. my life that anything of the kind took place. I never talked in my sleep, nor had any experience the least like this before or since."

The following is from Mrs. K.'s daughter: —

"January 23rd, 1884.

" I remember that on the morning of the 29th August my mother told me of the curious coincidence of which she has written to you. She told me when I went into her room the first thing, and the nurse was also in her room. «j] j] j£ »

It having been pointed out to Mrs. K. that her daughter said the 29th, not the 28th, of August, she explains: —

" My daughter, E. E. K., says I told her of my cry in the morning of the day after I uttered it; of course, it was therefore on the 28th that everything occurred. In writing to you she did not realise that the death and my cry were both after midnight, and simply writing from memory, put the 29th, as being the day after the 28th. There is no doubt Edward's death and my cry occurred during the night of the 27th, or rather in the early morning of the 28th." 2

1 The reader who has studied the records of automatic phenomena in Chap ii., §§ 12 and 13, will not find it specially surprising that a telepathic impression should manifest itself in an involuntary utterance of this sort.

2 This is not very clearly expressed; but there seems little doubt that the cry took place on Sunday morning, August 28th, and was mentioned to E. E. K. a few hours later.

Mrs. K. kindly wrote to another daughter at Durban, to make sure of the exact time of the death; and quotes the following passage from the reply:—

" Edward died at 20 minutes before 5 a.m.; his watch was just beside him, and as he drew his last breath, I looked at the time and said, ' Mother will be awake! how will she bear it? ' " The writer adds that her husband's entry in his diary for August 28th, 1881, is, "Ned died 4.40 a.m."

Allowing for longitude the cry here followed the death by about an hour. Mrs. K.'s preoccupation with her son's condition is, of course, a weak point in the evidence: on the other hand she is very certain of the uniqueness of the experience. If the case was telepathic, its peculiar nature would strikingly support the view already advanced, that a telepathic impression may be produced below the threshold of consciousness. And on that view the slight deferment of the further effect by which the impression is plainly manifested becomes completely intelligible.

The next case is very similar to No. 103 (p. 330), but the effect on the percipient is even more unlike that of any ordinary dream. And from the evidential point of view, even those who most strongly realise the scope that the vast number of dreams affords for accidental coincidences; will hesitate to assume that avast number of boys of 16 get up, dress, and wait for messengers in the middle of the night. The narrative is from a paper called " Man, Trans- Corporeal " — by Dr. C. B. Radcliffe, of 25, Cavendish Square, W. — which appeared in the Contemporary Review for December, 1874.

(148) " My grandmother, a lady considerably over 70 years of a°-e resided with my parents, and I was [at the time of the occurrence] staying at a place about 4 miles away from home. Everybody at home was, to all appearance, in good health, and had been so for a lono- time and on that particular night I went to bed and fell asleep, without at all divining what was so soon to happen.

"I have no remembrance of having dreamt, and all I know is that after having slept for a couple of hours, I woke with full conviction that my grandmother had been taken suddenly ill, that a messeno-er was on his way to fetch me, and that I should not reach home before all was over. A moment or two later I got up, lit a candle, looked at my watch, dressed, and waited at the window in the full belief that my grandmother was then dead and that I should have to «-o presently; and as I expected, so it was, the messenger arriving just as I was ready to return with him, and the death happening, as it proved afterwards, at the very moment I had looked at my watch. I had not any impression at the time that there was anything supernatural in the way in which the intelligence was thus conveyed to my mind. I remember nothing like a feeling of fear at the time, and I did not (I was a lad of

400 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

not more than 16 years of age) perplex myself with reasoning on the subject."

[We find that this incident took place in 1837, and no corroboration is now procurable. In deciding whether to include a case of this degree of remoteness, the intellectual status of the narrator must naturally be a chief consideration. Dr. Radcliffe tells us that it stands out very clearly in his memory, and that everybody who knew him at the time heard of it.]

§ 4. To pass now to definitely sensory cases, I will first quote one which is interesting as a perfect example of an "illusion hypnagogique," suggested apparently by the ideas in a neighbouring mind. Miss Deering, of Louisville, Kentucky, writes to us as follows: —

"October 18th, 1884.

(149) " I very distinctly remember that one day, a few years ago, my father lay down for a few minutes, as at that time usual before going to his office in the afternoon. Seated on a stool beside him, and with my left hand enfolded in one of his, I read the book in which I was at the time interested, for 5 or possibly 7 minutes. At the end of that time he turned his face towards me, and seeing that the room was shaded, remarked: ' Anna, you will injure your eyes reading in this dim light.' ' And I do not particularly like this book,' I responded. I held in my hand a historical novel, the name of which I am sorry I cannot recollect, but I remember vividly that the passage I had just read purported to be one of the last scenes in the life of Marie Antoinette, and I remember as distinctly that in that scene a tall man carried a coffin from a room in which Marie Antoinette and some attendant ladies were at the time standing. I remember that in the story that tall man stood prominently in the foreground, and that my mind was strained under the part he took in that scene almost to the verge of repugnance.

" In reply to my father's question why I did not like the book, I replied in substance as in the foregoing, and he immediately told me that he had just seen what I had described, and had opened his eyes and turned his face towards me to dissipate the scene, which for the moment he had looked upon as an isolated phantasm. 1 a Anna m. Deering."

Mr. Deering writes: —

" Louisville, Kentucky, U.S.

" October 21st, 1884.

"While I lay with my daughter's hand in mine, as she relates in the accompanying memoir, 1 fell into the semi-slumber usual with me on lying down to rest for a few minutes after my luncheon, early in the afternoon. At these times I very seldom fall asleep, but simply into a species of slumber, in which I frequently find myself in a kind of rayless or moonless moonlight, looking, and this usually with serene pleasure, at nearby gardens, slopes, rivulets, and various little vistas, which more times than otherwise vanish at my bidding, and except I fall asleep, are immediately replaced by others. Sometimes these are peopled with

1 A parallel case, where a dream seems to have been suggested by what someone else had been silently reading, is No. 407 in the Supplement.

apparently living figures, and frequently these also dissolve at my bidding and are replaced by others. There is, however, this difference; any control I exercise for the purpose of a change seems to be more immediate and more absolute over a change of figures than over a change of scenes.

" I am quite sure that at these times I do not fall into any condition that fairly can be called pathological.

" Under the slumber now under consideration, my attention became fixed on a tall thin man, with head uncovered, beardless, and dressed in black. He came toward the foot of the bed on which I lay from the left; and perhaps I should note that my daughter sat upon my left. Immediately I saw several other figures; and though these stood outside the lines or field of my direct vision, I remember distinctly that they made on me an impression of sympathy with powerlessness. I might think that the sympathy touched me through the countenance of the man, were it not that he impressed me with also the opposite of powerlessness. His age seemed to be about 50, his face oblong, a little sallow, seriously thoughtful, and withal indicative of great but quiet firmness in action, whether from a sense of duty based on his own judgment, or duty under a sense of obedience, I cannot determine; though, in the absence of any appearance of the vindictive, I think or at least am inclined to think that alike his presence and his action were based on simply an obedience to some rightful authority. This action was a reverent stepping forward, and a silent laying of his hands on a coffin that seemed to rest across the foot of the bed. The moment I saw the coffin I thought: I do not like this scene; please go away and let something more agreeable come in. But the scene would not change, and again I thought: Please go away and let something more agreeable come in; and again the scene would not change. He raised the coffin, it seemed as easily as though it had been that of an infant, and was in the act of stepping backward, as though withdrawing from a presence, when I thought: Then I will not prolong this slumber; I will open my eyes and arouse myself. And, on immediately doing so, I spoke to my daughter as she narrates, and then, without anything like amazement, listened to her description from the book.

" I have been minute, as in the foregoing, because I wish to put every feature of and every impression given me by the scene carefully on record, against a search which I purpose to keep up for the book out of which my daughter at the time sat reading. She did not then or ever read to me what she had read, but simply and in her own language drew the scene; and this in, perhaps, as few words as she has now written it, nor have we since that time in any particular way conversed about it. My impression is that the book she read was an octavo in paper covers, but its name or author, or whose it was or what became of it, neither of us can recollect; nor do either of us at this time remember any of the scenes immediately preceding or attending the tragic death of Marie Antoinette, as these are, or may be, recorded in history.

"William Deering."

This incident was originally related in the Louisville Medical News by Professor Palmer, a letter from whom is appended.

402 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

"University of Louisville, Kentucky, U.S.A.

" September 26th, 1883. " The article appearing on the other side is true in every particular. The gentleman, a resident of this city, a man of high nervous organisation, was born in Belfast, U.S.A. Between himself and his daughter exists a degree of attachment rarely seen in such kinship. I related the incident as he gave it to me.

" E. R. Palmer, M.D.,

" Professor of Physiology," &c.

It is obvious that the value of this narrative, as affording evidence of thought-transference, must be proportional to the degree of exactness with which the correspondence between the dream and the description in the book can be made out. It might, therefore, be considerably increased if the book could be discovered; but we have failed to find any historical novel, or any memoir or history, containing the incident. Even as it stands the coincidence is certainly remarkable; but as Miss Deering's description preceded her father's account of his vision, it is possible that its similarity to the description became unconsciously somewhat stronger in recollection than it was in reality.

This particular type is in any case unusual. Looking at the " borderland " impressions of the higher senses as a class, we at once observe the same important change as struck us in the course of our survey of dreams (pp. 341-2). The experience of the percipient is henceforth no longer (or only very rarely) a direct reproduction or embodiment of the idea or sensation of the agent; it is something in which his own creative faculties are at work. He is the author of his impression in the same sense as before he was the author of his dream. I merely note this in passing, reserving further discussion of this point till the subject of waking hallucinations can be treated as a whole.

§ 5. I will first take examples where a single sense only is concerned, and will begin with the sense of hearing. There is a group of cases where what has been heard has suddenly awakened the percipient — not, however, as the climax of a dream, but with the vivid and instantaneous impression of a sound externally caused. It may, no doubt, be suggested that in such cases the sound is the climax of a dream of which no memory survived. But if so, the immediate oblivion of the dream serves to set off the specially startling nature of the experience in the moment of waking; and such instantaneous startings from apparently dreamless sleep, with a definite sound in the ears which has no objective reality, are at any

rate sufficiently rare to justify us in regarding them, for purposes of evidence, as borderland and not as dream experiences. The cases, however, differ considerably in their evidential force. In some which have most powerfully impressed the imagination of the percipients, the sound has been inarticulate and of the nature of a scream, not identified with the person afterwards assumed to have been the agent. Now this of course diminishes the improbability that its synchronism with an exceptional state of that person was accidental. And again, it is difficult in such circumstances to prove conclusively that the sound may not have been due to some normal cause which was not discovered; for odd sounds at night are not uncommon, and, till accounted for, may have a peculiarly exciting effect. As regards the first of these objections, it must be remembered, on the other hand, that screams are a very unusual form of purely subjective impression — my large collection of waking hallucinations of the sane does not include a single instance; while they do not seem an unlikely form to be taken by a hallucination which is the sensory embodiment of a sudden undefined idea of death or calamity.1 As to the likelihood of a real external sound whose source was not discovered, the reader will be able to form his own judgment from the cases themselves.

The following account is from Viscount L., the very reverse of a credulous witness, and with no sort of leaning towards the marvellous.

" November 5th, 1884.

(150) "Thirty years ago and upwards [August 13th, 1849], I was staying with my father at our place in Ireland. I was then my father's second son, having an elder brother. I was awoke out of my sleep by violent screams, so much so chat I got up and walked all over the house to endeavour to ascertain where the screams came from. All appeared, as far as I could judge, quite regular and quiet in the house (a very large one), and I went back to bed and thought no more about it. On inquiry in the morning, nobody had heard the screams except myself. But 2 days after, I received a letter, stating that my elder and only brother had died at Ramsgate. after 6 hours' illness, of cholera, and died about the hour when I certainly heard screams."

In answer to inquiries, Lord L. says, " I never in my life experienced any sort of hallucination of the senses." In conversation, he informed me that his brother certainly died in the night. He had travelled to Ramsgate on the preceding day, and was taken ill after his arrival. Lord L.'s wife was sleeping in a room which opened into his, and heard nothing.

Now no doubt the wind sometimes plays odd tricks; and,

1 Seethe discussion and examples of "rudimentary hallucinations," Chap, xiv., § 4, and Chap, xv., § 6.

2 C 2

404 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

moreover, it is possible to be awoke by a scream of ones own which seems to the bewildered sense to have been external.1 But if a healthy man gets out of bed and walks all over a large house merely because the wind is high, he is, one would think, likely to remark that the wind is high — whereas Lord L. remarked (he tells me) that the night was calm; and the sounds which so ring in his waking ears as to prompt this unusual course would at any rate be likely to be noticed by someone else. The use of the plural word " screams " is also worth noting, as opposed to the view that the sleeper woke himself by some shrill exclamation; indeed, his sex would alone make this explanation less plausible than in some other i cases. But the case is remote in time, and depends on a single 1 memory. This last objection does not apply to the following account, from Mrs. Purton, of Field House, Alcester.

"March 16th, 1884.

(151) "In the autumn of 1859, we were expecting my youngest brother

home from Australia, after an absence of eight years. He was a passenger

on board the ' Royal Charter.' The night, or rather in the early dawn of the

fatal morning of the wreck of that unhappy vessel, I suddenly started out

of my sleep and found myself seizing hold of my husband's arm, horrified

at the most awful wail of agony, which appeared to me to fill the house.

Finding my husband still asleep — he was a medical man, and had been out

the whole of the previous night, so was unusually tired — I slipped out of

bed and went round to look at all the children and to the servants' room,

' but found all quietly sleeping, so thinking it must have been the wind

I only which so disturbed me, I lay down again, but could not sleep. I

noticed that day was just breaking. In the morning I asked different

people if they had been disturbed by any unusual noise, but no one had

heard it.

" The post brought a letter from a cousin in Liverpool, telling us the ' Royal Charter ' was telegraphed as having arrived at Queenstown, and we might expect to see Frank very shortly. We passed the day in most joyful anticipations of the meeting. My mother had his room prepared, a good fire burning, and his night-shirt and slippers laid out for use, and a nice supper ready. Wheels were heard, but, instead of Frank, my cousin appeared. She, as soon as the awful news of the wreck reached Liverpool, started off herself to bring us the melancholy tidings. Even then I did not connect the fearful sounds I heard with the wreck, but when the newspapers came and I read the accounts of the eye-witnesses of the wreck, and of the screams which rent the air as the ship broke her back and all on board were overwhelmed in the waves, I could only shudder and exclaim, ' That was what I heard.' It was months before I could forget the horror which thrilled my very soul at the remembrance of that awful night. « Frances A. Purton."

1 In proof of this, see case 126, p. 360, top.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Purton adds: —

" I never have had, at any other time than the one I mentioned to you, a vivid dream of death, or an auditory hallucination of any kind."

The following is an extract from a letter written to Mrs. Purton by her daughter, Miss Sarah Sophia Purton, who was about 12 years old at the time of the occurrence: —

" I distinctly remember your speaking of the cry of distress you heard when the ' Royal Charter ' was lost. My remembrance of it is that you woke with this cry ringing in your ears, and got up at once, quietly, without disturbing my father, who had been out late somewhere to a patient. You found it was about 3 o'clock. You then went to the nursery and to each room where anyone was sleeping, but finding all was quiet and right you went back to bed. I fancy you inquired next morning if anyone had heard the sound which disturbed you, but could not swear to this."

Miss Purton writes to us: —

"April 7th, 1884.

"To the best of my recollection my motherspoke of theory sheheard the following morning. I distinctly remember her saying when she heard of the terrible cry as the vessel parted and went down, ' There, that was the cry I heard,' and the thrill it gave me at the time, but this must have been a day or two after the occurrence — either just before or after she had visited the scene of the wreck. " S S Purton "

Here, the vivid character of the impression, and the fact that it was unique in the percipient's experience, will probably be accepted without dispute. And if so, the coincidence — though easy enough to regard as accidental if it stood alone or nearly alone — seems fairly admissible as an item in a cumulative proof of telepathy.1

1 We have received a similar case from Mr. D. H. Wilson, of Rosemont, Hyeres, who was told by an intimate friend, Miss Maclean, that she was awakened one morning by an appalling shriek, and marked the hour; and that at that exact time (allowing for longitude) her brother met with a violent death in Australia. But we have not been able to trace Miss Maclean; and in this somewhat doubtful type, first-hand evidence is specially requisite.

The following case, though it is first-hand, and though the incident is unique in the narrator's experience, is open to objections of another kind. The account is from Miss Dora Kennedy, of Rockville, Rainhill, and was obtained through the kindness of the late Dr. Noble, of Manchester.

" September 29th, 1884.

"A young married sister of mine lived in the country, and was recovering from a long illness, through which I had nursed her. We went to Liverpool to consult her doctor, and to spend a few days with a relative. During the course of the visit, I had to leave her in the care of an aunt, whilst I went home for a short time to Manchester. In the middle of my first night at home, I was suddenly awakened by a piercing scream, and jumping out of bed, saw my mother coming into the room in great alarm. Having heard and been awakened by a scream, she thought something terrible had happened, and asked me what it was. I thought and said at once (as I felt quite sure) that something had happened to my sister in Liverpool. The next morning I returned to my sister, and on my arrival saw that they were greatly alarmed. My aunt told me that during the night she got up to give my sister her usual medicine, and by mistake took the wrong bottle containing laudanum, and gave a dose. Fortunately my sister only took a small portion before it was discovered. When my aunt knew what she had done, she gave a frantic scream, and said, ' Oh, I have killed her! if only her mother and Dora ' (myself) ' were

406 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

To come now to cases where distinct words are heard — in the following example the voice heard was at once connected with a particular person; but still not with the person whom, if the incident be interpreted telepathically, we must regard as the agent. The account was obtained for us by Miss Fripp, of Lulworth House, Hampstead Hill Gardens, from her grandmother, Mrs. Roe.

(152) "Some years since, when in manifestly good health, I was aroused by what appeared to be some one at my bedroom door, calling ' Mary Anne, Mary Anne.' It seemed like my mother's voice, who had been dead two or three years. I roused my husband, but there was no one at the door or anywhere on the same floor. Going upstairs to my son's bedroom, it was so full of smoke that I was nearly suffocated, till I could open the window, when I found my son apparently asleep but quite insensible, till we got him into the air; and then when we aroused him, he remembered when he came up to bed he laid the pipe he had been smoking on a pile of handkerchiefs, which had been put on the dressingtable, and were completely burnt and the table injured, but no flames. Our medical man thought had I not gone in just in time, my son would have been dead.

" Mary Anne Roe."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Fripp writes: —

"June 25th, 1884.

" I have asked Mrs. Roe the questions you sent me, and I find —

" (1) She has never had other dreams which impressed her in the same way as the two she wrote an account of. [The other dream was about the wreck of her son at sea.]

" (2) My mother was in the house when my grandmother had the warning about the fire. My grandfather told her in the morning that Mrs. Roe insisted on getting out of bed, as she fancied she had heard her mother's voice calling her outside the door.

" (3) There was no smell of smoke in the room; Mrs. Roe's room was on a different landing, quite apart from her son's room.

" J. Fripp."

Here again we have a case which might be variously described as an accident or as " special providence," if it stood alone, but which cannot be excluded from our cumulative argument. If telepathic, it

near.' My sister also told me how ardently she had longed for me. I never doubted (for we were deeply attached to each other) but that her longing for me had an influence over me, and that in some way we at home had been made aware of the scream. I was never troubled with morbid fancies. "

Here the reference of the sound to a particular person was clearly not due to recognition, but merely to the fact that that person was at the time a special object of solicitude. But in what, it may be asked, is the case weaker than Lord L.'s or Mrs. Purton's, quoted above? The answer is that the fact of a second person's sharing in the experience is a strong (though not a conclusive) argument for supposing the sound to have been a real one, the source of which did not happen to be discovered. It will be seen readily how much more probable this hypothesis is in the present case than, e.g., in the case given above (No. 30) as an example of collective telepathic percipience, — which happened also to be of the " borderland" type.

is a good instance of total unconsciousness on the part of the agent. (See p. 230.)

The next example — received in 1883 from the Rev. Andrew Jukes — resembles the last in that the voice, though recognised, was not that of the agent, but of a person some time deceased. In neither instance is there any reason to regard this feature as other than a purely subjective element supplied by the percipient's own brain — a piece of dream-like investiture in which the telepathic impression clad itself. (See above pp. 341-2, and below, Chap. XIII., § 5.) Mr. Jukes's case, however, differs from the preceding in the important evidential point that the words heard bore a distinct

relation to the agent.

" Upper Eglinton Road, Woolwich.

(153) "On Monday, July 31st, 1854, 1 was at Worksop, staying in the house of Mr. Heming, the then agent there to the Duke of Newcastle. Just as I woke that morning — some would say I was dreaming — I heard the voice of an old schoolfellow (C. O), who had been dead at least a year or two, saying, ' Your brother Mark and Harriet are both gone.' These words were echoing in my ears as I woke. I seemed to hear them. My brother then was in America; and both were well when I had last heard of them; but the words respecting him and his wife were so vividly impressed upon my mind that before I left my bedroom I wrote them down, then and there, on a scrap of an old newspaper, having no other paper in the bedroom. That same clay I returned to Hull, mentioned the circumstance to my wife, and entered the incident, which had made a deep impression on me, in my diary, which I still have. I am as certain as I can well be of anything that the entry is a transcript of what I wrote on the bit of newspaper.

" On the 18th of August (it was before the Atlantic telegraph), I received a line from my brother's wife, Harriet, dated August 1st, saying that Mark had just breathed his last, of cholera; after preaching on Sunday, he had been taken ill with cholera on Monday, and had died on Tuesday morning; that she herself was ill, and that in the event of her death she wished their children should be brought to England. She died the second day after her husband, August 3rd. I immediately started for America, and brought the children home.

" The voice I. seemed to hear, and which at first I thought must have been a kind of dream, had such an effect on me that, though the bell rang for breakfast, I did not go down for some time. And all that clay, and for days after, I could not shake it off. I had the strongest impression, and indeed conviction, that my brother was gone.

"I ought perhaps to add that we had no knowledge of the cholera being in the neighbourhood of my brother's parish. My impression was that both he and his wife must, if the voice were true, have been taken away by some railway or steamboat accident. But you should notice that at the moment when I seemed to hear this voice my brother was not dead. He died early next morning, August 1st, and his wife nearly two clays later, namely, August 3rd. I do not profess to explain it — I simply state

408 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

the facts or the phenomena. But the impression made on me was profound, and the coincidence itself is remarkable. << Andrew Jukes "

Mr. Jukes has kindly allowed me to inspect the record in his diary. I had hoped to be able to incorporate this verbatim in the account; but he has private reasons — quite unconnected with the present case — for desiring that this should not be done.

In conversation, I learnt from him that the words he heard formed, in fact, the continuation of a dream, but that the dream had not been about his brother and sister-in-law; and he has dictated to me the words, " My impression is that the remark passed while I was awake." He has never on any other occasion in his life made a written note of a dream. Asked if he could recall having experienced an auditory hallucination on any other occasion, he replied that he had " never experienced anything of the kind," except that on one occasion he had a subjective impression of hearing music.

Considering the uniqueness of the impression in this case, it is not evidentially important to decide at what exact stage of the waking process the auditory experience took place. That experience may fairly be assigned to the " borderland," on the ground partly of Mr. Jukes's conviction that he was more awake than asleep, and partly of the fact that the supposed agent or agents had not figured in the preceding dream. The time of its occurrence, however, was not that of either of the two critical moments of death in America. If it coincided with any special moment, it must probably have been with the first shock of alarm in the mind of Mrs. Jukes, at the idea of cholera in her household. But this is conjecture only; we do not know how early on the Monday it was that the first symptoms of illness were apparent; and the evidential force of the case is so far diminished.

The following example, where the voice was not recognised, presents the interesting point of immediate repetition, which we shall encounter in some of the visual cases (see p. 414). The narrator is Miss Thompson, now residing at 7, Place Vaugirard, Paris.

" 106, Boston Street, Hulme, Manchester.

"January 12th, 1884.

(154) "In the autumn of 1873 my cousin Harry, to whom I was engaged, suddenly came to spend a few days with my family, then staying in London. We made a bet for some gloves at parting After paying several visits in the country, he returned to his home in Yorkshire. During this time we had no letter from or news about him.

" On December 1 8th I awoke in the night, hearing someone earnestly calling me by name. I rose, and went down to my mother's room on the floor beneath, and asked her if she knew who had called me. She said I must have been dreaming, and told me to go back to bed. I did so, and

again heard my name called distinctly. I went again to my mother, who was a little vexed with me, as she feared I should disturb my father, who was sleeping in the room adjoining. I therefore went back to bed, feeling ill at ease. I don't think that I fell asleep again, but am not quite sure, but shortly after heard the voice distinctly calling me for the third time. I was now thoroughly alarmed, and dared not stay upstairs alone, so went again to my mother, and stayed with her the rest of the night. " The next day we heard that Harry Suddaby had died in the night, from a short attack of bronchitis. I asked if Harry had called me really, but no one remembered his doing more than sending his love.

" Christine Thompson."

The Register of Deaths gives the date of the death as December 19th, 1873. It no doubt took place in the early hours of the morning.

In answer to inquiries, Miss Thompson writes on April 27, 1885: — "I have never had any experience similar to that of which I sent you an account, and am too practical a mortal to believe in anything at all resembling ' visions ' or ' hallucinations.' It was rather against my judgment that I was persuaded to send you the account."

[For Mrs. Thompson's corroboration, see the " Additions and Corrections," which precede Chap. I,]

In the next case — from Mr. Everitt, of Holders Hill, Hendon, and first published in Light for Jan., 1883 — the voice was recognised. Though remote, the incident is of a sort that might well make a vivid impression.

(155) "When quite a youth, I had a remarkable experience, in some respects not unlike that which the reprover of Job had. In the silence and darkness of the night I was suddenly awakened from a deep sleep, and I heard a voice, and I have no doubt that I might have seen a spirit l if I had not been, like Eliphaz, so greatly frightened; but I heard a voice, and that voice I recognised as the voice belonging to the dearest object I had in this world. I had no reason at the time to believe otherwise than that the person to whom the voice belonged was in good health and many miles from where I was; yet I heard and recognised the voice of my dear mother, who called me by the familiar name she always used, and strange to say she told me ' she was dead,' and the next post brought the too true and too sad news of her sudden departure from earth-life.

" I have always from a boy up to the present time locked my bedroom door on retiring for the night. At the time there was no one sleeping in the room but myself.

" I was not in a drowsy state when I woke up, but all my senses were as clear and as vivid as they are now I am writing this; they could not have been more so if any one shook me and shouted, ' Jump up, the house is on fire.' Indeed, the feeling and belief was then, and still is, that I was suddenly awakened from a sound sleep by someone in the room, and I felt certain by a slight noise or movement which I heard that there was some-

1 I must note here, as once before in relation to the word " supernatural," that we are in no way responsible for the expressions or views of our informants.

410 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

one bending over me; which feeling was confirmed by the sound of my mother's soft and gentle voice which said ' Tommy ' three times in a way as though she wanted or expected me to answer her, and she then said, ' Your mother is dead.'

" You can better imagine my feelings than I can describe them. I told my fellow apprentice in the morning what I had experienced, and said I was afraid that I should hear bad news from home. My father wrote to my eldest brother asking him to call and break the sad news to me, which he did. I anticipated him by relating what I had heard the previous night. "Thomas Eveeitt."

The brother mentioned in this account is dead. In a letter written on the 5th of December, 1884, Mr. Everitt adds: —

" I showed my fellow-apprentice my night-shirt, which was wet with perspiration from covering my head over with the bedclothes; his evidence would be more valuable than my brother's but I have not the remotest knowledge as to where he is, not having seen or heard anything of him for nearly forty years. My wife, even before she was my wife, had often heard me speak of it; the members of my family have on different occasions heard me refer to it, but all this, of course, would carry but little or no weight with it to the outside public. I only mention it now as showing how sure and certain the experience was."

In answer to further inquiries, Mr. Everitt says: — ■

"The date of my mother's death was the night of June 1st, 1841. It was the same night that she made me conscious of her presence, and also of her death." The Register of Deaths confirms the date given.

[Mr. Everitt has since had one other auditory hallucination, which also represented his mother's voice.]

The following account is from a gentleman residing at Tynemouth, who has at present a reason, which seems to me a sufficient one, for withholding his name from publication, but will withdraw this restriction after an interval of a few years. u December 1884.

(156) "On December 29th, or 30th, 1881, about 1 a.m.,' I awoke hearing my name called. Nobody was in the house, the servants being away for a holiday. I recognised the voice of my father.

" Next afternoon I received a telegram saying he was unwell, and on arriving I learnt from the doctor that my father had been unconscious, and had repeatedly called for me during the night in question. I had no idea of his illness at the time, and believed him to be perfectly well. The attack was very short and severe. He was in Dumfries, and I at Tynemouth, Northumberland."

In answer to inquiries our inf oi'mant writes, on December 27, 1884: —

" I paid no attention to the ' auditory experience,' although the thingcame to my mind while dressing, and probably should never have given it further attention, if I had not been struck by the fact that apparently at or about the same time my father, although unconscious, had been calling for me. I had no means of comparing the exact times, as neither the doctor (whose name I forget, and who is now dead) nor I noted them.

This curious coincidence impressed the fact on my mind, the more so as I have never been able to find any reasonable explanation of the case; and as the tendency of my education has been to believe nothing that can't be accounted for logically, I have almost come to doubt the fact, and in consequence have kept it to myself.1

" I never have had, either before or since the case I mentioned already, any hallucination of the senses. It may perhaps have some bearing on the case, so I add this postscript to say that at one time, when in sound health, my father was one of the most skilful amateur mesmerists I ever knew; his power over some people being quite extraordinary, and sometimes it was exerted almost unconsciously by him."

In the next two cases, the words that the percipient heard seem actually to have been uttered (and, therefore, to have been heard) by the agent; and we may, if we please, refer the examples to that rarer type where a sensation seems to have been quite literally transferred, as contrasted with the cases where the percipient supplies a sensory embodiment to a less definite telepathic impression.2

The first account was sent to us by the Rev. Augustus Field, Vicar of Pool Quay, Welshpool. He describes it as an " Extract of a letter received by me from my brother, Henry C. Field (Surveyor and Civil Engineer), resident at Tutatihika, Wanganni, New Zealand, in reply to letters we had written to him telling about our mother's death." A letter to us from Mr. H. C. Field himself, dated Wanganni, Sept. 25, 1886, gives a completely concordant account.

"March 7th, 1874.

(157) " I was deeply interested in the account of our mother's last illness, and was particularly struck by the circumstance of my name beingcalled, because I heard it. I am not accustomed to dream, and am sure I speak far within the mark when I say that I have not dreamed a dozen times since my marriage, 23 years since. Dreams, too, are supposed to arise from something affecting one's mind, and producing some temporary strong impression, and in this case there was nothing which could affect me in that direction, but some quite the reverse.

" Our first horticultural show of the season took place on November 27th. I won several prizes; and after the show closed at 10 p.m., I had to take home some of my smaller exhibits, and arrange for getting the others home next morning. It was thus near midnight when I reached

home, and the only things talked about by and myself afterwards

were the show and matters of local interest. If anything, therefore, were likely to be on my mind when I fell asleep, it would probably be one or other of the above matters. I do not know how long I slept, but my first

1 A person may very naturally be disposed to keep to himself, and even after a time to doubt, an experience which he cannot fit into any natural scheme; and this cause has probably prevented many telepathic incidents from becoming known. The presentation of a large collection of cases, and the vindication of their purely natural character, may perhaps do something towards removing this difficulty.

2 Compare the dream-cases Nos. 112 and 113; and several examples in Chapters xiv. and xv.

412 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

sleep was over and I was lying in a sort of half-awake, half-asleep state, when I distinctly heard our mother's voice say faintly, ' Harry, Harry! ' and when daylight came and I thought the matter over, I wondered what could have possessed me to fancy such a thing. Our Uncle C. and his family called me Harry, and Uncle B. sometimes did so, and the D.'s also called me Harry, but with these exceptions I was called Henry by all our relations. It is possible our mother may have called me ' Harry ' during my very early childhood, but so long as I can remember she always called our i ' father ' Papa ' and me ' Henry.' It seemed to me, therefore, so utterly absurd that I should fancy her calling me by a name that I never recollected to have heard her use, that I mentally laughed at the idea and wondered how such a thing should have entered my head. Still the circumstance struck me as so strange that I underlined the date on the margin of my working diary, in order that if anything should occur to corroborate it I might be certain as to the time. Directly, therefore, after I reached home with S.'s and your letters, I turned to the diary and found the underlined date was November 28th. It was evidently during the afternoon of November 27th that our mother uttered my name (this would have been so, A. F.); and allowing for the difference of longitude, the time would be early morning of the 28th with us, so that I don't think there can be any question that the call actually reached my ear. I am only sorry that I was not sufficiently awake to note the exact time, but should fancy it to have been between 2 and 3 o'clock in the morning, which would represent a few minutes later on the previous afternoon with you."

The Rev. A. Field adds that in a subsequent portion of the letter his brother refers to a letter written a few weeks earlier, in which he had offered his sister a home, " and says that he believes he was led to do this partly in consequence of the idea which the circumstance he had described had left on his mind, viz., the probable death of our mother."

In his letter to us, Mr. H. C. Field says, " The voice, though not loud, was so distinct that, as I had not time to collect my senses, I started up in bed, expecting to see my mother beside it." His wife was aroused by this movement, and Mr. Field at once told her of his experience. He adds that he " is not superstitious," and " hardly knows what it is to dream," which he attributes to his active out-door life.

Miss Field wrote to us in October, 1885: —

"On 26th November, 1873, while sitting by my mother's bed, I heard

I her say most plainly, ' Harry, Harry.' On the following day she died.

In course of time we heard from my brother in New Zealand that at a

corresponding time (their night) he distinctly heard the same in his

mother's voice, and noted the fact in his diary.

" Sophia Hughes Field."

Later, the Rev. A. Field sent us the following extract from his diary: —

"November, 1873.

"'Thursday, 27th, arrived in London at 5.30 a.m., by train, to 70, Bassington Road. Found mother conscious, &c.; read, &c, with her at frequent intervals through the day. K. and A. (my brother and sister) arrived. Gradually weaker, and at last, 5.45 p.m., she passed away.'

" You will understand my object in giving you these full particulars. I myself heard (as I thought) my mother mention my brother's name, and spoke of it to my sister and my aunt. I think they told me that she had mentioned his name several times during her last brief illness. She was seized with paralysis on Wednesday, 26th, and her speech became more and more affected. It was this that made me feel uncertain whether my brother's name was really mentioned in my hearing by my mother or not. In consequence of what my aunt and sister said, I could have no longer any doubt."

[It will be seen that the percipient's impression probably coincided closely with the death, but that Miss Field's written recollections do not confirm (though they do not contradict) her brothers' idea that the name was uttered on the same afternoon.]

The next account is from Mrs. Stent, living at 14, Singapore Road, Ealing Dean, a former valued servant of Miss Craigie, of 8, McGill College Avenue, Montreal. I cite the account which she gave to Miss Craigie, rather than a later one (completely agreeing with it except in one detail) which she wrote for us on June 1, 1885.

(158) " On the 18th of Oct., 1881, I was awakened by hearing myself called twice by an old servant, who was ill in an infirmary in Chelsea. I then heard ' Reggy ' (one of the young gentlemen of the house we had lived together in) called once. It was half-past 4, but 1 could not sleep so got up and dressed. [Here the later account adds, " I told the housemaid, E. Morris, and we wondered what it meant."] It was impossible for me to go that day to the infirmary, for my present mistress had company; but I went the next day.... She had called twice for me and once for ' Reggy,' (so the patient in the next bed informed me,) and had died at the hour, half-past 4 the morning before — the precise time I had heard myself called. [The later account adds, " I was not dreaming. I never had anything of the kind happen to me before, and she called us so plain."] " E. Stent."

In reply to inquiries, Mrs. Stent says that she has lost sight of E. Morris, and adds: —

" Elizabeth Membrey [the deceased] was my dearest friend, and was more to me than a sister, but was no relation to me — only my clear friend. I think the bond of sympathy was very strong between us; only death could break it. We told our troubles to one another; for years past we did not do anything without talking about it first. Mr. Reggy was the son of the lady where we lived in service together, and she was very fond of him, and he went to the infirmary to see her as often as he could find time."

The medical superintendent of the Chelsea Infirmary writes to us: — " I find that Elizabeth Membrey was in this Infirmary from July 15th until October 18th, 1881, when she died."

In conversation, Mrs. Stent (a sensible and sober-minded witness) said that she marked the time of her experience as 4.30, as she heard the half-hour strike just after she got up, and did not sleep again. In her later written account she said that the porter told her the time of death

414 "BORDERLAND" GASES. [chap.

was 20 minutes to 4. But this seems to have been a slip; as she has found and handed to us a post-card, written to her by Mr. R. W. Craigie (the " Reggy " of the narrative) on the day of the death, as shown by the post-mark — which gives the time as 4.30. Mrs. Stent further mentioned that she was not expecting the death — that her friend had seemed cheerful, and it was thought that she would leave the hospital. She was suffering from an old injury to the base of the skull.

| 6. I pass now to the cases where the sense of sight alone was concerned. The first instance was thus narrated by the Bishop of Carlisle, in the Contemporary Review for January, 1884.

(159) "A Cambridge student, my informant, had arranged, some years ago, with a fellow student that they should meet together in Cambridge at a certain time for the purpose of reading. A short time before going up to keep his appointment, my informant was in the South of England. Waking in the night, he saw, as he imagined, his friend sitting at the foot of his bed. He was surprised at the sight, the more so as his friend was dripping with water. He spoke, but the apparition (for so it seems to have been) only shook its head and disappeared. This appearance of the absent friend occurred twice during the night. Information was soon received that shortly before the time of the apparition being seen by the young student, his friend had been drowned whilst bathing."

Having learned that the Bishop's informant was Archdeacon Farler, we applied to this gentleman, who wrote to us on Jan. 9, 1884: —

" Pampisford Vicarage, Cambridge.

" The fact of having witnessed the vision was mentioned the next morning at breakfast, several days before I received the news of my friend's death, to my tutor, John Kempe, Esq., his wife, and family. Mr. and Mrs. Kempe are now dead, but it is probable his family might remember the circumstance, although they were but children at the time. I was staying at Long Ashton, in Somersetshire; my friend died in Kent.1 As I did not feel frightened at the time of the vision, I have always spoken of it rather as a singular dream than an apparition.

" The date of my vision was either the 2nd or 3rd of September, 1878,2 but I have not my memoranda with me to be quite sure. I also saw the vision again about the 17th of the month. These are my sole experiences of an apparition. I have never experienced any sort of sensory hallucination. «j p Farler."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the narrator's friend was drowned in the river Crouch, on Sept. 2, 1868.

Mr. W. J. Kempe writes to us, from Long Ashton School, (1885), that Archdeacon Farler certainly told him of the occurrence, but he does not remember exactly when. Other members of the family, who have been applied to, were either away from home at the time, or too young to be told of the matter.

1 This is clearly a slip; in another letter Archdeacon Farler gives the name of a village in Essex as the place where the death occurred.

2 This is an error. The year was first written 1888, and then, by an obvious slip, the second 8 was altered to a 7, instead of to a 6. Mr. J. Kempe died in 1874.

Here the repetition during the night reminds us of several of the dream-examples, and of case 154 above. The feature in waking cases is of special interest. For repetition after a short interval is an occasional feature oi purely subjective hallucinations;x and this point may be added to many others which will occupy us hereafter, showing the fundamental identity, in relation to the percipient's senses, of subjective and telepathic phantasms. The subsequent vision on the 17th may be attributed to the emotional excitement of the recent bereavement.2

The feature of repetition occurs again in the next case. The percipient, Major A. P. Scott Moncrieff, is dead; but his widow, who describes his experience, was cognisant of it before the news of the death arrived. She wrote on May 20, 1885: —

" 14, Gilmore Place, Edinburgh.

(160) "The circumstances of the dream or vision, as far as I can remember at this distance of time, were these. A. awoke me one night, and said, ' I have had a strange dream about S., and I fancied I saw her standing at the foot of the bed; indeed, I had to rub my eyes to convince myself that she was not really there.' He fell asleep, and again dreamt the same, and this made a powerful impression upon his mind, with almost a depressing effect. He was in perfect health at the time, and of a thoroughly practical nature; not at all given to sentimentality. He had also no reason to believe that S. was in frail health. Some weeks after, the news came of her death, and by comparing dates, and allowing for the difference of time between India and Scotland, the event must have taken place during the period of these dreams; but whether at the time of the first or the second, I cannot remember. This happened on the 7th September, 1852. "Elizabeth H. S. Moncrieff."

Mr. R. Scott Moncrieff, of 4, Marclale Crescent, Edinburgh, writes to us: —

" I very well remember my brother, the late Major A. P. Scott Moncrieff (whose widow has written the preceding narrative) telling me of this apparition, as he believed it to have been, of our sister Susan, after the news reached us of her death in Edinburgh, on September 7th, 1852. I was living in Calcutta at that date; my brother was with his regiment at Dinapore. In the month of November, I was on a visit to his house in Hazareebagh, where he was then living with his wife; and it was then that he told me of the apparition. As he was a man of a very unroniantic, practical character, always ready to ridicule a ghost story, I was the more struck with the depth of the impression left on his mind by the vividness of the apparition, as he believed it to have been, which had led to his taking a note of the date in writing.

1 See Chapter xii., § 10. In Dr. Jessopp's experience (Athenaeum for Jan. 10, 1880), the figure which he saw disappeared suddenly, and reappeared after about five minutes; and my own collection includes a very similar case. See Vol. ii., p. 237, note.

2 See Chapter xi., § 6; but see also the remarks on Mr. Keulemans' case, p. 445.

416 "BORDERLAND" CASES.. [chap.

" He told me that after having been asleep for a time, during the night of that date (which must have been the 7th September), he awoke, feeling the heat rather trying; that he saw, by a light burning in the room, the punkah swinging above the bed, and then saw our sister Susan standing at the foot of the bed, gazing at him very earnestly; that he was so surprised, he sat up, rubbed his eyes, and looked again, seeing her still there, that he exclaimed, ' O, Susan! ' (I think he added, ' what are you doing here 1 ' but I am not certain that these were his words; though I am certain that he did utter some such words after saying, ' O, Susan! '); that his wife awoke on hearing him speak, and said, ' What is it, Alick? ' or words of similar import; but that he, fearing lest, in the state of health she was then in, it might prove injurious to her to be told what he believed he had seen, said he had awakened from a dream, but did not tell her how fully he was convinced he had been awake when he saw the apparition of his sister, which had disappeared before his wife had spoken

to him- " R. Scott Moncrieff."

Miss Scott Moncrieff, of 44, Shooter's Hill Road, S.E., writes: — " I heard the same account from my brother, Major Scott Moncrieff, on his return from India. « Mary Anne gC0TT Moncrieff."

[As a matter of form, we have verified the date of death, in the obituary of the Scotsman. But such verification of course adds nothing unless the date of the percipient's experience is independently remembered.]

The next example is from Miss Barr, of East Grinstead, who has

been already mentioned (p. 342).

" 1884. (161) "On the night of January — ■, 1871, I awoke up with the idea that someone was moving by the bedside. I was a little frightened, and I saw the curtain at the side of the bed slightly pulled aside, and a hand, with the back turned towards me, appearing round the curtain. I recognised the ring on the hand as that of my cousin and dear friend [Captain C. M.]. I told my sister in the morning that I had seen a hand,1 wearing a ring, but did not tell her that I had recognised the ring, as I did not care to make too much of the incident. On that day, as we learnt from a letter received a few days afterwards, my cousin died in Canada, from the effect of an accident. » j^ Barr."

Mrs. and Miss Harriet Barr also attest with their signatures the fact that the vision was narrated before the news of the death was received.

Miss L. Barr afterwards stated that she thought the death "must have been on or about the 6th of January, 1870; " and we find from the Indian Army List, and from the Times obituary, that it took place on that day, at Halifax, Nova Scotia. She tells us that she has experienced in her life only one other hallucination, which occurred in close connection with a bereavement (see p. 510).

We have received the following account from our friend Mr. J. A. Symonds.

1 On this fragmentary form of apparition, see Chap, xi., § 4, and Vol. ii., p. 33, note.

"Davos, 1882.

(162) "I was a boy in the Sixth Form at Harrow; and, as head of Mr. Rendall's house, had a room to myself. It was in the summer of 1858. I woke about dawn, and felt for my books upon a chair between the bed and the window; when I knew that I must turn my head the other way, and there, between me and the door, stood Dr. Macleane, dressed in a clergyman's black clothes. He bent his sallow face a little towards me and said, ' I am going a long way — take care of my son.' While I was attending to him, I suddenly saw the door in the place where Dr. Macleane had been. Dr. Macleane died that night (at what hour I cannot precisely say) at Clifton. My father, who was a great friend of his, was with him. I was not aware that he was more than usually ill. He was a chronic invalid. "John Addington Symonds."

We learn from the Rev. D. Macleane, of Codford St. Peter, Bath, that his father, Dr. Macleane, " died at Clifton at a quarter before 6 a.m., on May 14th, 1858."

[Mr. Symonds has had one or two purely subjective visions when in a waking state.]

The following case is from the Rev. W. J. Ball, of 6, Pemberton Terrace, Cambridge. It is apparently a good example of the vivid survival of a dream-image into waking moments — an experience which Mr. Ball tells us he cannot recollect to have occurred to him on any other occasion.

"1884.

(163) " During my college days I had a very dear and intimate chum, R. F. Dombrain. We used to walk together, read together, pray together, and would have thought it wrong to keep any secret from each other. We hoped to go together into the foreign mission-field; but my friend was ready to go before I was, and it was while he was in London making arrangements about going abroad, that he was seized with a very bad fever, and his life for some time despaired of. At last he recovered and returned to Dublin, where I saw him several times. He was not quite restored to health, but I hoped he would soon be so. This was the state of things when I went down to the County Limerick, in the spring of 1853. I received a few letters from my friend which told me of gradually improving health. I was busily occupied about my mission work at the village of Doon, and felt perfectly at ease about my dear friend's recovery.

" A few days had elapsed without any tidings reaching me, when on the morning of the 14th of April I had the most vivid dream I remember ever to have seen. I seemed to be walking with young Dombrain, amidst some beautiful scenery, when suddenly I was brought to a waking condition by a sort of light appearing before me. I started up in my bed, and saw before me, in his ordinary dress and appearance, my friend, who seemed to be passing from earth towards the light above. He seemed to give me one loving smile, and I felt that his look contained an expression of affectionate separation and farewell. Then I leaped out of bed, and cried with a loud voice, ' Robert, Robert,' and the vision was gone.

2 D

418 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

" In the house there was sleeping a young servant boy, whose name was also Robert. He came running into my room, saying that my loud cry had awakened him from sound sleep, and that he thought I was ill. The whole scene was so impressed upon my mind that I felt the death of my friend just as really as if I had been by his bedside, and seen him pass away. I had looked at my watch and found the time 3 minutes past 5. I knew that at that moment my friend's spirit had passed from his body. I could think of nothing else. A class of Scripture readers came to me at 10 o'clock that morning. I told them I could not speak to them of the appointed subject, but must tell them what had occurred, and for a long time I lectured them entirely on the subject of the future state, and the separation of the soul from the body. During the whole of the day the same sad gloom weighed down my mind which I should have felt had I been with my friend at his death-bed. I wrote to my sister asking for particulars, and I wished to know the exact time the death had taken place. Never once did the slightest doubt cross my mind that my friend had died.

" The following morning I received a letter from my sister, stating that for a few days Mr. Dombrain had not been so well, and that at 3 minutes past 5 in the morning he had quietly passed away from this world. Since then I have very often mentioned the circumstance to friends, and the deep impression made by the event can never pass from my mind."

Mr. Ball wrote to ask his sister for her recollections. Her reply contained the following passage, the original of which was sent to us: —

" 12, Upper Leeson Street, Dublin.

"July 17th, 1884.

" I have not a distinct remembrance of the dream. I have heard you allude to it from time to time, and feel quite confident of its reality.

"S. P. Ball."

We find from the obituary in the Gentleman 's Magazine that Mr. Dombrain's death took place at Dublin, on April 14th, 1853.

The appearance of light in this case is to be noted (see cases 178

and 184 below).

The next account is from the Rev. C. C Wambey, of Salisbury,

the narrator of case 129.

"April, 1884.

(164) " Mr. B., with whom I was intimately acquainted before he left England, was appointed to the mathematical mastership in Elizabeth College, Guernsey. Some 10 years after his appointment, I accepted a temporary sole charge in the island, and renewed my acquaintance with my quondam friend; indeed, I was with him some portion of nearly each day during my stay in Guernsey. After my return to England, we maintained a regular correspondence. In the last letter I had from him, he described himself as being in unusually good health and spirits.

" One morning I surprised my wife by telling her that poor B. was dead — that he had appeared to me in the night. She endeavoured to assuage my grief, suggesting that the apparition, whatever it may have

been, was due to my indisposition. I had been ailing for some time. I answered that I had received too certain intelligence of my friend's death.

" A few days subsequently, I had a letter in a black-edged envelope, bearing the Guernsey postmark. In that letter Mrs. B. told me that her husband had died after a few hours' illness, and that during that illness he frequently spoke of me."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Wambey says: —

" I have seen other forms than that I have mentioned. My grandfather appeared to me on the night in which he died; but I was in the house at the time, and he had been sinking for many hours. [The only other case — the subjective vision of an unrecognised figure — took place when Mr. Wambey was reading late at night, at a time when he was seriously overtaxed by work.]

" From his widow's letter I ascertained that Mr. B. died the night in which he appeared to me. I was awake — I could hardly have been deluded on this point — when my friend appeared to me. I did not notice his dress, I was so engrossed with his face — his look. Mrs. Wambey endorses the statement that I told her next morning I had seen my friend, and that I was sure he was dead. I think it was in 1870."

We learn from a son of Mr. B.'s that the date of his father's death was October 27th, 1870.

Mrs. Wambey, writing on May 17, 1884, corroborates as follows: — " My husband, the Rev. C. C. Wambey, the morning after he had seen Mr. B., mentioned the circumstance to me, and with much grief expressed his firm conviction that his friend was dead. "~M. B Wambey "

Our informant in the next case, Captain P., withholds his name

from publication, as the percipient would object to its appearance.

It will be seen that she admits the occurrence.

" December, 1884.

(165) " Some time at the end of 1868, I was discussing with a lady of my acquaintance the question of making compacts to appear after death. I doubted whether such compacts could be fulfilled; she stoutly maintained that they could be. Finally we agreed to make such a compact ourselves — that whichever of us first died should appear after death to the other.1

" At the beginning of the next year I went on a voyage in the merchant ship ' Edmund Graham,' of Greenock, to Australia, and on the 22nd of June, when we were between the Cape of Good Hope and Australia (lat. 40° S., long. 22 E.), and the ship running before a heavy gale of wind, the sea swept over the deck and washed 7 of us, myself among the number, overboard. I gave myself up for lost, and I remember well that I thought of the panorama of their past lives which drowning men are said to see, and hoped that the show would commence. Then I regretted I was without my oilskin, as the water would have time to wet me through before death, and I expected to find it very cold; as far as I can recollect, this was all that passed through my mind. The next moment I caught hold of a loose rope that was hanging from the ship, and hauled myself on deck. The others were drowned. This took place between 3 and 4 a.m.

1 See Vol. ii., p. 66.

2 d 2

420 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

on June 22nd.1 A few months afterwards I had a letter at Bombay, from my friend, in which she mentioned that on the night of the 2 2nd June she had seen me in her room.

" When I saw her again, I received from her a full account of the circumstances. She told me that she woke up suddenly in the night, and saw me at the other end of the room, and that I advanced towards her. Whether she noticed the dress which I was wearing I cannot say. I have often since heard her describe the incident. As far as I can recollect, she told me the precise time of the appearance; and my belief is that it coincided in time with my being washed overboard. Though I cannot recollect calculating the difference of time, by reference to the longitude, I think it most likely that I did do so and found the times to correspond. I was certainly, at that time, quite alive to the fact that 22° of longitude would make a sensible difference in the apparent time. "~M. P "

The following is a portion of a letter from the percipient to Captain P.: —

" I enclose the papers you gave me to look at the other night, and in looking over the printed notes of the Society, I see (as a Catholic) I can have nothing to do with it.

" You can tell your friend the reason I decline saying anything about it is because I am a Papist, and that I consider those sort of things much too sacred to make the topic of conversation at any modern scientific meeting."

These last remarks exemplify what was said above (p. 130) as to a particular class of obstacles which our investigation has to encounter, and which we can only trust to time to remove.

The next case is one of the very few which is here quoted from a previous collection. It was first published by Mr. Dale Owen, in his Footfalls on the Boundary of Another World, pp. 299-303. One of us has seen the percipient, Mrs. Wheatcroft, who, however, finds herself precluded by family reasons from giving any further account.

(166) "For the following narrative I am indebted to the kindness of London friends. Of the good faith of the narrators there cannot be a doubt.

"In the month of September, 1857, Captain G. W., of the 6th Dragoon Guards, went out to India to join his regiment. His wife remained in England, residing at Cambridge. On the night between the 14th and 15th of November, 1857, towards morning, she dreamed that she saw her husband, looking anxious and ill, upon which she immediately awoke, much agitated. It was bright moonlight; and looking up, she perceived the same figure standing by her bedside. He appeared in his uniform, the hands pressed across the breast, the hair dishevelled, the face very pale. His large dark eyes were fixed full upon her; their expression was that of great excitement, and there was a peculiar contraction of the mouth, habitual to him when agitated. She saw him, even to each minute particular of his dress, as distinctly as she

1 By this the narrator undoubtedly meant "on the night of June 22-23,"as he believes the coincidence to have been exact.

had ever done in her life; and she remembers to have noticed between his hands the white of the shirt-bosom, unstained, however, with blood. The figure seemed to bend forward, as if in pain, and to make an effort to speak; but there was no sound. It remained visible, the wife thinks, as long as a minute, and then disappeared.

" Her first idea was to ascertain if she was actually awake. She rubbed her eyes with the sheet, and felt that the touch was real. Her little nephew was in bed with her: she bent over the sleeping child, and listened to its breathing; the sound was distinct; and she became convinced that what she had seen was no dream. It need hardly be added that she did not again go to sleep that night.

" Next morning she related all this to her mother, expressing her conviction, though she had noticed no marks of blood on his dress, that Captain W. was either killed or grievously wounded. So fully impressed was she with the reality of that apparition that she thenceforth refused all invitations. A young friend urged her, soon afterwards, to go with her to a fashionable concert, reminding her that she had received from Malta, sent by her husband, a handsome dress cloak, which she had never yet worn. But she positively declined, declaring that, uncertain as she was whether she was not already a widow, she would never enter a place of amusement until she had letters from her husband (if, indeed, he still lived) of later elate than the 14th of November.

" It was on a Tuesday, in the month of December, 1857, that the telegram regarding the actual fate of Captain W. was published in London. It was to the effect that he was killed before Lucknow on the fifteenth of November.

" This news, given in the morning paper, attracted the attention of Mr. Wilkinson, a London solicitor, who had in charge Captain W.'s affairs. When, at a later period, this gentleman met the widow, she informed him that she had been quite prepared for the melancholy news, but that she felt sure her husband could not have been killed on the 15th of November, inasmuch as it was during the night between the 14th and 15th that he appeared to herself.1

"The certificate from the War Office, however, which it became Mr. Wilkinson's duty to obtain, confirmed the date given in the telegram, its tenor being as follows: —

' No. 9,579. ' War Office.

'January 30th, 1858.

' These are to certify that it appears, by the records in this office, that Captain G. W., of the 6th Dragoon Guards [a mistake, as Mr. Dale Owen points out, for 6th (Inniskilling) Dragoons], was killed in action on the 15th November, 1857. (Signed) ' B. Hawes.'

" While Mr. Wilkinson's mind remained in uncertainty as to the exact date, a remarkable incident occurred, which seemed to cast further suspicion on the accuracy of the telegram and of the certificate. That

1 The difference of longitude between London and Lucknow being about 5 hours, 3 or 4 o'clock a.m. in London would be 8 or 9 o'clock a.m. at Lucknow. But it was in the ofternoon, not in the morning, as will be seen in the sequel, that Captain W. was killed. Had he fallen on the 15th, therefore, the apparition to his wife would have appeared several hours before the engagement in which he fell, and while he was yet alive and well.

422 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

gentleman was visiting a friend, whose lady has all her life had perception of apparitions, while her husband is what is usually called an impressible medium; facts which are known, however, only to their intimate friends. Though personally acquainted with them, I am not at liberty to give their names. Let us call them Mr. and Mrs. N.

" Mr. Wilkinson related to them, as a wonderful circumstance, the vision of the Captain's widow in connection with his death, and described the figure as it had appeared to her. Mrs. N turning to her husband, instantly said: —

" ' That must be the very person I saw the evening we were talking of India, and you drew an elephant with a howdah on his back. Mr. Wilkinson has described his exact position and appearance; the uniform of a British officer, his hands pressed across his breast, his form bent forward as if in pain. The figure,' she added to Mr. W., ' appeared just behind my husband, and seemed looking over his left shoulder.' "

