Various other points of frequent or occasional resemblance between the two classes remain, which have been noted or will be noted as they occur in the examples, and need here only be briefly summarised. Such are the various degrees of externalisation, and of apparent solidity or tenuity;1 rudimentary appearances;2 fragmentary appearances;3 rapid repetitions;4 movement in the figures seen;5 gradual disappearance; 6 special modes of disappearance;7 disappearance on sudden speech or gesture;s response of the phantasmal voice to words of the hallucinated person;9 the fact that the hallucination is unshared by other persons who may be in the hallucinated person's company or vicinity; 10 and the fact that every now and then the liability to either type of hallucination seems hereditary.11

Of still greater importance are the contrasts that exist between the phenomena of the two classes; e.g., the great superiority in number of visual over auditory cases in the telepathic class, which is the reverse of what obtains in the purely subjective; and the large proportion, in the purely subjective class, of unrecognised phantasms, which are decidedly exceptional in the telepathic. But these points of contrast are chiefly interesting as bearing on a larger question which I can now no longer defer — the question whether the cases presented as telepathic can reasonably be regarded as more than merely accidental coincidences; and they will find their appropriate place in the next chapter.

1 Pp. 480-3, 488, 526, 568; Vol. ii., pp. 29-38, 120, 137.

2 Chap, xiv., §§ 4 and 6.

3 P. 504; Vol. ii., p, 33, note; and see cases 116, 240, 553, 572.

4 P. 414; Vol. ii., pp. 105, 237, note. "

5 This f eature is so common, in both classes, that I need hardly call special attention to it where it occurs. In this chapter alone, for instance, we have encountered it in 7 cases— Nos. 198, 199, 202, 203, 204, 211, 215.

6 See above, p. 521, and Vol. ii., p. 97.

7 See p. 432, note, and, e.g., case 211, above.

8 See Vol. ii., p. 91, second note; and add cases 499 and 540 to the list. 0 P. 476; and see cases 498, 547, 568, 639, 654.

10 See above, p. 223, and Vol. ii., p. 105, second note. The cases where the experience affects more than one person will be discussed in Chap, xviii., and may perhaps be found to supply a fresh point of resemblance between hallucinations of subjective and of telepathic origin.

11 Vol. ii., p. 132, note.

END OF VOLUME I.

PRINTED BY THE NATIONAL PRESS AGENCY, LIMITED, WHITEFRIARS STREET, LONDON, E.C.

saw

H H Ri

''••',>' ^H 'iR ■BbqBH WW ■

■ ■ •

H

SSks

Pi M

■■'.•■. ' • ■ ■

■R

Wm

WMlflp

WKm

Wm

Mr

HL

Hi

ill

MB

■HI

' '. f'M,i.^y.''Wii'yi* tilt-:

m

Mm-'

rip*

aA^-

Boston

Medical Library

8 The Fenway

PHANTASMS OF THE LIVING.

Digitized by the Internet Archive

in 2010 with funding from

Open Knowledge Commons and Harvard Medical School

http://www.archive.org/details/phantasmsoflivin02gurn

BY

EDMUND GURNEY, M.A,

LATE FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,

FREDERIC W. H. MYERS, M.A.

LATE FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,

FRANK PODMORE, M.A.

VOLUME II.



London :

ROOMS OF THE SOCIETY FOR PSYCHICAL RESEARCH,

14, Dean's Yard, S.W.

TRUBNER AND CO., LUDGATE HILL, E.C.

1886.

x%

FURTHER ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.



Volume II

Page vi, line 13. For 247 read 248. Line 18. For "nearly a trillion of trillions of trillions " read '' about a thousand billion trillion trillion trillions."

Page 16, line 23. If only cases are reckoned where the auditory phantasm was recorded or described before the news of the death arrived, the odds will be reduced to about a million to 1.

Page 17, line 29. If only cases are reckoned where the visual phantasm was recorded or described before the news of the death arrived, the odds will be reduced to about a hundred billion trillions to 1.

Page 21, end of § 8. In the numei'ical estimates, I have throughout confined the reasoning to sensory experiences, and have not attempted to extend it to the ideal and emotional impressions which were considered in the 6th and 7th chapters. This is because a trustworthy census of strong but purely subjective impressions of these commoner and often vaguer kinds would have been imjDossible to obtain. There is, however, one important point which concerns the non-sensory experiences as well as the sensory, and which ought not to be omitted from the argument; the occurrence, namely, at various times, to a single percipient, of several " veridical " impressions, sometimes similar, sometimes different in type. (See p. 77, note.) It is clear how enormously this multiplication of the coincidences in one person's history multiplies the already enormous odds against chance as their cause.

Page 24, line 3 of note. For 40 read 39

Page 26, line 8 of note. For 32 read 31. This correction will slightly, but not appreciably, afiect the subsequent estimate.

Page 50, case 233. The narrator mentioned in conversation that she woke her sister at the time of her experience, and also described it to her fai\iily at breakfast, before the news of the death anived. Her sister — who probably supposed it to be a dream, and fell asleep again at once — had no recollection of it when it was referred to some years ago.

Page 52, case 235. The narrator's first initial is G. We have applied to the gentleman to whom the earlier account was sent; but he forwarded it to some one else, and cannot now recollect to whom. The friend with whom Colonel Swiney was staying has long since left Norfolk, and we have not been able to trace him.

Page 68, line 23. For 296 read 246.

Pages 139-41, case 296. Further knowledge and a more critical study of this case suggest doubts as to whether it should have been included. It will be seen that three important points — the impression of seeing the handle turn, the getting out of bed to search, and Mr. Phillips's statement as to his wife's having imagined herself to be in the narrator's house — are not mentioned in the diary, but only in the account written more than 3|^ years afterwards. Moreover, it appears probable from an inspection of the diary that the entry for Oct. 23 was not written on that day, but after the news of the death had arrived on the followingday; and it is, therefore, not unlikely that the description, " steps as of a female walking aimlessly," was to some extent suggested by the news.

Page 346, line 5. For maladie read malade. With this account should be compared the apparent instance of thought-transference in a case of hysterical catalepsy, recorded by Dr. Bristowe in the British Medical Jotirnal iov Yeh. 8, 1879.

Page 390, line 1. For Kirkbright read Shuck burgh.

Page 393, case 419. A first-hand account from Mr. John A. Orr, F.R.C.S.I., of Fleetwood, shows that the dream on which the mother acted had conveyed no more than the idea of her son's serious illness, and, moreover, had been dreamt some nights before the accident, as she arrived on the morning of its occurrence. The case should, therefore, be omitted.

Page 397, case 424. The narrator mentioned in conversation that the ex2Derience was a very vivid impression on waking, rather than an actual dream. The impression was sufficiently disquieting to keep her awake for several hours.

Page 398, case 425. In conversation, Mrs. Tandy, a daughter of the narrator's, who has heard the percipient describe her vision, expressed a distinct opinion that she spoke of it as a tvaking experience.

Page 404, case 432. The narrator mentioned in conversation that her dreams are rarely painful or distressing, and that she has never on any other occasion taken action on a dream.

Page 461, first line of case 499. For 1877 read 1867.

Page 469, case 505. The narrator not only told her sister of her experience on the morning (Tuesday) after it occurred, but wrote the same day to England, expressing her uneasiness about her nephew, and asking if anything was wrong with him; and Mrs. Wilkinson, (of 63, Harcourt Terrace, Redcliffe Square, S.W.,) the boy's mother, remembers receiving this letter on the Wednesday evening, while she was herself in the act of writing to tell Miss Wilkinson of the accident. (Miss Wilkinson was therefore mistaken in saying that her sister-in-law wrote on the day after the accident.) Mrs. Wilkinson further mentioned in conversation that on the Monday, while lying in a semi-conscious state, the boy constantly asked whether his aunt had been told of the accident. He was much attached to her, and had been nursed by her through a serious illness.

Page 474, case 509. We have procured an official certificate from New South Wales, which corroborates the narrator's statement that her mother died on June 17, 1868.

Page 513, case 556. The name of the percipient has been privately communicated.

Page 515, case 558. We have now received a written account of this incident from another daughter of the percipient, who was present at the time. It was inferred that the dying man spoke of the little grandson of whose sudden illness and death he had been kept in ignorance, froin the fact of his turning to the child's mother and addressing her in the way desci'ibed (the second account substitutes " Don't fret " for " Never mind"); but it ought to be added that he had lost a son of the same name 24 years before.

Page 524, end of case 569. The name of the percipient has now been privately communicated.

Page 566, line 4 from bottom. The narrator explains (Dec. 22, 1886) that her father was " an amateur doctor " only; he, had been a solicitor by profession, but had studied medicine.

Page 584, line 29, and page 585, line 4. For Heaton read Seaton.

SYNOPSIS OF VOLUME II.

Additions and Corrections ■. xxi-xxvii



Chapter XIII

The Theory op Chance-Coincidence. § 1. Assuming the substantial correctness of much of the evidence for phantasms which have markedly coincided with an event at a distance, how can it be known that these coincidences are not due to chance alone? In examining this question, we must be careful to distinguish waking cases from dreams — in which latter class (as we have seen) the scope for chancecoincidences is indefinitely large....... 1-4

§ 2. The answer to this question depends on two points — the frequency of phantasms which have markedly coincided with real events, and the frequency of phantasms which have not. If the latter class turned out to be extremely large — e.g., if we each of us once a week saw some friend's figure in a place which was really empty — it is certain that occasionally such a subjective delusion would fall on the day that the friend happened to die. The matter is one on which there have been many guesses, and many assertions, but hitherto no statistics..... 4-6

§ 3. To ascertain what proportion of the population have had experience of purely subjective hallucinations, a definite question must be asked of a group large and varied enough to serve as a fair sample of the whole. The difficulty of taking such a census has been much increased by a wide misunderstanding of its purpose..... 6-8

§ 4. But answers have been received from a specimen group of 5,680 persons; and there is every reason to suppose this number sufficient 8-10

§ 5, It may be objected that persons may have wrongly denied such experiences (1) through forgetfulness — but the experiences of real importance for the end in view are too striking to be readily forgotten; (2) by way of a joke or a hoax — but this would lead rather to false confessions than false denials; (3) in self-defence — but such error as may

vi SYNOPSIS OF VOL. II.

have been produced by this motive has probably been more than counterbalanced in other ways........ 10-12

§ 6. First as to auditory hallucinations, representing recognised voices — in the last 12 years such an experience has, according to the census, befallen 1 adult in every 90; but it would have had to befall 7 in every 10, to justify the assumption that the cases recorded in this work on first-hand testimony, of the coincidence of the experience in question with the death of the person represented, were due to chance. The odds against the accidental occurrence of the said coincidences are more than a trillion to 1...... 12-16

§ 7. Next as to visual hallucinations, representing a recognised face or form — in the last 12 years such an experience has, according to the census, befallen 1 adult in every 247; but it would have had to befall every adult once, and most adults twice, to justify the assumption that the cases recorded in the present work on first-hand testimony, of the coincidence of the experience in question with the death of the person represented, were due to chance. The odds against the accidental occurrence of the said coincidences are nearly a trillion of trillions of trillions to 1 16-18

§ 8. The extreme closeness of some of the coincidences afibrds the basis for another form of estimate, which shows the improbability of their accidental occurrence to be almost immeasurably great.. 18-20

And a number of further cases and further considerations remain, by which even this huge total of improbability would be again swelled. The conclusion, therefore, after all allowances, that at any rate a large number of the coincidences here adduced have had some other cause than chance seems irresistible........ 20-21

§ 9. An argument of a quite different sort may be drawn from certain peculiarities which the group of coincidental hallucinations present, when compared, as a whole, with the general mass of transient hallucinations of the sane. The chief of these peculiarities are (1) the decided preponderance of visual cases over auditory, and (2) the immense preponderance of cases where the figure or voice was recognised as representing some one known to the percipient: whereas among clearly subjective hallucinations there is a very great preponderance of auditory cases, and almost an equality between recognised and unrecognised phantasms, the preponderance being slightly with the latter. 22-25

Another striking point — the preponderance of cases in which the distant event with which the phantasm coincides is death, or one of the crises that come nearest to death — again marks out the coincidental phantasms as a distinct group of natural phenomena., 25-28

SYNOPSIS OF VOL. 11. - vii



Chapter XIV

Further Visual Cases Occurring to a Single Percipient.

§ 1. Visual hallucinations may present various degrees of apparent externalisation, beginning "with what is scarcely more than a picture in the mind's eye, and ending with a percept which seems quite on a par with all surrounding objects. Examples of these varieties in telepathic phantasms.......... 29-37

§ 2. Examples of completely externalised phantasms. In connection with one case (No. 225) it is shown that a slight liability to subjective hallucinations (which a few telepathic percipients have exhibited) need not seriously affect the probability that a particular experience was telepathic. Another case (No. 242) is remarkable in that the actual percipient had no direct connection with the agent, but was in the vicinity of a person intimately connected with him.... 38-62

§ 3. Cases where the hypothesis of illusion or mistaken identity has to be taken into account. This hypothesis would not exclude a telepathic origin, as telepathic illusions are quite conceivable phenomena. But more probably these cases were hallucinations; and if so, their telepathic origin would hardly be doubtful. One of them (No. 243) exhibits the point of a previous compact between the agent and percipient, that whichever died first should endeavour to make the other sensible of his presence. Such a compact, latent in either mind, may quite conceivably have some conditioning efficacy........ 62-73

§ 4. Cases of a rudim,entary type — perhaps of arrested development — not representative of a human form; they might be compared to a motor effect which is limited to a single start or twitch. The class is too small to carry any conviction on its own account, but its type is not so improbable as might at first appear...... 73-76

§ 5. Certain cases involving no coincidence with any ostensibly abnormal condition of the agent. (1) Instances where several percipients, at different times, have had hallucinations representing the sam,e person, in whom a specific faculty for producing telepathic impressions may therefore be surmised......... 77-90

§ 6. And (2) instances where a presumption that a hallucination was. not purely subjective is afforded by peculiarities of dress or aspect in the figure presented......... 90-96

§ 7. And (3) instances where the phantasm appears at a time when the

viii SYNOPSIS OF VOL. II.

person whom it represents is, unknown to the percipient, actually approaching him, with thoughts more or less consciously turned in his direction. The last two examples (Nos. 265 and 266) are auditory.. 96-100

CHAPTER XY.

Further Auditory Cases Occurring to a Single Percipient.

§ 1. Cases where the phantasm has been of a recognised voice — the words heard having been, certainly in some cases and possibly in others, those which the distant agent was uttering. One case (No. 269) illustrates the feature of repetition after a short interval... 101-108

§ 2. Cases where what was heard was the percipient's own name — which is a very common form of purely subjective hallucination.

In most of these cases there may probably have been a certain occupation of the agent's thoughts with the percipient... 108-114

§ 3. Cases where the phantasm has been of an unrecognised voice. In one instance, (No. 279) several experiences of the sort, in close coincidence with the deaths of relatives, have occurred to the same percipient.......... 114-118

§ 4. Oases where the impression was of a complete sentence, conveying either a piece of information or a direction, projected by the percipient as a message from without....... 118-124

§ 5. An example where the sound heard was vocal, but not recognised and articulate......... 124-125

§ 6. Phantasms of non-vocal noises or shocks. These are parallel to the rudimentary visual hallucinations; but need a more jealous scrutiny, since odd noises are often due to undiscovered physical causes in the vicinity. Still, some impressions of the sort are pretty clearly hallucinatory; and the form is one which telepathic hallucinations seem occasionally to take. The final case (No. 291) suggests the possibility of family susceptibility to telepathic influences... 125-132



Chapter XVI

Tactile Cases, and Cases Affecting More than One of the Percipient's Senses.

§ 1. Purely subjective impressions of touch, of at all a distinct kind, are rare; and when they occur, may often be accounted for as illusions due



Synopsis of Vol Ii. Ix

to an involuntary muscular twitch. It is not surprising, therefore, that telepathic hallucinations of this type should be rare.. 133-134

The most conclusive examples are those where an affection of touch is combined with one of sight or hearing. Examples, 135-139

§ 2. Combined affections of the senses of sight and hearing: one case (No. 299) is peculiar in that the person who was probably the agent was in the percipient's company at the time... 139-149

§ 3. A case where the impressions of sight and hearing were separated by some hours......... 149-152



Chapter XVII

Recipeocal Cases.

§ 1. It occasionally happens that at the time when A telepathically influences B, A on his side has an impression which strongly suggests that B has reciprocally influenced him. The best proof of this is where A expresses in words some piece of knowledge as to B's condition. Other more doubtful cases (of which a few are quoted) may be provisionally referred to the same type; but unless A's description includes something which he could not have known or guessed in a normal manner, his alleged percipience of B cannot be assumed to have been more than mere subjective dream or vision....... 153-158

§ 2. Examples of apparently reciprocal action. They may be regarded as special cases of " telepathic clairvoyance "; A's percipience of B being apparently active rather than passive, and due to some extension of his own faculties, connected with the abnormality of condition that occasions his agency, and not to any special abnormality in B's condition.......... 158-166

The cases which, on the evidence, would be clearly reciprocal, are so few in number as to justify a doubt whether they represent a genuine type. Supposing them to be genuine, however, their rarity is not hard to account for; and it may be hoped that time will bring us more wellattested specimens...■.,.,.. 167

X " STJVOPSIS OF VOL II.



Chapter XVIII

Collective Cases.

§ 1. Phantasms which have affected the senses of more than one percipient, are a specially perplexing class. On the face of them, they suggest a real objective presence of the person seen or heard. But such "objectivity" (unless conceived as some illusive form of matter) can hardly be defined except just as a temporary existence in more minds than one: it does not explain, but merely repeats, the fact that the experience is collective.......... 168-170

In the absence of evidence (worthy of the name) that a telepathic phantasm has ever given a test of physical reality — e.g., by opening a door or a window — we are led to inquire how far the phenomena of collective hallucination can be covered by a theory of purely psychical impressions. Two views (which will subsequently prove capable of amalgamation) present themselves: — (1) that A, at a distance, produces simultaneous telepathic impressions on the minds of B and C, who happen to be together; (2) that B's impression, however originated, passes on to C by a process of thought-transference — the hallucination itself being, so to speak, infectious 170-171

§ 2. The Jirst of these hypotheses presents great difficulties. For our review of telepathic hallucinations, so far, has shown that they may take very various forms, and may be projected at various intervals of time (within a range of a few hours) from the crisis or event to which we trace them; so that, supposing several persons to have been the joint recipients of a telepathic impression, it seems most improbable that they should independently invest it at the same moment with the same sensory form. Nor, again, should we expect to find, among those jointly affected, any person who was a stranger to the distant agent; nevertheless, cases occur where such a person has shared in the collective percipience. And yet again, on this theory of independent affection of several persons, there seems no special reason why they should be in one another's company at the time, since the agent may presumably exercise his influence equally in any direction; nevertheless, cases where the percipients have been apart are, in fact, extremely rare....... 171-172

A few examples of the sort are given; but in several even of these, the percipients, though not together, were very near one another, and had been to some extent sharing the same life.... 173-183

§ 3. As to the second of the proposed hypotheses— that one percipient catches the hallucination from another by a process of thought-trans-



Syjvofsis of Vol. Ii. Xi

ference — the question at once suggests itself whether such communicability is ever found in cases where no distant agent is concerned — cases of purely subjective hallucination. Such an idea would, no doubt, be as new to scientific psychology as every other form of thought-transference; but transient hallucinations of the sane have been so little studied or collected that it is not surprising if the evidence for collective experiences of the sort has escaped attention — though collective illusions have sometimes been described as hallucinations...... 183-184

It is in collective cases that the importance of distinguishing illusions from hallucinations becomes plain. In illusions, the persons affected receive an actual sensory impression from a real object, the error being simply in their way of interpreting it; and in the interpretation they are often greatly at the mercy of one another's suggestions. Many historical incidents — such as visions of signs in the heavens and of phantom champions — might be thus explained 184-186

In other alleged instances of " collective hallucination " there is no proof that the impression was really more than a vivid mental picture, evoked under excitement. And even where the image probably has been externalised in space — as, e.g., in religious epidemics, or in experimentation with hypnotised subjects — most cases may be at once explained, without any resort to thought-transference, as due to a common idea or expectancy. (Apart, however, from special excitement or from hypnotism, the power of mere verbal suggestion to produce delusions of the senses may easily be exaggerated) 186-188

It is only when these various conditions are absent — when the joint percept is clearly hallucination, and is also projected by the several percipients without emotional preparation or suggestion — that the hypothesis of thought-transference from one percipient to another can reasonably be entertained 189-190

§ 4. The examples to be adduced, of collective hallucinations, not apparently originating in the condition of any absent living person, include cases which may be regarded by some as indicating post-mortem agency. It is not necessary to enter into the vexed question as to whether the power of exercising psychical energy can or cannot continue after physical death. Whatever answer that question received, these cases would still, in the writer's opinion, (for reasons set forth in § 2,) bear witness to a quite mundane transference between the minds of the living percipients........., 190-192

§ 5. Fiswa^ examples. Hallucinations of light.. 192-194

Various out-of-door experiences, not easy to explain as illusions 194-198 Examples of the simultaneous appearance of an unrecognised figure to

xii SYIfOFSIS OF VOL. 11.

two percipients, who in most instances were in each other's company at the time. The two impressions received in several cases were not precisely similar, and in one (No. 322) were markedly different.. 198-207

Similar appearances of recognised phantasms; one o£ which (case 333) represented the form of one of the percipients... 208-218

The auditory class requires special care, owing to the liability 9f real sounds (whose source is often uncertain) to be misinterpreted. Examples of voices.......... 218—221

And of mMsica? hallucinations..... 221-223

The examples may at all events show that a purely psychical account of these joint experiences is possible. It is not, indeed, obvious why hallucinations of the senses should be a form of experience liable to transmission from mind to mind; but as regards the cases which are telepathically originated, some explanation may perhaps be found in the fact that they at any rate involve a disturbance of a very peculiar kind... 224-225

§ 6. Collective hallucinations of telepathic origin. Auditory examples, representing vocal sounds....... 226-230

And non-vocal sounds....... 230-235

Visual examples. In two of these (JSTos. 345 and 346) the experiences of the several percipients were not precisely similar. Another case (No. 349) affords an opportunity for estimating the probability of a collective mistake of identity...... 235-264

§ 7. The fact that in most of the examples the two percipients, B and C, were together suggests that mere community of scene, or of immediate mental occupation, may establish a rapport favourable to "psychical" transferences......... 264-266

And this conception may lead us, in cases where a distant agent. A, is concerned, to an amalgamation of the two hypotheses (see § 1) which have hitherto been treated separately. C's experience, qua hallucination, that is to say in its sensory character, may be derived from B's; but, for all that, A may be telepathically affecting C. It may be A's joint influence on B and C that has conditioned the transference of sensation between them; or, in cases where C holds no intimate relation to A, a rapport may be established, ad hoc, between A and C by the rapport of both of them with B — who thus serves, so to speak, as a channel for C's percipience; and this would even help to explain the cases where B is not himself consciously percipient........ 266-268

The conception of rapport through community of mental occupation might explain the various cases where the telepathic influence seems to have been locally conditioned, by the presence of the percipient in a place that was interesting to the agent. And the idea may receive a still

SYIfOPSIS OF VOL. II. xiii

further extension in cases where there is reason to suppose a reciprocal telepathic clairvoyance of the scene on the agent's part. 268-269

Conjectures of this sort concerning the more outlying telepathic phenomena have an air of rashness; but the mere fact that " psychical " transferences are possible, when once admitted, opens up a scheme of Idealism within whose bounds (if bounds there be) the potential unity between individual minds is at any rate likely to realise itself in surprising ways........... 270

CONCLUSION.

§ 1. The case for spontaneous telepathy, being essentially a cumulative one, hardly admits of being recapitulated in a brief and attractive form. Nothing but a detailed study of the evidence — dull as that study is — can justify definite conclusions concerning it. After all, the dulness is perhaps not greater than attaches to the mastery of details in other departments of knowledge; and it cannot be too clearly realised that what the research requires is not sensational incidents, but verified dates. 271-272

§ 2. The present instalment of evidence, with all its defects, may yet, by making the idea of telepathy better understood, facilitate collection in the future; and already various difficulties and prejudices show signs of giving way........... 273

§ 3. But though a fair field is sure, in time, to be allowed to the work, its advance must depend on very wide co-operation; and the more so as the several items of proof tend to lose their efiect as they recede into the past. The experimental investigations must be greatly extended, the spontaneous phenomena must be far more intelligently watched for and recorded, before the place of telepathy in scientific psychology can be absolutely assured........ 273-274



Note on a Suggested Mode of Psychical Interaction (by Mr. Myers)

PSYCHICAL INTERACTION.

§ 1. The hypotheses contained in this note are tentatively advanced, but may at least direct observation......277

§ 2. The theory which represents a veridical phantasm as the externatisation of a telepathic impression encounters a difficulty in the fact that when two (or more) persons are together the phantasm is usually, though not always, perceived by hoth...... 277-278

xiv jSYMOFSIS of vol. II.

§ 3. This complex fact seems in the first place inconsistent with the popular theory of a material ghost, or " meta-organism," — a theory on other grounds objectionable;...... 278-279

§ 4. Nor can we always assume a separate telepathic impulse from A to B and from A to C. Mr. Gurney therefore supposes a fresh telepathic communication from B to C:....... 279

§ 5. But no such cases of communication of hallucinations are recorded by alienists who have treated of " folie a deux ";.. 279-280

§ 6. And in morbid hallucinations of the sane, no degree of duration or intensity seems to effect this communication of the hallucination to bystanders 280-282

§ 7. Moreover, in Mr. Gurney 's collection of casual hallucinations of the sane, there are no collective cases which are indisputably falsidical;......... 282-284

§ 8. Alleged phantasms of the dead, for instance, cannot all be classed with certainty as merely illusory in the present state of our knowledge........... 284

§ 9. It may be better, then, to fall back on observation of the experimental cases, and to note that in them the percipient exercises a species of supernormal activity........ 284-286

§ 10. Such activity, if pushed further, might become first telepathic clairvoyance, then independent clairvoyance... 286-287

§ 11. Clairvoyant perception seems to be exercised in inverse ratio to activity of normal faculties, and to be stimulated by influence from another mind............ 287

§ 12. If this be so, we have an analogy which throws light on cases in this book where a dreaming, or even a waking, percipient becomes conscious of a distant scene;...... 287-289

§ 13. And, furthermore, our cases suggest that correspondently with clairvoyant perception there may be phantasmogenetic efficacy:. 289

§ 14. So that all the persons present together may be equally likely to discern the phantasmal correlate of the dying man's clairvoyant perception; and collective cases will no longer present a unique difficulty. 289-290

§ 15. And this will hold good whatever view we take of the relation



Syjvopsis of Vol. Ii. Xv

to space or matter, either of the clairvoyant percipience or of its phantasmal correlate 290-291

§ 16. This view suggests test-experiments. Points to be noticed in a collective hallucination;....... 291-292

§ 17. And in a hallucination induced by hypnotic suggestion 292-293

§ 18. But if the dying man's conception of himself is thus presented as a quasi-percept to a group of persons collectively, then some cases where there is one percipient only may be similarly explained.. 293-294

§ 19. If we consider the indications of origin in one or the other mind given by the dress of phantoms, we find no clear case where such origin must be referred to the percipient's mind;.... 294-297

§ 20. And the symbolism of phantoms also is generally such as may have been common to both minds..... 297-298

§ 21. On the other hand there are cases where the dying man's actual dress at the moment, though an improbable one, is reproduced by the phantom, which thus is clothed according to the dying man's conception of himself, and probably not according to the percipient's antecedent conception of him;......... 298

§ 22. And the symbolism of the figure sometimes conveys true information, or is in other ways probably referable to the dying man 299-300

§ 23. And the cases of imperfect or deferred recognition seem similarly to indicate that the aspect of the apparition has not been determined by the percipient himself........ 300-301

§ 24. Moreover, the attraction which determines the phantasmal presence seems sometimes to be local rather than personal; as if the percipient merely saw an apparition which was generated by causes independent of himself....... 301-302

§ 25. It may be said that on this view the mass of our cases should be reciproccbl. But in order to prove a case reciprocal it is necessary that clairvoyant percipience should be recollected, which is a rare thing 302-303

§ 26. Still further, the agent's death often prevents his recounting such percipience as he may have enjoyed. His last words sometimes indicate that there has been such percipience. Dr. Ormsby's case. 303-306

§ 27. In our few cases ol voluntary self-j^rojection the experience seems rarely to have persisted into waking memory;... 306-307

xvi SYNOPSIS OF VOL. II.

§ 28. And after clairvoyant dreams the fact of the clairvoyant m-yas'iori may be forgotten till revived by accidental presence in the scene thus discerned........... 307

§ 29. Invasion, however, is sometimes remembered; faintly and brokenly by an agent waking at the time;.... 307-308

§ 30. More often and more distinctly by an agent sleeping at the time 308

§ 31. Such reciprocity seems further facilitated by a state of trance or delirium.......... 309-310

§ 32. Stages by which, in this view, veridical phantasms gradually approach a reciprocal type....... 310-311

§ 33. Power of the death or crisis of one person to evoke the clairvoyant percipience, and invite the supernormal invasion, of another. Parallel with clairvoyance mesmerically induced... 311-312

§ 34. A true classification must depend on the condition and crises of the unconscious rather than of the conscious self... 312-314

§ 35. In the meantime reciprocal percipience may be taken as the type of a fully-developed veridical hallucination; its relation to space and matter being as yet unknown...,.... 314

§ 36. Suggested analogy of telepathic with vital or organic communication......... 314-316

SUPPLEMENT.

INTRODUCTION.

§ 1. The supplementary evidence for telepathy, like that in the main body of the work, consists of experimental cases (Chap. I.) and of spontaneous cases (Chaps. II. -IX.)...... 321

§ 2. The spontaneous cases, in the aggregate, have less force than those which have preceded — the chances of error in many of them being very appreciable, and some of them being second-hand. Still, the evidence is for the most part of a character which allows us to suppose that the essential

SYJ^rOPSIS OF VOL. II. xvii

point has been truly retained, even though details may have been altered or added 321-322

§ 3. And since this evidence, which might not prove the reality of spontaneous telepathy, is sufficient, even alone, to establish a very strong presumption for it, it lends an important support to the cumulative argument already presented....... 322-323

Further Examples of Thought-Transperence, Principally in

Hypnotic Cases.

§ 1. Experiments in the transference of tastes and pains. 324-329

Occasionally the transference seems to be from the " subject " to the

operator.......... 330-331

§ 2. Examples of the power of the ivill in producing the hypnotic condition, or in evoking particular actions.... 331-334

§ 3 Transferences of ideas unconnected with movement. One remarkable record (No. 366) exemplifies a very long-continued susceptibility on the percipient's part. Several of the cases, here treated as telepathic, have been attributed without sufficient grounds to independent clairvoyance........ 334-348

Ideal, Emotional, and Motor Cases.

§ 1. Examples of spontaneous thought-transference of a tolerably literal kind, several of which suggest a fugitive faculty of percipience developed by illness........ 349-362

§ 2. Examples of an apparently abnormal intuition of the approach or proximity of certain persons...... 363-36.5

§ 3. Cases where the " agency " is difficult or impossible to assign, and which recall the Creek notion of 4>rjM.... 365-370

§ 4. Emotional impressions (involving in one case — No. 391 — distinct physical discomfort) which the percipients connected at the moment with particular individuals........ 370-374

VOL. II. b

lii SYNOPSIS OF VOL. II.

§ 5. Emotional impressions not so connected... 374-376

§ 6. Examples of motor effects..... 376-379

Deeams.

§ 1. Examples of simultaneous dreams corresponding in content 380-383

§ 2. Examples of dreams which have seemed to represent some thought or mental picture in thQ imndi oi 3u waking &gent. 383-393

§ 3. Examples of dreams which have directly corresponded with a real event (usually death) that befell the agent... 393-401

§ 4. Examples of pictorial dreams with a similar correspondence; in many of which the dreamer has invested the idea with original (symbolic or fantastic) imagery...... 401-428

§ 5. Examples of dreams that may be described as telepathically clairvoyant, in several of which (Nos. 481-4) the object prominently presented has been a letter....... 428-448



Chapter IV

" Borderland " Cases.

§ 1. First-hand cases of rather remote date: Visual cases 449-459

Auditory cases......•• 459-461

§ 2. First-hand and more recent cases: Visual cases. 461-470

Auditory cases 470-474

§ 3. A group of first-hand cases taken from printed sources 474-477

§ 4. Second-hand cases from informants who were nearly related to

the original witnesses........ 477-496

§ 5. And from informants who were not so related.. 496-508

SYJ^OPSIS OF VOL. 11. xix

CHAPTER Y.

Visual Oases.

§ 1. First-hand death-cases...... 509-523

§ 2. First-hand cases where the conditioning event on the agent's side was something other than death...... 523-532

§ 3. Second-hand cases from informants who were nearly related to the original witnesses. In connection with one of these cases (No. 583) some remarks are made on the Scotch " second sight "; another case (No. 586) illustrates the difference between the right and the wrong sort of transmitted evidence.. •... *.. 532-542

§ 4. Second-hand cases from informants who were not nearly related to the original witnesses....... 543-558

§ 5. Ancient cases, which, by rare exception, were recorded in such a way as to have permanent value...... 558-560



Chapter VI

Auditory and Tactile Cases.

§ 1. Oases where the impression was of distinct words. 561-568

§ 2. Cases where the impression apparently represented what was

actually in the agent's ears at the time.... 568-570

§ 3. Non-vocal cases 570-574

§ 4. Tactile cases 574-576

A case suggesting a peculiar sympathy of physical condition 576-577



Chapter VII

Oases affecting more than one of the Percipient's Senses 578-589



Chapter VIII

Reciprocal Cases 590-599

VOL. II.

h 2

XX SYJVOFSIS OF VOL II.



Chapter IX

Collective Cases. § 1. Three outlying cases....... 600-603

§ 2. Visual cases, apparently connected with the condition of a distant agent, occurring to percipients who were apart... 603-607

§ 3. And to percipients who were together... 607-623

§ 4. Visual cases where it is doubtful whether there was any "agency" on the part of the person whom the phantasm represented. 623-630

§ 5. Auditory cases, where the impression was of a recognised voice.......... 631-634

§ 6. And where the impression was of inarticulate or non- vocal sounds 634-641

Of Cases received too late for Insertion in their Proper Places.

§ 1. Experimental cases —

Reproduction of diagrams..... 642-653 Transference of ideas of numbers, words, and

objects....... 653-666

Transference of tastes..... 666-669

Transference of ideas below the threshold of

consciousness...... 669-671

§ 2. Transitional cases-Production of visual phantasms at a distance. 671-676 Hypnotic effects at a distance.... 676-687

§ 3. Spontaneous cases of various types. The last two (Nos. 701 and 702) afford a specially good illustration of the psychological identity of dreams and hallucinations..... 687-705

Table of numbered cases...... 707-722

Analysis op the Table....... 723

Index 725-733

ADDITIONS AND COEEECTIONS.

VOLUME II.

Page 13, line 13 from bottom. " One in every 90 of the population." The probability that the ratio ^, observed in the specimen-group, may be fairly assumed as correct for the whole population, admits of precise determination. A general idea of its degree of correctness may be obtained from the following analogue, which I owe to Mr. F. Y. Edgeworth. Suppose 5680 balls to be drawn from a bag containing immense numbers of black and white balls, mixed in a certain ratio. If the real ratio of black balls to the total be g^, the odds against our drawing so small a proportion of black balls as -^ — i.e., the odds against the ratio appearing to be -^ — are about 10 to 1. If the real ratio be eV? the odds against its appearing to be so small as ^q are about 500 to 1. If the real ratio be ^, the odds against its appearing to be so small as yV a.re more than 100,000 to 1. It will become obvious, I think, as we proceed, that even in this last contingency — on the violently improbable assumption that the true ratio of hallucines in the population is double that observed in the specimen group — my general conclusion would remain safe, even for the auditory cases; and a fortiori for the visual cases, where a far smaller ratio is substituted for ^q. But it is enough to notice that practically, as the ratio for the population is as likely to be less than the specimen-ratio as greater, and as it cannot differ from it very materially on either side, the specimen-ratio may safely be used.

Page 24, line 1. For 13 read 12, and for 6 read 7. Lines 17-22. Among the " recognised " visual cases, I include three where the figure seen did not represent the person who was probably the agent. I do not reckon on either side two cases of mis-recognition, which might equally well be described as partial recognition; nor three cases where the recognition was retrospective; nor four " collective " cases where one of the percipients recognised the agent, but the other was a stranger to him. I reckon in the unrecognised class three cases where the percipient was a stranger to the agent, but described his appearance correctly. Among the " recognised " auditory cases, I include two where the voice heard was not that of the supposed agent. I do not reckon on either side case 279; nor case 507 where the recognition was retrospective; nor the case of mis-recognition. No. 570.

Page 25, note. The slight difference from the numbers given in Vol. I., pp. 392 and 498, is due to cases received since those pages were printed off.

xxii ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

Page 26, lines 12 and 13. For 399 read 401, and for 303 read 304.

Page 27. " The only way of meeting this argument," &c. In more technical language, the point stands thus. The determination of the a posteriori probability that certain events took place by chance depends not only on the " objective " probability of the occurrence of such events under a regime of chance, but on d priori probabilities depending (except in imaginary problems about bags and balls) on what Professor A. Marshall has felicitously called " that abstract and essence of past experience which is on the one side science, and on the other practical instinct." And as Mr. P. Y. Edgeworth remarks, in writing to me on this topic, " Scratches or ordering boots might be as unique experiences as death, or at any rate not materially more frequent; yet all would agree that the d priori probability of a causal connection between a phantasm and ordering boots is nil; while as to death, many would think differently." Now in applying this remark, it must be remembered that that which alone could make a number of the coincidences — whether between phantasms and orderings of boots, or between phantasms and deaths — explicable as accidental occurrences, would be the universal though unknown and unnoticed prevalence of spectral illusions. This is itself a huge improbability, determined as such by the relation of the statistical results of my census to complex a priori probabilities concerning facts of human memory and testimony. And what I have implied in the text is simply that it is an improbability so huge as to outweigh the a priori improbability of a causal connection between phantasms and deaths, though not perhaps the a priori improbability of a causal connection between phantasms and orderings of boots.

Page 37, first note. Since this note was printed, I have met with an interesting case of the peculiar sensation described, in connection with purely subjective hallucinations. Mr. J. Russell Lowell tells me that in past years he had frequent hallucinations of vision, of both the recognised and the unrecognised sort, which greatly interested him; and that the experience was ushered in (he believes invariably) by a feeling of marked chill, which seemed to ascend from the feet to the head.

Page 37, second note. Mr. Lowell also tells me that though the figures he saw were sometimes quite natural-looking, at other times they were of the semi-transparent sort here described, allowing the wall or furniture to be seen through them. He spoke of these as looking as if composed of " blue film " — a description which is of great interest, when taken in connection with some of the telepathic cases, e.g., Nos. 210, 311, 315, 485, 555.

Page 39, line 2 from bottom. Por Act read Acte.

Page 42, case 226. In conversation, General H. informed Mr. Podmore that the native who was with him at the time of his experience was not facing the figure, but still would probably have been aware of the presence of a real person who occupied the spot where the figure was seen.

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS. xxiii

Page 66 note. For case 197 read cases 197 and 509.

Page 67, case 245. The narrator has added, in conversation, that he was in Huddersfield for the day only, and that his sudden resolve necessitated his telegraphing to the friends with whom he was staying. For the moment he does not know the address of these friends; but he hopes to procure us their recollections as to the receipt of this telegram and his subsequent explanation of it.

Page 71, case 249. The following corroboration is supplied by Mr. and Mrs. Coates, of 156, Waperton Road, Bradford, who were with Mr. Carr at the time: —

"June 23, 1886.

" We shall only be able to confirm the statement of Mr. T. Carr. So far as we can remember, while we were sitting in the room, T. 0. came from his chair to the window; and, while looking out of the window, he made the remark, ' Ah, there is [X.] coming to see us,' and stepped back from the window, waiting to hear a knock at the door, which however did not come. T. C. remarked that he must have gone up the yard, and looked at the clock to see what time it was. We afterwards heard that at the time we thought [X.] was in the yard, he was just about dying.

"Charles Coates.

" Annie Coates."

In conversation, Mr. Coates gave the time as about 4 p.m.; and spoke of Mr. Carr's consulting his watch.

Page 72, case 250. In conversation I have learnt from Mr. Schofield that he had been absent from home for some days — which explains his having heard nothing of the illness. The deceased had a warm affection for his mother.

Page 85, case 257. Since this case was printed, a hallucination representing the same person has been seen by a fourth percipient. Mrs. Olanville writes from Shute Haye, Walditch, Bridport, on Aug. 23, 1886: —

" After breakfast this morning, I was outside the breakfast-room window, looking about, when I saw Mrs. Stone walking up one of the paths by the side of the lawn. I followed her. The path is long and winds round. I saw her turn the corner into a path that led through the orchard, but when I came there I could not see her. I wondered at her walking so quickly as to go out of sight, and strolled on, following the path, which led me back to the house. Here I saw Mrs. Stone talking to the gardener. She was surprised when I asked her how I could have missed her, and said she had not been walking at all, had not left her plants. Well, I saw her, her black dress, her white cap, her walk, Mrs. Stone certainly, but whether out of herself, or by an impression on my brain, I cannot tell — but I never saw anything more distinctly." [A plan of the paths was enclosed.]

Mrs. Stone writes, Aug. 25, 1886: —

" You wish me to give an account of my proceedings when Mrs. Glan-

xxiv ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

ville saw my double. About 10 on the morning of Monday, August 23rd, I had gone direct from the house to water some flowers in a greenhouse marked in Mrs. Glanville's plan. My mind was rather disturbed at not hearing from my son. I was watering in a rather dazed, mechanical way, but did not lose consciousness. Walking from the place I met Mrs. Glanville, who said, ' How could you get here without my seeing you? ' I had not been near the spot where she saw me."

The percipient in this case has had one other visual hallucination representing a living person, which was very likely telepathic. She thus describes it: —

" I remember one experience of the same sort happening when I was a, girl. I certainly did see an old gentleman in the street who was then on his death-bed, but nobody would believe it. He was standing outside his shop-door; there were two other men with him. I can see him now in my mind's eye — a tall thin man; I knew his face quite well. When I said at dinner that Mr. Worth was better, for I had seen him in the street, my father told me he had just called, and Mr. Worth was very ill, in fact dying, and I must be mistaken."

Page 112, case 277. The narrator has explained to me that her mother was taken ill on the Saturday night, and lay all that night and the next day on the sofa, muttering to herself, but not thought to be dying.

Page 116, case 281. We have procured, from the Acting Registrar-General at Fiji, a certificate which shows that the death took place on Sept. 8, 1875. But we learn from the Astronomer-Royal that, until recently, the nomenclature of days of the month at Piji followed the rule of Australia. Sept. 8, 1875, therefore, began there nearly 12 hours before it began here; so that unless the deceased was bathing late in the evening, the narrator's experience must have followed the death by more than 12 hours. This, of course, is on the supposition that the experience was really on the night of the 8th, and not of the 7th; in which latter case the coincidence might have been exact. The narrator is sure that the 8th was the date — not, however, from any independent recollection of the number 8, but on the ground that she referred to her diary after she heard of the death, and verified the coincidence, which she then mentioned to one or two persons. But it will be seen from her account that, for aught she knew, the death might have occurred on the 7th; and therefore the days would have seemed to her to have very probably coincided if the day which she found noted in her diary was also the 7th. Should the diary ever be found, the point may be cleared up.

Page 123, case 287. Since this case was printed, I have learnt from Dr. Joseph Smith that he was seeing Mrs. Gandy nearly every day. He nevertheless feels pretty confident that his experience was not due to anything that he had heard or observed — arguing that that explanation of it, if it had been the true one, would have occurred to him at the time. But extremely slight and transient impressions may, for aught we know, serve as the germ of subsequent hallucinations, just as they may serve as the



Additions and Corrections. Xxv

germ of subsequent dreams; and the case ought not, I think, to have received an evidential number.

Page 199, case 319. Both witnesses are positive that the case was not one of mere illusion; though it was dusk, there was enough light for the clergyman to observe that the figure outside was rather badly dressed, besides difiering from Dr. Cant in being considerably stouter and wearing a beard. They discussed the matter the same evening, at about 1 1 p.m. In the interval, something had occurred by which Dr. Cant tells us that he was a good deal impressed. At about 8 p.m. he was called to visit a stranger, who was dying, and who had expressly desired his attendance; and he was startled by the close (though not exact) resemblance of this man to the hallucinatory figure.

Page 209, case 326. Mrs. R.'s sister. Miss Norman, of Stone, Stafibrd, has sent the following independent testimony, dated June 21, 1886: —

" After the lapse of so many years, the statement I now write is all that I can remember of seeing my father and mother walking together, in the year 1843, in the village where we then resided. At the time, my father was from home, very ill; and my mother, to the best of my remembrance, was out on that day. I have a very vivid recollection of the vision, which I think remarkable. My parents were walking together by the churchyard wall, close to the parsonage. This happened in September, 1843."

Mrs. R. writes that she is confident that neither she nor the manservant saw her mother's figure: — " He saw just what I saw — my father entering the church by the vestry door." After so long an interval, it is likely enough that the sisters' accounts might differ, even if their experiences had been identical. But it seems quite possible, on the analogy of several other cases, that the simultaneous hallucinations were not exactly identical.

Page 237, line 24. After Mr. R. Hodgson insert " and later the present writer."

Page 247, lines 4, 5. The testimony in question has now been obtained, and is as follows: —

" Lakeside Cottages, Newby Bridge.

"June, 1886.

" It was one evening, about 4 years ago, that I sat in the kitchen, at Lindale Parsonage, at supper, and looking at the window I saw, at the side of the blind, which was not hanging quite straight, a very pale face looking at me. It was turned sideways when I first saw it, and thinking it was one of the young men from the village come up to make game of us, I made a face at it; then it turned full face towards me, and I saw that it was the face of Mrs. John Robinson, my present husband's first wife. It looked very pale. I watched it with the other servants for about 3 minutes perhaps, and then it dropped down and disappeared. I could see all round it,i so that I

1 Compare cases 553 and 572..

xxvi ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

could see that it was not a real face, and it was too close to the window for that. It looked as if resting on the sill.

" I have never on any other occasion seen anything which was not really there. " Helen Robinson."

Page 297, line 14. Before p. 546 insert Yol. I.

Page 336, case 366. The phenomena of mesmeric rapport described in this case strongly suggest a specific influence exercised by the operator, of a sort not as yet recognised in the various scientific theories of hypnotism; but a more decisive proof of such an influence is of course afibrded if the same operator has produced kindred efiects on more than one " subject." After the case in the text was printed, I heard from Mrs. Pinhey of another occurrence which, from this point of view, is of the greatest interest, besides supplying a parallel to the examples of the telepathic production of hypnotic sleep given in Vol. I., p. 88, and below, pp. 679-87. During the period when the events described in case 366 were proceeding, Mrs. Pinhey was staying with some friends at Pakenham, and was requested by Sir Walter Trevelyan, one of the party, to try to induce -mesmeric sleep in another guest. Miss Lofit. Mrs. Pinhey was rather unwilling, but at last consented.

" The experiment was quite successful as far as it went. Miss L. soon went off into the sleep and was laid upon a bed in that state. I believe she did not wake for some hours. The Trevelyans and Miss Lofit were to leave the next day, and before they did so Sir Walter startled me by making the following request: ' Would I, as an experiment and to oblige him, undertake to retire at a certain hour, which he fixed, that evening, and make the usual passes with an intention of again mesmerising Miss Lofit, who would by that time be with him and his wife at a hotel at Lincoln or Leicester, or some town which he named but which I have now forgotten % ' Again I hesitated.   However, curiosity, and a comfortable assurance that there could be nothing in it, gradually conquered my repugnance, and I promised to make the attempt, heartily hoping that it might not succeed. The Trevelyans and Miss Lofit all left at about noon for the railway station, and travelled by train to their destination. The day passed as usual, and I began to feel more confidence and could almost laugh at my former fears. When the appointed time came, I retired quietly to my own room, and, imagining Miss Lofit before me, I made the usual passes ^ just as I had done the evening before, and for about the same length of time. It appeared very absurd and I could not help laughing at the situation; but I kept my own counsel and said nothing to anyone.

" A day or two later, when I had returned home, a letter came for me from Sir Walter Trevelyan. It informed me in a few words that at the preconcerted hour Miss Lofft was sitting at table after tea or supper, that she suddenly began to feel very drowsy, said her sensations were the same as when she was being mesmerised, and that at last she slept much as she had done the evening before, though, I think, less deeply and for a shorter time. I confess that I was so astonished at this news, and found it so disagreeable and bewildering, that I destroyed the letter, an act I have

1 Possibly effective indirectly, as aiding concentration of attention.

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS. xxvii

often since regretted, and said as little as possible about the matter to anyone. I instinctively felt that it would be commonly regarded as so incredible that I had better say nothing about it, lest it should throw discredit upon the other experiments. Nevertheless, the main facts are perfectly true, though I will not undertake to answer for every detail. For instance, it is certainly true that Miss LofFt was affected in the way I have described, but I cannot remember to what exact extent."

[A niece of Miss Lofft tells us that she remembers Mrs. Pinhey mesmerising her aunt at Pakenham; but she was not told of the subsequent experiment.]

Of course if this occurrence stood alone, the most natural hypothesis would be that Sir Walter Trevelyan had in some way betrayed what was being attempted, and that the trance was caused by suggestion and expectancy. But in view of other cases of the same sort, and especially of the recent French records, it is not unreasonable to suppose that he was sufficiently on his guard not to mar his own carefully-planned experiment, and that the incident was genuinely telepathic.

Page 413, case 445. We find from the Register of Deaths that the lady's death took place on March 2, 1843. The narrator tells me that there was no immediate apprehension of it — that, for aught he knew, " she might have lived for 20 years." He thinks, but cannot be sure, that his eyes were open.

Page 422, lines 4 and 16. For Harley read Holies. The note to this case (within brackets) is not quite correct, as a sailing-vessel bound for Melbourne might have 6 weeks' start, and still be outstripped by a steamer. But even with this correction, the time of the second dream cannot be brought into correspondence with any customary hour for a London funeral.

Page 460, second note. For 568 read 569; for 639 read 638; for 654 read 653.

Pas:e 485, case 522. A sister of the narrator's, who had also heard of the experience from her father's lips, confirms the account given.

Page 511, case 552. In conversation, Mrs. Rooke mentioned that she saw the figure as she was coming out after prayers, all the students being behind her. This is important, as telling against the hypothesis of mistaken identity. She regards that hypothesis as out of the question, the recognition of the face being complete. The dress was a grey suit with black-barred pattern, and cap to match, such as the young man had been used to wear at the college. Mrs. Rooke did not mention her experience to her husband, not liking to appear superstitious; but both he and she agree that she mentioned it as soon as the news of the death arrived, which was about 6 weeks later; the words " many months " in her account seem therefore to be a slip.

Page 612, note. Omit 659, and add cases 30, 190, 198, 495, 530, 537, 591.



Chapter XIII. The Theory of Chance-coincidence.

§ 1. An issue has now to be seriously considered which I have several times referred to as a fundamental one, but which could not be treated without a preliminary study of the subject of sensory hallucinations. That, as I have tried to show, is the order of natural phenomena to which "phantasms of the living" in general belong; they are to be regarded as projections of the percipient's brain by which his senses are deceived. We have further found that in a certain number of cases — which may be taken as representing the still larger number to be cited in the following chapters — a phantasm of this kind is alleged to have coincided very closely in time with the death, or some serious crisis in the life, of the person whose presence it suggested. The question for us now is whether these coincidences can, or cannot, be explained as accidental. If they can, then the theory of telepathy — so far as applied to apparitions — falls to the ground. If they cannot, then the existence of telepathy as a fact in Nature is proved on the evidence; and the proof could only be resisted by the assumption that the evidence, or a very large part of it, is in its main features untrustworthy. It is very necessary to distinguish these two questions — whether the evidence may be trusted; and if trusted, what it proves. It is the latter question that is now before us. The character of the evidence was discussed at some length in the fourth chapter, and is to be judged of by the narratives quoted throughout the book. In the present chapter it is assumed that these narratives are in the main trustworthy; that in a large proportion of them the essential features of the case — i.e., two marked experiences and a time-relation between them — are correctly recorded. Here, then, is the issue. A certain number of coincidences of a particular sort have occurred: did they or did they not occur by



Vol. Ii. B

2 THE THEORY OF CHANCE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

chance? Now there are doubtless some who do not perceive that this question demands a reasoned examination at all. They settle it a 'priori. " One is constantly coming across very startling coincidences," they observe, " which no one thinks of ascribing to anything but chance; why should not these, which are no more startling than many others, be of the number? " This idea need hardly detain us: the point in our cases is, of course, not that the coincidence is startling 1 — that alone would be insignificant — but that the same sort of startling coincidence is again and again repeated. That is clearly a fact which demands treatment by a particular method, often vaguely appealed to as " the doctrine of chances." The actual application of that doctrine, however, even to simple cases, seems to require more care than is always bestowed upon it.

Especially is care required in the simple preliminary matter of deciding, before one begins to calculate, what the subject-matter of the calculation is to be — what precise class of phenomena it is to which the doctrine of chances is to be applied. I need only recall Lord Brougham's treatment of his own case (Vol. I., pp. 396-7). His attempted explanation, as we saw, entirely depended on his miscalling his experience, and referring it to the class of dreams — a class numerous enough, as he rightly perceived, to afford scope for numbers of startling coincidences. And his remarks illustrate what is really a very common outside view of psychical research. Dreams, and hallucinations, and impressions, and warnings, and presentiments — it is held — are the " psychical " stock-in-trade; and these phenomena are all much on a par, and may all be shown by the same arguments to be undeserving of serious attention. There has been the more excuse for this view, in that those who have claimed objective validity for what others dismiss as purely subjective experiences have often themselves been equally undiscriminating. Even this book might

1 It is, however, something to get even the startling character of the coincidence admitted. For there are writers of repute who seem to think that the whole occurrence receives a sufficient rationalistic explanation when some plausible subjective cause for the hallucination has been suggested. The Abbd de St. Pierre, after telling the well-known story of Desfontaines' appearance to his friend Bezuel, at the time of the former's death by drowning, and while the latter was apparently in a swoon, opines that the swoon was the cause of the apparition; and Ferriar, who agrees with the Abb^ in this, and adds, " I know from my own experience that the approach of syncope is sometimes attended with a spectral appearance," agrees with him also in leaving the little detail of the drowning wholly out of account. So with respect to the story told by Baronius, of the appearance of Ficino, at the time of his death, to Michael Mercato, who was studying philosophy. Ferriar (instead of making inquiry into the evidence of dates, which would show the story tn be spurious) explains that Mercato 's study of philosophy may have revived the idea of his friend in a vivid manner. It would certainly be a very vivid manner that could kill the friend at a distance.

lead a critic who confined his perusal to the headings of the chapters to imagine that dreams form a corner-stone of the argument; and in admitting that topic at all, we have so far laid ourselves open to misunderstanding. Thus a distinguished foreign critic of our efforts thought the subjective nature of what we regard as telepathic incidents sufficiently proved by the suggestion that " any physician will consider it quite within the bounds of probability that one per cent, of the population of the country are subject to remarkably vivid dreams, illusions, visions, &c,," and that each of these persons is " subject to a dream or vision once a week."^ It is obvious enough that in circles whose members have " spectral illusions " of their friends as often as once a week, the approximate coincidence of one of these experiences with the death of the corresponding person will be an insignificant accident. But we have not ourselves met with any specimen of this class; and the present collection comprises first-hand accounts of recognised apparitions, closely coinciding with the death of the original, from 109 percipients, of whom only a small minority can recall having experienced even a single other visual hallucination than the apparition in question.^ Once again, then, let me repeat that, though this work connects the sleeping and the waking phenomena in their theoretic and psychological aspects, it carefully and expressly separates them in their demonstrational aspect. The extent to which either class demonstrates the reality of telepathy can only be known through the application of the doctrine of chances; but the application

1 Another trap lies in the word hallucination (see Vol. i., pp. 458-9); which in this book is strictly limited to sensory affections, but which common usage often applies to purely mental errors. But for this equivoque, an eminent physiologist would perhaps hardly have thought he made a point against us in the remark — a rather rash one from any point of view — that our evidence is manifestly derived for the most part "from a class of persons given to hallucination, especially clergymen and women, who are naturally inclined to believe marvels." (Deutsche Rundschau for January, 1886, p. 45.) Among 509 informants from whom I have received accounts of apparently subjective hallucinations of sight and hearing, I find the proportion of females to males almost exactly 3 to 2, and clergymen most sparsely represented. Of the 527 percipients concerned in the hallucinations of sight and hearing which are included as telepathic evidence in these volumes, 241, or more than 46 per cent., are males; 286, or less than 54 per cent., are females; and 28, or between 5 and 6 per cent., are ministers of religion. The slight preponderance of female informants may probably be due to their having, as a rule, more leisure than men for writing on matters unconnected with business.

2 Explicit denials have been given by 73 out of the 109. From 22 others no answer has been obtained on the point, either through our own failure at first to realise its importance, or owing to death or some unavoidable cause; but of these 22,_ the majority have pretty clearly implied that what they describe was a unique experience. Of the 14 who can recall some further instance or instances, 4 have had a single apparently subjective hallucination under exceptional conditions of bad health or mental strain; 3 have had one such experience when in a normal state; and 7 have had several such experiences — some of which, however, differed from the telepathic cases in not representing a living figure, while others were themselves either probably or possibly of telepathic origin. I may add that in a large number of other cases, not given in the actual words of the percipient, there is very good reason to believe the experiences to have been unique.

4 THE THEORY OF CHANCE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

must be made to them separately, not together; we must not, like Lord Brougham, argue to one class from the data of the other. I have already applied the doctrine to a particular class of dreams, with results which, though numerically striking, left room for doubt, owing to the peculiar untrustworthiness of memory in dream -matters. It remains to apply it to the waking phantasms; and here I think that the results may fairly be held to be decisive.

§ 2. It is clear that the points to be settled are two: — the frequency of the phantasms which have markedly corresponded with real events; and the frequency of phantasms which have had no such correspondence, and have been obviously and wholly subjective in character. These points are absolutely essential to any conclusion on the question before us; and if not settled in any other way, they must be settled by guesses or tacit assumptions. The theory of chance-coincidence, as opposed to that of telepathy, has so far depended on two such assumptions. The first is that the coincidences themselves are extremnely rare. They can then be accounted for as accidental. For we know that there are such things as hallucinations representing human forms, which do not correspond with any objective fact whatever outside the organism of the percipient; and it would be rash to deny that the death of the person represented may now and then, in the world's history, have fallen on the same day as the hallucination. The second assumption is that these purely subjective apparitions of forms are extremely common. It can then be argued that even a considerable number of them might fall on the same day as the death of the corresponding human being. Supposing that we could each of us recall the occasional experience of gazing at friends or relatives in places which were really empty, then — since people are perpetually dying who are the friends and relatives of some of us — every year might yield a certain crop of the coincidences.

But as soon as we make these assumptions explicit and look at them, we see how baseless and arbitrary they are. Why should either of them be admitted without challenge? The second one especially seems opposed to what we may call the common-sense view of ordinary intelligent men. The question whether or not a very large proportion of the population have had experience of morbid or purely subjective hallucinations is one, I submit, where the opponents of the chance-theory might fairly take their stand

on the ordinary observation of educated persons, and have thrown on others the onus of proving them wrong. On this point a broad view, based on one's general knowledge of oneself and one's fellows, does exist; and according to it, " spectral illusions " — distinct hallucinations of the sense of vision — are very far from the everyday occurrences which they would have to be if we are to suppose that, whenever they coincide in time with the death of the person seen, they do so by accident. Nay, if we take even one of our critics, and bring him fairly face to face with the question, " If you all at once saw in your room a brother whom you had believed to be a hundred miles away; if he disappeared without the door opening; and if an hour later you received a telegram announcing his sudden death — how should you explain the occurrence "? he does not as a rule reply, " His day and hour for dying happened also to be m/ij day and hour for a spectral illusion, which is natural enough, considering how common the latter experience is." The line that he takes is, " The supposition is absurd; there are no really authentic cases of that sort." Under the immediate pressure of the supposed facts, he instinctively feels that the argument of chance-coincidence would not seem effective.

Still, " common-sense" — though it would support what I say — is not here the true court of appeal. And, moreover, it is not unanimous. On the second point, as on the first, I have received the most divergent replies from persons whom I have casually asked to give a guess on the subject; and some have guessed the frequency of the purely subjective hallucinations as very much below what it actually is. The moral — that we cannot advance a step without statisticsseems pretty obvious, though the student of the subject may read every word that has ever been published on both sides of the argument without encountering a hint of the need. There is plenty of assertion, but no figures; and a single instance, one way or the other, seems often to be thought decisive. To A, who has himself seen a friend's form at the time of his death at a distance, the connection between the two facts seems obvious; B, having heard of a phantasm of a living person which raised apprehensions as to his safety, but which " came to nothing," is at once sure that A's case was " a chance." I have even seen this view expanded, and a leading review gravely urging that the coincidences must be regarded as accidental, if against every hallucination which has markedly corresponded with a real event we can set another which has not.

6 THE THEORY OF CHANGE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

This is certainly a statistical argument — of a sort — and might be represented as follows: — At the end of an hour's rifle-practice at a long-distance range, the record shows that for every shot that has hit the bull's-eye another has missed the target: therefore the shots that hit the bull's-eye did so by accident.

§ 3. Perhaps the neglect of statistics has in part been due to an apparent hopelessness of attaining a sufficient quantity of reliable facts on which to found an argument — to an idea that any census on which a conclusion could be founded would have to be carried out on a scale so vast as to be practically impossible. " Do you intend," I have been sometimes asked, " to ask every man and woman in England whether he or she has experienced any subjective hallucination during, say, the last twenty years, and also to get a complete record of all the alleged coincidences within the same period, and then to compare the two lists? " Happily nothing at all approaching this is required. We shall find that approximately accurate figures are necessary only on one point — the frequency of the subjective hallucinations; and this can be ascertained by making inquiries of any fraction of the population which is large and varied enough to serve as a fair sample of the whole. Even this smaller task, however, is a very tedious one, consisting, as it does for the most part, in carefully registering negative information. The believer in telepathy may feel that he is doing much more to advance his belief by narrating a striking positive instance at a dinner party than by ascertaining, for instance, from twenty of his acquaintance the dull fact that they have never experienced a distinct visual hallucination. Just in the same way a scientific lecturer may win more regard at the moment by a sensational experiment with pretty colours and loud explosions than by laborious quantitative work in his laboratory. But it must be persistently impressed on the friends of " psychical research " that the laborious quantitative work has to be done; and it is some satisfaction to think that the facts themselves may stand as material for others to deal with, even if the conclusions here drawn from them are incorrect.

Nor has the dulness of the work been by any means the only difficulty: its purpose has been widely misconceived, and its scope has thereby been much curtailed. The proposal for a numerical estimate was introduced in a circular letter, every word of which might have been penned by a zealous sceptic, anxious above all things to prove that, in cases where the phantasm of a distant person has appeared

simultaneously with the person's death, the coincidence has been an accidental one. Not a syllable was used implying that the authors of the letter had themselves any opinion as to whether phantasms to which no real event corresponds are or are not common things; it was simply pointed out that it is necessary to have some idea how common they are, before deciding whether phantasms to which real events do correspond are or are not to be fairly accounted for by chance. And since sensory hallucinations, whatever their frequency, are at any rate phenomena as completely admitted as measles or colour-blindness, it did not occur to us that the following question could possibly be misunderstood: —

Since January 1, 1874, have you — when in good health, free from anxiety, and completely awake — had a vivid impression of seeing or being touched by a human being, or of hearing a voice or sound ^uhich suggested a human presence, when no one was there? Yes or no? ^

Clearly, the more yeses are received to this question — i.e., the commoner the purely subjective hallucinations prove to be — the stronger is the argument for chance as an adequate explanation of the instances of coincidence; the more noes — the rarer the purely subjective hallucinations prove to be — the stronger the argument that the death or other crisis which coincides with the apparition is in some way the cause of the apparition. We should have expected, if any injustice was to be done us, that it would have taken the form of attributing to us an inordinate desire for noes. To our amazement we found that we were supposed to be aiming exclusively at yeses — and not only at yeses, but at yeses expanded into orthodox "ghost-stories" — to be anxious, in fact, that every one in and out of Bedlam who had ever imagined something that was not there, or mistaken one object for another, should tell us his experience, with a view that we might immediately interpret it as due to the intervention of a bogey. A more singular instance of the power of expectancy — of the power of gathering from words any

1 This comprehensive question has been actually asked in several parts. As first put, for example, it contained no limitation as to date — as I was anxious to oVjtain accounts of as many hallucinations of the sane as possible; and the fact that any experience recorded had or had not fallen within the specified period of 12 years was ascertained by subsequent correspondence. The details of the experience were also a matter of subsequent inquiry.

I need hardly warn the reader not to confound the group of hallucinations belong ing to the limited number of persons who were expressly asked the above question, with the large collection of similar exxaeriences which has been frequently mentioned in some of the preceding chapters. That large collection includes the smaller group, and also census-cases which fell outside the 12 years' limit; but it includes also a far larger number of cases which were received quite irrespectively of the census.

8 THE THEORY OF CHANCE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

meaning that a critic comes predisposed to find there — can hardly be conceived. A statistical question on a perfectly well-recognised point in the natural history of the senses was treated, in scientific and unscientific quarters alike, as a manifesto of faith in " supernatural " agencies; and we found ourselves solemnly rebuked for ignoring the morbid and subjective character of many hallucinations — that is to say, for ignoring the fact which we had set forth as the very basis of our appeal, and from which its whole and sole point was derived. § 4. If I have dwelt thus on difiiculties and misconceptions, it is not that I may boast of having altogether triumphed over them. On the contrary, they have made it impossible to attain more than a fraction of what I once hoped. I began with the idea that the census might be extended to 50,000 persons; the group actually included numbers only 5705. Still, though this is certainly not a showy number, any one who is familiar with work in averages will, I think, admit that it is adequate for the purpose; and the friends who have assisted in the collection of the answers (to whom I take this opportunity of offering my grateful thanks) need certainly not feel that their labour has been in vain. It is possible for a small group to be quite fairly representative. Thus, if 50 males were taken at random from the inhabitants of London, if the heights of their respective owners were measured, and added together, and if the total were divided by 50, the result might be taken as representing, within extremely small limits of error, the average height of adult male Londoners; we should not get a much more correct result by taking the mean of 500, or 500,000 heights. This is the simplest sort of case. When it is a question of what proportion of the population have had a certain experience which many of them have not had, we must take a larger specimennumber, adjusting it to some extent by our rough previous knowledge. For instance, if we want to know what proportion of the inhabitants of London have had typhoid fever, it would not be safe to take 50 of them at random, and then, if we found that 10 of these had had the illness, to argue that one-fifth of the inhabitants of London had had it. Our rough knowledge is that a great many have not had it, and that a good many have; and in such circumstances we should probably get a very appreciably more certain result by enlarging our representative group to 500.^ If, again, the

1 In the recently issued Supplement to the Registrar-General's Reports for 1870-80. he bases his conclusions as to the proportionate deadliness of different diseases in the various occupations on batches of 500-1000 deaths.

experience was of extraordinary rarity, such as leprosy, the number of our specimen-group would have to be again increased; even if we took as many as 500,000 people at random, that is about one-ninth of the population, and ascertained that one of them was a leper, it would not be safe to conclude that there were nine lepers in London. Now our rough knowledge as to hallucinations would place them in this regard very much more on a par with typhoid fever than with leprosy. We realise that a great many people have not had experience of them; but we realise also that they are in no way marvellous or prodigious events. And if a group of 5705 persons seems a somewhat arbitrary number by which to test their frequency, the view that it is too small and that 50,000 would be greatly preferable, is one that can at any rate hardly be held with consistency by advocates of the theory of chance-coincidence. For the main prop of that theory, as we have seen, is the assumption that purely subjective hallucinations are tolerably common experiences; whereas it is only of decidedly rare experiences that the frequency, in relation to the whole population, would be much more correctly estimated from the proportion of fifty thousand people that have had them than from the proportion of five thousand people that have had them. However, the adequacy of the latter number approves itself most clearly in the course of the census itself. We find as we go on that hallucinations are sufficiently uncommon to force us to take our specimen-group of persons in thousands, not in hundreds, but not so uncommon as to force us to take very many thousands: after the first thousand is reached the proportion of " yeses " to " noes " keeps pretty uniformly steady — as would, no doubt, be the case if the question asked related not to hallucinations but to tj^hoid fever.

As regards the sort of persons from whom the answers have been collected — if there have been any answers from persons whose deficiencies of education or intelligence rendered them unfit subjects for a simple inquiry bearing on their personal experience, they form, I may confidently say, an inappreciable fraction of the whole. Perhaps a fourth of the persons canvassed have been in the position of shopkeepers and artisans or employes of various sorts; but the large majority have belonged to what would be known as the educated class, being relatives and friends of the various collectors. It is, no doubt, safest to assume that a certain degree of education is a pre-requisite to even the simplest form of participation in scientific

10 THE THEORY OF CHANGE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

work; and this condition, it will be observed, in no way detracts from the representative character of the group. A few thousand educated persons, taken at random, present an abundantly sufficient variety of types; and, indeed, for the purpose in view, the group is the more truly representative for belonging mainly to the educated class, inasmuch as it is from that class that the majority of the cases which are presented in this work as probably telepathic are also drawn.

§ 5. To say, however, that the answers came in the main from an educated class, is not, of course, a guarantee of the accuracy of the census; and before giving the actual results it may be well to forestall some possible objections.

It may be said, to begin with, that people may have had the experience inquired about, but may have forgotten the fact. This is the objection which was considered above in respect of dreams of death, and which there seemed to have decided force. In respect of waking hallucinations of the senses, its force is very much less. No doubt hallucinations may exhibit all degrees of vagueness; and it is very possible that extremely slight and momentary specimens may make little impression, and may rapidly be forgotten; but for the purposes of the census it would not in the least matter that persons whose experience had been of this slight and momentary kind should answer no instead of yes. It would have been unwise to complicate the question asked by an attempt to define the extent of vividness that the hallucination must have reached, to be reckoned as an item in our census; but clearly the only subjective hallucinations of which it really concerns us to ascertain the frequency are those which are in themselves as distinct and impressive as the hallucinations that we represent as telepathic; and any that fall below this point of distinctness and impressiveness have no bearing on the argument. And, per contra, it will be seen that by not limiting the wording of the question to distinct and impressive hallucinations, the collector exposes himself to receiving the answer " yes " from persons whose hallucination actually was very vague and momentary, but who do, as it happens, remember its occurrence. In point of fact, this has occurred a good many times; and the swelling of the list of yeses by this means probably outweighs any losses of what should have been genuine yeses through failure of memory. For consider what such failure of memory would imply. A fact of sight, hearing, or touch, as clear and unequivocal as most of the sensory impressions which we adduce as evidence for telepathy, must be very clear and

xiii.l THE THEORY OF CHANCE-COINCIDENCE, 11

unequivocal indeed. And the absence of the normal external cause of such an impression, when recognised, can hardly fail to give rise to genuine surprise — the surprise that follows a novel and unaccountable experience: this has been the result of almost all the " telepathic " phantasms, quite independently of the news which afterwards seemed to connect them with reality. Now, can it be a common thing for an experience as unusual and surprising as this to be, within a dozen years or any shorter period, so utterly obliterated from a person's mind that his memory remains a blank, even when he is pointedly asked to try and recall whether he has had such an experience or not?

A second objection is this. It has been suggested that untrue answers may be given by persons wishing to amuse themselves at our expense. Now I cannot deny that persons may exist who would be glad to thwart us, and amuse themselves, even at the cost of untruth. But when the question is put, " Do you remember having ever distinctly seen the face or form of a person known to you, when that person was not really there? " it is not at once obvious whether the amusing untruth would be " Yes " or " No." In neither case would the joke seem to be of a very exhilarating quality; but, on the whole, I should say that " Yes " would be the favourite, as at any rate representing the rarer and less commonplace experience. " Yes " is, moreover, the answer which (as I have explained) it has been very generally thought that we ourselves preferred; so that to give it might produce a piquant sense of fooling us to the top of our bent. But the reader has seen that, so far as the census might be thus affected, it would be affected in a direction adverse to the telepathic argument; for the commoner the purely casual hallucinations are reckoned to be, the stronger is the argument that the visions which correspond with real events do so hy chance. And if the number of these coincident visions makes the chance-argument untenable, even when the basis of estimation is affected in the way supposed, a fortiori would this be the case if the yeses were reduced to their true number.

Yet another objection is that persons who have had hallucinations may sometimes be disinclined to admit the fact, and may say " No " instead of " Yes " in self-defence. This source of error must be frankly admitted; but I feel tolerably confident that it has not affected the results to a really detrimental extent. Any reluctance to give the true answer is, as a rule, observable at the moment; and

12 THE THEORY OF CHANGE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

