" We have received the following letter from a physician, narrating two psychological experiences, in one of which another element enters,

1 This account adds the detail that the name of the colonel of the regiment was Hebborn. We cannot verify this detail without a more extensive search than the War Office authorities will permit. The English withdrew from Minorca in 1802, having been in occupation there for a few years. This agrees with Mr. Savage's statement.

2 As Mr. Savage was only 9 at the time of the occurrence, he probably did not use exactly this phrase.

624 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

namely, an external event coincident with the subjective impression. Had our correspondent been expected by his family at the time, the explanation of ' expectant attention ' in an abnormal condition of the nervous system might have sufficed, if it be admitted that two persons can, through this cause, have optical illusions at the same moment. "Whether in such cases mere coincidence is a sufficient solution, or whether the two circumstances stand in any causal relation, must be decided by such an accumulation of evidence as would render the first hypothesis untenable." "February 12th, 1880.

" My dear Dr. Tuke, — Although the following circumstance is not exactly similar in kind to that related by Dr. Jessopp, you may like to make use of it. At any rate, it is at your service, and you may rely upon its being quite accurate. One day, some years ago, two of my female relations were looking out of a window in Greenwich just opposite the hospital, and both saw, or thought they saw, me pass and look in. One of them ran immediately to the door, but to her astonishment could see no one either up or down the street. At this time I was not expected, being, as all my family supposed, in Paris. But within a quarter of an hour I arrived at Greenwich. When I did enter, I was called to account for the practical joke I was supposed to have played upon my relations, by peeping in at the window and then concealing myself, and it was with some difficulty I convinced them that I had come straight to the house.

" Some years after this, my wife and daughter (not the relations referred to previously) were sitting in the dining-room, when they both saw an old lady enter at the gate, and walk up the steps leading to the front door of the house. My wife said to her daughter, ' What can bring old Mrs. C. out in such a flood of rain? Run and open the door, that she may not have to wait for the servant to answer the bell.' On opening the door, there was no one there, nor in the garden. Some other curious things of the same character have occurred; but as the illusion afiected only a single person, I refrain from mentioning them, as they might arise from the physical condition of the parties concerned, which could hardly, I think, be the case with the others. — Very sincerely yours,

"M. D."

In answer to inquiries. Dr. Hack Tuke writes to us: —

" Lyndon Lodge, Hanwell, W.

"January 29th, 1885.

" ' M. D.' died some while ago. His name was Dr. Boase, long respected as a physician at Falmouth. He retired to Plymouth, where he took an active part in the Irvingite Church to which he belonged.

" He was altogether reliable, and I have no reason to doubt the correctness of the facts narrated. «« j)_ jj_ Tuke."

[These incidents, if correctly recorded, do not look like mistakes of identity. If (as may be guessed from " M.D.'s " final sentence) either of the percipients in the second case had on other occasions experienced purely subjective hallucinations, the fact would be of interest as favouring the view that the vision of Mrs. C. originated subjectively in one of the two minds.]

(669) From Mrs. Sturge, 2, Midland Road, Gloucester.

" Nov. 26, 1884.

" When residing in Montserrat, West Indies, in or about the year 1858, I was on a visit to some friends in the principal town of Antigua. One evening Mr. George Habershon, a gentleman who boarded with the family, but lodged in another part of the town, remained rather late; Mrs. Burns, the lady of the house, retired, leaving her daughters, to one of whom Mr. Habershon was engaged, and a young lady named Minnie Anderson, and myself downstairs. The evening was a beautiful moonlight one. As soon as Mr. Habershon left, a servant passed through the room in which we were sitting and fastened the outer door, leading from the verandah into the street, passing into the house after he had done so. Soon after Minnie uttered an exclamation. I looked up and saw Mr. H., or what appeared to be him, entering the room from the verandah, and I said, ' Mr. Habershon! ' Minnie said, ' Yes.' None of the others in the room saw him. The apparition disappeared almost immediately. We were somewhat startled at his unexpected reappearance, and searched about and looked down the road (it was bright moonlight, as mentioned before), but could see no one, nor could we understand how he could have got in, as the outer door was locked.

" When our hostess heard of the matter in the morning she was much annoyed, and on Mr. Habershon's arrival to breakfast, she spoke to him about having come back, frightening the girls. He declared he had not done so, but said that on his way home he had thought of returning to ask for a piece of meat for the dogs, a thing which he had done more than once before, and that he stood in the road considering whether or no he should do so, deciding in the negative because he thought we should laugh at him, as he often did come back. I suppose he appeared to Minnie and myself at the time he was considering whether or no he should return.

" I regret to say most of those who were present in that room, as well as Mr. Habershon, are now no more, but I believe I have correctly narrated the facts. The only survivor is now the wife of Justice Semper, a judge in the Supreme Court of the Leeward Isles. I may add that Mr. Habershon was a much esteemed young Englishman, whose veracity could be entirely depended upon. "Annie Sturge."

Mrs. Semper sends us the following independent account, from which it appears that she was not herself present at the time.

" St. Kitts.

" 20th April, 1886.

" The incident to which you refer took place in the house of my father, Mr. Burns. I was not present, but the strange tale was told to me, and I am very pleased to tell you all I know about it, in accordance with your request. The facts, as well as I can call them to mind, are these. Mr. George Habershon spent the evening with my family. On his leaving, all the members of it retired to rest with the exception of my sister (since dead) and her friend Mrs. Sturge; the two girls remained in the drawingroom, which was still brightly lighted. To their surprise they became aware that Mr. Habershon had come back, and was standing at one of the entrance doors, gazing at them. They pretended not to see him; but on his keeping his statue-like position, they got so curious to know why VOL. II. 2 s

626 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

he had returned that one of them asked what he wanted. They received no reply, and on advancing to where he stood, he disappeared. Imagining he was playing them a trick, they searched about the verandah; they then watched the street up which he had to go to get to his lodgings — and it being a bright, moonlight night, every object would be seen distinctly. He, however, was not there.

" Next day, on their asking Mr. Habershon how he managed to elude them, he professed perfect ignorance of what they were talking about. Later on, my mother, who thought he had mystified the girls enough, privately asked him to set the matter at rest by explaining it. Mr. Habershon assured her that he had not come back. He said he had had a strong and almost irresistible wish to do so, that he had turned and walked a few steps, and then, thinking by that time the door would be shut, he retraced his steps and went home. Mr Habershon's denial could not be doubted by any one who knew him.

" I may as well mention that Mr. Habershon was engaged to be married to my sister, and the reason he wished to return to the house was that he had not quite understood something she wished done.

" Minnie Semper \nee Burns]."

[It will be seen that Mrs. Semper represents her sister, and not Minnie Anderson, as the second percipient.' After a conversation with Mrs. Sturge, I feel no doubt that her version is the correct one. The discrepancies between the two accounts can scarcely be held to afiect the central fact described.]

(670) From Dr. Wyld, 41, Courtfield Road, S.W.

"December, 1882.

"Miss L. and her mother were for 15 years my most intimate friends; they were ladies of the highest intelligence, and perfectly truthful, and their story was confirmed by one of the servants; the other servant I could not trace.

"Miss L., some years before I made her acquaintance, occupied much of her time in visiting the poor. One day, as she walked homewards, she felt cold and tired, and longed to be at home, warming herself at the kitchen fire. At or about the minute corresponding to this wish, the two servants being in the kitchen, the door-handle was seen to turn, the door opened,^ and in walked Miss L., and going up to the fire she held out her hands and warmed herself, and the servants saw she had a pair of green kid gloves on her hands. She suddenly disappeared before their eyes, and the two servants in great alarm went upstairs aod told the mother what they had seen, including the green kid gloves. The mother feared something was wrong, but she attempted to quiet the servants by reminding them that Miss L. always wore black and never green gloves, and that therefore the ' ghost ' could not have been that of her daughter.

" In about half-an-hour the veritable Miss L. entered the house, and going into the kitchen warmed herself by the fire; and she had on a pair of green kid gloves which she had bought on her way home, not being able to get a suitable black pair. uq._ "Wyld M.D."

The Hev. W. Stainton Moses writes: —

^ See p. 612, note.

ix.j COLLECTIVE CASES, 627

" 21, Birchington Road, KW., January 31st, 1883.

" I have heard the story of Miss L. from her mother. It is, as far as my memory serves, recounted here with perfect accuracy. Both the ladies mentioned were intimately known to me, and entirely to be trusted.

" W. Stainton Moses."

[This case, it will be seen, does not depend on the testimony of the servants, but on that of Mrs. L., whose character for truthfulness is vouched for by two gentlemen who knew her intimately. The point as to the longing to be " warming herself at the kitchen iire " is, however, one very likely to have been imagined or exaggerated; even supposing that it was genuinely remembered, the " minute corresponding " to it is not likely to have been afterwards ascertainable, though very likely indeed to be inferred as that of the apparition; and it is impossible to be sure that the green gloves were mentioned before the reality of their existence was known; so that Miss L.'s agency cannot be confidently assumed.]

The next two cases resemble Nos. 328 and 329, the state of the person whose phantasm appeared presenting nothing which could be supposed to be a distinctive condition of telepathic agency.

(671) From Dr. Buchanan (late H.E.I. C.S. Bengal Establishment), 12^ Rutland Square, Edinburgh. All the percipients are dead, except one, who is inaccessible. Among them were Dr. Buchanan's late wife, and her parents.

"The following circumstance took place at a villa about one and a-half miles from Glasgow, and was told me by my wife. Of its truth I am as certain as if I had been a witness. The house had a lawn in front, of about three or four acres in extent, with a lodge at the gate very distinctly seen from the house, which was about 80 yards distant. Two of the family were going to visit a friend seven miles distant, and on the previous day it had been arranged to take a lady, Miss W., with them, who was to be in waiting at a place about a mile distant. Three of the family and a lady visitor were standing at one of the dining-room windows waiting for the carriage, when they, including my wife, saw Miss W. open the gate at the lodge. The wind had disarranged the front of a pelisse which she wore, which they distinctly saw her adjust. She wore a light greycoloured beaver hat, and had a handkerchief at her mouth; it was supposed that she was suffering from toothache, to which she was subject. She entered the lodge, to the surprise of her friends, and as she did not leave it, a servant was sent to ask her to join the family; but she was informed that Miss W. had not been there, and it was afterwards ascertained that no one, except the woman's husband, had been in the lodge that morning.

"The carriage arrived at the house about 10 a.m., and Miss W. was found at the place agreed upon in the dress in which she appeared at the lodge, and sufiering from toothache. As she was a nervous person, nothing was said to her of her appearance at the gate. She died nine years afterwards. "Wm. M. Buchanan, M.D."

Dr. Buchanan wrote, on 30th Oct., 1883, to say that he had just been staying with relatives of his late wife, who had often heard the story from her, and confirmed it in every detail, except that it was a ^vhite VOL. II. 2 s 2

628 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

beaver hat. He adds that " those who witnessed the fact are quite matterof-fact people, not in the slightest degree excitable, and most certainly not nervous."

[The fact of the figure's seeming to enter the lodge, as to which Dr. Buchanan is quite positive, favours the hypothesis of hallucination, as against that of mistaken identity.]

(672) From Mrs. Bevan, Plumpton House, Bury St. Edmunds.

" 1884.

"In the month of July, 1855, I was spending a week with my brother, the Rector of Chedburgh, and his sweet young wife, when one evening, after the children had gone to bed, and we were all three sitting together, my brother said, ' Cecilia and I have often wanted to ask you whether you were thinking of us in any special way on the 15th of last November '? '

" After a few minutes' consideration, I could only say that I remembered nothing of the sort, as there was no special cause for it at that time, and begged to know why they asked.

" My brother then said that on the morning of that day, which of course they specially noted, he awoke while the night-light was still burning, between 6 and 7 o'clock, and opening his eyes, he distinctly saw me standing at the foot of the bed, on his wife's side of it. After watching me for a short time with some wonder, but with no sensation of fear, he reached out his hand and touched his wife, saying, ' Cecilia, are you awake?' 'Yes, I have been awake some minutes.' 'Do you see anything? ' ' Yes, I see Sarah standing at the foot of the bed.' ' How very strange! ' and while they spoke to each other, the furniture of the room was seen through my figure, which soon entirely disappeared.^

" We were at the time living only 14 miles ofi*, and I was in a delicate state of health. They came down to breakfast quite expecting that the post would bring some bad news of me, and all day looked for a messenger from Sudbury, and made an early reason for driving over, to find all as usual. Thinking that such a strange circumstance might make me nervous, they kept it to themselves until time had proved that, whatever it was, no harm had come to me. They asked each other whether it could possibly have been our mother who was then living near Norwich, and who died there in February, 1855, but they were quite agreed that it was no one but me. I certainly knew nothing about it, either at the time or afterwards; nor did it make me feel the least nervous.

" My dear brother and his wife also are passed to the other world; she in 1862, he in 1864. " Sarah Bevan."

[I have pointed out, on p. 83, that a person whose phantasm has appeared to others, and who has been informed of the fact, is in rather a difierent position from an ordinary second-hand witness.]

In the next two cases the originating agency of an absent living

person seems out of the question; and for the first of them, at

any rate, there would, in my view, be no difficulty in supposing a

purely subjective origin in one mind, (perhaps that of the dying

woman,) and a transference thence to the other.

1 See p. 38, note, and p. 97, first note.

(673) From Miss J. E. Walker, 48, Pembroke Road, Clifton, Bristol. She heard the account from a cousin, of whom she writes, on Feb. 6, 1883: —

" Cousin Emmeline was old Squire Bingley's youngest daughter; she was sincere and fearlessly true, but she had no poetic and scarcely any imaginative faculty. I should have cited her as a good specimen anywhere of the matter-of-fact and common-place woman, which perhaps gives a somewhat additional weight to her narrative which she confided to me many years ago. She died about 6 years since." Later Miss Walker adds: — "The event narrated took place when she was about 20, and must have happened in (I think) 1844 or 1845. She told me her story very simply and vivd voce. She also told it separately to my elder sister in precisely the same terms. It was / who threw it, for brevity's sake, into the narrative form " [and into the first person].

" My father and mother had many children; most of us died in infancy; Susanna survived, and Charlotte and myself. Father's was an entailed estate, and the deaths of two sons, William, who died in boyhood, and John, who died in infancy, had been the great disappointment of his life. Susanna remembered both the boys, but William was born and died long before my time, and John died at about two years old, when I was the baby. Of William there was no likeness, but you know John's picture well, a well-painted full-length oil picture representing a toddling babe in white frock and blue shoes, one of my father's prize greyhounds crouching beside him, and an orange rolling at his feet.

" I was grown up, about 20, Susanna was 40, and Charlotte about 30 years old. Father was declining, and we lived together, contented and united, in a pleasant house on the borders of Harrogate Common. On the day about which I am writing, Charlotte was unwell; she had complained of a chill, and the doctor recommended her to keep in bed. She was sleeping quietly that afternoon, and Susanna sat on one side of her bed and I sat on the other; the afternoon sun was waning, and it began to grow dusky, but not dark. I do not know how long we had been sitting there, but by chance I raised my head and I saw a golden light above Charlotte's bed, and within the light were enfolded two cherubs' faces gazing intently upon her. 1 was fascinated and did not stir, neither did the vision fade for a little while. At last I put my hand across the bed to Susanna, and I only said this word, ' Susanna, look up! ' She did so, and at once her countenance changed, 'Oh, Emmeline,' she said, 'they are William and John.' Then both of us watched on till all faded away like a washed-out picture; and in a few hours Charlotte died of sudden inflammation."

In conversation, Miss Walker told me that she is certain that her cousin drew the other sister's attention to the vision without mentioning what she herself saw; also that she was singularly precise in statement and incapable of exaggeration.

We find from the Register of Deaths that Miss Charlotte Bingley died at Harrogate, on June 8, 1843.

The next account is one of the puzzling carriage-cases mentioned on p. 195. Here there was a local tradition of a phantasm carriage.

630 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

due to sounds, frequently heard, which were probably not hallucinations but illusions; and this may possibly have acted as a favourable condition to a visual hallucination of the sort described; but it will not in the least account for the correspondence and coincidence of the two hallucinations, which yet can hardly have been accidental. I do not give the case an evidential number, because the written account does not make it appear as impossible as to the witnesses on the spot it certainly did appear, that the carriage should have been a real one. The narrator is Mr. Paul Bird, Strand, Calcutta.

"July 25tli, 1884. " One evening, just at dusk, I was returning home from office in my buggy, with lamps lighted. It was dusk, but under the shadow of the trees which overhang the avenue it was pretty dark. I was driving pretty fast, when I heard what appeared to be a runaway gharrie coming from the house towards me. I immediately checked my horse and peered ahead to see how to avoid the coming danger, but as the noise did not appear to get any nearer, I cautiously proceeded, and when about 100 yards from the house, distinctly saw the reflection of my lamps on the panels of a carriage in front of me, proceeding the same way, viz., to Hastings House [in the suburb of Alipore]. I kept my eyes on the panels, so as not to run into them. The gharrie turned to the left to go under the portico, followed by me,'^ but when I arrived there, there was no gharrie; it had disappeared. I was very much puzzled at this, but should probably have thought nothing more about it, had- not my wife, who was watching for my arrival from an upper window, asked me at once, ' What gharrie was that just ahead of you? ' This, you will admit, was curious, and I oflfer no theory about it. <t Paul Bird."

Mrs. Bird writes, on July 26, 1884: —

" I cannot add anything further to my husband's description about the gharrie at Hastings House, except that I also saw the outline of the gharrie as it came up the avenue in front of my husband's buggy, with his lamps shining on it so as to define the outline; and I was at a window upstairs watching for my husband's return, so that we saw the apparition from totally difierent points of view, and without, of course, holding any communication. I suddenly lost sight of the fictitious gharrie, and did not trace it right up to the portico. It turned oif, I thought, from the direct road; certainly, it disappeared. I may further state that I heard no sound of a second vehicle, but only that made by my husband's horse and buggy; but I was aware of his checking his horse, as if he saw something ahead, and this action of his may have been the cause of conjuring up in my vision the supposed gharrie. We have always spoken very sceptically of this circumstance, although feeling in our inner consciousness that there was something not utterly to be disregarded in the occurrence.

"Gertrude Bird."

1 See p. 616, first note.

§ 5. The remaining cases are auditory. In the following group the impression was of a recognised voice.

(674) From Mr. C. F. H. Froehnert, (Bandmaster of the Royal Marines,) 3, Yictoria Place, Stonehouse, Plymouth, who wrote as follows to the Daily Telegraph, on October 15, 1881.

" SiR^ — Returning from India in 1854, I resided for a few months at Diisseldorf, and there made the acquaintance of two well-known families — Haskal and Focke. Mr. Haskal, a gentleman well known as the author of several works on Oriental botany, held a high appointment under the Dutch Government in Batavia; and his family, consisting of Mrs. Haskal, several daughters, and Miss Focke as companion, had engaged passage out in a large Dutch vessel, and sailed from Amsterdam. One evening, soon afterwards, when Mrsi Focke, with the rest of her family, were at tea, they all heard a loud cry of ' Mother! ' outside the window. They all recognised at once the voice of the eldest daughter, Anna, who had sailed with the Haskals. They rushed to the window, but saw nothing. Scarcely had they taken their seats again, when a most agonising shriek was heard, and twice ' Mother, mother,' in the same voice. A few days later a report came that a large Dutch vessel had been wrecked. I had left for England, and was written to and asked to make inquiries at Lloyd's if there was truth in this report. The answer I received was that on that particular evening this vessel was lost with every soul on board.— Yours truly, " C. F. H. Froehneet."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Froehnert wrote to us, on June 11, 1883:—

"The Fockes were old and. well-known residents of Diisseldorf; but no doubt Mr. and Mrs. Focke are dead by this time; but there was another daughter — sister of the one lost — but I dare say she has been married long since, and would go under another name. Diisseldorf being near Holland, the news of a large Dutch vessel having been lost soon reached that town, especially as it was reported that among the effects washed on shore many things were recognised as having belonged to the family, Haskal, such as some valuable pictures, &c., &c.

" Mrs. Ifjen, a friend of mine and the Haskals, wrote to me,^ telling me of the hearing of the voice on that particular evening, and of the rumour of the stranding of the vessel, requesting me to ascertain at Lloyd's if a vessel had been lost; the answer was as I stated, the ship had been lost that very night.

" Mrs. Haskal and her children had also resided at Diisseldorf until they departed.

" At the time when this happened I was Bandmaster of the 2nd Life Guards at London."

Mr. Froehnert adds, on April 1, 1885: —

" In reply to your letter regarding the Focke case at Diisseldorf, I am sorry I cannot recollect the house they were living in at the time; it is so long ago. But I quite remember that it was in a quiet locality; and the voice came from the back of the house, which in most German houses is called ' Der Hof,' and which is usually not frequented in the evening by

1 Unfortunately this letter has not been preserved.

632 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

the occupants of the houses; the voice came distinctly through the window, which was open."

In the next case, the two persons affected were widely separated, and their impressions differed.

(675) From Mr. Thomas Young, Elsinore House, Robert Road, Handsworth, Birmingham. u gig^ December, 1884.

" One evening— ten years ago about — I was sitting at tea with my wife and children, when my wife suddenly said, ' What a noise there is upstairs,' asking me if I heard it. I said ' No.' She, however, insisted that there was, and insisted upon going upstairs to investigate. She could hear the windows rattled as if by the wind. I accompanied her upstairs, and as she went she suddenly felt a wind rush by her. I felt no rush of wind, nor were the windows rattling. The night was calm. After investigating the room from whence the wind was supposed to proceed, and finding nothing out of the common, we returned to the parlour, my wife much agitated, and I was also agitated. When next she heard from home, it was a letter conveying the sad intelligence of her father's death by drowning, which took place about the time she felt the physical influence. But what is still more strange, her brother, who was captain of a small vessel, and at sea on the same evening of his poor father's death, heard his name called. He was in the cabin at the time. He immediately went on deck, asking who called. ' No one,' was the reply. He went into his cabin, and again he heard his name, and again he went on deck, thinking a trick was being played. Once more all denied having called him. He thereupon re-entered his cabin, only to hear his name called again, and on demanding sternly who called, and receiving the same answer, ' No one,' he said he felt very queer. i u Thomas Young."

[Mrs. Young's experience could not be presented as telepathic evidence on its own account, the impression having been so vague. But she is not a nervous or fanciful person, and is certain that she has never had any similar experience — while the fact that her husband did not hear or feel what she heard and felt decidedly supports the view that the experience was hallucination; and if so, it is a remarkable fact that it fell on the night which was marked not only by her father's death, but by her brother's far more distinct hallucination of the recognised voice.]

Captain Adams writes: —

" 62, Commercial Road, Newport, Monmouthshire.

"November 13th, 1885.

" In answer to your letter in reference to my father's death, I will endeavour in a few lines to give you the information you want.

"As the ship was lying in the port of St. Malo, in France, on the 15th December, 1871, I was lying in my berth at 4 o'clock in the afternoon. I heard a voice. I knew the voice at once to be my father's, calling ' Jim, Jim, Jim.' It was not a dream, for I was awake and getting up. I asked the men on board whether they heard anyone calling.

1 Here again we have an account of three separate calls — the favourite legendary number (p. 229, note). In the first-hand version which follows, it will be seen that there is no mention of any repetition of the call, though it is represented as having consisted of three utterances of the name.

They said, ' No.' I said to them, ' My father is dead.' When I arrived at Jersey (Island), my wife said to me, ' There is bad news for you.' I said, 'Yes, I know; my father is dead.' This was about nine days after my father was lost in Burnham (Essex). When I read the news of his death, [I found that] it was at the same hour I heard his voice.

" James Adams."

In answer to an inquiry as to whether this was his sole experience of a hallucination. Captain Adams adds: —

" You wish to know whether it is the only time I have heard anything of the kind. Yes, it is the only time."

Mrs. Adams writes for her husband, on January 19th, 1886: —

" In reply to your letter of November 17th, in which you ask a few more questions:

" First.- — -You ask my husband whether he made a note of it. He did not; but he always remembered the date, for he has a very good memory.

" Secondly. — It is impossible to find any of the men who were with him at the time. Some are dead. The others, I do not know where they are.

" S. E. Adams."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the father of Mrs. Young and Captain Adams was drowned in the River Crouch on Dec. 15, 1871.

In the next case, the agency is doubtful, as, though a near relative of one of the percipients died at the time, the voice heard was taken to be that of his brother. It is not unlikely that the two men's voices resembled one another's: compare the cases of mis-recognition, Nos. 170 and 171. The account is first-hand; but we do not know how long a period had elapsed after the occurrence, before it was recorded in writing.

(676) From the Gentleman's Magazine for 1752, Yol. XXII., pp. 173-4. The editor states the writer (who signs himself "A. B.") to be " a man of great veracity," and the communication to be " a piece of his own private history."

"On the 23rd August, 1736, at noon, standing at the shop door with my mistress and maid-servant and Mr. Bloxham, then rider to Mr. Oakes and Co. (who now lives and follows the haberdashery trade in Cateaton Street), we were choosing figured ribbons and other millinery goods, when I heard my father's voice call ' Charles,' very audibly. As accustomed, I answered, ' Coming, sir.' Being intent on viewing the patterns, I stayed about four minutes, when I heard a voice a second time call ' Charles.' The maid heard it then as well as myself, and answered, ' He is coming, Mr. W — m — n.' But the pattern book not being gone through with, I was impatient to see the end, and being also unwilling to detain the gentleman, I still tarried. Then I saw the door open,i heard my father call a third time, in a strong, emphatic, angry tone, and shutting the door I heard

1 Compare cases 659 and 670. I have mentioned that this form of hallucination is one that occurs also in purely subjective cases.

634 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

its sound. Both my mistress and the maid heard this last call, on which she pushed me out of the shop with, ' Sirrah, get you gone, your father is quite angry at your stay.' I ran over, lifted up the latch, but found the gate locked. Then going in at the back gate saw my mother-in-law in the yard.... I immediately went in, when I found no father nor any appearance of dinner. Returning, I inquired of her for my father; she

said he was not come home, nor would dine at home that day

I then went back to the company, whose consternation was as great as my

own Whether all this was the force of imagination I cannot

say, I believe it may. I will not argue to the contrary, though two senses of two persons besides myself could not, probably, be so liable to deception. My mind and disposition from that hour received a new turn. I became another creature....

"It is very remarkable that I had an only uncle (who was gunner of the ' Biddeford,' then stationed at Leith), that died there that same day and about the same hour."

"We learn from the Admiralty that H.M.S. " Biddeford " was at Leith Road on August 23, 1736.

The following case is an exact parallel to No. 336, and should be read in connection with the remarks on pp. 190-2.

(677) From Mr. Emmerson, Cullercoats, near Newcastle-on-Tyne.

"January 9th, 1885.

" In the summer of 1849, I was sitting in my studio painting, about noon, three days after my mother was buried. (In this locality people were dying by hundreds of cholera — of which she died.) I distinctly heard her call my name, ' Harry,' in a very loud voice, which made me start to my feet. My father, who was in another room, rushed into my studio, terrified, and asked me if I had heard my mother calling me. My mother, who was deaf, had a very shrill voice, that there was no mistaking it.

" This is the only experience of the kind that I have ever met with, but which made a lasting impression on my mind.

" H. H. Emmerson."

Mr. Emmerson's father is dead. Mrs. Emmerson writes to us on January 21st, 1886: —

" I wish to write a few lines to inform you that I frequently heard my husband and his father talking about both of them hearing the mother calling him by name. They were both Tuost positive about it; and it left quite an impression upon their minds. I can vouch for the truth of this statement. u Mart Emmerson."

In conversation, I learnt from Mr. Emmerson that he and his father were the only persons in the house at the time that the voice was heard; he had no sisters living at home, and the household had been disorganised owing to the cholera. Mr. Emmerson is very far from inclined to believe in marvels, and the above has simply remained in his mind as a unique and inexplicable fact, which at the time was evidently of the most startling kind. The conditions were of course favourable to subjective hallucination; but, equally of course, this will not explain the double experience.

§ 6. In the next and final group, no articulate sounds were heard; and in most of the cases the impression was of a mere noise.

The following two cases are too remote for details to be relied on; and the nature of the sounds may very likely have become more precise in recollection after the coincident facts were known. Still it may be surmised that the experiences described were, at any rate, collective hallucinations.

(678) From Mr. M. P. Stephenson, the narrator of case 613. " 8, Southfield Road, Gotham, Bristol.

"January 31st, 1884.

" The case I am going to relate happened more than 50 years ago. Myself and wife had been to her brother's to see their little daughter, aged about two years, wlio was thought to be dying. It was evident when we saw her that she could not last long. We left about 10 o'clock at night, and retired to bed, and settled quietly to go to sleep. But before we could do so we heard a startling scream — a sort of death-scream i — on the pillow between us. We each thought the other was taken ill, and turned in alarm, and found that the noise was not aroused by either of us. I turned the matter off as best I could, not to alarm my wife. In the morning she said to me, ' That was a curious noise we heard last night; what could it have been? ' I said, ' Little Mary died last night at that time, and that was the noise she made before she died,' which proved to be the fact. I imitated the noise the same evening, and the child's mother exclaimed, ' How strange! that was the exact scream made by my child before she died.'

" These things, when they occur, take a deep hold on us, and although it happened more than 52 years ago, we both of us remember it as freshly as if it were but a year ago."

In answer to inquiry, Mr. Stephenson adds: —

" The death-cry of the child was heard by us at the precise time of her death, and the mother (who has been dead more than 30 years) recognised the cry I imitated as the last cry of her dear child."

To a request for his wife's written corroboration, Mr. Stephenson replies: —

" I am sorry that I cannot comply with your request. My dear wife is a confirmed invalid and cannot be persuaded to do what you wish. You are not to suppose that there is any doubt as to the truth of what I related to you."

(679) From the mother of a Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge, who desires that her name may not be published. ft 1884.

" On the 15th of May, 1829, my mother, myself, and a servant were in the hall, when we heard a loud groan. We were somewhat startled, and a short time after we heard the groan repeated, but louder. We then looked about the garden and in the street, but could see nothing. We had just returned to the house, when a third time ^ the groan was repeated, but still louder. We were much startled, and again looked about to find the

1 It is very doubtful, of course, whether this particular description woidd have been given but for the fact of the death, which was afterwards ascertained.

2 See p. 229, note.

636 SUPPLEMENT. [chap,

cause, but to no purpose. Shortly after, my brother came in, in breathless haste, to tell his mother that his grandfather was thrown from his horse, and nearly killed. The dear old man died the same night."

We find from a copy of a tombstone in Loughton churchyard, that the death occurred on May 16th (not 15th), 1829. The parish-clerk tells us that the accident took place about 100 yards from his house.

(680) From Mr. Charles H. Kallensee, Croan House, Sladesbridge, Cornwall.

" December 30th, 1882.

" In the year 1841, an elder brother of mine died, at Princess Street, Devonport. When I returned from school on the day of his death, I was told to go to his room, as he had inquired for me. On entering the room, I found a great change in him since the morning, and I, who had never seen death, yet knew that he was dying. In the room were my father and mother; my father standing at the side of my brother's bed, while my dear mother sat weeping near the foot. I took a seat near my mother's side.

" It might have been an hour or more that we remained thus, listening to the breathing of my brother, expecting each breath to be the last. I remember it was a beautiful afternoon, and the sun shone into the room and across my brother's bed. Suddenly there were three violent blows or concussions, so violent that I felt the room shake. My mother sprang to her feet, and with excitement exclaimed, ' There it is again '; at the same time I saw my father stooping down and turning back the carpet that went round the bed. My own feeling was one of wonder and curiosity, and on looking at my brother, I saw he was dead. My father's stooping down and examining the carpet was explained by him, after he had felt the third blow strike him at the bottom of his foot; while my mother's exclamation, ' There it is again,' was because she had heard similar manifestations at the death of other members of her family. I know nothing of Spiritualism per se; I never attended any meeting or seances on the subject, therefore cannot say whether the knocking I heard was of that character; but of this I am quite certain, that no known power produced the noise. " Charles H. Kallensee."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death occurred on October 21, 1841.

In answer to an inquiry whether he had ever experienced hallucinations of the senses on other occasions, Mr. Kallensee replied: —

" I have not met with any similar manifestations. I can scarcely call it a ' knocking,' as it seemed to fill, and even shake, the room. The sound was as of a stick being broken, but much louder,and powerful. My father felt the last blow at the bottom of his foot, and almost the first thing I remember, after my wonder had passed, was seeing him stooping down and examining the carpet under his feet. My mother told us children afterwards, on several occasions, that she had heard similar noises at the death of her father and brother. My mother was an educated woman, and far from superstitious; and yet she could not but believe in this."

(681) From Mr. H. C. Hurry, C.E., 60, Lawford Road, Kentish Town, N.W.

"January 4th, 1884. " Many years ago I lodged with an old lady, her son and daughter, of the name of Spencer, in Manchester. In conversation they frequently told me that on the occasion of the death of any member of their family, one or more of them invariably had some monition of it. This I treated with a considerable amount of scepticism. One morning they received a letter from Ormskirk, near Liverpool, informing them that the young people's aunt was very ill. The son at once went off to see her. That night I had gone upstairs to bed, my room being up one flight, and immediately opposite to the front door; whilst I was undressing I heard a very loud knock, as though given with the hand, not the knocker. Miss Spencer immediately came out of the sitting-room, and called, saying, ' Mr. Hurry, did you knock down? ' I answered, ' No, it was at the halldoor.' She went and opened it, and at once said, on finding no one there, ' Good God! my aunt's dead.' Without saying anything to them, I wrote down the exact time, about 11 p.m., so far as I can remember. By the first post possible, they received a letter from young Spencer, informing them the aunt had died exactly at the time I had noted, allowing for the difference of mean-time, by which watches were then regulated. I should add that I was in no way related to the Spencers."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Hurry says: —

" I do not know of any of the Spencer family; the old lady, her son and daughter, I mentioned, having long been dead. The circumstance I named occurred in the year 1841, but as I was a party to it I consider my evidence first-hand. You next ask me whether I have had ' any auditory hallucinations.' I cannot remember any but the one I give you."

We find from the Register of Deaths that a Mrs. Spencer, who is probably the person mentioned in this case, died at Ormskirk in 1841.

[This case could, of course, have no claim at all to attention, but for its analogy to others, as there is no sufficient proof that the sound was not a real knock. If it was a hallucination, Mr. Hurry's share in the experience cannot be accounted for as the subjective effect of strain and anxiety.]

(682) From Mr. W. Hillstead, a teacher of music, who, at the time when he gave us the account, in 1884, was acting as care-taker in a large house at Cambridge.

" In October, 1848, I was sitting with my mother in 8, Suffolk Place, Pall Mall East. The house was empty except for ourselves. The room was mainly lighted by a large skylight. The house was quite quiet. It was rather dark on an October day. Suddenly we were both startled by a terrifying noise, as if a cartload of gravel had been shot down from a height on to the skylight. I jumped up in startled alarm, thinking that the skylight was, of course, smashed to pieces by the stones which I had actually heard falling on it. There was not the slightest trace of anything unusual. My mother, who had had many warnings of different kinds, was less alarmed. She took for granted that someone was dead, but we could neither of us think who it could be, as we knew of no one who was ill.

" Some days afterwards, a cousin of mine called, and told us that his

638 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

brother Richard was dead. "We asked when he died, and found that it was at dusk on the very afternoon on which we heard the crash. My mother had been very fond of the young man, and so was I. Of late he had gone wrong, and we had seen less of him. " William Hillstead."

[Unfortunately the information necessary to enable us to verify the death was not asked for at the time; nor was an address obtained to which we might subsequently write. The narrative was certainly given in good faith; but its only force, again, depends on its analogy to other cases.]

As regards the curious form of the impression in the following case, see the remarks on case 625, pp. 572-3.

(683) From Mrs. Windridge, Sutton Villa, 99, Albert Road, Dalston, E.

"November 9th, 1882.

"In or about the year 1861, I, being weary and worn, first through the long illness and then the depression and inertness of my husband, complained to a lady friend, Mrs. H., whose husband had frequently remonstrated with mine for what appeared to be his laziness. My friend, having a strong sympathy for me, urged her husband to obtain a situation for him. He said, ' I will kill him for her '; and procured my husband work which he believed would place his life in danger.

" Three years after, Mr. H. lay dangerously ill; at his request I had gone over to see him, and found him in a most excited state; he entreated me to use all my influence to induce my husband to leave the situation he had procured, as he feared it would ultimately cause his death.

" Some weeks afterwards my husband and I were awoke by the noise, apparently, of someone endeavouring to open our bedroom door. The noise was quite loud, as if the intruder could not open it readily, and did not care who heard him. My husband listened for a while, and then opened the door with a light in his hand. There was nothing there, but immediately there was the sound of a large dog entering, and scratching on the floor at his feet. My husband searched the house, but we could find nothing. It was just 2 a.m. A day or two afterwards I heard of his death that night. The widow, whom I went to see, told me that, in her own words, he ' died twice.' When, as they thought, already dead, — they began to lay him out, — he opened his eyes, and muttered something about ' Windridge.' ' What time was this? ' I asked. ' Just 2 a.m.,' she said.

"E. Windridge."

Mr. Windridge corroborates as follows: —

" One night, having retired in the ordinary way, we were aroused by a shaking and scratching at the bedroom door, so distinct and impressive that we began to be alarmed, and I arose, and striking a light, went to the door, and opened it. With an exclamation I started back. Something touched my feet. Something seemed, as it were, to be grovelling at my feet, but I could see nothing. I then searched the house and found all undisturbed, as we left it. I looked at the time; it was 2 o'clock. I could not sleep any more that night.

" The next day I heard that a man, who had expressed to my wife that he would do a great wrong to me, had died. I informed my wife, and she said she would visit the widow. She went, and Mrs. H., in relating the

incidents most remarkable in her husband's death, informed her that he had died, as it were, twice; for after he was pronounced dead, and the nurse was laying him out, he seemed to return to life, and murmured the name ' Windridge.' Life was not extinct for a quarter of an hour after this. Mrs. H. informed my wife that her husband died at 2 o'clock, the time I looked at my watch. a -q Windridge."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death took place on September 14, 1863.

In conversation, Mr. Windridge informed Mr. Podmore that he had never experienced any other hallucination. Mrs. Windridge has experienced one other, which was of a singular kind, and is described in the Proceedings of the S.P.R., Vol. III., p. 89.

Mr. Windridge could not clearly remember having been touched, as he puts it in his letter; he can only be sure that he had the impression of something grovelling at his feet. That impression may, however, have been conveyed by sound only. Mrs. Windridge states that he told her at the time that he had been touched.

The following is a further specimen of the musical class,^ parallel to No. 388. With respect to its place in the present collection, I must again refer to pp. 190-2,

(684) A gentleman who is a master at Eton College wrote to us, on Feb. 3, 1884:—

" I enclose a copy of a memorandum made a few days after the event referred to. My memorandum has been copied for me by Miss H., whose name occurs in it. She is my matron; a sensible, middle-aged, active, and experienced woman. None of the people concerned were young, flighty, or fanciful. I have the doctor's letter; his name is G-., and he still resides here. Miss H. only wishes to add that it must have occurred from 20 minutes to perhaps 30 after dissolution, and she says that she has never heard anything like the extreme sweetness of the sound.

The memorandum is as follows: —

" Eton College.

"August 6th, 1881.

" I wish to write down, before there is time for confusion, the following fact, occurring on Thursday morning, July 28, 1881, when my dear mother died, whom G-od rest! After all was over. Miss E. I., Eliza W., Dr. Gr., and myself being in the room, Miss I. heard a sound of ' very

1 In a case which E. M. Arndt (Schriften fiir und an seine Lichen Deutschen, 1845, Vol. iii., pp. 525-6) records, with names and details, on the first-hand authority of a family whom he highly esteemed, the music of a guitar was heard, first by two daughters of the house, and then by their father and a large group of persons, at the time of the death in battle of an officer who had been staying with the family a little time before, and had delighted them by his performances on that instrument. But there is no sufficient statement of the grounds on which the hearers were convinced (as they undoubtedly were) that the sounds were not due to any objective cause in the vicinity. The house was searched; but there is no mention of inquiries in the environs.

640 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

low, soft music, exceedingly sweet, as if of three girls' voices, passing by the house.' She described further the sound as if girls were going home singing, only strangely low and sweet; it seemed to come from the street, past the house towards the College buildings (the road ends there in a cul-de-sac), and so passed away. She looked to call my attention, and thought I perceived it. She noticed that the doctor heard it, and that he went to the window to look out. The window faces S.E. Eliza W. being in the room at the same time heard a sound of very low, sweet singing. She recognised the tune and words of the hymn. ' The strife is o'er, the battle done.' Miss I. recognised no tune, but felt 'that the music sounded, as it were, familiar.' As a very accomplished musician, especially remarkable for her quick memory of music, had words or air been those of a well-known hymn, she would almost certainly have remembered it. These two spoke to each other when alone about what they had heard. Miss I. gives the time at about 10 minutes after my dear mother expired. They were then unaware of this additional circumstance. Miss H. had left the room, and had summoned Charlotte C, with whom she had procured something required for laying out the body. As the two returned upstairs they heard a sound of music, and both stopped. Charlotte said to Miss H., ' What is this 1 ' After a pause she said, ' It must be Miss I. singing to comfort master.' They afterwards entered the room, of which the door had been shut all along. Charlotte further described the sound as very sweet and low, seeming to pass by them. She felt as. if, had she only been able to listen, she could have distinguished the words. It did not occur to her that her description was most incongruous; she could not listen attentively, but felt ' as if rapture were all around her.' It was not until afterwards, when she mentioned to Eliza having heard Miss I. singing, and how strangely it sounded, that they found that each had heard the sound. Miss H. described the sound as very peculiar and sweet, seeming to pass by them and pass away, as they both stopped on the stairs. All the staircase windows give north-west. I heard nothing, ^ and I should have given no weight to a sound heard or described by these women in the room after communicating with each other, or by these women out of the room respectively; but the coincidence of each party hearing it separately and independently without previous communication, as well as the matter-offact explanation suggested for it by one of them seeming to imply that their thoughts were not dwelling on the supernatural, added so much weight to this account that I wrote to the doctor, who answers: — ' I quite remember hearing the singing you mention; it was so peculiar that I went to the window and looked out, but although quite light I could see no one, and cannot therefore account for it.' The time must have been about 2 a.m. on July 28th, 1881."

Miss I. writes: —

"13, Park Street, Windsor.

" February 22nd, 1884. " I will copy the memorandum which I made in my diary just after the death of my dear friend and connection, Mrs. L.

1 Comijare case 666, and see p. 105, second note.

"July 28th, 1881.

" Just after dear Mrs. L.'s death between 2 and 3 a.m., I heard a most sweet and singular strain of singing outside the windows; it died away after passing the house. All in the room heard it, and the medical attendant, who was still with us, went to the window as I did, and looked out, but there was nobody. It was a bright and beautiful night. It was as if several voices were singing in perfect unison a most sweet melody, which died away in the distance. Two persons had gone from the room to fetch something, and were coming upstairs at the hach of the house, and heard the singing and stopped, saying, ' What is that singing? ' They could not naturally have heard any sound outside the windows in the front of the house from where they were. I cannot think that any explanation can be given to this — as I think — supernatural singing; but it would be very interesting to me to know what is said by those who have made such matters a subject of study.

"B. I."

Dr. G. writes in 1884:—

"Eton, Windsor.

" I remember the circumstance perfectly. Poor Mrs. L. died on July 28th, 1881. I was sent for at about midnight, and remained until her death at about 2.30 a.m. As there was no qualified nurse present, I remained and assisted the friends to ' lay out ' the body. Four or five of us assisted, and at my request the matron of Mr. L.'s house and a servant went to the kitchen department to find a shutter or flat board upon which to place the body. Soon after their departure, and whilst we were waiting for their return, we distinctly heard a few bars of lovely music — not unlike that from an ^olian harp — which seemed to fill the air for a few seconds. I went to the window and looked out, thinking there must be someone outside, but could see no one, although it was quite light and clear. Strangely enough, those who went to the kitchen heard the same sounds as they were coming upstairs, quite at the other side of the door. These are the facts, and I think it right to tell you that I have not the slightest belief in the supernatural, Spiritualism, &c., &c.



« J. W. G."

[The fact that Mr. L. did not share the experience is strong evidence that the sounds were not objectively caused by persons singing outside the house; and this is further confirmed by the slight difference which there appears to have been between the impressions received.]

END OP THE SUPPLEMENT.



Vol. Ii. 2 T



Of Cases Received Too Late for Insertion in Their

PROPER PLACES.

I 1. The printing and revision of these volumes have occupied a considerable time; and meanwhile several items of evidence have been received too late for insertion in the chapters to which they properly belong. They fall under the three classes, already distinguished, of experimental, transitional, and spontaneous cases. I will begin with some cases of the first class, which sufficiently show that the experiments described at the opening of the treatise admit of being repeated and varied with success.

The following results were sent to us at the close of last year, by Herr Max Dessoir, of 27, Kothener-Strasse, Berlin. He has devoted a good deal of time to experimenting with a few friends, he himself almost always acting as percipient. He began with trials of the "willing-game" type, and soon convinced himself that slight muscular hints were the full and sufficient explanation of all the ordinary " thought-reading " exhibitions. He then introduced forms of experiment which offered no opportunity for unconscious guidance on the agent's part — such as the guessing of numbers, words, and cards, without any contact between agent and percipient. These trials, though the amount of success was above what could with probability be ascribed to chance, were not numerous enough to justify any definite conclusion. But a series of trials in the reproduction of diagrams affords an interesting parallel to those described in Vol. I., pp. 37-51. The agent was in some cases Herr E, Weiss, of 28, Wilhelm-Strasse, Berlin (a fellow-student with Herr Dessoir at the Berlin University); in others Herr H. Biltz, of 14, Schelling-Strasse, Berlin; and in one case (No. 7) Herr W. Sachse, of 2, Kirchbach-Strasse, Berlin. (Herr Weiss and Herr Biltz are known to us, through correspondence, independently of these experiments.) All three gentlemen have sent us certificates of the accuracy of the record of the experiments in which they were respectively concerned.

Herr Dessoir thus describes the conditions of the trials: —

" While the agent drew the original, I was almost always out of the room, to avoid being influenced by the sound of the drawing. When the agent called out ' Ready,' I came in, with eyes closely bandaged — the bandage being made to cover the ears, so as to shut out casual sounds. I set myself at the table, and in many instances placed my hands on the table, and the agent placed his hands on mine: the hands lay quite still on one another.! When an image presented itself in my mind, the hands were removed, the original drawing [on which the agent bad been fixing his eyes] was turned over, or covered with a book, and I took ofi" the bandage and drew my figure. Many of the experiments were made without contact, even though no note to that effect was made."

As regards the cases where there were two or three attempts at reproduction, Herr Dessoir says, that after he had had a clear image in his mind, and had removed the bandage, the image would sometimes lose its clearness, and that he was sensible that the figures which he produced did not correspond with it, and so tried again. Still, as no doubt the agent would have told him if the earlier attempt had been successful, and he would not then have made another, every incorrect attempt must count as simply a failure.

The following woodcuts, which have been very carefully copied from the original sheets, include all the trials in which Herr Dessoir was himself the percipient, with the exception of two, (one, to the eye, a success, and the other a failure,) omitted on account of some uncertainty as to the conditions. Nos. iii., vi., and x., in which Herr H. Biltz was the percipient, must be set against three complete failures on his part. The series given contains a considerable proportion of failure; but if the reader will draw 19 figures of about an equal degree of complexity, and get a friend to do the same, and will then compare each figure of one series with the corresponding one of the other, he will realise the improbability of obtaining by mere chance, in so short a set, 9 resemblances as close as those in Nos. i., iv., vi., vii,, xi., xiii., xv., xvii. and xviii., below.

^ It is important to observe the fundamental difference between contact which continues while the writing or dratuing is going on (as in the writing of the figures of banknotes, which is a favourite trick in the public "thought-reading" exhibitions), where what the performer receives from the innocent " wilier " is delicate muscular guidance from moment to moment; and contact which ceases before the attempt at reproduction commences, and which could only betray the required figure if the hand of the agent (which seems both to himself and to the percipient to be perfectly still) were moved on that of the percipient in such a way as to draio the required shape. I have reason to believe that certain figures may be thus indicated without the agent's consciousness; but it seems to me unlikely that they could be unconsciously perceived — at any rate by an observer who, like Herr Dessoir, has devoted special pains to analysing his impressions and discovering their source.

Oeiginal.

Reproduction.

Agent: H. B.

II.

Rep. 2.

Oeig.

Rep. 1.

Agent: H. B.

III.

Rep.

Oeig.

Agent's name omitted.

It appears here that the agent's image included an impression of the left part of the frame. M. D.

IN THEIR PROPER PLACES.

IV.

Oeig

Rbp.

Agent: H. B.

Okig.

Agent: H. B.

Hep. 1.

Rep. 2. Rep. 4.

Rep. 3.

N

Agent: M. D.

VII.

Obig

Rep, 1.

Rep. 2.

While the second reproduction was proceeding, an interruption occurred which prevented its completion.

Agent: W. S.

IN THEIR PROPER PLACES.

Rep. 1.

Agent: H. B. Rep. 2. Rep. 3.

Rep. 4.

Y

A

IX.

Oeig.

Rep. 1. Rep. 2.

Rep. 3.

The percipient said, " It looks like a window."

Agent: H. B.

Oeig.

Rep. 3.

Rep. 1.

Rep. 2.

rsT7i

\iii

Agent: M. D

XI.

Oeig.

Agent: H. B.

Rep. 2.

Rep. 1.

Rep. 3.

IN THEIR PROPER PLACES.

Agent: H. B.

Rep. 1.

Rep. 2.

XIII.

Oeig.

Rep. 1.

Rep. 2.

Agent: E. W.

The percipient said, " It looks like a window."



Gases Too Late Fob Insertion

Orig.

Aeent: E. W.

XIV.

Rep. 1.

Rep. 2.

Rep. 3.

n

A

Obig.

Agent: E. W.

Oeig,

XV.

Rep. 2.

Rep. 3,

The arst attempt at reproduction appears to have been a failure.

XVI.

Rep. 1.

Rep. 2. Rep. 3.

L

Agent: E. W.

IN THEIR PROPER PLACES.

Obig.

Rep. 2.

Agent: E. W.

Obig.

Rep. 2.

<a>

Agent: E. W,

The percipient said, "I see two bright triangles, but I cannot tell exactly how the second is situated."

Obig.

XIX. Rep. 1.

Rep. 2.

Rep. 3.

Agent: E. W.

The following shorter record is taken from the monthly journal Sphinx (Leipzig), for June, 1886, and we have not seen the original diagrams. The experiments were made at the house of Baron Dr. von Ravensburg, whose wife was the percipient. Herr Max Dessoir drew the originals on the spur of the moment, out of the Baroness von Ravensburg's sight, and taking care that his pencil should move noiselessly. He and the Baron then concentrated their attention on the figure, which the Baroness, sitting at another table, endeavoured to reproduce, after a time varying fi:om 20 to 45 seconds. (The Baron did not take part in the first experiment, which, it will be seen, was a failure.)

Rep. 1.

Rep. 2.

II.

Orig.

Rep. 1.

Rep. 2.

III.

Oris.

Rep.

The correction was made by the

percipient before the original was

shown to her.

IN THEIR PROPER PLACES. Oeig. IV. Rep.

Rep.

Oeig.

The percipient said, " It is a circle outside, and there is something else inside it; " then, after a pause, " A triangle." She then drew the reproduction, and added that the circle was an imperfect one.

With respect to these experiments, the Baron and Baroness von Ravensburg have sent a note of corroboration, of which the following is a translation: —

"18, Zietenstrasse, Berlin, W.

"July 9, 1886. "We certify that the report of our sitting for a trial of thoughttransference, which appeared in the sixth number of Sphinx, is throughout in correspondence with the facts, and has been drawn up with complete accuracy. " Feeiherr Goeler von Ravensburg.

"Elizabeth, Freiprau Goeler von Ravensburg."

The following is a set of 400 trials, made in batches of 40 or 50 at a time, in June, 1886, by the Misses Wingfield, whose former experiments have been described in Yol. I., p. 34. The ninety numbers which contain two digits were inscribed on ninety slips of paper, and placed in a bowl. Miss M. Wingfield, sitting six feet behind the percipient, drew a slip at random, and fixed her attention on the number which it bore; Miss K. Wingfield made a guess at the number, and the real number and the guess made were at once recorded in the Table. The slip of paper was then replaced, the contents of the bowl shufiled, and another draw made at hap-hazard. The most probable number of right guesses for accident to bring about in the 400

trials was 4. The actual number of completely right guesses was 27; in 21 other cases the two right digits were given in reverse order: and in 162 others, one of the digits was given rightly in its right place. The probability which this result affords for a cause other than chance is represented by 47 nines and a 5 following a decimal point; i.e., the odds are nearly two hundred thousand million trillions of trillions to 1. It would be a very inadequate statement of the case to say that, if the waking hours of the whole population of the world were for the future continuously devoted to making similar trials, life on this planet would come to an end without such an amount of success, or anything like it, having been accidentally obtained.

K. M.

go

J6

2n

n

S2

S6

K.

M.

J4 ^4

S3

S5

S7

65 90

2S 90

K. M.

II

il

S5

7^ g8

K. M.

S3

3S

S3

K. M.

SO

Si

J6

S3

JO

n

K. M.

45 \ 4^ 69 1^8

IJ

go

40 48

60 46

72\59 53\29

6g

SS

80179 8o!j9

K. M.

6j

K. M.

4S ^I5 97\5o

3S

T-4

S3

II

8g

J?

K. M.

o7

Si

4S

ss

^4 8g

3S

So\77 93^ 14

3S

K.

M.

JO

JI

go

go

^3 5S

g8

J6

K. M.

A2

go

S5

K. M.

IS

n

S2

8j

li

IS

K. M.

2J

3S

44 19 24 85

3S ^5

JO

K. M.

3S

II

S3

17 64 19 51

S3

K. M.

8z Z2

ll

3S

71 2S

44 23

K. M.

7J-3S

i8 ij

g8

K. M.

16 56

24 57

S5

V

K. M.

A8 4^

94\32 70 '43

6g

n

K. M.

40 14 68 7/

go

SO S3

3S

6j

5S

i8

K. M.

i8

go

3l\15 67 • la

70 16 50 19

SS S7

g6 3S

g6

lo 54 'jg 60

The next account is from the Rev. Canon Lefroy, Incumbent of St

Andrew's, Liverpool. The percipient, Miss, is known to Mr. Myers

and the present writer. Her bona fides is above suspicion; but her state of health has unfortunately prevented further experimentation.

"1885.

"Early in September, 1884, in Zermatt, I was, through the kindness

■of Miss, permitted to have an opportunity of testing, by personal

observation, experience, and evidence, the reality or otherwise of what is, I believe, called telepathy. I am bound to say that when I was informed, and most kindly informed, of what was proposed to be done, the innate scepticism of my nature rose to its highest.

" I was informed that the eyes of Miss would be tightly bandaged,

and I saw them bandaged; that in this darkened state, mental or ocular perception — probably the latter ^ — would, nevertheless, enable her to read any word written by me on a slip of paper. There might be mistake; there might be literal transposition [? transposition of letters]; there might be -delay; but, speaking broadly, I was assured that the word could be discerned. We sat at opposite sides of the table. I was desired to hold the lady's hand. I did so, and while so doing 1 exerted my will to the utmost, and to the intent that, if possible, the conflict of wills should result in favour of my scepticism. I must, with shame and humiliation,.confess that my incredulity and volitional resistance did not hesitate to select a word which my gifted antagonist probably never heard of; and accordingly I defiantly, confidently, and I will add, mercilessly, wrote the name of Terence's old play — Heautontimoruvienos. The completion of my word was followed by a prolonged pause. I felt as if breathing was an intrusion, and not a sound was heard. At last the blinded, and I thought the wearied, or at least strained, interpreter said, 'What a long word! ' Then a pause. Then as follows: 'Why — two, four, six, eight — there are.eighteen letters in that word! '

" Unconsciously my resisting power became less than it was, and it ■decreased from the moment Miss said, 'What a long word! ' Nevertheless, the long pause seemed to give me a chance, and again I gathered up my mind to resolve that detection should be arrested. But very soon this purpose was foiled; the lady calmly said, ' That word has two m's to it; it begins with an h; and I never saw that word before.' I felt very guilty as I observed what I thought were signs of fatigue, and then (declared the word was unusual — ill-known, and asked that the bandage might be removed.

" In a few moments I was allowed to try with simpler words. Again the bandage was applied, the word was written, and our hands were clasped. I wrote the word ink. In about one minute the word was read, -thus, 'k, n, i; your word is inh.'

"Again I was most kindly allowed to try another word. I wrote,toy. In a minute the word was read thus, ' y, o, t; your word is toy.''^

^ See p. 48, note.

2 The following note, by Mr. Myers, of a trial made in 1884, with the same percipient, lexhibits the same curious reversal of letters; which mi^ht be compared with the production of anagrams, and of independent and phonetic spelling, in automatic writing (Vol. i., ]pp. 76'8, and below, p. 665). " I asked Miss to try some experiments in thought-trans-

The experience then closed, so far as this species of discovery was concerned. "William Lefroy, M.A."

In answer to inquiries, Canon Lefroy writes, on June 17, 1886: —

" Abercromby Square, Liverpool.

" I believe I wrote the letters under the cover of my left hand.

Miss could not possibly descry them. My own inflexible scepticism

respecting her power provided, I can assure you, a ready safeguard against anything she might have been disposed to do under the peculiar circumstances of the experiment. I am, to this hour, a most unwilling believer in her possession of some force which revealed what she could not see, and which disclosed what I resolved should be impenetrable."

Miss Hamilton, of 47, Albert Mansions, Kensington Gore, W., a Member of the S.P.R.,' sends (in June, 1886,) the following record of an impromptu trial, of the sort which we wish we could persuade more people to make. In such a case as this, contact, though better avoided, can scarcely be held to afford the opportunity for unconscious physical hints. One reservation unfortunately must be made: the record was not drawn up in writing at the time. But Miss Hamilton tells us that the details were then and there carefully gone over, with a view to the present report; and we have several memories to rely on.

" Experiment between Miss Leila Melvill [now Mrs. Lewis Hamilton] and Mr. Lewis Hamilton, September, 1885.

" Miss L. M., eyes lightly bandaged with a silk handkerchief, was ' willed ' by Mr. Hamilton. He placed his hands on her forehead, and willed intently that she should read the [printed] words, A Sermon, at which he gazed steadily all the time he willed. She said, slowly, A; then spelled the first few letters of ' Sermon,' and then said the whole word.

"The same evening she read in the same manner these words, County Families. Later on, in November, the same experiment was tried, and she read the unusual words, Chatto and Windus. Each experiment took about three minutes. Amongst the witnesses present were: —

"Mary C. D. Hamilton. " A. Melvill [sister of the percipient]. " LiLLiAS Hamilton."

The agent and percipient also sign the account.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Hamilton writes, on June 25, 1886: — "Lansdowne, Farquhar Road, Upper Norwood.

(1) "Had the subject's eyes been unbandaged, she could have undoubtedly seen the words; but not only were they tightly bandaged, but my fingers were placed on her closed eyelids, so that she could not even

f erence with her sister. She soon told me that the experiments had succeeded, but with this strange peculiarity, that, when the sister fixed her eyes on some word, Miss K. saw its letters appear in her field of mental vision in reverse order. Miss K. was, unfortunately, very liable to headache, which these experiments quickly induced, and I was only allowed one short series of trials. I placed the word NET behind her, and looked fixedly at the letters. She said that she saw successively the letters T, E, N. I next chose SEA, and she saw A, E, S. I chose a third word, but she saw no mental image, and headache stopped the experiments."

have opened them, had there been no bandage. On one occasion the words she read were held above the subject's head, so that she could not in any case have seen. [Miss Hamilton independently confirms this.] I may say, however, that in no single case was there any possibility of her having seen the words. The words, and book, or pamphlet, from which they were read, were chosen after her eyes were bandaged, and out of her sight, and they were not whispered from one witness to the other, but shown round.

(2) " In no instance did she fail with me, but when Mr. Hope tried her one evening, she failed, and on another occasion (one) she said almost at once she could not do it that evening. The experiment was tried a good many times, and except for the above, always succeeded.

(3) " For about six months we did not try again, and on the two occasions we have tried lately, she has said she could not do it. We, however, do intend to try again. » Lewis Hamilton."

The following records of experiments have been sent to us by our friend Dr. Liebeault, of Nancy, a Corresponding Member of the S.P.R.

" Oompte-rendu des experiences de transmission de pensees, faites le 10 Decembre, 1885, de 3 heures a 4 heures et demie du soir, chez M. le Dr. Liebeault, en presence de M. le Dr. Liebeault, de Madame S., et de M. le Dr. Brullard. Operateur, M. le Professeur Li^geois; sujet, Mile. M., 20 ans.

"1. Mile. M., tres intelligente et impressionable, est habitude a etre endormie et entre tres vite en etat de somnambulisme, pendant lequel elle est en rapport avec tous les assistants.

" M. le Professeur Liegeois la met en ^tat de somnambulisme hypnotique, et lui suggere de n'etre en rapport qu'avec lui seul; il lui donne du papier et un crayon, et lui commande de faire la meme chose que lui. Alors il se rend a une table voisine et dessine un triangle sur un registre, dont la couverture relevee forme un ^cran entre lui et le sujet, et intercepte toute communication visuelle. Aussit6t Mile. M. ecrit de son c6te, ' Les grands hommes.' Le r^sultat est done nul.

"2. En second lieu M. Liegeois dit au sujet, toujours en somnambulisme, ' Je dessine un objet,' et dans les memes conditions que precedemment, il dessine une carafe. Le sujet dit aussitot, ' C'est un vase,' et elle dessine un vase de forme carree. ' Ce n'est pas cela,' dit M. Liegeois. Alors Mile. M. dessine un objet de meme forme que la carafe, mais difibrme, vu qu'ayant les yeux fermes elle pla9ait ses traits au juger. Le resultat est done exact. ^

" 3. En troisieme lieu, ' Je dessine quelque chose,' dit M. Liegeois, et il figure un bonhomme. Le sujet, dans le meme etat passif, dit successivement, ' C'est un dessin d'ornement,' et elle commence a tracer quelques traits; puis sur une reponse negative, ' On croirait une boussole — un arbre — une maison.' Resultat nul. A ce moment M. Liegeois reveille Mile. M. avec la suggestion de tres bien voir a son reveil

1 The drawings have been sent to us, and entirely accord with Dr. Li^beault's description.

VOL. II.

2 U

le dernier objet dessine, et des ce moment elle est en communication avec les assistants. ' Je ne sais pas,' dit Mile. M., et aprfes quelques minutes, ' C'est une tete,' que sur demande elle figure de profil. Alors on lui dit que c'etait un bonhomme. 'Eh bien! ' repondelle, 'ma premiere impression a etd de faire un bonhomme, mais j'ai craint que Ton ne se moquat de moi.'

"4. Mile. M. restant r^veillde, M. Li^geois retourne a sa table et dessine une table carree vue en perspective, avec un tiroir et son bouton; puis, apres avoir montre silencieusement son dessin a chaque assistant en particulier, il place ses deux mains sur la tete du sujet et lui dit, ' Maintenant vous allez deviner ce que je viens de faire.' Apres moins de deux minutes de reflexion, ' C'est une table,' dit-elle; ' elle est ronde — pas tout-a-fait.' Sur demande de la dessiner, elle dessine peu-a-peu une table exactement semblable et dans la meme position, avec le tiroir et son bouton. Resultat exact.

" 5. Mile. M., qui, conime aucun assistant, n'a vu le dessin, est en rapport avec M. Liegeois seul. M. Liegeois dessine un cube. Mile. M. dit spontanement, ' C'est une lampe.' M. Liegeois lui met les mains sur la tete. ' C'est une chaise,' dit-elle. M. Liegeois lui fixe les yeux sur les siens et lui tient la main. 'Je ne sais pas.' Alors le dessin est montre aux assistants. ' C'est un chapeau,' dit-elle. Mile. M. est mise de nouveau en somnambulisme. ' Je veux que vous voyiez le dessin,' dit M. Liegeois. ' C'est un petit bureau.' ' ISTon.' ' Oh, il y a des carres — oui,' et elle dessine deux carres, I'un audessous de 1' autre. ' Oe n'est pas cela,' et comme elle ne trouve pas, apres quelques minutes, ' Quel est I'objet ou il y a des carres r ' Je ne sais pas.' ' C'est un cube. ' 'Ah, c'est vrai; je voulais le faire.' Pendant I'experience, M. le Dr. Liebeault avait ajoute des points figurant un de. Done resultat mediocre.

" 6. Mile. M., etant toujours en etat de sommeil hypnotique, M. Liegeois dessine une croix. 'II y a un carre,' dit Mile. M. (C'etait vrai; la croix etait dessinee dans un carre.) 'Mais qu'y a-t-il dedans?' demande M. Liegeois. ' C'est un verre — non — une etoile — non — un triangle. Cependant il y a trois traits.' Enfin elle figure successivement un angle, puis une croix de S. Andre, quand on lui eut dit de laisser aller son crayon sans s'en occuper. Resultat a peu pres nul.

"7. M. Liegeois ecrit le mot manage. Mile. M. ecrit de suite, ' Monsieur.' Puis elle dit, ' Carafe — non — tableau — non.' ' Quelle est la lettre? ' ' C'est un <!— non, c'est un m.' Puis, apres quelques minutes de reflexion, ' II y a dans le mot un — i — un a apres I'm — un g — un autre a — un e — il y a six lettres — non — sept.' Quand elle eut trouve toutes les lettres et leur places, ma iage, elle ne put d^couvrir la lettre r. Ce n'est qu'apres plusieurs minutes qu'on lui dit d'essayer les combinaisons avec les diflferens consonnes, et enfin elle ^crit mariage. Resultat mediocre."

" Proces- verbal relatant trois faits dtonnants de suggestion mentale, obtenus par MM. Liebeault et De Guaita, au domicile du Dr. Liebeault (4, rue Belle vue, Nancy), le 9 Janvier, 1886.

"Nous soussignes Liebeault (Ambroise), docteur en medecine, et De Guaita (Stanislas), horame de lettres, tous deux demeurant actuellement a Nancy, attestons et certifions avoir obtenus les resultats suivants.

" 1. Mile. Louise L., endormie du sommeil magnetique, fut informee

qu'elle allait avoir a repondre a une question qui lui serait faite mentalement sans I'intervention d'aucune parole ni d'aucun signe. Le Dr. Liebeault, la main appuyee au front du sujet, se recueillit un instant, concentrant sa propre attention sur la demande, Quand serez-vous guerie? qu'il avait la volonte de faire. Les levres de la somnambule remuerent soudain: ' Bientot,' raurmura-t-elle distinctement. On Tin vita alors a rep^ter devant toutes les personnes presentes, la question qu'elle avait intuitivement pergue. Elle la redit dans les termes memes, ou elle avait ete formulae dans I'esprit de I'experimentateur. Oette premiere experience, entreprise par le Dr. Liebeault, a I'instigation de M. de Guaita, reussit done pleinement. Une seconde epreuve donna des resultats moins rigoureux mais plus curieux peut-etre encore, ainsi qu'on va voir.

" 2. M. de Gruaita, s'etant mis en rapport avec la magnetisde, lui posa mentalement une autre question, Reviendrez-vous la semaine prochaine? ^ ' Peut-etre,' fut la reponse du sujet; mais invite a communiquer aux personnes presentes la question mentale, elle repondit, ' Yous m'avez demande si vous reviendrez la semaine prochaine.' Oette confusion, portant sur un mot de la phrase, est tres significative. On dirait que la jeune fiUe a ' bronche ' en lisant dans le cerveau du magnetiseur,

" 3. Le Dr. Liebeault, afin qu'aucune phrase indicative ne fut prononcee, meme a voix basse, ecrivit sur un billet, ' Mademoiselle, en se reveillant, verra son chapeau noir transforme en chapeau rouge.' Le billet fut passe d'avance a tous les temoins, puis MM. Liebeault et de Guaita poserent, en silence, leur main sur le front du sujet, en formulant mentalement la phrase con venue. Alors la jeune fille, instruite qu'elle verrait dans la piece quelque chose d'insolite, fut reveill^e. Sans une hesitation elle fixa aussitot son chapeau, et, avec un grand eclat de rire, se recria, ' Ce n'etait pas son chapeau; elle n'en voulait pas. II avait bien la meme forme; mais cette plaisanterie avait assez dur^; il fallait lui rendre son bien.' ' Mais enfin, qu'y voyez-vous de change 1 ' ' Vous savez de reste. Vous avez des yeux comme moi.' ' Mais encore 1 ' On dut insister tres longtemps pour qu'elle consentit a dire en quoi son chapeau etait change; on voulait se moquer d'elle. Pressee de questions elle dit enfin, ' Vous voyez bien qu'il est tout rouge.' Comme elle refusait de la reprendre, force fut de mettre fin a son hallucination, en lui aflirmant qu'il allait revenir a sa couleur premiere. Le docteur souffla sur le chapeau, et, redevenu le sien a ses yeux, elle consentit a le reprendre.^

" Tels sont les resultats que nous certifions avoir obtenus de concert. En foi de quoi, nous avons redige le present proces-verbal.

"Nancy, ce 9 Janvier, 1886, fait en double.

" A. A. Liebeault. "Stanislas de Guaita."

"Nous avons dte, une fois, tres heureux avec une jeune fille de 15 ans, Mile. Camille Simon, et cela en presence de M. Brullard et de quelques autres personnes.^ Je lui ai suggere mentalement qu'a son reveil elle verrait son chapeau, qui est brun, transform^ en chapeau jaune; puis je

1 The questions were not committed to paper till after the conclusion of the sitting, which is unfortunate, as everything depends on their exact wording.

2 Et la somnambule, immddiatement aprfes, ne se souvient plus de son hallucination.

3 Moi seul ai touch^ la somnambule. — A. A. L.

VOL. II. 2 u 2

I'ai mise en rapport avec tout le monde, et j'ai fait circuler, sous les yeux de chacun, un billet indiquant ma suggestion, avec recommandation de penser comme moi. Mais, par une distraction dont je suis coutumier, je n'ai plus songe a la fin a la couleur que j 'avals designee ant^rieurement par dcrit; j'ai eu I'idde bien arretee qu'elle verrait son chapeau teint en rouge. Et, en la reveillant, je lui ai affirm^ qu'elle verrait quelque ciiose representant notre pensee commune. Cette jeune fille, eveill^e, n'a plus reconnu la couleur de son chapeau. ' II etait brun,' a-t-elle dit. Apres I'avoir longtemps considere, elle a assure que r^ellement il n'avait plus le meme aspect, qu'elle n'en pouvait pas trop en definer la couleur, mais que toutefois il lui paraissait d'unjaMwe-roit^et^ire. Alors je me suis souvenu de ma distraction. Au cas present les temoins avaient pense jaune et moi rouge; par suite, I'objet a paru jaune et rouge a la somnambule reveillde; ce qui est la preuve qu'une suggestion mentale peut etre I'echo de plusieurs cerveaux pensants." ^

The following experiment, made with the same " subject," and sent to us by Dr. Liebeault on June 3, 1886, is an interesting example of temporary latency of the telepathic impression.

" J'avais, a cette jeune fille, fait suggerer par plusieurs personnes, et mentalement, qu'apres la sortie de son sommeil elle verrait un coq noir se promenant sur le plancher de I'appartement. Au reveil et longtemps apres (a peu pres une demie heure) elle ne voit absolument rien, quoique je lui eusse annonce qu'elle devait apercevoir quelque chose. O'est alors (au bout d'une demie heure) que cette jeune fille etant alle au jardin, et ayant considere ma petite basse cour, par hasard, elle revint tout courant nous dire: ' Ah! je sais ce que je devais voir; c'est un coq noir. Cette idee m'est venue en regardant votre coq.' Mon coq est moitie d'un noir verditre sur les ailes, la queue, et le ventre, et partout ailleurs il est d'un blanc jaunatre. Ainsi voila une association d'une idee se transmettant de la vue d'un etre reel, a une idee fictive transmise suggestivement et mentalement par les personnes presentes."

The following record of experiments was kindly sent to us, on April 27, 1886, by Dr. Jules Ochorowicz, ex-Professor Agrege of the University of Lemberg, now residing at 24, Boulevard St. Germain, Paris.' It is to be wished that the original notes had included a very much more detailed description of the conditions; ^ but as corroborative of the parallel but more striking results recorded in Vol. I., Chap. IL, the present set deserves attention.

^ The reader may recall Prof. Lodge's experiment as to the combination of telepathically transferred impressions from two different agents (Vol. i., p. 50; see also p. 80). Mr. Myers and I were witnesses of a similar confluence of suggestions verhally given at Dr. Liebeault's house, on Aug. 31, 1885. Mr. Myers hypnotised a "subject," and told her that on awaking she would see a baby on his knees. I told her that she would see a cat there. When she awoke she gazed at a hat which was on Mr. Myers' knee, and exclaimed, " C'est ni chat ni enfant!" and the mixed hallucination inspired a terror and disgust which lasted for three or four minutes.

"^ Possibly Dr. Ochorowicz will to some extent repair this omission in his forthcoming book, Le Frobleme de la Suggestion Mentale, in which this record will be embodied.

The first experiments, with cards, were of the type described in Vol. I., pp. 31-3; but though the success obtained told slightly in favour of a cause other than chance, the series was too short to have any independent value. The complete record of the next set of trials is as follows. The percipient was throughout in a normal waking state. (Complete successes are marked *, partial successes \, first guesses only being counted.)

Madame D., agee 70 ans, forte, robuste, tres intelligente. Rheumatisme articulaire chronique. Experience hypnotique; lourdeur, paralysie, analgesie, dans le doigt. Deux personnes imaginent un objet, Madame D. le devine. Elle ne peut pas nous voir.

Premiere Serie, le 2 Avril, 1885.

{a) Une Carte de Jeu.

OBJET PENSE. OBJET DEVINE.

1. Six de pique "Sixnoir."f

2. Dix de pique " Rouge; un roi; un dix."

3. Valet de ccBur " Rouge;t un roi; une dame? "

{b) Une Couleur.

4. Bleue " Bleue."*

5. Jaune " Jaune."*

6. Noire "Noire."*

(c) Un Objet Quelconque.

7. Une lampe " Un iivre; un cigare; un papier."

8. Un chapeau de sole, noir... " Quel que chose de bleu; chaise."

9. Un fauteuil " Une sucriere j une armoire; un

meuble."

10. Lesel " Un gout de sel."*

{d) Une LEtTRE.

11. z "i, r, s."

Une Personne Connue.

12. Valentine "Valentine."*



13. M'^ 0 "m^- D. ? M^- Z. ?"

Un Portrait de la Salle.^

14. D'un eveque " C'est I'eveque." *

Un Chippre.

15. 8 "7, 5, 2, 8."

1 It ought to be made a rule that the object chosen is not anythmg visible in the room; as it is impossible to prove that it was not indicated to the guesser by the attitude or glance of some one present. It ought to have been stated in many cases whether the object or colour was looked at, or merely imagined, by the agents.

Une Impression, objet pense. objet devine.

16. Gaie "Triste."

Une Figure Quelconque.

17. Une croix noire " Un arbre — branches croisees."

18. Un vieillard a longue barbe... "Un homme, barbu; barbe

blanche."*

Une Photographie sur Sept.

19. D'un gar9on " Une jeune fiUe; des enfants."

Un Nom Quelconque.

20. Marie "Marie."*

21. Adam " Jean, Gustave, Charles."

Un Nombre Quelconque.

22. Dix " Six, douze, neuf, dix."

Un Objet Quelconque.

23. Un livre bleu, satin " Couleur violette — rose."

24. Un crayon d'or pose sur un

fond bleu " Quelque chose de noir sur du bleu, "f

25. As de pique sur un fond noir... " Quelque chose de noir — bleu; une

carte; Fas de trefle."

Un Instrument.

26. Un clairon "Unviolon."

Un Chifpre.

27. 3 "2, 5."

Un Objet de la Salle.

28. Une assiette avec un image... " L'assiette avec I'image."*

Un Got)^T.

29. Du sel "Aigre — amer."

30. Sucre "Doux."t

31. Des f raises " D'une pomme — du raisin; des

f raises."

Deuxi^ime S^rie, le 2 Mai, 1885.

Un Objet Quelconque.

32. Un buste de M. N. " Un portrait — d'un homme;t un

buste."

33. Un eventail " Quelque chose de rond."

34. Une clef " Quelque chose en plomb — en

bronze — en fer."

35. Une main portant une bague... "Quelque chose qui brille — un

diamant — une bague."

IN THEIR PROPER PLACES.

" Quelque chose d' irregulier." " Un triangle — un cercle."

Un GotTT.

OBJET PENSE. OBJET DEVINE.

"Doux."

Une Forme.

Un carre

Un cercle

Une Lbttee. " M." " D." "J."*

" A, X, R, B." " W, A— non, c'est un 0." "J" (Continuez), "Jan."*

Troisi^me Serie, le 6 Mai, 1885. Le sujet, nous tournant le dos, tient un crayon et ecrit ce qui lui vient dans la pensde. Nous lui touchons le dos legerement d'un doigt, en regardant les lettres ecrites par nous. Yingt-deux experiences ^ ont ete faites sans etre notees exactement; c'etaient pour la plupart des echecs. Suit une serie de succes dtonnants.

66. Brabant "Bra — " (je m'eflforce mentalement

a aider le sujet, sans rien dire) "bant."*

36. Acide

39. M

40. D

41. J

42. B

43. O

44. Jan

67. Paris "P

68. Telephone "T

QuATRiBMB Serie, le 8 Mai, 1885, Une Lettre.

69. Z "L, P, K,T."

.. Telephone."* (MtMEs Conditions.)

B...

F...

n

P...

Y...

e

Gustave

Duch

ba...

N 0...

44...

" B."* " S, T. F." « M, N." " P, Z, A." " V, Y."

"F, T, Gabriel." " C, 0." " B, A."t " F, K, O."

Un Nombre.

.... "6,8,12."

.... "7,5,9."

(J'engage men aide a se representer la forme ecrite et non les sons des nombres.)

82. 3 "8, 3."

83. 7 "7."*

84.8 " 8— non, 0, 6, 9."t

^ Dr. Oehorowicz speaks of 22 experiments between 44 and 66, but only allows for 21.

Suivent 13 experiences sur les formes dessin^es, phantastiques, parnii lesquelles cinq seulement presentaient une certaine analogie.

Une Personne Connue. objet pense. objet devine.

98. Le sujet lui-meme " M. 0. — non, c'est moi."

99. M. D.

« M. D."*

Un Image Quelconque. 100. Nous nous representons la lune " Je vois les nuages, qui filent. Une croissant — M^- P. (mon aide) lumiere. C'est la lune."*

sur un fond de nuages, moi

dans un ciel bleu fonce. The following is a tabular view of the results of this series: —

■ai

s

s V.

I. Visual — Diagrams, with contact

II. Imagined objects, various, with contact...

without contact

III. Imagined numbers, letters, and names,

without contact

IV. Visual numbers and names and letters,

with contact

V. Abstract ideas

VI. Tastes

It will be seen that the majority both of complete and partial successes occur in the first 44 trials, in which there was no contact.

A third set of trials, made with a hj^notised " subject," gave 8 complete and 7 partial successes, and II failures. But here, though contact was avoided, the form of experiment — involving movement of the limbs, and sometimes actual movement about the room, — is open to grave objection; as it can never be proved to the satisfaction of persons not present that guidance of some sort was not afforded by unconscious physical signs.

The following case of the transference of a name is recorded by M. Ch. Richet. It is one of the sporadic instances which occurred before the time was ripe for placing telepathy on a firm evidential basis. In future, we may hope that similar casual instances will, as a matter of course, be recorded at the moment, (especially by medical

and scientific observers,) and forwarded to our London headquarters, or to those of the SocieU de Psychologie Physiologique in Paris.

"Octobre 30, 1885.

" Je n'ai obtenu qu'une seule fois dans de nombreuses recherches sur la lucidite des personnes mesmerisees, un resultat satisfaisant. C'est precisement dans une de mes premieres experiences, et elle est remarquable, car je ne I'ai jamais pu repeter, meme avec une approximation moindre. Une jeune fiUe, convalescente, fut mise dans le sommeil magn^tique, en Novembre, 1872, par moi, a I'Hotel-Dieu. Un jour, vers 4 heure de I'apresmidi, j'amenai avec moi un jeune etudiant Americain de mes amis, M. Hearn. M. Hearn n'avait jamais vu cette jeune fille. Lorsque elle fut endormie, je dis a mon sujet magnetique: ' Oonnaissez-vous le nom de mon ami?' ( J'etais sur de ne pas avoir prononce son nom.) Elle se mit k sourire. 'Non,' me dit-elle. Puis, comme j'insistais, elle ajouta: 'Jene le vois pas.' J'insiste encore, et elle me dit: ' U y a cinq lettres.' ' Eh bien! ' dis-je alors, ' quelle est la premiere lettre 1 ' Alors elle, a voix tres basse, me dit, 'H.' ' Quelle est la seconde lettre? ' dis-je. ' E.' ' Et la troisieme? ' ' Je ne la vois pas.' Oomme elle cherchait inutilement, je dis, ' Passons a la quatrieme.' ' R.' ' Puis la cinquieme.' 'N.'

" J'ai essay^ le lendemain d'autres experiences analogues avec le meme sujet, mais sans succes. De meme plus tard, sans succes, avec d'autres personnes.

" C'est pour cela que je ne I'avais pas publiee; mais maintenant que le fait de cette thought-transference semble bien prouv^, je me crois autoris^ a le donner; car il rentre dans un ensemble de faits qui paraissent demontr^s, et j'en ai etd tellement frappe que je me souviens avec une precision absolue de toutes les circonstances qui Font accompagne."

The next case is from Dr. A. M. Chiltoff, of Kharkoff, and is parallel to those described in Vol. I., pp. 82-3.

" University of Kharkoff.

