" I am quite sure that Marian Hughes read not a word aloud, and did not mention to me any of the circumstances which reproduced themselves with the grotesque triviality of such things in my dream, and that I did not know anything of the contents of the book.

" It was one of a number sent me to review (I leave it with you, with the relevant passages marked), and Marian being very unwell, I advised her to look through the heap instead of doing anything else. She sat by me all the evening reading this novel. I was busy with something else, and we hardly exchanged a word. We went to bed at the same time, and I had a vivid dream of meeting two children in the street (there is only one in the book), and getting into a conversation with the girl about building. The only sentence which remains with me is the absurd one, ' What! don't you know that all the heart of oak used in England comes from Florence? ' where she told me she had lived all her life. I had a vivid sense in my dream of the intelligence and rare knowledge of the little girl, and when I opened the book at p. 38 it came to me with an almost startling sense of familiarity. I think I mentioned that I was wandering with my little girl in a curious new building, and noticed the ceiling, but it was not a cathedral, so that again was only partly like, but it was, I remember, a curiously low roof. There was a sense of rather dramatic interest in the little girl which the story reproduces, and which is very rare in dreams, but I can remember no words to help it out. I think the child was 10, but the sense of premature cleverness and of surprise at myself in being interested in a child's talk about buildings is what remains with me."

Miss Wedgwood adds: —

" The dream corresponded with her [Marian's] inaccurate recollection of the fiction more than with the fi.ction itself. She fancied that the incident was supposed to occur as in my dream — a grown person walking with a little girl in the street. It is one of several faint coincidences of the same kind, but most are so uninteresting that we forget them.

" Another little case of thought-reading between us may have interest for you. I should premise that M. H. is my most intimate friend as well as my maid — copies all my writings for me, and shares all my interests.

" In the year 1 880, I was troubled by some circumstances which I carefully concealed from her. I thought that some actions of mine might have caused annoyance to a friend long dead, if he had been still among us, and the doubt stirred up much speculation in my mind as to the possible feeling in those who are gone. On the morning after I had been dwelling on this (which I did with a sense of vivid anxiety), M. H. said to me, ' Oh, I had such a strange dream last night. I thought I saw Mr. A. come alive in his picture in the wall, and stand out of the picture, and look down with sorrow and grief, as if he were much hurt! ' I felt she had exactly read my anxious feelings, all sign of which had been

carefully concealed fram her. She had never seen the picture which was very familiar to me."

(408) From Mrs. Hunter, 2, Victoria Crescent, St. Helier's, Jersey.

"January 8th, 1884.

" The following happened in India some 13 years ago. My second daughter had been with me, while I was preparing for bed one night. Our talk was merry, and only gossip. At last she left me for her own room. In the middle of the night I awoke in an agony of grief, and sat up in bed, sobbing and trembling. In vain I reasoned and tried to believe ' it was only a dream.' For a time I could not; it was so real. My dream was that a cobra di capello had bitten my daughter, and she raised a blanched, pinched face to mine, and said, ' Must I die, mamma % ' and I had replied, in agony, ' You must, darling.'

" Next morning, my dream hardly remembered, I was dressing, when she, as usual, came to me. Her first words were, ' Oh, mamma, I had such a horrid feeling last night while I was undressing. I felt sure there was a snake in my room, and had such a hunt before I got into bed; indeed, I feel sure the wretch is there still, and I have ordered the hammal (male housemaid) to turn my bathroom upside down. It was a horrid feeling.'

" No snake was ever seen in her room.

" Even in those days, before one had heard of thought-transference, I explained it to myself in some such way, viz., that her waking terror had communicated itself to me in sleep, and caused my dream.

"H. E. Hunter."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Hunter adds: —

" No, we never had dreams nor apprehensions, nor talks about snakes. At hill stations, where they may be seen, we have, of course, talked of them (glad to have any subject for talk!), but at the time of my dream we were living in a large house close to the sea, and where snakes were almost unknown. As to the seeming discrepancy in time, it can be removed in this way. / got into bed directly she left me, and in India, when in health, I generally went to sleep at once. She was given to sit up reading, and it was while undressing the panic began; then followed the hunt, and we may feel sure that even after she got into bed sleep might not come all at once. M-j feeling when I awoke was as if it were the middle of the night, but it might really have been only an hour- or two. I never looked at the time."

[We of course cannot assume that the coincidence was exact.]

(409) From Mrs. Sibley, 6, Radipole Road, Fulham, S.W.

"January 26th, 1884. "The following occurred about May, 1859. I believed my son to be away in the Mediterranean, and I had no reason to believe he would come home for a year or two, when one night I dreamt that I had a letter, and all that was written on it and inside it was ' Woolwich,' ' Woolwich,' ' Woolwich.' I awoke with the belief that I must be going to hear from him; it was then about 6.30. I could not sleep any more, and when I heard the postman's knock at the door, I sent immediately for the letters. Only one was brought to me, and that had for its postmark ' Woolwich VOL. II. 2 c

386 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

Dockyard,' and it was from my son, telling me of the safe arrival, the night before, of the ship he was on. My son was in the navy, and I am perfectly certain that the idea of his speedy return had never crossed my mind; for aught I knew he might be several years away. This dream is unique in my experience, in the strength of the conviction it produced that it must correspond with reality.

" I mentioned this dream immediately on waking to a daughter (since deceased), who was sleeping with me. u Katherine Sibley."

The following corroboration is from the wife of the present writer, a younger daughter of Mrs. Sibley's: —

"26, Montpelier Square, S.W.

"Jan. 26, 1884.

" I remember the news of this incident spreading through the house before breakfast, and our rushing to my mother's room— when we were shown the letter, and told the dream.

"Kate S. Gurney."

(410) From Mr. E. C. Trevilian, 3, Petersham Terrace, S.W.

"February 2nd, 1884.

"The following occurrence took place some 12 or 14 years ago. I was unmarried, and my house in Somerset had no establishment in it — merely an old housekeeper and a maid-servant. I lived more than half the year in chambers in London, and when I went alone down to the country, I never gave notice of my coming.

" On the day in question I walked up from the station, leaving my luggage to follow, and rang — as usual — at the side door. The maidservant unlocked and opened it, paused a moment while a look of terror came over her face, and fled in much confusion. I walked in slowly, and instead of turning towards my study, marched straight to the servants' hall. The old housekeeper was by the fire, and as I approached her, walking up one side of the long table, she rushed down the other, and out of the room. I retreated to my study, and in about half an hour rang the bell. The old woman was still a little shaky, but was able to explain that the two had so entirely made up their minds that I was dead, that on my appearance just now they had taken me for my ghost. The maidservant had dreamed, some 10 days before, that I was out shooting, that my gun had burst, and that I had been killed on the spot. They had mentioned this to several people — among them to the clergyman and to my agent — but without producing much effect. The girl had been so positive, that she, the old woman, had come to feel equally sure of my death.

" Now on the day of the dream it is a fact that my gun had hurst — that is, it had gone in two at the breach, and no harm had been done. It was at a country house in Oxfordshire, and I was using sawdust powder, then a new invention, and several accidents had occurred with it about that time, and some had been mentioned in the newspapers. This, however, I well recollect. My host and I, then and there, standing among the beaters, decided that the accident should not be mentioned, and we looked regularly and found no notice of it in the local or London papers; nor

could I find out that any mention of it had been seen in any of the Somerset local papers, though it was chiefly by inquiry and not by myself examining the files that I went to work.

" I have quite lost sight of the servant-maid — the old woman was still in existence in the neighbourhood some months ago.

" E. C. Treviliaj^."

(411) From Miss Augusta Gould (now Mrs. Temple, and resident in India).

"Sunny bank, Ealing Dean, W.

"December 19th, 1883.

" When my brother was in Glasgow, I told his son I had had a curious dream of an unwieldy chair coming to me as a present from his father. As I was only residing in his house, I had no idea or need of receiving a chair.

"The next post brought me a letter from him, saying he had bought me such a curious American revolving chair, which was unwieldy when it came, the heavy pedestal and legs giving us difficulty in moving it from one place to another.

" I have had other curious unexpected events occur after dreams foreshadowing them, but will not burden you with more particulars. Surely the afikir of the chair was a curious case of rapport between my brother's spirit and mine. As he never retired to rest till very late, and then was sleepless, he might have been thinking of his present to me when I was dreaming of it. «« Augusta Gould."

In answer to inquiries. Miss Gould added: —

" I send my nephew's corroboration of the dream as to the chair. I may mention that my nephew is 26 years old and clear in memory usually, but he forgets that my brother was in Glasgow at the time. As to one of your questions, I dream always in sleep, either by day or night. Whenever I wake a dream is broken into; so I often dj:-eam things which do not come to pass, though often a foreshadowing of events does come to be realised."

The following is from a postcard written to Miss Gould by her nephew, from 6, Ellison Place, ISTewcastle-on-Tyne, and forwarded to us: —

"January 2, 1884.

" I remember perfectly about the chair; it was one time when my father was south that you had the dream, and when he came back he brought the chair with him. I have told several people about the circumstance.— Alex. G."

Where the subject of the dream is as odd and unlikely as in this case and the next, its triviality can scarcely be held to diminish the force of the coincidence.

(412) Erom a letter written on June 27, 1875, by Mr. J. L. O'Sullivan, then United States Minister at Lisbon, to the late Serjeant Cox, as President of the Psychological Society, and handed to us by Mr. F. K. Munton, who was Secretary of that Society.

Mr. O'Sullivan was engaged to dine, one evening in 1858, with his

388 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

British colleague, Mr. (now Sir Henry) Howard. By an accident, he was obliged to present himself in a pair of wet, muddy, and broken boots, which he sedulously kept concealed during the evening, taking care to arrive after the dinner had begun, and to play cards afterwards, instead of resorting to the drawing-room.

"The next morning I went as usual to the bedside of my invalid mother, who for years had not been able even to turn over in bed. After a little while she said, ' My son, I had such a queer dream about you last night. I saw you at Mrs. Howard's party, and you were in such a comical but annojdng predicament. I thought you had on a pair of wet and muddy and broken hoots, and you were keeping your feet hidden under the table.' And she laughed over the recollection of such an absurd dream.

" I ascertained that my servant had not become afterwards conscious of his omission, and that no human being under my roof knew that night of what had indeed been my queer predicament."

(413) From Mrs. Barr, Apsley Town, East Grinstead.

"Dec. 11, 1883.

" When in England some years ago, I had a very bad cough, for which a blister was ordered by my medical man, but being improperly applied it left a very ugly mark, like the print of a horse's shoe. I was then preparing to rejoin my husband [the late General Barr] in India, and carefully avoided mentioning the circumstance to him.

" On my way out to Bombay I was taken seriously ill, and was so weak on my arrival that I had to be carried on shore. As our own house was some miles from the place of landing we rested half way at my fatherin-law's house. Whilst there my husband's mother said to him, ' Does Lizzie look at all as you saw her in your dream % ' Upon which my husband turned to me and said, ' I had such a horrid dream about you the other night. I saw you looking pale and ill, as you do now, but you had a dreadful mark like a horse shoe upon your chest.' Being ill, I had landed in a white muslin dressing-gown, and I slightly parted it in front and showed him the mark. He was much astonished and said, ' How did you get that 1 It is exactly the mark I saw in my dream.'

" Elizabeth H. A. Bare."

(414) From a narrator, Mr. B., whose name and address (though he made no stipulation on the subject) it seems right to suppress.

"January 16th, 1885. "In March, 1880, our servant A. had been with us a few months, was well recommended by people we knew, and for the time she had been with us proved trustworthy, and as good as we could expect a servant to be. The dream Mrs. B. had respecting her happened in the early morning. She dreamt that the maid came into the dining-room, sat down by her (a strange proceeding), and said she had something on her mind to tell her mistress. It was that she had a boy of three years old, whose name was Bertie. When Mrs. B. got up, which she did after breakfasting in bed as usual, she went out into the orchard where A. was hanging the clothes. Mrs. B. told her her dream, and A. made no reply, but looked very pale and peculiar. Mrs. B. left her under the impression that she had offended her. Some time after, Mrs. B. found

iii.J DREAMS. 389

A. in the kitchen, crying bitterly. On inquiring what was the matter, whether she was offended, she replied, ' Oh, no! ma'am, your dream is quite true in all respects, even the name.'

" It seems that A. had had it on her mind to tell Mrs. B. about this child from the first, and her mother had pressed her to tell Mrs. B. about it. Mrs. B. says she had not the least suspicion of this matter, not even after the dream.

" The servant A. and her mistress had a great liking for each other, more than is usual with servant and mistress, and A. had never been so happy in a situation before.

" A.'s age at the time was 23 years. IP " [A year subsequently,] when in London, visiting her relatives, Mrs.

B. dreamed that her servant, A., whom she had left at home, was in dreadfiil trouble — could see her in tears; all night Mrs. B. was continually dreaming of her. Next morning Mrs. B. determined upon returning home, although it was arranged for a longer stay. On her arrival, A. opened the door, and at once burst into a paroxysm of grief, saying that ' Bertie was dying,' that she had been praying for him and for Mrs. B.'s return, and crying all the previous night, and wished to go to him at once. (It should have been mentioned that the child, Bertie, was living with A.'s mother.)

" Mrs. B. is not remarkable for many dreams."

Mrs. B. writes: —

" I certify that the foregoing statement is quite correct.

" Ellen B."

In answer to inquiries as to the first dream, Mr. B. says that his wife did not mention it to him till some time afterwards, but then could refrain no longer. In conversation Mrs. B. told me that she was quite confident that the detail of the name occurred in the dream, and was not subsequently read back into it; and also that she had had no idea whatever of A.'s history. The dreams were exceptionally vivid in detail.

(415) From Miss A. J. Middleton, 20, Stanley Gardens, Kensington Park Road, W.

" 1884.

" Some years ago, I was staying with friends, and came down one day, saying I had had such a dreadful dream, that my youngest brother was drowned; the impression was so vivid I could not forget it. When the second post letters came, at about 2.30, I heard that a man who was boating with this brother had slipped getting into the boat, and was drowned, and my brother was in great distress about it; the man I never saw, and did not know his name. When I read the letter, my friends said, ' How odd that you should have dreamed your brother was drowned; we should have said you had made it up had you not told us first.'

" A. J. Middleton."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Middleton adds: —

" I send you the card to-day I received from my friend confirming my first dream. I fancy I stayed with them about a week. This is the only occasion on which I have had a very distressing dream of death which left a vivid and lasting impression."

The card is as follows: —

390 SUPPLEMENT. [chap,

" Kirkbright Yicarage.

" March, 1884. " Yes, I quite well remember your telling us about your dream, and your hearing the news the next morning. Thanks to our visitors' list I can tell you the date of your coming to us, January 21st, 1881.

"M. CoPE."i

The dream in this case, if telepathic, was probably due to the idea in the brother's mind. The next case might be explained in a similar way, by reference to what was filling the minds of those who surrounded the percipient; but it might also be regarded as a case of direct impression from the drowning man; and the mis-recognition would then be very similar to what has been observed in other examples (Nos. 170, 171, 249, and cf. 455 below). The case may further illustrate that development of the percipient faculty in illness, which was noticed in the preceding chapter (p. 349).

(416) From Miss Copeman, St. Stephen's House, Norwich.

" March 2nd, 1884.

" My mother nursed my grandmother all through her last illness, and a few days before she died they received the intelligence of the sudden death by drowning of the eldest son of the family. It was not referred to in the presence of my grandmother, but that day or the next, awaking from a sleep, she said, ' I have just seen John in the water; has anything happened to him 1 ' Joseph was the name of the one drowned, and they were able to say that John., another son, was quite well, and she was quieted. It was thought she meant Joseph at the time, but in her feebleness did not remember the right name. She died a day or two after.

" I have often heard my mother repeat this, as a remarkable coincidence not to be explained."

In answer to inquiries. Miss Copeman writes: —

" May 13th, 1884.

" I fear I cannot give all the particulars you msh to have; the coincidence is one not easy to relate clearly, for no one is living now who remembers anything definite about it. I only know of it as I heard it from my own mother's lips, and it is 3 years since her death. I have ascertained from another member of my family that the two deaths occurred in the year 1844, with an interval of about a week between them. My grandmother's name was Mrs. Elizabeth Buck, of East Dereham, Norfolk.

" My father and sister confirm my statement, as they, too, have more than once heard my mother speak of it. "Lucy A Copeman "

1 We have received a parallel case to this from Miss M. J. Potter, of 42, Northumberland Avenue, Kingstown, who tells us that in 1860 she dreamt very vividly that a cousin was drowned in a deep pond, on the night after the drowning in a mill-pond of another cousin who was living in the same house as the one dreamt of. The news of the accident arrived before Miss Potter left her room next morning, and before she had an opportunity of mentioning her dream.

We find from the Register of Deaths that Mr. Joseph Buck was drowned at Sproughton on the 9th of August, 1844, and that his mother died on the 17th.

[In cases like this it is impossible to be absolutely certain that the news did not become known to the sick person through a whisper, or a reference made to it when she was supposed to be asleep, which may have acted as the nucleus of a dream.]

It occasionally happens that a mene seems to have been telepathically represented at a time when it was not occupying the agent's senses, though it may have been consciously occupying his mind (c/. Miss Wilkinson's case below, Chap. IV., § 2).

(417) From the Rev. W. Champneys, Haslingden Vicarage, Manchester. ^

"September 3rd, 1884.

" The incident to which I imagine you allude happened to my father, the late Dean of Lichfield. I have often heard him tell the story.

" One of his brothers was secretary of the Church Pastoral Aid Society, and in that capacity was often travelling about the country, preaching sermons and attending meetings. He was in precarious health, having once had rheumatic fever, which had left behind it heart-complaint. One night my father dreamed that he was walking through the street of a village where he had never been before. The whole scene was entirely new, and impressed itself strongly on his memory. Coming to the village inn, he walked up to the door to inquire after his brother, who had started off on one of his journeys a few days before, in his usual health. The landlady, of whom he made the inquiry, returned an evasive answer, and then he asked if his brother's wife was there: to which she replied, ' Not his wife^ sir, but his widow: ' and with the shock of these words he awoke.

" As soon as a message could reach him the next day (it was before the days of telegraphs), he heard that his brother had been taken ill on his journey the day before; that trying to reach the town, where he was expected, they had been obliged to put up at a village inn on the way, and that there, after a very short illness, he had died; and when my father went to the place that day, which was one he had never been to before, or even heard of, the whole scene was exactly the same that had been before him in his dream — street, houses, country, everything was the same, and at the very inn where he dreamed he had inquired for his brother, he found his brother's body lying. u Weldon Champneys."

Through the kindness of the Secretary of the Church Pastoral Aid Society, we have been able to ascertain that the death of the Rev. E. T. Champneys occurred on June 16, 1845, at Caxton.

[The essential point of such a narrative as this is of course independent of the alleged correspondence of detail, which is likely to seem in memory more exact than it really was.]

1 A not quite correct version of this narrative, without names, is given by the Rev. J. S. Pollock. Incumbent of St. Alban the Martyr, Birmingham, in Bead and Gone, p. 30.

392 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

The next case may possibly be of the same kind; but we have no proof that the scene was more than an imaginary setting supplied by the dreamer (as in several of the cases in | 4 below). The percipient did not himself believe that he had been asleep; but without external evidence that he was awake, we can hardly regard otherwise than as a dream an experience in which he appears to himself to be acting a part, during a time much longer than the actual duration of the impression.

(418) From Mr. Adrian Stokes, M.R.C.S., 16, Howell Road, St. Davids, Exeter. The account was originally published in the Spiritual Magazine^ in December, 1867.

" My uncle, the late Adrian Stokes, Esq., of Thornbury, near Bristol, was living at his villa in that little town, in the year 1842, and on the evening of a certain day in November had retired to bed, in his usual health, at his customary hour. Contrary to his habit, however, he could not sleep, but lay awake counting the hours until 3 o'clock in the morning, when suddenly he found himself in a country whose features were quite strange to him. He became aware that he was in the Neilgherrie hill country of India, where his brother Sam was on invalid furlough. It appeared to him that he remained three months there with Sam, that he attended him during his illness, and that finally Sam died, when the vision faded, and he found himself again in his bed.^ He was now satisfied that this vision had revealed a certainty to him, turned round and fell asleep, and in the morning he told my aunt all about it. He has mentioned this matter to me several times, and always expressed his belief that he was broad awake while he saw the vision, which he thought must have passed with the rapidity of ' thought,' and was quite sure it was no dream.

" In due course my uncle received from his brother's agents at Madras a letter containing information of Sam's death at such and such a place in the Neilgherrie Hills, at the precise day and hour that my uncle saw the vision in his bed at Thornbury. ' It was no news to me,' said my uncle to me when telling me of the circumstance; ' I knew poor Sam was gone several months before.'

" Adrian Stokes,"

We find from the Indian Service Register that the death took place on November 12th, 1843 (not 1842), at Ootacamund.

In answer to a question, Mr. Stokes tells us that he was not told of this vision till several years after its occurrence.

The following example might be referred to the same type, if we

1 We have a similar case — first-hand, but remote and from an uneducated witness — where the dreamer saw her brother, a carpenter's mate, fall from a yard and break his leg, and then nursed him till his death. She says that she marked the day, as it happened to be his birthday, and afterwards learnt from one of his shipmates that he had died on the date of her dream, having broken his leg by a fall three days previously.

could be quite sure that the details following the accident really figured in the dream; but they may easily have been " read back " into it; and the case is again second-hand and remote.

(419) From Mr. A. W. Orr, Kingston Road, Didsbury, near Man-

"January 2nd, 1885.

" Some 40 years ago, my father was house-surgeon at the City o£ Dublin Hospital, and one day a young man, a sailor, was brought in who had fallen from one of the yards of the vessel on which he served. He was badly injured, and in about three days he died. Late in the afternoon of the day on which the man died, an old woman, very poor and fagged, came up to the hospital and asked to see the surgeon. My father saw her, and inquired what he could do for her; when she inquired whether a young sailor had been brought to that institution, and if so, could she see him 1 My father told her of the man above mentioned, and that he had died that morning.

" It turned out that the old woman was the young man's mother, that she lived in the Co. Carlow, and that three nights previously she had dreamt that her son had fallen from the rigging of the vessel, and had been taken to an hospital. So vivid was the dream that she could not rest till she got to Dublin (where she had never been before), and the moment she saw the hospital, she recognised it as the building she had seen in her dream. Her dream was only too true, for she found that her son had died from the eflfects of injuries occasioned by a fall just as appeared in her dream.

" The old woman had walked a distance of over 60 miles, and entered the city by the road which passed the front of the hospital.

" A. W. Orr."

In a second letter Mr. Orr says: —

" You may rely upon the facts being as I have stated them, as I have frequently spoken to my father on the subject, the case being of such a very remarkable character."

§ 3. These last cases form a transition to the next class, which is distinguished by the direct correspondence of the dream with a real event that befell the agent; but many of the dreams may still, as before, be regarded as literal representations of the agent's thought. The prominent event, as usual, is death.

(420) The Rev. W. B. B. having communicated to me the fact that some time ago, he had had an exceptionally vivid dream — which haunted him for a portion of two days — of the death of an acquaintance, and that the death had happened coincidently with the dream, the usual questions were asked. He replied as follows: —

" The Vicarage,.

"December 9th, 1884. " In reference to the subject of your note, I am able to say that I had

394 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

no means of knowing that the lady in question was ailing or even in delicate health. She was the wife of a cousin from whom or of whom I do not think I had heard for some months. I have so much to do in my parish that I have little time for correspondence, but in consequence of what I dreamed I at once wrote to the son of the lady referred to, having previously, on awaking, mentioned the matter to my own wife. My

remark to her was, ' We shall hear some bad news, I fear, from E, '

(the residence of my cousin), and I then repeated the dream. Within another post I heard that Mrs. B. had died on that night." [The narrator goes on to say that a very near relative of his had three times had exactly similar intimations. See p. 132, note.]

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death occurred on Sept. 2, 1866.

The following is the corroboration of the narrator's wife: —

"December 11th, 1884.

" Mrs. B. has much pleasure in confirming the statement made by her husband as to his having communicated to her the substance of his dream boding something very serious to his cousin's family. We had had no intimation of the illness. The family lives in Ireland, and the news of the death did not reach us until two days after."

[The slight discrepancy as to when the news arrived does not seem important. It will be seen that the dream was impressive enough to cause a busy man to write a letter.]

(421) From Miss C. D. Garnett, Furze Hill Lodge, Brighton.

"December 18th, 1883.

" On the 13th of February, 1883, when at Biarritz, I dreamt that a relative, whom we had left in perfect health in England, and between whom and myself there was a strong afiinity, was dying, and that we had to leave Biarritz sooner than we intended. The dream haunted me throughout the following morning, and in the evening we received a telegram summoning us home at once. She died as we reached England. I may mention that this event was entirely unlooked for.

"C. D. Garnett."

We find from the Liverpool Daily Post that the death occurred on Feb. 15, 1883.

Miss Garnett adds:—

"March 3rd, 1885.

" In reply to your questions respecting the dream I had at Biarritz: 1. What was the state of the dying person at the time of the dream? — She was unconscious.^ 2. What was the character of the dream 1 — I dreamt that we were summoned home suddenly (we had then been a week in Biarritz, and intended remaining two months), that we received a telegram announcing the sad state of my relative; and the dream was all concerning her — and a very troublesome one. Jt wasn't an ordinary dream. I felt greatly disturbed throughout the day following, and in the evening, about dinner time, the telegram came."

1 See Chap, v., § 10, and Vol. i., p. 563, note.

Miss M. Garnett writes, on December 30, 1883: —

" I understand from my sister that you desire a corroboration of her remarkable dream at Biarritz. She mentioned it to me the following morning. She was much attached to the relative dreamt of.

" MiLLiCENT Garnett."

(422) From Colonel V., who says that the case " was written from memory, and dates in my diary."

" March 11th, 1886.

"On Sunday night, 25th May, 1884, I had a most extraordinary dream. I dreamt that my son A., a young officer in a regiment at Gibraltar, was lying very ill there with fever, and was calling out to me, ' Father, father, come over and let me see you or my mother.' The next morning I went to see the Rev. G., the well-known coach, living near me. On entering his room, he exclaimed, ' Do you believe in " dream-waves"?' I replied, No, I did not. He remarked that just as I was entering the room, ne was on the point of sitting down before his desk and commencing a letter to me, asking me to come over and see him. I then said, ' I had a curious dream last night. I saw before me my son A. down with fever at Gibraltar, imploring me to come over and see him.' As I had that morning a letter from him, written in good spirits, I thought it curious, and gave the dream no further thought.

" On Tuesday, the 27th May, I went to Ramsgate with my second son, for change. On the 29th May, one of my family here wired to me to return home, as news had arrived from Gibraltar that my son A. was very ill with Rock fever. I returned in a few hours. I read over my letters from Gibraltar. It appears that on the 17th May my son fell ill, and was placed on the sick list. The attack turned out to be Rock fever. He gradually got worse; on the 24th he was delirious, and on the 25th his brother officers had to get a nurse, Mrs. S., to take charge of the patient. On the 23rd a second doctor was called in consultation. So bad was the news that I received from Gibraltar by letter and telegrams, that I left London on the 4th June, and reached it on the 9th. I found the patient doing well, but very weak. I had to remain there till the 3rd July, the attack of fever continuing, and we both returned home on the 8th July.

" I mentioned to the nurse my curious dream of the 25th May. She said she was placed in charge of the patient on the afternoon of that day. He was very delirious all that night, and was constantly calling out, ' Oh, mother, mother, do come over to see me '; and as he probably remembered how delicate she was, and that she could not take a sea voyage across the Bay of Biscay, he also called out, ' Father, father, come and comfort me, and let me see you again.'

" It was months after our return home before the fever left him, and he did not quite get rid of it till November, 1884."

In conversation. Colonel V. informed me that he dreams very little, and scarcely ever has distressing dreams; and that, quite apart from the confirmation, this dream would have been very exceptional in its character. Mrs. S., who was an excellent nurse, and whom he regards as entirely trustworthy, has left Gibraltar, and gone, he thinks, to Morocco.

396 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

The Rev. H. P. Gurney, to whom Colonel V. described his dream next morning, writes from 2, Powis Square, W., on March 22, 1886: —

"I do not remember any particulars of Colonel V.'s dream. It occurred nearly two years ago, and at a time when I am particularly busy. I only recollect that he told me that he had had a curious dream about his son at Gibraltar, who is one of our former pupils. I cannot recall any particulars, but I think that his son called to him to come and visit him. I know that he afterwards found out that he was seriously ill with fever, and had to go out to bring him home.

" H. P. Gurney."

Mrs. Thrupp, of 67, Kensington Gardens Square, W., writing to us on April 2nd, 1886, says that she called at Colonel V.'s house when he was on the point of starting for Gibraltar to see his son, and that he then told her " all about his dream."

(423) From Mrs. S. (the narrator of case 74), who is willing that her name should be given to any one genuinely interested in this case.

" October 27th, 1885.

" In 1871, I was staying at Diisseldorf with my daughter, who had just been to an eminent doctor in Bonn ta have an operation performed on the throat. My mother-in-law was also in Bonn, and, after the operation, had run after the cab containing my daughter and myself, and had given the former (who was a child at the time) a ten-thaler note, as a reward for the brave manner in which she had submitted to the operation. She was in excellent spirits, and laughed and joked with us before parting. A day or two afterwards I awoke, and said to my daughter, who slept in the same

room, ' O M, I have had such a dreadful dream. I dreamt your

grandmother was dead.' The terror caused by the dream was so great that I felt compelled to wake my daughter, though I knew that in her condition this was most unwise, as she was still suffering from the effects of the operation. I felt I must tell someone. My daughter said it was ' only a dream,' and told me to go to sleep. I asked how her throat was, and she said it was better. I pulled out my watch from under the pillow, and found it was between 3 and 4 a.m.

" The following morning, at 10 o'clock, I received a telegram, telling me to meet my mother-in-law's sister at Cologne Station. I did so, and they broke to me the news of my mother-in-law's death, which had taken place the previous night. I had been in no sort of anxiety about her, and I was only told afterwards that she had been suffering for many years from some internal complaint, for which she had been operated on on the day following that on which I last saw her. I was totally ignorant that this was going to be done.

" This was the only occasion on which I remember having had a vivid and distressing dream of death. ^^ lyr o »

[Mrs. S.'s daughter " thinks her testimony would be of little use, as she was quite young at the time, and her memory is not quite clear on several points."]

(424) A lady who prefers that her name should not be published, having been asked (by Miss Bryce, of 35, Bryanston Square, W.) whether

since January 1st, 1874, she had had an exceptionally vivid dream of the death of some person known to her, answered: — ^j -^gg^

"Yes, on August 13th, 1877. I was 27, and in excellent health, as I was on my way home from a month's stay in Switzerland. The impression lasted for some hours after I rose. In the night it was so distressing as to wake me. The person of whose death I dreamt was my oldest and dearly-beloved brother, a young man of 26. He died at Blackheath just at the same time, i.e., between 12 and 3 in the early morning. I had heard the day before that he was unwell, but no fatal consequences were thought of."

In answer to further inquiries, our informant writes on May 17, 1884: —.

"My brother was a young man of fine physical frame, in vigorous health, going daily to the City from his home with my parents at Blackheath. He had, however, a constitutional weakness in the ' hsemorrhagic diathesis,' which was not appreciated by me as in the least likely to shorten his life.

" At the time in question he had taken a fortnight's holiday at Maidenhead, chiefly spent in rowing, at which he was an adept. After his return he fainted, one morning, and a bruise was found on his left shoulder. The letter that I received told me of this, adding that the doctor had seen him, that some anxiety had been excited, but that he was better.

" Had there been any apprehension of fatal consequences, or even of a serious illness, I should have left Boulogne on the day I received the news (Sunday). But I remained there with my husband, and, as I said, in the night between Sunday and Monday, I had the terrible impression — the chill horror of which I cannot forget.

" On reaching London in the afternoon of the next day (Monday), I learnt that he had died suddenly at the time of my distress; the cause being internal haemorrhage from the lacerated muscle. He had never had internal haemorrhage before. He had only been unwell three or four days."

We have verified the date of the death in the Times obituary.

[Mrs. W.'s husband prefers not to state positively whether it was after or before the news of the death that he first heard of the dream. On the supposition that latent anxiety may possibly have been the source of the dream, the case is excluded from the group used in the calculation in Yol. I., Chap. YIII., § 4.]

(425) From Mr. T. J. Norris, Dalkey, Ireland. The account was written many years ago.

" In the year 1839, Mrs. Norris, of Mohill, Co. Leitrim, accompanied by her two daughters (now Mrs. West, the Asylum, Omagh, and Mrs. Crofton, Portnashangan Rectory, Mullingar) and by Mrs. Draper (now Mrs. Simonet, St. Helier's, Jersey),i went to Lausanne for the benefit of the health of one of her girls, and remained there for a couple of years. Mr. Norris being an extensive land agent, could not remain with them, but paid them a visit each summer. While there in 1840, and just before the day fixed for his return home, Mrs. Draper, at breakfast, in-

1 Since deceased.

398 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

formed all present that a Mrs. Wilson, of St. Heller's, a friend of them all, had died the evening before, at such an hour and under such-and-such circumstances, and asked Mr. Norris to write to Jersey about it. He first entered all the circumstances minutely in his pocket-book, and then wrote over as requested, desiring the answer to be directed to him in Mohill, to which he was about to return. I, his only son, was with him one day, when the post came in, bringing him a letter from Jersey. He opened and read it, and then gave me his keys and desired me to bring him down his pocket-book, to open it at a certain date, and see how far his memorandum agreed with the information contained in the letter. In substance they were identical, except that it ajypeared that Mrs. Wilson did not die until more than half-an-hour after her appearance to Mrs. Draper. I suggested that this could be accounted for by the difference of longitude, and on calculating this it just made up for the seeming discrepancy.

"Thomas J. Norris."

Mrs. West, of Sion Cottage, Sion Mills, Co. Tyrone, writes: —

" December 7th, 1882.

"I am not sure whether it was a dreain or that Mrs. Draper thought she saw Mrs. Wilson; but if the former, Mrs. Draper must have awoke at once, as I know she looked at her watch and remarked the hour, and afterwards, when she heard of Mrs. Wilson's death, she inquired particularly at what hour she died. We at first thought the time was different, till we calculated the difference of Lausanne and Jersey time.

"A. M. West."

Mr. Norris has given us his reasons for fixing the year as 1840; but we cannot find the death in the Jersey Register for that year. Registration had been then only recently introduced, and had perhaps not become universal.

[This case is very remote; but the incident which Mr. Norris relates was such as would be likely to impress the facts on his memory, at any rate to a greater extent than if he had merely been told the story.]

(426) From Miss Churchill, 9, Eversley Park, Chester.

"August 13th, 1884.

[A few words are added from a second account written on November 18th, 1885.]

"About the month of August, 1877, I dreamt most vividly of the death of a gentleman, a friend of the family, whom I had not seen for some years. I fancy I saw him in the dream, but cannot distinctly remember. I had not heard of his illness, or anything of him at the time of my dream. But the next day I heard of his death having taken place; I do not remember the hour, but as far as I can say I believe he must have been dead at the time of my dream, or dying.

" I cannot positively say whether I mentioned my dream before hearing of his death; I think I did. " Emily Churchill."

In answer to an inquiry. Miss Churchill replies: —

"I do not remember (with this exception) dreaming vividly of a death, and believe the one referred to to be the only one.

One of Miss Churchill's sisters says: —

" I can perfectly well remember hearing the dream before we heard of

the death. As he was a strong man, and as far as we knew in excellent health, we. did not for a moment suppose it was true. If I remember rightly, he was only ill three or four hours."

Another sister writes: —,,.. too^

"August, 1884.

"It is so long ago that we have rather forgotten. My own impression was that Emily told us her dream at breakfast, and that we heard of the death in the evening, — that the gentleman concerned had died the day before. I know I was much impressed at the time, but I couldn't declare that she told us in the morning. I know directly Lizzie told us of the death (she had not been at home in the morning) Emily exclaimed to her, ' I dreamt last night that he was dead.' "

We find from the Times obituary that the death took place on July 19th, 1877.

In conversation, Miss Churchill mentioned — as showing how sudden the death was — that the daughters of the gentleman who died had just gone on a visit, and had to be telegraphed for. The two families lived in the same town; but the interest of the Misses Churchill was in the daughters; they rarely saw the father, and had not seen him for a considerable time before his death.

The following is a similar case, where the death of a person not closely connected with the dreamer was dreamt of vividly, but not in a specially pictorial way.

(427) From Miss C, whose mother sent us the main facts of the case in 1883, and who herself wrote a fuller account on January 12, 1886.

In November, 1880, Miss G., the daughter of a country rector, was staying in her father's former parish in London. The vicar of this parish had exchanged livings with her father, and was thus associated in her mind with both her homes, though she only knew him slightly. One Saturday night she dreamt that he was dead. There was an odd confusion in the dream, as her father's death was also suggested. She felt it was something to do with both parishes. On entering the breakfast-room, she learnt from the friend with whom she was staying that the vicar had died in the night. She had heard some days before that he had a cold; but, as she remarks, " colds in November are anything but uncommon," and she had thought no more about it. "He had said, the Thursday before, that he was feeling so much better that he hoped to be able to take his Sunday duty; but on the Saturday he had grown suddenly worse, and died that evening." Miss G. does not remember to have dreamt of death on any other occasion.

We find from the Times obituary that the death took place on November 13, 1880.

The friend with whom Miss G. was staying writes to her (in February, 1886), " I am afraid I do not remember about your dream at the time it happened; but I quite well remember your telling me some time afterwards you had dreamed a dream which I ought to have remembered." Miss G. is confident that she mentioned the dream before sitting down to breakfast.

400 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

(428) From a most trusted and valued servant of the present writer's — now Mrs. Humphry, residing at Hiley Lodge, Kensal Green — who wrote, in the week following the dream: —

" On Tuesday night [March 24th, 1885], or rather Wednesday morning, I dreamt that Fenning, a milkman in the employ of Mr. John Jarvis [of Dale Hill Farm, Ticehurst], formerly in the employ of Mr. Thos. Jarvis, my late master, said to me, ' He's gone at last.' I said, ' Who? ' He said, ' Why, Mr. John Jarvis is dead.' On Wednesday morning, when I saw my fellow-servant. Rose, I told her my dream." [This was confirmed in writing, at the same time as the account was written, by Rose Wade.]

On March 30th, the news of the death arrived, and Mrs. Humphry at once mentioned the coincidence to her mistress. She was told to ask the day and hour of his death, and the following is a copy of her brother's reply: —

" Piatt Cottage, Ticehurst.

"March 31st, 1885.

" Just a line to let you know that Mr. Jarvis passed away on the 25th — that was last Wednesday morning as near as I can tell you at 2 o'clock. "William Vidler."

We have confirmed the date by the Register of Deaths.

Mrs. Humphry told the present writer that the dream was quite unique in her experience, for its vividness and the distress that it caused her.

(429) From Fynes Moryson's Itinerary. (See above, p. 382.)

" Whilst I lived at Prage, and one night had sat up very late drinking at a feast, early in the morning, the sunne beams glancing on my face as I lay in bed, I dreamed that a shadow passing by told me that my father was dead; at which awaking all in a sweat, and afifected with this dreame, I rose and wrote the day, the houre, and all things connected therewith in a paper booke, which Booke with many other things I put into a pouch, and sent it from Prage to Stode, thence to be convoyed into England. And now being at Nurnberg, a merchant of a noble family, well acquainted with me and my friends, arrived there, who told me that my father died some two months past. I list not write any lies, but that which I write is as true as strange. When I returned into England some four years after, I would not open the pouch I sent from Prage, nor looke in the paper booke in which I had written this dreame, till I had called my sisters and some friends to be witnesses, when my selfe and they were astonished to see my written dreame answer the very day of my father's death."

(430) From the Rev. F. R. Harbaugh (Pastor of Presbyterian Church), Red Bank, Monmouth County, New Jersey, U.S.A.

"February 7th, 1884. " In the afternoon of January 29th, 1881, between the hours of 2 and 4 o'clock, while asleep (in ordinary good health), and with no conscious or immediate procuring cause for the same, I had a ' dream ' charged with every element of the horrible and distressing. I awoke greatly confused in mind, but with these very distinct impressions: — first, that some tragedy

had occurred; and second, that some relative was implicated in it. The dream, for the while, very greatly affected me, so much so as to seriously disqualify me for my Sabbath services the day following.

" Within a few days after this dream I received a letter from my father, which began something like this: —

" ' You will be shocked to hear that your cousin, on last,

(the same day on which I had my dream), ' took the life of his wife and babe, and then killed himself.'

" It is not necessary to give the details of the crime. My reply to my father's letter contained the following: —

" ' Shocked I certainly was by the intelligence in your last letter, but

hardly surprised; for ever since last afternoon I have been oppressed,

because of a dream, with an impression that something of the kind had occurred.'

" From his letter in reply, I found that my dream was coincident (how exactly I do not remember) with the tragedy. "With regard to the person who committed the crime, I had neither seen him nor had any communication with him, nor, indeed, any information about him, since we separated, in our early boyhood. No acquaintance of mine of so long a time could have been more absent from my mind than he. Nothing proximate to the tragedy had transpired to recall or suggest him. I have never been able to detect what it was, or might be, that brought him to my knowledge. The absence of anxiety, or anything like it, may be seen in my almost utter forgetfulness of him. Indeed, for 20 years I did not know whether he was living or dead."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Harbaugh says: — '

" Horrifying dreams are exceedingly rare with me. The doubt on my mind as to the coincidence of time (as I now recall the occurrence) is as to the hour. The day of the tragedy and of my dream were the same." He adds: —

" A clergyman residing in the place where the crime was committed writes, ' I am going to see the man who was the first in the house after the deed was done, and ask him for the exact hour.' Later he writes, ' I find it was on Saturday evening, January 29th, at just about 7.30 p.m. The town marshal fixes the time at the same hour.' My recollection of the day of the week and the time of the day on which I had the dream is very distinct — as well as the recollection of the letter I received from my father, telling me of it, and of my reply."

[If this case was telepathic, the idea of the deed must have been present to the perpetrator's mind 4 hours before it was acted on — which seems a reasonable supposition. The telepathic explanation is of course rendered less probable by the absence of intimacy or affection between the parties; but we have had indications that mere kinship may supply the adequate condition (see, e.g., case 244).]

§ 4. Coming now to the class of more distinctly pictorial dreams, corresponding with some critical situation of the agent, but not a mere reflection of his conscious thought, I will begin with cases where what is seen is a tolerably simple embodiment of the idea



Vol. Ii. 2 D

402 SUPPLEAfENT. [chap.

supposed to have been transferred, and then pass on to cases where the dreamer invests the idea with fresh elements and imagery of his own. The following four cases are of the simplest possible type. The first of them resembles the last quoted, in the fact that there was no bond of friendship between agent and percipient; but the proximity to the latter of a third person — her father — who was connected both with her and with the agent, suggests that though the impression did not affect his consciousness, it still reached her in some sense through him (p. 267).

(431) From Mr. Gr. J. Davis, St. Chloe Endowed School, Amberley, near Stroud. (The account is slightly condensed.)

After mentioning that about 1848, he had served under a certain clergyman, Mr. S., Mr. Davis continues: —

"About 1860, I married my present wife, and she did not, nor my children, know anything of Mr. S., and, consequently, took little interest in hearing about him. We seldom or never spoke about him, except perhaps when a letter came from him, and I might mention the fact.

" One Saturday morning, as I was reading the Standard after breakfast, my daughter, aged about 1 9, suddenly broke the silence thus: —

" ' Papa, have you heard from Mr. S. lately "? '

" ' No, I have not,' I replied; ' in fact, it is my turn to write. He wrote about three months ago; but I have not written since. "Why do you ask 1 '

" ' Because I dreamt about him last night. I dreamt he had lost the use of his side ' (here she made a motion with her hand down her side); ' paralysed, don't you call it 1 '

" She spoke very earnestly, I noticed; but I merely replied, ' How strange,' and went on reading my Standard. This was on Saturday morning, you will observe.

" Well, the next day was Sunday, and we always made it a point to call at the post-office for our letters on Sundays. We did so on this

Sunday. Among them was a C newspaper, I noticed the address

was not in Mr. S.'s handwriting; this moved my curiosity, and there being no folk about, I opened the paper, and what was my surprise to find a paragraph marked, announcing, ' That their respected neighbour, the Rev. E. H. S., had been seized with paralysis.' Certain persons were with him — doctors, &c., — and they hoped he would get better, &c., &c. Of course, I was very much surprised, and when we got home, I said, ' Sissy, do you remember anything more about your dream 1 ' (after reading the paragraph, and saying how strange it was, &C.)

" ' No,' she said, ' but the dream made such an impression upon my mind that I lay awake thinking about it, and wondering how I knew he was paralysed, for he didn't tell me, and I saw no one else but himself lying ill in bed.'

" This is all literally true. "Gboege Jesson Davis."

In reply to an inquiry, Mr. Davis wrote that the date of Mr. S.'s seizure was Nov. 8, 1878. We have verified the occurrence and the date in the local newspaper of Nov. 16. It would appear, therefore, that the dream must have been on the night of Nov. 15 — i.e., a week after

the actual seizure — though while its effects were continuing. This extension of time of course extends the scope for accidental coincidence, and so far weakens the case; on the other hand there is the strong point of a double correspondence, the right person being associated with the right complaint, though neither one nor the other had been in the least degree occupying the dreamer's waking thoughts. Mr. S. never recovered from the attack, and died some months afterwards.

In conversation Mr. Davis stated that his daughter was not in the habit of having vivid dreams, and that her mention of this one was exceptional; and that by temperament she is the very reverse of gushing or visionary.

(432) From Mrs. Jennings Bramly, Strathmore, Killiney.

" February 3rd, 1886.

" I am happy to give you an exact account of the dream which I had about my brother. Professor of Greek in Trinity College, Dublin. I cannot fix the exact time; it was probably two and a-half or three and a-half years ago. It was simply a vivid dream; I by no means saw an exact enactment of what was going on. I dreamed (being at home in my own house in Killiney, my brother being in his, in Dublin) that I saw my brother covered with blood, and that I threw my arms round him and implored him not to die, and that Ifelt the blood touch me, and saw it drip on me. I awoke in great distress, and remained awake lest I should dream it again. In the morning I told my husband I had had a fearful dream. I did not in the least think it was true, but it was very real, and it frightened me. In spite of daylight, and companions around me, I still felt a vague uneasiness, and in order to dispel the feeling by seeing my brother in perfect health (as I quite expected I should), I went into Dublin by train, and to his rooms in College to see him. I found him sitting by the fire, and I asked him if he would come to us next day and play tennis. He replied, ' that he should not be able to play tennis for many a day,' and then told me ' he had had an accident the evening before; he was in the garden with his children, and one of them had got up on the roof of a small toolhouse, which had a glass window in the roof; the child was frightened, and my brother went up the ladder to lift him down; he put one foot on the window and reached forward for the child, when the glass broke and my brother's leg went through, cutting a vein in the leg; it bled -profusely for a couple of hours before a doctor could be found to bandage it up. This accident took place early in the evening; I, probably, was not in bed until after the bleeding had been stopped.

" My brother noticed how white I had become while he was telling me of his accident. I told him my dream, and he agreed with me in thinking it a very remarkable coincidence. He evidently had not thought of me the previous night, or he would have said so. My attachment for him is, I believe, unusually strong, and my sympathy in all his pursuits extreme. It is right to mention that in 1879 he had had a much more serious accident, about which I had no dream. " M. Geealdine J. Bramly."

Mr. Bramly writes on Feb. 3, 1886: —

" I recollect my wife telling me her dream, as above narrated, on the following morning. She has a very accurate memory.

Professor Tyrrell writes, on Feb. 5, 1886:— " ^- ^- Bbamly."

404 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" I remember the incident communicated to you by my sister, Mrs. Bramly. The details are accurate. She told me of her dream when she called on me in College the following morning." Later he adds: —

" I should wish it to be understood that I look on the dream and the accident as mere coincidence.^ The accident was slight, but there was considerable effusion of blood. ««!{,, Y. Tyreell." '

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Bramly says:

" I am a very restless, uneasy sleeper, and every night dream the wildest dreams possible. I have never, however, except in this instance, dreamed of any accident to anyone, or of the death of anyone."

(433) From Mr. Durell, Wrenthorpe, The Thicket, Southsea.

"April 1, 1886.

" On the night of the 4th May, 1863, when I was in Australia,^ I dreamed that a postman handed me a letter with a deep black border. The purport of the letter was to announce the death of an uncle in England, and that he had left me some property which would necessitate my immediate return to England.

" When I awoke, the dream still haunted me, and I made a note of it, and mentioned it to several of my friends, feeling sure I should hear of my uncle's death.

" I could not do so by the next mail, but the one after that brought me the intelligence of his death on the 4th of May, the day of my dream, and he had left me property which required my return to England.

"I had no idea of my uncle's illness, and still less that he was going to leave me any property. " F. T. D. Durell."

The Times obituary confirms May 4, 1863, as the date of death.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Durell writes:

(1) "I do not recollect ever having had a dream about death, certainly none that ever impressed me as this did; and I am not in the habit of having distressing dreams.

(2) "I did make a note at the time of my dream; unfortunately the diary I had of that year, 1863, I lost.

(3) " The two friends who were with me at the time of the dream, and to whom I mentioned it, are both dead."

In conversation, Mr. Durell distinctly confirmed the fact that the date in the letter was compared with that in his diary, and found to be the same; he does not know what was the hour of death. He is not, and was not, at all in the habit of having vivid dreams: this one made an extraordinarily strong impression on him before the receipt of the news. Mrs. Durell well remembers hearing the account very soon after Mr. Durell's return to England.

(434) From a gentleman, resident at Widnes, who prefers that his full name should not be published. The account is dated Dec. 12, 1882. ■■':'■-'

"I was about 14 years old, and at school at Southport, a town about 30 miles from my house. One night I dreamed in a most vivid manner that I saw my mother dead. Next morning I was oppressed with the firm

^ Professor Tyrrell clearly means accidental coincidence. A similar remark might be made, as I have again and again pointed out, about almost every isolated case; yet no one, on reflection, will maintain that the cases to which it would apply have therefore no legitimate place in a cumulative argument.

in.] DREAMS. 405

conviction that my mother had died, and though we happened to have a half holiday that morning, I could not throw off the feeling. While we were playing some game in our cricket field, a messenger came to say that my master wanted to see me at once. I felt that I knew what he had to say, and I suppose that my face must have shown some signs of my trouble, as, before telling me that my mother had died during the previous night, he asked me some kindly questions as to whether I felt ill. I have never had any similar kind of dream since (indeed, I very rarely dream), but I can never forget the impression made on me by this dream. " H. W. D."

[The memory of the subsequent incidents in this case to some extent confirms the coincidence. In conversation, I found the narrator very far from disposed to attach significance to an isolated case of the sort, though the impression made upon him was very strong.]

In the following case, though remote in date, there is no reason to doubt that the facts are correctly recorded. It is at any rate a point in favour of that view — and one rarely met with in second-hand narratives of the sort — that the degree of closeness in the coincidence is left uncertain.

(435) From Mrs. A. L. Udny, 61, Westbourne Park Villas, W.

"My father-in-law, G-eorge Udny, of the Bengal Civil Service, at one time Member of Council there, and a great friend of Lord Wellesley when he was Governor-G-eneral, was a man of deep religious feeling and high honour, but I imagine not the least disposed to believe in any superstitions or marvels; so I think his narrative may be depended on, and this was his account.

" He was residing at Maldah, in India, in 1794,^ and his only brother, Robert, to whom he was much attached, was living in Calcutta, with his wife Anne. Mr. Udny dreamed one night that he saw his brother and his wife struggling in the water, which distressing dream awoke him. He was about 200 miles from Calcutta, and very shortly received by dak-post a letter informing him that his brother and his wife had been drowned in the Hooghly shortly before, I do not know exactly how long. Robert and Anne Udny had been to pay a visit at Howrah on the other side of the Hooghly, and not returning at night to their own house, the servants had supposed that they had been induced to stay all night, and it was only the next day found that they had left their friends and had embarked in a Boleah (a large river pleasure boat), to return — which had got foul of, and been overturned by, the cable of a vessel lying at anchor in the river, and the current had carried away their bodies some distance down the stream, where they were found locked in each other's arms."

In a letter which accompanied the account, dated 25th July, 1883, Mrs. Udny writes: —

" I had always heard that the dream was three times repeated, ^ but the story as I have it, written down from my husband's dictation,^ is as

1 From The Life and Times of Carey, Marshman, and Ward, the Serampore Missionaries, we have been able to fix the incident as in January or February, 1794.

2 As regards the frequent recurrence of the number three in narratives of this sort, see p. 229, note.

3 The account was only in part dictated, but was throughout revised by Mr. Udny, on April 27, 1861.

406 SUPPLEMENT. [chap,

above; and I believe he was afraid to add more particulars, as he was a most exact man, and would rather understate than exaggerate, even undesignedly, any story."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Udny adds that her husband was not born till 1802, and therefore cannot have heard of this incident till a good many years after its occurrence; "but his father lived till 1830, and it must have been often talked of after my husband had grown up."

In the next case, it seems possible that the dreamer was impressed by some one known to her on board the ship (she knew Captain King, the commander), and that she embodied the idea of wreck in a simple manner.

(436) From Mr. E. Gardner Colton, Southampton Buildings, W.C.

"July 31st, 1883.

" Some years ago we were living in Derby Lane, Stoney croft, Liverpool. I remember one morning, early, a Mrs. Tate, a friend of my mother's (and who lived at Iquique, Peru, but was stopping with her father in England), came to our house and informed us she had had a very strange dream that morning early, in which she saw the steamer ' Santiago,' of the Pacific Company, strike on a rock in the Straits of Magellan, through which she [Mrs. Tate] had many times passed, and founder.

" Now, the extraordinary news came several weeks later that the steamer had that night or time run on that very rock.

"I well remember Mrs. Tate's vivid description of it.

" E. Gardner Colton."

We have written to Mrs. Tate, at Iquique, but have received no reply.

Mr. Colton's mother writes, from 61, Park Street, Southend-on-Sea: — •

" I remember this also, and it is quite correct. And Mrs. Tate was so strongly impressed by the dream that she noted the time by her watch, and, as far as I can recollect, it agreed with the time."

We learn from the Secretary of the Pacific Steam Navigation Company that the " Santiago " was lost in the Straits of Magellan on 25th January, 1869.

[The Times of March 19th, 1869, says that the ship "struck on a sunken reef, not shown in the charts." This shows that the accuracy of the dream has been to some extent exaggerated. We have no reason to doubt its exceptional vividness; but the case is clearly not one that would deserve attention, so long as the reality of telepathy was doubtful.]

In the next case, which is recent and corroborated, the deathscene is still just such as the dreamer might most naturally conjure up.

(437) Letter to the Rev. J. A. Macdonald, now of Rhyl, from Mrs. Harrison, of Park View, Queen's Park, Manchester.

"September 2nd, 1885. " I had a dear uncle, John Moore, St. John's, Isle of Man. I knew he had failed in health and strength during the winter of 1883 and 1884, but was not aware that he was really ill, or worse, so had not been thinking of him more than usual, nor anticipating a change; on the contrary, I was rather sanguine that, with the return of spring, his strength

would revive, knowing that he had only two years before recovered from a severe illness, his constitution being so excellent, though he was 85 years old when he was taken away. But on the night of March 1st, or very early in the morning of the 2nd, 1884 (I did not ascertain the time, but I had retired to rest very late and seemed to have slept two or three hours), I awoke crying, and with the agitating scenes of my dream clear before me. It was that I stood in the bedroom of my uncle, that he lay there dying, his remaining family near him, I just a short distance from the bed, looking on. When I joined my husband and daughter at the fireside, on coming downstairs in the morning, I told them my dream, and then thought no more about it till two days later, 4th March, when a letter arrived, saying that my uncle had passed away at 2 o'clock on the morning of the 2nd. " R. J. Harrison."

Mrs. Harrison can recall no other dream of death.

We find from the Isle of Man Register that the date of the death was March 2, 1884.

Mr. Harrison corroborates as follows: — "September 2nd 1885

" I distinctly remember my wife telling me the above dream on the Sunday morning, 2nd March, 1884, and it has often been spoken of in the family since. The letter acquainting us of Mr. Moore's death arrived at Manchester, from the Isle of Man, two days after, viz., Tuesday, 4th March, 1884. "J. P. Harrison."

[In conversation I learnt that Mr. Moore's son and daughter, who appeared in the dream, were the relatives likely to be present; so that point goes for nothing. But there is no doubt as to the exceptional character of the dream. On account of the age and infirmity of the person who died, this instance has not been included in the special group, used in the calculation in Vol. I., Chap VIII., § 4.]

In the next two cases, again, the death is represented in a completely natural way.

(438) From the late Mrs. Denroche, of 1, Berkeley Villas, Pittville, Cheltenham, who said that she had " never had any distressing or remarkable dream save this one." "February 23rd 1885.

" On the Easter morning [1843], about 6 o'clock, I dreamt that I was looking out of my bedroom window, and that I saw Mr. R. walking up the avenue, and that, knowing him to be in Australia, I felt so surprised and pleased that I ran down to meet him at the glass portico. When I put out my hand, I said, ' Oh, how glad I am to see you again.' He looked so sad and said, ' You will not be glad, as I bring you sad news. Your brother Stephen is dead.' I awoke at the moment, and it seemed as though the words were sounding in my ears. When the servant came to assist me to dress, I told her my dream, and to comfort me she said that dreams always went by contraries, ' and that he was most likely being married,' but said I must not tell this dream to my mother or to any one who might do so, as my brother writing so seldom always made her so anxious and unhappy; and so acting upon her advice, I did not speak of it, but the thought of it constantly recurred during the four months that intervened between the Easter and a visit to Bangor, in Wales, where a letter from Mr. R., dated Easter Sunday, was forwarded to me. He wrote

408 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

to me for the reason that he thought I could more gently break the sad news to my dear mother, and his letter commenced almost with the same words that I had heard in the dream. He told how that, a fortnight before his death, my brother had reached his house sadly out of health, and worn with the toilsome journey. At once he became too ill to write, and continued so till he died on Easter Sunday morning. " Olivia A. Denrochb."

[The death must have preceded the dream by a good many hours. The case is remote; but the fact that Easter Sunday is so marked a day makes it fairly probable that the coincidence was rightly remembered. Australian newspapers have been searched, as well as the most likely English obituaries, for a notice of the death, but without success,]

(439 and 440) From La Chance et la Destinee (1876), by Foissac, p. 599. Recit de M. Longet, membre de I'lnstitut, professeur de physiologie a la Faculte de Medecine de Paris.

" Notre savant confrere (M. Jules Cloquet, membre de I'lnstitut, professeur de Clinique Chirurgicale) nous a raconte que sortant fort avant dans la nuit d'une soirde chez M. Chomel, et s'etant endormi, il vit en songe un fant6me qui lui repr^sentait son f rere Hippolyte. II portait sur son dos una grande liane de papiers qu'il jeta au milieu de la chambre, en lui disant, ' Maintenant je n'ai 2^lus besoin de rien,' et il disparut. A son reveil M. Cloquet raconta ce songe aux personnes de son entourage sans en etre autrement impressionne. II se rendit a I'hopital, fit sa leQon de clinique comme a I'ordinaire, puis M. Giron de Busarainque lui dit, en lui prenant le bras: ' Ton frere Hippolyte est malade.' ' AUons le voir,' repondit M. Cloquet. Chemin faisant, M. Giron de Busarainque lui apprit qu'Hippolyte Cloquet ^tait mort dans la nuit d'une attaque d'apoplexie.

" Le songe qui me concerne est plus explicite encore. Lorsque j'etais ^tudiant en medecine, et interne de Dupuytren, je revai que je voyais mon pere atteint d'une maladie qui le conduisait au tombeau. Je m'eveillai dans un grand trouble que je cherchais a dominer en me disant que j 'avals quittd mon pere le dimanche d'auparavant en parfaite santd; nous dtions au mercredi. Je me representai que c'^tait une grande faiblesse de m'inquieter d'un songe, et je resolus de n'en tenir aucun compte. Mais I'image de mon pere mourant etait sans cesse presente a ma pensee, et pour echapper a cette obsession, quoique honteux de ma faiblesse, je partis pour St. Germain, ou je trouvai mon pere atteint d'une fluxion de poitrine qui I'enleva en cinq jours."

[This second case would more properly belong to the preceding section.]

Similarly in the next case, the agent's actual thought may have been the nucleus of a dream to which the dreamer supplied a setting.

(441) From Mr. Alexander G. Sparrow, Derwent Square, Liverpool.

" 1882.

" About 23 years ago, my youngest sister was visiting my then bachelor quarters; there was then residing in Liverpool an old friend of mine, D. L., a bachelor past 40, and who was considered by his friends most unlikely to marry. One morning at breakfast I related to my sister a very vivid dream. I was in the Old Exchange room; not being the

'Change time, it was nearly empty. I was leaning against a sort of counter under the clock. D. L. was sauntering up the middle of the long narrow room; and when he caught sight of me he quickened his step, and smiling put out his hand, saying, ' Sparrow, congratulate me; I am engaged to be married, and am as spooney as I was at one-and-twenty.' I did offer him my congratulations, and asked who the lady was, to which he replied, ' She is an Irish girl; I met her at Kingstown Regatta.'

"My eldest sister was, at that time, living with her husband in Ireland. When I returned from business that evening, my sister said, ' Your dream has come true, even the very words.' She put a letter from my eldest sister into my hand, and I read, ' Tell Alick his friend D. L. is engaged to one of the daughters of our rector. He met her at Kingstown Regatta.'

" Alex. G. Spareow."

The sister to whom the dream was told vaguely remembers the main fact of the occurrence.

[In conversation, Mr. Sparrow told Mr. Myers that he did not know his friend to be in Ireland, though he may have noticed that he was not on 'Change as usual; that there was nothing to connect his friend with Kingstown Regatta; that he had thought him a " regular old bachelor "; and that the words used in the letter were the exact words used in his dream. But after so long an interval of time, memory cannot be implicitly trusted for such details.]

The next dream presents an interesting mixture of right and wrong detail. If telepathic, and not accidental, it probably fell on the night following the event, and would then seem more naturally referable to the agent's subsequent picturing of the scene than to an immediate " clairvoyant " impression whose development had been deferred. The dream, as so often in these coincident cases, produced a quite exceptional impression of reality.

(442) From Mrs. Saxby, Mount Elton, Clevedon.

"January 31st, 1883.

Mrs. Saxby begins by saying that her husband was on the Continent at the outbreak of the Franco-German war, and that in one of her letters to him she copied out the famous " draft treaty."

" One night, not long after this, I saw in a kind of dream that my husband was walking on a high road, under the shade of broad spreading trees. I was charmed with the brilliancy of the green of their translucent leaves, through which the sunlight streamed overhead.

" I noticed that a country cart with three men in it passed him, and that one of the men had remarkably bushy black whiskers. They were all dressed in blouses, and had a very peculiar kind of cap on their heads. These caps had peaks to them. Presently the cart halted, and the men had some communication with my husband, in which the man with the black whiskers took a prominent part. I noticed that the men got out and in of the cart, and stood up and spoke for some time. There was evidently something going on, and it ended in one of the men going one way, on foot, while the other men jogged away in the cart in the contrary direction, and all, including my husband, passed away.

410 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" I cannot state why I knew that this was one of my mysterious kind of dreams, but I did, and I felt sure that something had happened to my husband; so I sat down and wrote to him directly, telling him my dream, and describing the scene and the circumstances that occurred in it, describing also the men and the cart as exactly as I could. I even etched with my pen a picture of the man with the black whiskers, and I asked my husband what kind of trees they were with the very bright translucent leaves, and what had happened to him under them. On August 2nd, 1870, dating from Luxembourg, my husband wrote to me: —

" ' My Dearest Effie, — 1 write a line from this station, while waiting for the train, to say that all is right.

" ' This will be posted somewhere on the way up the line, and will very likely not get to you much before I am coming in sight of England, only it is better you should hear from me before any chance story appears in the papers (should it so appear) of my having been taken prisoner by the Prussians yesterday (August 1st).

" ' I was simply at Wasserbillig, the pretty frontier station of the Luxembourg Duchy, and instead of roasting on the bridge over the little stream which here joins the Moselle, and marks the Prussian boundary, I strolled leisurely along in the deep shade of the walnut-trees by the river-bank, intending to turn back as soon as I should see the Prussian sentries.

" ' I had not gone far before I met a cart, with four sturdy peasants in blouses. As soon as they had passed me, they stopped the cart. One of them sprang out to cut off my retreat, and the rest took me prisoner. They were soldiers in disguise, all signs of douanes or frontier-guard having been done away in order to entrap spies, the patrols going about in blouses, with revolvers underneath, and short swords tucked away in their trousers, I think.

" 'They took me to Izel, near Treves, the nearest outpost, first possessing themselves of all letters and papers out of my pouch, and the having upon me a MS. draft of the proposed treaty for the French acquisition of Belgium, written in French, while I asserted myself to be an Englishman, made a fine point against me.

" ' The Major in command of the post was, luckily, a gentleman, though very strict in his examination, and the thing ended in my being released, and sent back to the Duchy under guard, but I was within an ace of being sent into the interior, to headquarters, for adjudication as a spy.

" ' You did not imagine what your diligence was putting in pickle for me, in copying the treaty, did you? Good-bye. — Ever your afiectionate husband, " ' S. H. S '

" After this my husband told me that the sergeant who took him prisoner had bushy black whiskers, and answered to the description I had given of one of the men whom I saw in the cart. He also told me that the soldiers, disguised as peasants, did not wear the caps with peaks, which I had drawn; but, strange to say, I had drawn the common foraging cap of the Prussian soldier, I not knowing what those soldiers wore.

" He also told me that when I sent him a copy of the draft treaty it had not appeared in any of the Belgian papers.

" If I recollect right, our letters crossed in reaching us.

" J. E. Saxby."

Writing on March 25, 1886, Mrs. Saxby adds:—

" The only hitch about it is that according to my calculations I saw the whole thing happen before it did happen, but I cannot help guessing that, because of the uncertainty of letters at the time of the war, I made a mistake as to dates. All I am quite sure there could be no mistake about is, that my husband's letter about the event and mine telling him what I had seen, crossed on the road. I have got his letter to me, and he brought home mine to him with the picture on it; but he subsequently burnt it, so my date was lost."

In the next case, a feature is introduced into the dream which happened to be impossible, but was in no way fantastic or symbolic.

(443) From Mr. J. D. Best, 70, Meldon Street, Newcastle-on-Tyne.

"December 23rd, 1885.

" The experience that you refer to took place just four years ago. My age was almost 1 9, and at the time I was in perfect health mentally, though physically rather fagged. The particulars, as far as I remember them, were as follows: —

" I had spent the evening of December 5th in close study at Greek grammar. About 11 o'clock I stopped, and sat down by the fire to read Manon Lescaut. Some time afterwards I fell asleep, and it was then that the idea of my grandmother's illness or death (I am uncertain which) first came to me. On wakening, about 12.30, 1 found my dictionary under the bars, and my anxiety for that made me, for the moment, forget my dream. Carelessly leaving the gas burning, I went to bed; and all I remember is that every particular of the room which I saw was strongly impressed upon me; that the old lady was breathing very heavily; and, strangest of all, my mother, who was and is in Australia, seemed in the room. She, as I thought, turned to me, saying, ' I fear, Duncan, she is dying! ' How long it was before I wakened I cannot say; but every fact was strangely distinct, for I seem to remember even the ticking of the clock. The gas being quite bright when I awoke, I rose to extinguish it, and quite accidentally noticed the time.

" On receiving the intimation of her death, on the morning of December 7th (Wednesday), the time, I noticed after my surprise had passed away, was between 4 and 5 a.m. On further inquiry, my aunt said that it was between half-past 4 and 5 o'clock. The time I had noticed was 5.30. I did not know that my relative was ill until I heard the news of her death. She was no great friend to me, and consequently I rarely troubled her, or thought of her. I had received a letter a week before, saying that she was not very well; but as she was a woman of about 76 years, I took but little notice of this, and had thought no more about it.

" You ask if I have ever had other dreams of death, which did not correspond with the reality. I think I can honestly answer ' No.'

" John D. Best."

[Mr. Best has gone to Australia, which prevents us for the time from obtaining further details.]

412 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

The next case introduces a distinctly bizarre element — the percipient's imagination reacting in a typically dreamlike fashion on the telepathic impression.

(444) From Miss Hutchinson, 3, Bagdale, Whitby.

"December 6th, 1885.

"On the morning of the 15th February, 1864 — the day after Valentine's Day, which impressed it on my mind — my father told me he had had that night a most painful and vivid dream, begging me not to mention it to our mother. The dream was this. Our dear E. clinging to him wet and naked, and begg-ing him to save him, for he was drowning; but the form was not that of a man of 22, but what he was as a baby.

" Early in March we received the sad intelligence that E. was drowned off the Cape, on the 14th February, through the swamping of a boat. He and one of his brother officers were caught in a squall when returning to H.M.S. ' Tartar,' after a few hours leave. These are the plain facts.

" Elizabeth L. Hutchinson."

In reply to inquiries, Miss Hutchinson adds: —

"Both my father and mother are dead, and i/* my father made any note of the dream at the time, it has been destroyed. It was natural for him to tell me, being the eldest in the family, six years older than my naval brother. It was on the morning of the \bth that he told me of his dream. A fortnight later, the Cape mail brought the sad news. An apparently foolish and trivial thing impressed the date on my memory at the time that it was told me, the day after Valentine's Day."

We find from the Admiralty that Lieut. A. E. Hutchinson's death occurred on Feb. 14, 1865; and Miss Hutchinson has kindly sent us a photograph of a tablet, erected to his memory, which records that he was drowned in Simon's Bay on the night of that day, by the swamping of a boat. The difference of time between England and the Cape is not much over an hour.

In the following case the brightness of the figure, and its gesture, were imagery sufficiently appropriate to the circumstances. We should hardly be justified in treating the experience as other than a dream; but it must be remarked that the form of the vision — a single figure appearing in the room where the percipient knows himself to be — is very unlike ordinary dreaming (see cases 527 and 545).

(445) From the Rev. John Mathwin, Vicar of West Pelton, Co. Durham. "December 19th, 1884.

" Forty years ago, or thereabouts, when I was about 20 years of age, a lady friend of mine, a distant relative by marriage — age between 40 and,50 — had for some time been in a delicate state of health, though not confined to the house. We frequently had quiet conversations together on religious matters. Neither of us was of an excitable turn of mind. As well as I can now recollect, I last saw my friend ahve about a fortniirht before her death. She did not seem at that time to be worse than

usual, and apparently might have lived at any rate for a few years. However, one night when I was in bed — say about 4 o'clock in the morning— I had what I may call a vision. A figure appeared before me neatly draped, and a certain brightness about it seemed to awake me. I at once felt conscious that someone was near me who wished to make a communication to me. I soon recognised the face of my invalid friend. She seemed to wish to give me tune to collect myself — evidently intimating that there was no cause why I should be afraid. As a matter of fact I had no fear at all. My then feelings may perhaps be best described as partaking both of wonder (or expectation) and pleasure. When, apparently, the figure had convinced herself that I recognised her, and that I had satisfied myself that I was under no delusion, she seemed to beckon me cheeringly with one or two fingers of her right hand, and to say to me, ' It's all right; come on.' She then vanished, and I neither saw nor heard anything more.

" Though there was no injunction given to me not to tell what I had seen, I yet felt that the communication was of too solemn a nature to allow me at once to talk of it openly. But I said to my brother at breakfast, about 8 o'clock that morning, that I had dreamt in the night that Mrs. So-and-so was dead, and it turned out, as we heard about 10 o'clock, that our friend had died during the night. For some years I never mentioned this experience to anyone, but afterwards I felt no hesitation in talking about it to intimate friends."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Math win writes on Feb. 17th, 1885: —

" To my brother I spoke of what I call the vision as if it had been a dream; but this was because I did not wish to draw his attention very specially to it, although I felt constrained to mention it to him in some way.

" He tells me now that he has no recollection of my having spoken to him about it, as I did at breakfast, on the morning of the death, but before we knew of the death having taken place. I am not, however, surprised that my brother should not now recollect the remark I made to him at that time.

" I never had any similar experience before, neither have I had since. I had no reason to expect any communication of the kind at any time.

" John Mathwin."

[In an uncorroborated case of so remote a date, it is of course impossible to be certain that the coincidence was as exact as in memory it appears to have been.]

The next case is very similar, though it was possibly not the dying person who was the agent.

(446) From Mrs. Penny, The Cottage, CuUompton.

"November 30th, 1882.

"One day I slept late, having a bad headache, and dreamed that I was in a wonderfully beautiful garden, and while I walked along its alleys a friend of one of my sisters, F. H., came smiling towards me, dressed in white, and looking radiant with joy. She said, ' I am here now,' and it is

414 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

always so lovely.' On waking, I found breakfast and letters brought up, and one open on my pillow to my sister from the sister of F. H., telling her that she had died after a very short illness.

"Now, as this poor F. H., who seldom had a day's happiness, was to me only an acquaintance, I conclude that the aura of her sister conveyed to my higher consciousness the fact of which she was full, and in the momentary duration of a dream this fact got translated into the adjacent ideas of life in Paradise.

" Yery likely the consciousness of my two sisters did affect my dreaming brain by some wave of new and energetic impulse; but I know there had been no possibility of talking in my room that morning. Though it all happened years ago, I can vouch for the accuracy of my memory. I cannot be sure whether it was in 1852 or a year or two later. "A. J. Penny."

We find from a notice in the Gentleman^s Magazine that F, H. died on June 6, 1852.

(447) From a German nurse who has been for 22 years in the service of Mrs. Balgarnie, of 9, Filey Road, Scarborough.

"July 9th, 1885.

" In February, 1871, I dreamed one night that I received a letter, on the envelope of which was written in my father's handwriting, ' 0 Death, where is thy sting? '

" Next morning I went in great trouble to my mistress, saying I felt perfectly sure my father must be dead, and related my dream. This fact was immediately written down, but the paper cannot now be found. Three days after the news came that my father had died that Sunday night, quite suddenly. During the day of the night on which he died he had evidently wished to tell me something, for he twice said, ' Tell Marie, tell Marie!' He soon became unconscious, and died in his sleep. I had not seen him for eight years, and though I knew he was not well, I had no idea that death was expected. My father lived and died in Germany, while I was, and am, in England. " Marie Lautier."

Miss Balgarnie, writing on December 11th, 1884, gave us a precisely similar account, saying, " the date and circumstances were put down by us immediately " on the narration of the dream.

Mrs. Balgarnie writes on July 28, 1885: —

In answer to yours, I can only say that the nurse told me her dream, on my entering the nursery one morning, adding, ' I am sure my father is dead.' And so it proved; in three days the letter announced the fact, and that he died with her name on his lips.

" I do not think I can give you any more particulars. I can't find the memorandum of the incident. " M. Balgarnie."

[The narrator's father, it appears, had been ill for 3 or 4 months; and she states that, though she had not heard of his being worse, her thoughts had been a good deal occupied with him. Mrs. Balgarnie, however, thinks that she now rather exaggerates the extent to which this was the case, from an objection to having her experience regarded as of any special interest.]

In the next case, the imagery is again distinctly suggestive of death, and fantastically represents the popular conception of " spirit " as a tenuous form of matter, but has no emotional character.

(448) From Mr. W. Brooks, Brooksby House, 87, Petherton Road Highbury New Park, N. u j^^y 27th, 1885.

"On the 15th November, 1875, at 5, Wallace Road, N., at 7.45 a.m., or thereabouts, I saw my late brother as a spirit, but when I spoke to 'him,' he gradually disappeared. I then woke up.

" On arriving at Hastings the following morning, I learnt from my sister that the above was the time my brother died there. This was the only time I ever saw him in the form of a ' ghost.' a ^ jj_ Brooks."

"We find the date and place of death confirmed in the Times obituary.

The following is a more detailed account of the dream: —

