" Colonel F. had died after a short illness, of which I knew nothing at all. My husband thought he had a cold, but had not named it to me or been anxious about it himself, and, as far as I was concerned, my acquaintance with him was of the slightest, so that if I had been told he had a cold, I should not have thought about it again.

" I may add that I have said many times, when asked to explain it, I believe it was caused by Major White, who was with the F.'s, thinking of us, and what a shock it would be, as my husband was the only other R.E. officer there, and would have to arrange for the funeral next day. That was what seemed to me likely, because I have noticed all my life that I frequently speak of the subjects which are in the thoughts of my friends and companions without any apparent cause, and have been accustomed to speak of it as the result of ' my sixth sense,' because I did not know what else to call it. It has often been a subject of annoyance to me in one way, which was that, with one very dear friend, our letters invariably crossed (though very infrequently written), so that we never felt as if we had an answer. She complained, and so did I, but we could not alter it. « Katje e Bolland."

We find from the Army List that Colonel F. died on September 7th, 1879.

The following is from Lieut. -Colonel Bolland, R.E.: —

"July 20th, 1884.

" With regard to Colonel F., I cannot say I remember that Mrs. Bolland mentioned his name, though she may have done so; but having awoke me with a terrific scream at about 1 a.m., on the 8th September, 1879 (which I think was the date), she told me she had been dreaming of my sister, and when looking up to speak to her, she saw a tall man, dead, being carried by four other men, his head dropping, and long, thick hair falling back.

" She was terribly frightened, and it was some time before we again got to sleep. The next sound I heard was the servant knocking at my door, and calling out, ' Get up, sir, you are wanted; the Colonel is dead! ' I had known Colonel F. was ill, but had not thought seriously of it, nor had I named it to my wife, who had herself been ill some days with denzie

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 361

fever. If I had thought of his illness at all, it would have been without any anxiety, as I had heard he was better, and able to lie on the sofa. It is now some years since these things happened, and I may not be correct in my remembrance of all details; but as to both the waking1 and the sleeping impressions being named to me before the events which they seemed to have indicated were known, or could be known to us in any ordinary way, I am positive.

" G. Herbert Bolland."

In conversation with the present writer, Colonel Bolland spontaneously referred to the extraordinary character of the scream.

Colonel Bolland's account suggested some doubt in his mind as to whether his wife had actually identified the dead man before the news of the death was known, and this point was accordingly inquired about. In his reply, Colonel Bolland mentioned that for some time past his hearing has been somewhat imperfect and uncertain, and he continues: —

" I can safely say that Mrs. Bolland, from the time of the event, has always said she said, ' It is the Colonel,' and I have never told her that I did not hear her, never doubting but that she said it. She, however, is much surprised that I never mentioned the fact of not having heard it. Her description at the time left no doubt in my own mind that it was Colonel F. She said she saw a long (or perhaps tall) man being carried, with his long hair falling back. Colonel F. wore his hair long for a military man of the present day, so the short description she gave me identified the man, as long hair is so rarely worn by military men. We may even have discussed whether it was he, but I don't remember her saying almost at once, ' It is the Colonel.' My wife has a very much better memory for conversations than I have, so that I will not undertake to say that we did not discuss, between 1 a.m. and 6 a.m., whether or not it was Colonel F.; but I am certain I did not hear my wife say at once, immediately after her short description of the dream, ' It is the Colonel,' but she may have said it without my hearing it. Mrs. Bolland is so minutely accurate in repeating a conversation that I feel sure her version is much more to be relied on than my own."

And Mrs. Bolland adds: —

"July 27th, 1884.

" As regards my own opinion of what happened after my dream about Colonel F., I have not, nor ever had, any doubt that it was he I saw. I can see the whole scene before me now, as I saw it then, and I cannot get over my impression that I mentioned his name at once, or rather, as soon as I came upon the recollection of what had made me scream. I think I have told you that although my own scream awoke me, 1 did not at once know that I had been frightened, or that I had cried out. But in describing my dream to my husband, I suddenly came upon the picture again, and then I was so frightened it was some time before I could get over it."

[I received by pure accident a confirmation of the fact that Mrs. Bolland mentioned Colonel F. at the moment. I was sitting at tea with

1 This refers to another case, No. 20], below.

362 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

Colonel and Mrs. Bolland; and the conversation turning on telepathy, but no mention having been made of the above case, a sister of Colonel Bolland's, who was present, suddenly said to Mrs. Bolland, " Do you remember about that time when you called out, ' There's the Colonel 1 ' " It turned out that she remembered these words as having occurred in a letter from Mrs. Bolland, which described the incident immediately after its occurrence; and neither of them could recall that the subject had been afterwards talked of between them.]

We come now to cases where a distinctly fantastic element appears; the reality is bodied forth in a dream-scene which has no relation to actual possibilities.

The following case is remarkable in that there were two percipients, for one of whom the distant event was embodied in a fantastic, and for the other in a more normal, manner. The doubling of the experience of course enormously increases the improbability that the coincidence was accidental; but it is open to us to suppose that only one of the dreams was directly connected with the absent friend, and that this dream produced the other, on the analogy of some of the cases of simultaneous dreaming already given.1 Miss Varah, of 40, James Street, Cowley Road, Oxford, writes: —

"January, 1885.

(127) " A friend of mine, Mr. Adams, was seriously ill, and we were expecting his death. I had a dream that I saw the corpse of his wife laid out upon a bed, though we had no reason to suppose that she was even ill. A friend with whom I was staying also dreamed that she saw Mrs. Adams a corpse. [This is not accurate.] The morning's post brought news of her dangerous illness, and a telegram during the morning announced her death. My friend and I told each other our dreams in the morning at breakfast. My friend had called for her letters before coming down in the morning, fearing bad news. " Marianne Yarah."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Yarah tells us that Mrs. Adams died between 11 and 1, on the night of February 25th, 1876, and we find the 25th given as the date in an obituary notice in the Sheffield Daily Telegraph; but she does not know the exact hour of her dream. She adds, " The dream described is the only one I believe I ever had of the kind."

Miss Varah's friend, the late Mrs. Muller, wrote as follows: —

" 8, Bevington Road, Oxford.

"January, 1885.

" I dreamed that I was at Hastings, on the shore. I saw my friend,

Miss Adams, running towards me. She passed me by, and then took off

her hat and bent her head down into the sea. I tried to grasp her by

her clothes, but she cried out, ' Don't stop me, for my mother is dying.'

1 This alternative will be considered in Chap, xviii., on " Collective Cases."

In the morning I jumped out of bed on hearing the post, and said to Marianne Varah, ' Have you had a letter from Miss Adams? There must be something the matter with her mother.' Miss Varah answered, ' I have a letter, but have not opened it. I have had a very strange dream, but I thought nothing of it, because Mr. Adams is so ill.' Miss Varah then opened her letter, and called out, ' You are right.' There were a few lines, ' My mother is dangerously ill: doctors say no hope. We will send a telegram.' The telegram came during the morning of February 24th, [clearly a mistake for 26th,] 1876, saying she was dead. She had been in perfect health the day before.

" Neither Miss Varah nor myself are at all given to dreams, and had not till then believed in them at all. « Emily E Muller "

The next account is contained in a letter from Brigade-Surgeon Wright, Junior Army and Navy Club, St. James' Street, S.W., to his sister.

"October 18th, 1884.

(128) "You asked me to give you an account of the extraordinary dream I had in India, on the occasion of our mother's death. It was more vivid than an ordinary dream, and impressed itself so much on me that directly I awoke, which was at the conclusion of the dreani, I looked at my watch, and, allowing for the difference of time between India and England, my mother was dying at the moment of my dream.

"I was out deer-stalking during the month of April, 1869, in the territory of our feudatory chief, the Maharajah of Gualior, who provided me with a guard of Sepoys, while in the jungle, to protect me from Dacoits. On the night of April 15th I slept outside the village of Kurkurree, under a large variety of fig-tree called in India a burgot tree. I dreamed that my father (who died in 1854) and mother appeared to me; the latter addressed and kissed me and asked me, ' Where is Maggie? ' [the narrator's wife.] She then receded gradually and disappeared. I noted carefully the date and hour. When I returned from there to Theusie, where my regiment was stationed, I got a letter from my mother, written as if she was in excellent health and spirits; but soon after came two letters, one from my brother James, and one from my brother-in-law, Arthur Wright. I opened my brother's first, and, after the first paroxysms of grief had lessened, eagerly scanned it to see if the death corresponded with my dream, but no date was mentioned. Deeply have I often since regretted not having called somebody in before opening letter No. 2, in order to fully verify the circumstances. For really, now that the sad intelligence was known to me, Arthur's letter was opened by me more to see if it coincided as to the date of her death and my dream, and I then found that it coincided exactly. << pj> Wright "

In a letter to us, Mr. Wright says: —

"October 24th, 1884.

" The dream took place about midnight, which, allowing for the difference of time between India and England, makes the coincidence very close. I did look at my watch directly I awoke, but regret very much not having taken written notes at the time. I awoke at the end of the dream. Death was suggested to my mind by seeing my mother accompanied by my

364 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

father, who had predeceased her by 15 years. I have not often dreamt of my relatives in a vivid way."

In answer to inquiries, he adds: —

" I was not awake. The impression produced was that arising from a very vivid dream. The date of my dream being April 15th, was far more than an inference, it was a certainty; as when I got the two letters announcing my mother's death (one from my brother and one from my brother-in-law) I opened my brother's first, and after recovering somewhat from the shock of the sad intelligence, I eagerly re-perused it to see if the date of the death corresponded with that of my dream, but found that no date was mentioned. I then hurriedly opened the second letter, with a view of seeing the date of her death, and then for the first time learned that she died on the 15th April, the date of my dream."

Miss Wright, Secretary of the Girls' Friendly Society, 3, Victoria Mansions, Victoria Street, Westminster, S.W., says: —

"October 18th, 1884. "My mother died on April 15th, 1869, at 8 p.m. Her death was sudden. She was only 24 hours ill, and was quite unconscious for 4 hours before her death.1 « LucY a Weight."

Here the dreamer's mind embodied the idea of death in the figure

of a long deceased relative. More commonly the imagery in such

cases is drawn from the familiar earthly symbols of death — coffins,

funeral processions, and graves. A few examples may be given here;

others will be found in the Supplement (Vol. ii., pp. 417-26). The

following account is from the Rev. C. C. Wambey, of Paragon,

Salisbury, who in conversation communicated the names of the

persons concerned.

"April, 1884.

(129) "In my bachelor days I lived for two years at C, in the outskirts of London. On a certain night I dreamed that Mr. W., with whom I was acquainted, and myself were walking in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey.

" He abruptly bade me ' Good-bye,' saying that he must go to a particular gravestone. I — in my dream — entreated him not to go, but to come back with me out of the cloisters. ' No, no,' he replied, ' I must go, I am fated to go.' With that he broke from me, hurried to the stone, and sank through the floor. The next morning I mentioned the dream to my landlady, and told her it was my firm conviction that my friend was dead.

" The next morning's post brought me a letter from my brother, who stated that on the previous night Mr. W. had died suddenly from disease of the heart."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Wambey says: —

1 See on this subject Chap, v., § 10, and the list of cases in the Index under the heading

Unconsciousness.

viil] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 365

"May 17th, 1884.

"This occurred between June, 1855, and June, 1856; I forget the month and day.

" I mentioned the dream to my landlady next morning. The last time I saw Mr. W., he was in his usual health, and I had received no intimation whatever that he was ailing, before I had the dream.

"Just at this time I cannot recall any dream I may have had of a friend's death, but I have dreamt of a friend's marriage, which dream was fulfilled by the event, which took many by surprise; it appeared wholly improbable. Nothing had occurred to lead me to dream of Mr. W."

The next case is from Mr. N. T. Menneer, Principal of Torre College, Torquay.

"December 18th, 1883.

(130) " I thought you would be interested in the following account of a strange dream that came under my notice some 26 years ago.

" My wife, since deceased, had a brother residing at Sarawak, and at the time to which I refer, staying with the Raja, Sir James Brooke.

" The following is an extract from the second volume of The Raja of Saraivak, by Gertrude L. Jacob, p. 238. ' Mr. Wellington ' (my wife's brother) ' was killed in a brave attempt to defend Mrs. Middleton and her children.' The Chinese, it appears, taking Mr. Wellington for the Raja's son, struck off his head.

" And now for the dream. I was awoke one night by my wife, who started from her sleep, terrified by the following dream. She saw her headless brother standing at the foot of the bed with his head lying on a coffin by his side. I did my best to console my wife, who continued to be much distressed for some considerable time. At length she fell asleep again, to be awoke by a similar dream. In the morning, and for several days after, she constantly referred to her dream, and anticipated sad news of her brother.

" And now comes the strangest part of the story. When the news reached England, I computed approximately the time, and found it coincided with the memorable night to which I have referred.

"N. T. Menneer." In reply to inquiries, Mr. Menneer adds: —

" My deceased wife never had, as far as I know, similar distressing dreams of death to which no real event corresponded.

"There is no doubt that the Chinese struck off his head. Particulars of his fate were sent to Mr. Wellington's father by the Raja himself.

" In saying I calculated the time and found it to correspond approximately, I probably gave you a wrong impression. I did not note down the date of the dream, but when the news reached England I calculated the usual time of such a voyage, and found it corresponded with the time I considered had elapsed since the night of the dream."

Professor Sidgwick, after an interview with Mr. Menneer, on September 17, 1884, wrote: —

" He said that Mrs. Menneer had no definite idea where her brother

366 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

had gone; they had not heard from him since his departure; she had certainly no idea that he would be engaged in military operations at all, still less that he would be engaged with Chinese. In fact she was in no state of alarm about him at all. Mr. Menneer said that they did not put down the date of the dream at the time, and that when the news came he could not remember it exactly; but he took pains to calculate it at the time, and satisfied himself that it was at the time of the death as nearly as he could reckon. He had not been a believer in dreams previously. He heard the particulars of the death from Mr. Wellington, the father."

This dream, if it is to be telepathically explained, must apparently have been due to the last flash of thought in the brother's consciousness. It may seem strange that a definite picture of his mode of death should present itself to a man in the instant of receiving an unexpected and fatal blow; but, as Hobbes said, " thought is quick." The coffin, at any rate, may be taken as an item of death-imagery supplied by the dreamer's mind. The repetition of the dream should again be noted (p. 357).

In the following cases the imagery of death is still more elaborately developed. Mrs. Hilton, a lady actively engaged in most practical work, and not in the least a " visionary," has given us the following accounts.

" 234, Burdett Road, E.

" April 10th, 1883.

(131) "The dream which I am about to relate occurred about 2 years ago. I seemed to be walking in a country road, with high grassy banks on either side. Suddenly I heard the tramp of many feet. Feeling a strange sense of fear, I called out, 'Who are these people coming 1 ' A voice above me replied, 'A procession of the dead.' I then found myself on the bank, looking into the road where the people were walking, five or six abreast. Hundreds of them passed by me — neither looking aside nor looking at each other. They were people of all conditions and in all ranks of life. I saw no children amongst them. I watched the long line of people go away into the far distance, but I felt no special interest in any of them, until I saw a middle-aged Friend, dressed as a gentleman farmer. I pointed to him and called out, ' Who is that, please 1 ' He turned round and said in a loud voice, ' I am John M., of Chelmsford.' Then my dream ended. Next day, when my husband returned from his office he told me that John M., of Chelmsford, had died the previous day.

" I may add that I only knew the Friend in question by sight and cannot recollect ever speaking to him."

We find from a newspaper obituary that J. M.'s death took place on January 14th, 1880.

(132) " About a year ago, I had a dream very similar to the preceding one. The locality was the same. The only difference was that I was standing in the road, trying to prevent a little girl from joining the pro-

viil] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 367

cession. The lady, in whose charge the child was and who was standing by me in the road, said, ' I am giving her into the charge of Charles P., of Darlington,' mentioning the name of a well-known member of the Society of Friends. I replied, ' That is not Charles P.' I called out as before, ' Who are you, please 1 ' A young man in the procession turned round and said, ' I am J. G.' Next morning I heard that J. G. had died rather suddenly in the night. I knew this young man, but not intimately, and I had not seen him for months.

"Again,. a third time, I found myself in the same place, but my terror was so extreme, that I kneeled on the bank and prayed that I might not witness the march of the dead. Instantly I was removed, and the tramp of the terrible procession ceased. I never discovered that anyone whom I knew died at the time of this last dream.

"In each of these three dreams I seemed to be under the influence and dread of some unseen power. « Marie Hilton "

In answer to inquiries as to the first of these cases, Mrs. Hilton says: — " I did not know that John M. was ill, and had not even heard his

name mentioned; I could not trace any reason why he should have been

in my thoughts."

In answer to inquiries as to the second case, she says: —

" I recognised the little girl as the child of a friend. I had not heard

anything about the child to make me dream of her. Charles P. had been

dead for some years at the date of the dream."

The absence of any ascertained coincidence on the third occasion might be represented as an argument for regarding the correspondence on the two previous occasions as accidental, but it would be a very weak one; since even if the dream had recurred a thousand times, the chances against the accidental occurrence of two such coincidences would still remain enormous. The tendency on the dreamer's part to symbolise death in one particular way is neither against nor in favour of the telepathic explanation.1

While on the subject of symbolic dreams, I may observe that many persons profess to have a particular recurrent dream, which in itself has no obvious relation to death, but which proves in fact to coincide more or less closely with deaths or other calamities that affect them. I need hardly say that such statements have no evidential value, unless we can be sure that they are more than the loose assertions of persons who see no importance in noting misses as well as hits, and to whom it is no difficulty in the way of the supposed correspondence that the two events were separated perhaps by a month's interval. In most of such cases, indeed, the dream

1 It is worth noting that these dreams — for all their bizarrerie — seem to belong to a known type. Our friend, Mr. J. A. Symonds, has given us an account of a Swiss Todten- Volk-Seher, who sees a procession of the dead going along a path with a high bank on one side.

368 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

precedes the event and is professedly taken as a " warning "; so that, however well attested, they could have no place in this book. Occasionally, however, a person who professes this remarkable gift can supply sufficiently circumstantial evidence to have some claim to attention; and one rather striking instance of the sort will be found in the Supplement (case 460).

§ 8. I pass now to the final class of cases, where the dreamer seems, as it were, to be transported to the actual scene of the event. These cases, like the final cases of the 6th chapter, cannot but suggest certain phenomena of the waking state which are other than those of thought-transference — the phenomena of so-called clairvoyance. But I must again draw attention to the radical differences in the phenomena which that word may be made to cover. There are certain alleged facts of waking clairvoyance which, if true, would drive us to the conclusion that the percipient's powers of vision were independent of the thoughts, either actually passing or latent, in the minds of others. No doubt very many facts have been loosely ascribed to clairvoyance, which we should now regard as simple examples of thought-transference. This has been owing partly to the blindness of writers on clairvoyance to the enormous difficulties which the assumption of such a faculty involves; but still more to the lack, until lately, of accurate experiments in thought-transference. But there remain facts which — if the testimony of Robert Houdin and other experts can be trusted — no possible extension of the theory of thought-transference will cover; and in which, though the particular result obtained depended in some manner on the particular person who sought to obtain it, the range of perception altogether transcended the past or present contents of that person's mind. Now with such cases as these we have nothing to do in the present work. Even should some of the examples to be adduced seem to take us beyond the confines of thought-transference in any literal sense, they will still not take us beyond the confines of telepathy — of a theory which implies some sort of influence of the mind of an agent on the mind of a percipient. The percipient may observe a scene, into the midst of which he finds himself mentally transported, with such completeness of detail, and for such a length of time, as at any rate to suggest some actual exercise on it of his own independent perceptional powers; but it will still be a scene with some pnncipa.l actor in which he is in some way linked. He may see

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 369

a death-bed and the surrounding mourners; but we have no sort of reason to suppose that he could similarly see any death-bed. There has, at any rate, been an agent, in the sense of a particular person whose actual presence in the scene has to be accepted as a condition of the percipient's imagined presence; and however novel and exceptional the way in which the percipient's range of knowledge may seem to be extended, these further glimpses still take place apparently not in any chance direction, but in a direction marked out by his previous affinities with other minds. But in fact the process need not seem so exceptional, if we recall once more the right which experiment has given us to draw on parts of the agent's mind which are below the level of ostensible consciousness. For in none of the cases to be here cited do the percipient's impressions extend beyond what has been before the mind — though certainly beyond what has been before the attention — of persons actually present at the scene. We may perhaps be led sometimes to conceive several of these minds as contributing to the impression. But some of the experimental results have already introduced on a small scale the notion of joint agency,1 and may thus enable us to maintain the analogy between experimental and spontaneous telepathy in a manner which least of all might have been expected.

I may cite at once the two cases which seem the furthest removed from any of the preceding, inasmuch as the " agency " in them is specially hard to conceive. They happen to be at the two extremes of the trivial and the tragic. The first is reported by a witness — Miss Busk, of 16, Montagu Street, W. — who is strongly adverse to the telepathic theory, and holds the view that all the alleged coincidences are accidental, and that the more numerous they are, the

more clearly accidental must they be. ^nni

J J "1884.

(133) " I dreamt that I was walking in a wood in my father's place in Kent, in a spot well known to me, where there was sand under the firs; I stumbled over some objects, which proved to be the heads, left protruding, of some ducks buried in the sand. The idea impressed me as so comical that I fortunately mentioned it at breakfast next morning, and one or two persons remember that I did so. Only an hour later it happened that the old bailiff of the place came up for some instructions unexpectedly, and as he was leaving he said he must tell us a strange thing that had happened: there had been a robbery in the farmyard, and some stolen ducks had been found buried in the sand, with their heads protruding, in the very spot where I had seen the same. The farm was underlet, and I

1 See Professor Lodge's experiment, p. 50; and the remarks on M. Richet's later results, p. 80.

2 A

370 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

had not even any interest in the ducks, to carry my thoughts towards them under the nefarious treatment they received.

"R. H. Busk."

Miss Busk's sister, Mrs. Pitt Byrne, who was present when this dream was told, corroborates as follows: —

" I distinctly remember, and have often since spoken of, the circumstance of Miss R. H. Busk's relating to me her dream of ducks buried in the wood, before the bailiff who reported the incident came up to town.

"J. Pitt Byrne."

The next case is remarkable for the number of points of correspondence, though the dream is typically fantastic and confused. The narrative is from Mrs. Storie, of 8, Gilmour Road, Edinburgh. It was written by her, she tells us, the day, or the day after, the news of the fatal accident arrived, merely as a relief to herself, and without an idea of any further use. She prepared an account for us in a more finished form; but it seems preferable to give the original rough notes, which she has kindly allowed us to copy. The brother in this case was a twin with herself (see p. 279).

"Hobart Town.

"July, 1874.

(134) "On the evening of the 18th July, I felt unusually nervous. This seemed to begin [with the occurrence of a small domestic annoyance] about half-past 8 o'clock. "When I went to my room I even felt as if someone was there. I fancied, as I stepped into bed, that someone in thought tried to stop me. At 2 o'clock I woke from the following dream. It seemed like in dissolving views. In a twinkle of light I saw a railway, and the puff of the engine. I thought, ' What's going on up there? Travelling 1 I wonder if any of us are travelling and I dreaming of it.' Someone unseen by me answered, ' No: something quite different — something wrong.' ' I don't like to look at these things,' I said. Then I saw behind and above my head "William's upper half reclining, eyes and mouth half shut; his chest moved forward convulsively, and he raised his right arm. Then he bent forward, saying, ' I suppose I should move out of this.' Then I saw him lying, eyes shut, on the ground, flat. The chimney of an engine at his head. I called in excitement, ' That will strike him! ' The ' someone ' answered ' Yes — well, here's what it was '; and immediately I saw William sitting in the open air — faint moonlight — on a raised place, sideways. He raised his right arm, shuddered, and said, ' I can't go on, or back, No.' Then he seemed lying flat. I cried out, ' Oh! Oh! ' and others seemed to echo, ' Oh! Oh! ' He seemed then upon his elbow, saying, ' Now it comes.' Then, as if struggling to rise, turned twice round quickly, saying, ' Is it the train 1 the train, the train,' his right shoulder reverberating as if struck from behind. He fell back like fainting; his eyes rolled. A large dark object came between us like panelling of wood, and

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 371

rather in the dark something rolled over, and like an arm was thrown up, and the whole thing went away with a swish. Close beside me on the ground there seemed a long dark object. I called out, ' They've left something behind, it's like a man.' It then raised its shoulders and head and fell down again. The same someone answered, ' Yes, sadly.' [1 ' Yes,' sadly.] After a moment I seemed called on to look up, and said, ' Is that thing not away yet 1 ' Answered, ' No.' And in front, in light, there was a railway compartment in which sat Rev. Mr. Johnstone, of Echuce. I said, ' What's he doing there 1 ' Answered, ' He's there.' A railway porter

went up to the window asking, ' Have you seen any of.' I caught no

more, but I thought he referred to the thing left behind. Mr. Johnstone seemed to answer, ' No '; and the man went quickly away — I thought to look for it. After all this the someone said close to me, ' Now I'm

a tall dark figure at my head going.' I started, and at once saw William's back at my side. He put his right hand (in grief) over his face, and the other almost touching my shoulder, he crossed in front, looking stern and solemn. There was a flash from the eyes, and I caught a glimpse of a fine, pale face like ushering him along, and indistinctly another. I felt frightened, and called out, ' Is he angry?' ' O, no.' ' Is he going away 1 ' Answered, ' Yes,' by the same someone, and I woke with a loud sigh, which woke my husband, who said, ' What is it 1 ' I told him I had been dreaming ' something unpleasant '■ — named a ' railway,' and dismissed it all from my mind as a dream. As I fell asleep again I fancied the ' someone ' said, ' It's all gone,' and another answered, ' I'll come and remind her.'

" The news reached me one week afterwards. The accident had happened to my brother on the same night about half past 9 o'clock. Rev. Mr. Johnstone and his wife were actually in the train which struck him. He was walking along the line, which is raised 2 feet on a level country. He seemed to have gone 16 miles — must have been tired and sat down to take off his boot, which was beside him, dozed off and was very likely roused by the sound of the train; 76 sheep-trucks had passed without touching him, but some wooden projection, likely the step, had touched the right side of his head, bruised his right shoulder, and killed him instantaneously. The night was very dark. I believe now that the someone was (from something in the way he spoke) William himself. The face with him was white as alabaster, and something like this [a small sketch pasted on] in profile. There were ' many other thoughts or words seemed to pass, but they are too many to write down here.

" The voice of the ' someone ' unseen seemed always above the figure of William which I saw. And when I was shown the compartment of the carriage with Mr. Johnstone, the someone seemed on a line between me and it — above me."

In an account-book of Mrs. Storie's, on a page headed July, 1874, we find the 18th day marked, and the words, "Dear Willie died," and " Dreamed, dreamed of it all," appended.

The first letter, from the Rev. J. C. Johnstone to the Rev. John Storie, announcing the news of the accident, is lost. The following are extracts from his second and third letters on the subject: —

2 a 2

372 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

" Echuce, 10th August, 1874.

" The place where Hunter was killed is on an open plain, and there was consequently plenty of room for him to escape the train had he been conscious; but I think Meldrum's theory is the correct one, that he had sat down to adjust some bandages on his leg and had thoughtlessly gone off to sleep. There is only one line of rails, and the ground is raised about 2 feet — the ground on which the rails rest. He had probably sat down on the edge, and lain down backwards so as to be within reach of some part of the train. It was not known at the time that an accident had occurred. Mrs. Johnstone and myself were in the train. Meldrum says he was not very much crushed. The top of the skull was struck off, and some ribs were broken, under the arm-pit on one side. His body was found on the Sunday morning by a herd-boy from the adjoining station." « August 29th, 1874.

" The exact time at which the train struck poor Hunter must have been about 9.55 p.m., and his death must have been instantaneous."

The above corresponds with the account of the inquest in the Riverine Herald for July 22nd. The Melbourne Argus also describes the accident as having taken place on the night of Saturday, the 18th.

The following remarks are taken from notes made by Professor Sidgwick, during an interview with Mrs. Storie, in April, 1 884, and by Mrs. Sidgwick, after another interview in September, 1885: —

Mrs. Storie cannot regard the experience exactly as a dream, though she woke up from it.1 She is sure that it did not grow more definite in recollection afterwards. She never had a series of scenes in a dream at any other time. They were introduced by a voice in a whisper, not recognised as her brother's. He had sat on the bank as he appeared in the dream. The engine she saw behind him had a chimney of peculiar shape, such as she had not at that time seen; and she remembers that Mr. Storie thought her foolish about insisting on the chimney — unlike (he said) any which existed; but he informed her when he came back from Victoria, where her brother was, that engines of this kind had just been introduced there. She had no reason to think that any conversation between the porter and the clergyman actually occurred. The persons who seemed to lead her brother away were not recognised by her, and she only saw the face of one of them.

Mr. Storie confirms his wife having said to him at the time of the dream, " What is that light 1 " Before writing the account first quoted, she had just mentioned the dream to her husband, but had not described it. She desired not to think of it, and also was unwilling to worry him about it because of his Sunday's work. This last point, it will be observed, is a confirmation of the fact that the dream took place on the Saturday night; and "it came out clearly" (Mrs. Sidgwick says) "that her recollection about the Saturday night was an independent recollection, and not read back after the incident was known." The strongly nervous state that preceded the dream was quite unique in Mrs. Storie's experience.

1 In conversation with the present writer, Mrs. Storie mentioned that on one other occasion in her life she had had a sort of "borderland " hallucination (see the following chapter); and that this had corresponded, certainly to within a few days, but she did not discover exactly how closely, with the death of another brother in America. She knew him to be delicate, but was not apprehending his death.

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 373

But as it appeared that, according to her recollection, it commenced at least an hour before the accident took place, it must be regarded as of no importance evidentially. The feeling of a presence in the room was also quite unique.

Here the difficulty of referring the true elements in the dream to the agent's mind exceeds that noted in Mr. Menneer's case (p. 365, but see pp. 230-1). For Mr. Hunter was asleep; and even if we can conceive that the image of the advancing engine may have had some place in his mind, the presence of Mr. Johnstone could not have been perceived by him. But it is possible, of course, to regard this last item of correspondence as accidental, even though the dream was telepathic. It will be observed that the dream followed the accident by about 4 hours; such deferment is, I think, a strong point in favour of telepathic, as opposed to independent, clairvoyance (see p. 329).

To come, however, to less abnormal cases — the following account is from Mr. J. T. Milward Pierce, who has a cattle-ranche in Nebraska.

" Blyville P.O., Knox County, Nebraska, U.S.A.

"December 5th, 1885.

(135) "I have just, or rather a month ago, had a very unpleasant accident which has fortunately turned out all right and has given me the pleasure of forwarding to you a very complete and unmistakeable case of 'second sight.' I think it better to enclose the two letters you will find herein, as I received them to-day. They are in answer to two of mine dated about the 2nd or 3rd, about a week after the accident.

" The accident occurred at 7 o'clock in the morning of the 26th of October. I fainted from loss of blood, and was lying for a few moments on the ground. I was walking towards a pair of French windows, with my hands in my pockets, when I stumbled over a chair and fell right through the lowest pane of glass, face foremost, cutting my nose off on one side, and nearly taking an eye out — so you will see my sister's dream was pretty accurate. I also enclose a statement made by two residents here of this end of the case, which will, I hope, make it complete. I may say our time is 6| hours ahead of [mistake for behind] England.

"Jno. T. M. Pierce."

Mr. Pierce enclosed the following statement: —

" On Monday, October 26th, about 7 o'clock a.m., Mr. J. T. M. Pierce fell through a French window, cutting his face badly, and lay on the floor insensible for several minutes. « j "Watson

" C. J. Hunt.

The enclosures, from Mr. Pierce's sister and mother, are dated respectively November 15th and 17th, 1885. Miss Pierce, after condolences as to the accident, writes: —

" Do you know it is the oddest thing, but on the 26th of October I dreamt that I saw you lying on the ground quite unconscious, your face bleeding and looking so dreadful. I woke up calling to you. I told Kate

374 DREAMS WHICH MAT BE REASONABLY [chap.

directly I came down, and we both marked the date. I told mother, too, I had had a bad dream about you, but I did not describe it for fear of frightening her. Was it not strange? It was such a vivid dream, it struck me very much, but I did not mention it in my last letter to you; I thought you would laugh about it. But it is strange — on the very day too."

In Mrs. Pierce's letter, the following sentence occurs: —

" Was not May's dream singular 1 She came down that morning you were hurt, and told Kate, every particular of it agreeing with the time you were hurt."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Pierce writes: —

" Frettons, Danbury, Chelmsford.

" December 31st, 1885.

" On the night of the 26th October (i.e., 26-27), I dreamt I saw my brother lying on the ground, his face bleeding and dark; he was quite unconscious. I called to him, but he did not answer, and was stooping towards him, calling him by name, when I awoke. It was so vivid a dream that it produced a great impression upon me, and I felt as though some accident had befallen him. I cannot tell at all what time in the night it was. In the morning I told my sister, and put down the date, also mentioning it to one or two others; but to my sister I described it in the same words that I have now used.

" I am not at all accustomed to having bad dreams about friends; indeed, I never remember having had one before. Neither am I superstitious, but, nevertheless, I felt convinced that something untoward had occurred. So when the letter came, just three weeks after the accident, I knew it was the confirmation of my fears.

" M. Pierce."

[The coincidence was not as close as Mrs. Pierce's words would imply; and she seems to have mistaken the morning on which the dream was mentioned. When Mr. Pierce was lying on the floor as described, the time of day at Chelmsford would be between 1.30 and 2 p.m. Therefore the dream on the following night must have been at least 8 hours, and may have been more than 12 hours, after the event. See the remark on deferment made in connection with the last case.]

The following narratives are from the Hon. Mrs. Montgomery Moore, now residing at Gipsy Lodge, Norwood.

" A. Adjutant-General's House, Royal Barracks, Dublin.

"December 5th, 1883. (136) " 1 had driven my husband, then commanding the 4th Hussars, out in the carriage very early one morning, on his way to a shooting expedition. I returned home, rather tired and exhausted, about 8 o'clock a.m. • and after breakfasting, Jay down on my bed before dressing for the day and fell asleep. I dreamed that a small blue three-cornered note was brought in to me, which contained these words: —

My dear Mrs. M. M.,— I know the Colonel is away; but would you

c< c

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 375

look in his room for the rules of the " Kriegspiel "? You will find them, I think, on his table. Yours sincerely, — George Philips.'

" I awoke, and never having heard that there were ' Kriegspiel ' rules, I laughed at having dreamed of it. When I had finished dressing, I went into the drawing-room, and on the piano just outside my door, I saw the identical blue three-cornered note, which I found contained the exact words written exactly as I had seen them in my dream. I mentioned it in my answer to Major Philips; for going to my husband's room, I found the little book of rules on his table. This was, I believe, in March, 1877."

(137) "A thing of the same kind occurred in April or May just after. I was asleep in an armchair on a very hot day, about 4 p.m., when I dreamed of receiving a note from a lady, asking us to come to lawn-tennis. She was a person I was not intimate with, and to whose house I had never been. I woke and saw a note on the table by me, which a servant had put down noiselessly. On opening it I found it was an invitation to lawn tennis, from the lady of whom I had dreamed, and in the very words I had dreamed of reading. " Jane Montgomery Moore."

Asked whether she had had any similar experiences which had not corresponded with reality, Mrs. M. Moore replied, " No, I don't think I ever had."

In answer to further inquiries, Mrs. M. Moore says: — " Probably both notes were written before I was asleep. Both places from which they came were very near to our house."

Here the immediate comparison of the reality with the dreams, and also the fact that the dreams contained apparently no extraneous features, make it especially unlikely that the correspondences were fictitiously " read back." And if not, the cases seem typical examples of telepathic clairvoyance; for no one probably will suppose that the percipient could have obtained a similar vision of notes with whose writers, and in whose contents, she had no concern.

The next case was sent to us by Miss Richardson, of 47, Bedford Gardens, Kensington, W., who says: —

(138) "The writer is a very worthy wife of a shopkeeper at home, who told me the occurrence some years ago, then with more detail, as it was fresh in her memory; and her husband can vouch for the facts told him at the time, and the strange ' uncanny ' effect of the dream on her mind for some time after."

From Mrs. Green to Miss Richardson.

" Newry, 21st First Month, 1885. " Dear Friend, — In compliance with thy request I give thee the particulars of my dream.

" I saw two respectably-dressed females driving alone in a vehicle like a mineral- water cart. Their horse stopped at a water to drink; but as there was no footing, he lost his balance, and in trying to recover it he plunged right in. With the shock, the women stood up and shouted for

376 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

help, and their hats rose off their heads, and as all were going down I turned away crying and saying, ' Was there no one at all to help them 1 ' upon which I awoke, and my husband asked me what was the matter. I related the above dream to him, and he asked me if I knew them. I said I did not, and thought I had never seen either of them. The impression of the dream and the trouble it brought was over me all day. I remarked to my son it was the anniversary of his birthday and my own also — the 10th of First Month, and this is why I remember the date.

" The following Third Month I got a letter and newspaper from my brother in Australia, named Allen, letting me know the sad trouble which had befallen him in the loss, by drowning, of one of his daughters and her companion. Thou wilt see by the description given of it in the paper how the event corresponded with my dream. My niece was born in Australia, and I never saw her.

" Please return the paper at thy convenience. Considering that our night is their day, I must have been in sympathy with the sufferers at the time of the accident, on the 10th of First Month, 1878.1

" It is referred to in two separate places in the newspaper."

The passage in the Inglewood Advertiser is as follows: —

"Friday evening, January 11th, 1878. " A dreadful accident occurred in the neighbourhood of Wedderburn, on Wednesday last, resulting in the death of two women, named Lehey and Allen. It appears that the deceased were driving into Wedderburn in a spring cart from the direction of Kinypanial, when they attempted to water their horse at a dam on the boundary of Torpichen Station. The dam was 10 or 12 feet deep in one spot, and into this deep hole they must have inadvertently driven, for Mr. W. McKechnie, manager of Torpichen Station, upon going to the dam some hours afterwards, discovered the spring cart and horse under the water, and two women's hats floating on the surface.... The dam was searched, and the bodies of the two women, clasped in each other's arms, recovered."

The following is an extract from evidence given at the inquest: — " Joseph John Allen, farmer, deposed: — ' I identify one of the bodies as that of my sister. I saw her about 11 a.m. yesterday.... The horse had broken away and I caught it for her. Mrs. Lehey and my sister met me when I caught the horse.... They then took the horse and went to Mr. Clarke's. I did not see them afterwards alive.' William McKechnie deposed: — ' About 4 p.m. yesterday, I was riding by the dam when I observed the legs of a horse and the chest above the water.' "

Mr. Green confirms as follows: —

"Newry, 15th Second Month, 1885.

" Dear Friend Edith Richardson, — In reference to the dream that my wife had of seeing two women thrown out of a spring cart by their horse stopping to drink out of some deep water, I remember she was greatly

1 The narrator has reckoned the difference of time the wrong way. The time in England which corresponded with the accident was the early morning of Jan. 9; and the dream which took place on the night of Jan. 9 must have followed the death by more than 12 hours. Thus, according to our arbitrary rule of limitation, the case ought not to have been included.

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 377

distressed about it, and seemed to feel great sympathy for them. Tt occurred on the night of the 9th of January.

" The reason I can remember the date so well is that the 10th was the anniversary of my wife and our son's birthday. As the day advanced she seemed to get worse, and I advised her to go out for a drive; when she returned she told me she was no better, and also said she had told the driver not to go near water, lest some accident should happen, as she had had such a dreadful dream the night before, at the same time telling him the nature of it. As my wife's niece did not live with her father, he was not told of it until the next morning, which would be our evening of the 10th, and which we think accounted for the increased trouble she felt in sympathy with him. " Thos. Green."

Mrs. Green can recall no other dream of at all the same character.

[The amount of correspondence in detail here is considerable. The fact that the figures seen were merely recognised as " two females " diminishes, of course, the force of the coincidence; though perhaps one would hardly expect identification of persons unknown to the percipient.]

In the next case the percipient withholds her name from publication, on the ground that she takes no interest in our work, and only wrote down the account at her aunt's request.

Mrs. P., of Rectory, writes: —

"March 4th, 1885.

(139) " My niece has written down the dream. She adds to her plain account, in writing to me, that she thinks it rather more remarkable that she should have dreamt it, being a person who hardly ever dreams, unlike her mother and sister, who never sleep without dreaming. She also says she has often regretted not having written it down at the time, but can safely sign all she has stated. " J. L. P."

"March 3rd, 1885.

" My aunt has asked me to try and recall a dream that I dreamt many years ago about an old man, the road-mender in our village, whom I had known and loved from my earliest childhood. He was naturally a bright cheerful old man, but was at the time I am speaking of in extremely low spirits, on account, as we supposed, of his wife, who was very ill and wretched, lying on what proved to be her death-bed. On the morning of my dream my sister and myself had both been awake at 6 o'clock, and I had fallen to sleep again before the servant came in, as usual, about 7 o'clock. Or. my waking from this sleep I told my sister that I had had a very painful dream about old William Thompson, whom I had seen in my dream running down the lane towards the Church fields in his grey stockings, looking very miserable, and I turned to her and said, ' I fear old William is going to make away with himself.' I hardly finished telling my sister the dream when our servant came in to call us, and said that our father (the rector of the parish) had been sent for in a great hurry to old William Thompson, who had just been found in the Church fields with his throat cut. He was without his shoes, and when my father got to him he was still alive. These are the circumstances as accurately related as I can recall them.

378 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

" I may add that I am not generally a dreamer, and have no recollection of any other dream about death.

We learn independently that the death took place on April 4, 1869. Miss S. S. P.'s sister writes:—

" I fear I cannot tell you more about my sister's dream than she has already stated, but as you wish to have what she has said confirmed by another person, I will add that I perfectly remember her telling me the dream before the servant came into the room and told us of the sad death of the old man.

The next case also has, unfortunately, to be given with initials only, as the writer fears that her friends would object to publicity. It belongs to a class which, as we have seen, must be treated with great caution — dreams occurring in seasons of anxiety. Still, judging from its effects, the experience must have been of a very unusual kind.

"January, 1885.

(140) "In the year 1857, I had a brother in the very centre of the Indian Mutiny. I had been ill in the spring, and taken from my lessons in the school-room. Consequently I heard more of what was going on from the newspapers than a girl of 13 ordinarily would in those days. "We were in the habit of hearing regularly from my brother, but in the June and July of that year no letters came, and what arrived in August proved to have been written quite early in the spring, and were full of the disturbances around his station. He was in the service of the East India Company — an officer in the 8th Native Infantry. I had always been devoted to him, and I grieved and fretted far more than any of my elders knew at his danger. I cannot say I dreamt constantly of him, but when I did the impressions were vivid and abiding.

" On one occasion his personal appearance was being discussed, and I remarked, ' He is not like that now, he has no beard or whiskers,' and when asked why I said such a thing, I replied, ' I knew it, for I had seen him in my dreams,' and this brought a severe reprimand from my governess, who never allowed ' such nonsense ' to be talked of.

" On the morning of the 25th September, quite early, I awoke from a dream to find my sister holding me, and much alarmed. I had screamed out, struggled, crying out, ' Is he really dead 1 ' When I fully awoke I felt a burning sensation in my head. I could not speak for a moment or two; I knew my sister was there, but I neither felt nor saw her.

"In about a minute, during which she said my eyes were staring beyond her, I ceased struggling, cried out, ' Harry's dead, they have shot him,' and fainted. When I recovered, I found my sister had been sent away, and an aunt who had always looked after me sitting by my bed. In order to soothe my excitement she allowed me to tell her my dream, trying all the time to persuade me to regard it as a natural consequence of my anxiety. When in the narration I said he was riding with another officer, and mounted soldiers behind them, she exclaimed,

viil] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 379

' My dear, that shows you it is only a dream, for you know dear Harry is in an infantry, not a cavalry, regiment.' Nothing, however, shook my feelings that I had seen a reality; and she was so much struck by my persistence, that she privately made notes of the date, and of the incidents, even to the minutest details of my dream, and then for a few days the matter dropped, but I felt the truth was coming nearer and nearer to all. In a short time the news came in the papers — shot down on the morning of the 25th when on his way to Lucknow. A few days later came one of his missing letters, telling how his own regiment had mutinied, and that he had been transferred to a command in the 12th Irregular Cavalry, bound to join Havelock's force in the relief of Lucknow.

" Some eight years after, the officer who was riding by him when he fell, Captain or Major Grant, visited us, and when in compliance with my aunt's request he detailed the incidents of that sad hour, his narration tallied (even to the description of the buildings on their left) with the notes she had taken the morning of my dream. I should also add that we heard my brother had made an alteration in his beard and whiskers just about the time that I had spoken of him as wearing them differently.

In answer to inquiries Miss W. says: —

" As to date, the dream concerning my brother's death took place in the morning half of the night of the 25th of September • and I think I noted in my MS. that an aunt to whom I related the dream at the time was so struck by the pertinacity with which I adhered to the various particulars, that she put clown the date and also the details of the dream.

" I have always been a dreamer. I never had the same sort of dream of death."

Miss W. further tells us that her aunt is certain that she never destroyed her notes of the dream, but does not know where they are, and is too old to be worried. She adds: " My sister perfectly remembers all about it." The sister, however, will not write out her recollections — considering that attention to such matters is ridiculous.

[We cannot feel certain that Miss W. is correct in saying that her brother's death took place on the 25th. The East India Register, which ought to be the most correct authority, says that he was killed on the 26th; and in that case his death may have exactly coincided with her vision. There was hard fighting on both days; and in some accounts the names of the officers who fell on the two days are grouped without discrimination. Allen's Indian Mail, however, gives the 25th as the date of Lieutenant W.'s death. If that is right, then the coincidence could only have been exact on the supposition that the date of the vision given in Miss W.'sjlrst account is the correct one.]

The next case is from Mrs. Hunter, of St. Catherine's, Linlithgow. It somewhat resembles Mrs. Storie's case, (p. 370) in the mixture of apparently true perception with foreign or symbolic elements — as though the vision were a scene which a painter or dramatist had framed on facts which he had only once heard hastily described.

"July 23rd, 1885. (141) " I am almost afraid to give particulars about the dream I had, as

380 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

it is now some time ago, and I had not been remembering it much. I wrote to Mr. Hunter [her brother-in-law] at the time, and he has unfortunately not kept my letter, so I must trust to my memory.

" The date I do not recollect. The time was 2 o'clock, I think. I knew then, as I looked at my watch when I awoke, and Mr. Hunter told me it was just the hour at which the event took place.

"I thought I was at the Manse, Cockburnspath, where he lives, and I saw Mrs. Hunter evidently ill. She went to her room. I heard the doctor's trap pass the house, and every one was rushing to get him, but he was gone. My sister-in-law kept calling for me, but I could not reach her. By-andbye a doctor arrived, and the nurse, a stranger to me, came to my room with an infant. She was putting white satin on the dress, and I remonstrated, saying that was only for dead infants. She replied, ' And isn't it right to do it to this one 1 ' and I looked and saw the child was dead, and I knew it was a boy. I awoke, felt anxious, fell asleep, and again dreamt the same, except, I think, the first part, that of seeing Mrs. Hunter.

" When I awoke I just remarked to my husband I hoped nothing had gone wrong, and told him my dream during breakfast.

" Not hearing anything for two days I had almost dismissed all thought of it from my mind, but I was a little surprised to find I had been dreaming a fact.

" I knew quite well that my sister-in-law expected her confinement [not, however, for two months — see below], but had no misgivings, as she had been so strong before. I had engaged a nurse for her, and she was not the woman I saw in my dream. I knew the assistant who was with the doctor then, but I did not see him in my dream, only I knew it was not Dr. Black.

" I believe I never fall asleep for any time, however short, without dreaming something or other, consequently I seldom let my dreams trouble me. I am anxious to prevent undue importance being given to my dreams, and I don't think I ever had one of the kind before, and certainly not since. I have dreamt the same thing more than once, but very rarely, and never in the same night as I did this one. " A. Hunter."

In conversation Mrs. Hunter told me that in character and vividness this dream stood out distinctly from the general run of her dreams.

The following is Dr. Hunter's corroboration, written on July 30th, 1885:—

" I have only now, while taking a brief holiday, found time to give you confirmation of the curious dream my wife had on the night of my sisterin-law's illness. When she awoke in the morning her first remark was ' I hope nothing serious has happened to Jessie. I have had such a horrid dream about her; I dreamt she had miscarried, and the child was dead.' This she repeated more than once. " George Hunter, M.D."

The Rev. J. Hunter writes, from the Manse, Cockburnspath, N\B.: —

" July 24th, 1885.

" You ask if I can recall the fact of receiving a note from my sister-inlaw making mention of her dream. We usually hear from her on the Monday evenings, and it is very possible that she might have mentioned it in such a note; but I am sorry that I cannot definitely recall it. I find from my diary, however, that I met Mrs. Hunter, of Linlithgow, on the

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 381

Tuesday following, in Edinburgh, and went out with her to Linlithgow; and I am perfectly positive that I heard of it on that Tuesday, if not on the night before. I have always regarded it as a strange occurrence, and have no manner of doubt that her dream corresponded, in a large measure, with the actual event. The event took place about 1 o'clock in the morning, December 17th, 1882, a Sunday. The baby lived only a minute or two. Mrs. Hunter tells me that she saw Dr. Black, our medical practitioner, drive past her window, and that he was not at home. True enough, Dr. Black was not at home at the time, but on a holiday. It was the assistant, Dr. Basil, who came after the confinement was about over. It was premature, and not expected for about two months. Mrs. Hunter of Linlithgow had arranged with my wife to come here during the confinement [she had attended her on a similar occasion in the previous year], but there was no expectation of it at the time."

[It is of course a point against the telepathic explanation, that the person dreamt of was to some extent on Mrs. Hunter's mind. On the other side we have the very exact coincidence of the dream with an event which was not regarded as imminent, and a considerable amount of correspondence in detail.]

The next account (which we owe to the kindness of Lieut.-Colonel J. D. Brockman) is from Dr. A. K. Young, J.P, F.R.C.S.I., of The Terrace, Monaghan, Ireland. It is slightly abridged from the original, which we received in November, 1882.

(142) One Monday night in December, 1836, Dr. Young had the following dream,, or, as he would prefer to call it, revelation. He found himself suddenly at the gate of Major N. M.'s avenue, many miles from his home. Close to him were a group of persons, one of them a woman with a basket on her arm, the rest men, four of whom were tenants of his own, while the others were unknown to him. Some of the strangers seemed to be murderously assaulting H. W., one of his tenants, and he interfered.

" I struck violently at the man on my left, and then with greater violence at the man's face to my right. Finding to my surprise that I did not knock him down either, I struck again and again, with all the violence of a man frenzied at the sight of my poor friend's murder. To my great amazement I saw that my arms, although visible to my eye, were without substance; and the bodies of the men I struck at and my own came close together after each blow through the shadowy arms I struck with. My blows were delivered with more extreme violence than I think I ever exerted; but I became painfully convinced of my incompetency. I have no consciousness of what happened, after this feeling of unsubstantially came upon me."

Next morning Dr. Young experienced the stiffness and soreness of violent bodily exercise, and was informed by his wife that in the course of the night he had much alarmed her by striking out again and again with his arms in a terrific manner, ' as if fighting for his life.' He in turn informed her of his dream, and begged her to remember the names of those actors in it who were known to him. On the morning of the following day, Wednesday, he received a letter from his agent, who

382 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

resided in the town close to the scene of the dream, informing him that his tenant, H. W., had been found on Tuesday morning at Major N. M.'s gate, speechless and apparently dying from a fracture of the skull, and that there was no trace of the murderers. That night Dr. Young started for the town, and arrived there on Thursday morning. On his way to a meeting of magistrates he met the senior magistrate of that part of the country, and requested him to give orders for the arrest of the three men whom, besides H. W., he had recognised in his dream, and to have them examined separately. [Dr. Young has given us in confidence the names of these four men; and says that to the time of their deaths they never knew the grounds of their arrest.] This was at once done. The three men gave identical accounts of the occurrence, and all named the woman who was with them; she was then arrested, and gave precisely similar testimony. They said that between 1 1 and 1 2 on the Monday night they had been walking homewards all together along the road, when they were overtaken by three strangers, two of whom savagely assaulted H. W., while the other prevented his friends from interfering.

H. W. did not die, but was never the same afterwards; he subsequently emigrated. Of the other parties concerned, the only survivor (except Dr. Young himself) gave an account of the occurrence to the Archdeacon of the district in November, 1881, but varied from the true facts in stating that he had taken the wounded man home in his cart. Had this been the case, he would of course have been called on for his testimony at once.

The Archdeacon mentioned, now Bishop of Clogher, writes to us: — ■

" Knockballymore, Clones.

"Dec. 14, 1886.

" I saw Mr. Read [the survivor mentioned by Dr. Young, since deceased] and recollect a conversation with him. I cannot recollect the particulars, but am sure that his statement was confirmatory [of Dr. Young's account]. The late Mrs. Young often referred to the dream in conversation, and confirmed Mr. Young's relation.

" Chas. W. Clogher."

An unsuccessful search has been made for some printed record of these facts. Dr. Young tells us that for many years he did not mention his experience except to his wife (now deceased); and in answer to an inquiry whether any independent record of the assault could be procured, he replied: —

" We had not at that time any local paper to record such an event; and as the attack was not followed by destruction of life, and as there was not any clue to the intended assassins, the occurrence passed into oblivion. I pass the spot where I was conscious of the attack very frequently; and I can point with my finger to within a foot or two of where I fought (shadowy), and the positions of all the parties present. Had not my wife been present and awake when I was so profoundly asleep, and witnessed the amazing and alarming violence of the blows I made, (a matter she spoke of afterw ards to me more than once, with terror,) I never could have accounted for the very wretched feeling of weariness, prostration, and pain with which I got from my bed on the next morning."

In conversation Dr. Young mentioned that he did not dream much, and never remembered his dreams. This dream was quite unique in his

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 383

experience. His wife's testimony established the fact that it took place before or about midnight; when she saw him throwing his arms about, she had not herself been asleep.

We have a case singularly like this in detail, where a gamekeeper dreamt of taking part in an affray with four poachers at the very spot where such an event actually and simultaneously took place. The dream in this case is confirmed as having been described before the reality was known; but is too directly in the beaten track of the dreamer's waking ideas to be presented as a parallel to the foregoing narrative.

The following account is from Mrs. Manifold, of Barnaboy, Frankford, King's County, Ireland, and was obtained through the kindness of the Rev. J. B. Keene, of Navan.

"January, 1884.

(143) " I once dreamt that an uncle (Dr. Hobbs), whom I had not seen for some time, was driving with his wife in a gig, when he was attacked from behind, beaten, and left on the roadside. The next morning I told my dream to my sister, who had been sleeping in the same room, and we thought no more of it till the afternoon, when a horse messenger came 30 miles to tell my father his brother had been beaten to death. The circumstances were exactly as I had dreamt, but he did not die then, and is still alive in America."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Manifold writes on Feb. 5, 1884: —

" I delayed answering yours of the 28th January, as I had written to ask a lady whom I thought might have remembered my having told my dream, relative to my uncle's accident, before we had heard of it, but she does not remember; and my sister, to whom I alluded, has been dead some years. I am not in the habit of dreaming of distressing things, but have on other occasions dreamt of persons and things I had not seen or thought of for a long time, and soon after have heard from or heard something particular of. Dr. Hobbs was dragged from his gig, beaten on the road, and thrown into a bog hole, supposed to be dead, near the town of Borrisokane, Co. Tipperary, I think about the year 1846. I was at the time unmarried, living at Green Hill, Frankford, 22 miles apart, and had no previous knowledge of any ill-feeling towards him, or anything to lead me to suppose such treatment would be likely to occur. I wish I could have given you more satisfactory testimony, but under the circumstances am unable to do so. « j Manifold."

Mrs. Hobbs, writing from London, Ontario, on Feb. 1, 1886, has sent us a description of the savage attack on her husband, which took place about 7 or 8 p.m. on April 12, 1845.

We find an account of the accident in the Nenagh Guardian for April 16th, 1845 — which completely agrees with the above. Two of Dr. Hobbs' assailants were identified, and sentenced to transportation.

In conversation Mrs. Manifold mentioned that, as soon as the news of the outrage arrived, her sister (since deceased) turned to her and exclaimed, " Your dream! " The dream, she says, was of an unusually vivid and

384 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

pictorial kind, as is shown by the fact that she gave a description of the road which she had seen to one of the men who went to her uncle's assistance, and was informed by him that it corresponded with the reality. But such assertion of correspondence, unless details are given, is of course not a point on which any stress can be laid.

The next account, which first appeared in a letter in the

Religio-Philosophical Journal, is from Dr. Bruce, of Micanopy, Fla.;

U.S.A. The case might have been reserved as " collective," but for

the fact that one of the dreams, though vivid and alarming, was

probably not so distinctive as was afterwards imagined, and moreover

was possibly dreamt on the night preceding that on which the tragic

event took place (see p. 140).

"February 17th, 1884.

(144) " On Thursday, the 27th of December last, I returned from Gainesville (12 miles from here) to my orange grove, near Micanopy. I have only a small plank house of three rooms at my grove, where I spend most of my time when the grove is being cultivated. There was no one in the house but myself at the time, and being somewhat fatigued with my ride, I retired to my bed very early, probably 6 o'clock; and, as I am frequently in the habit of doing, I lit my lamp on a stand by the bed for the purpose of reading. After reading a short time, I began to feel a little drowsy, put out the light, and soon fell asleep. Quite early in the night I was awakened. I could not have been asleep very long, I am sure. I felt as if I had been aroused intentionally, and at first thought someone was breaking into the house. I looked from where I lay into the other two rooms (the doors of both being open) and at once recognised where I was, and that there was no ground for the burglar theory; there being nothing in the house to make it worth a burglar's time to come after.

" I then turned on my side to go to sleep again, and immediately felt a consciousness of a presence in the room, and singular to state, it was not the consciousness of a live person, but of a spiritual presence. This may provoke a smile, but I can only tell you the facts as they occurred to me. I do not know how to better describe my sensations than by simply stating that I felt a consciousness of a spiritual presence. This may have been a part of the dream, for I felt as if I were dozing off' again to sleep; but it was unlike any dream I ever had.1 I felt also at the same time a strong feeling of superstitious dread, as if something strange and fearful were about to happen. I was soon asleep again or unconscious, at any rate, to my surroundings. Then I saw two men engaged in a slight scuffle; one fell fatally wounded — the other immediately disappeared. I did not see the gash in the wounded man's throat, but knew that his throat was cut. I did not recognise him, either, as my brother-in-law. I saw him lying with his hands under him, his head turned slightly to the left, his feet close together. I could, from the position in which I stood, see but

1 I have more than once pointed out (pp. 198-9, 301, 320) how irrelevant to cases where the dream is of a very exceptional or unique character (is the ordinary argument that dreams, from their number, afford limitless scope for accidental coincidences of a striking kind.

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 385

a small portion of his face; his coat, collar, hair or something partly obscured it. I looked at him the second time a little closer to see if I could make out who it was. I was aware it was someone I knew, but still could not recognise him. I turned, and then saw my wife sitting not far from him. She told me she could not leave until he was attended to. (I had got a letter a few days previously from my wife, telling me she would leave in a day or two, and was expecting every day a letter or telegram, telling me when to meet her at the depot.) My attention was struck by the surroundings of the dead man. He appeared to be lying on an elevated platform of some kind, surrounded by chairs, benches, and desks, reminding me somewhat of a school-room. Outside of the room in which he was lying was a crowd of people, mostly females some of whom I thought I knew. Here my dream terminated. I awoke again about midnight; got up and went to the door to see if there were any prospects of rain; returned to my bed again, and lay there until nearly daylight before falling asleep again. I thought of my dream and was strongly impressed by it. All strange, superstitious feelings had passed off.

" It was not until a week or 10 days after this that I got a letter from my wife, giving me an account of her brother's death. Her letter, which was written the day after his death, was mis-sent. The account she gave me of his death tallies most remarkably with my dream. Her brother was with a wedding party at the depot at Markham station, Fauquier Co., Va. He went into a store near by to see a young man who kept a bar-room near the depot, with whom he had some words. He turned and left the man, and walked out of the store. The bar-room keeper followed him out, and without further words deliberately cut his throat. It was a most brutal and unprovoked murder. My brother-in-law had on his overcoat, with the collar turned up. The knife went through the collar and clear to the bone. He was carried into the store and laid on the counter, near a desk and show case. He swooned from loss of blood soon after being cut. The cutting occurred early Thursday night, December 27th. He did not die, however, until almost daylight, Saturday morning.

" I have not had a complete account of my sister-in-law's dream. She was visiting a young lady, a cousin, in Kentucky. They slept together Friday night, I think, the night of her brother's death. She dreamed of seeing a man with his throat cut, and awoke very much alarmed. She awoke her cousin, and they got up and lighted the lamp and sat up until daylight. That day she received a telegram announcing her brother's death.

" I cannot give you any certain explanation of these dreams. I do not believe that they are due to ordinary causes, but to causes of which science does not at present take cognisance. u Walter Bruce "

In reply to inquiries, Dr. Bruce writes, on July 9th, 1884: —

" I have never had another dream similar to the one related in the letter. I have at times had dreams that were vivid, or from some cause impressed themselves upon my mind for a time, such as anyone would be likely to have. I cannot call to mind, though, any of special importance, or with any bearing upon the dream in question.

9. r

386 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

" I did not mention the dream to any one before receiving the letter confirming it. I live in rather a retired place in the country, and if I saw any one during that time, to whom I would care to relate the dream, it did not occur to me to do so.

"You ask me how my wife knew of the circumstances of her brother's death. She was visiting her relatives in Va. at the time, and was present when her brother died."

The following account is from Dr. Bruce's sister-in-law, Mrs. Stubbing:— « March 28th, 1885.

" Whilst in Kentucky on a visit, in the year 1883, I had a dream, in which I saw two persons — one with his throat cut. I could not tell who it was, though I knew it was somebody that I knew, and as soon as I heard of my brother's death, I said at once that I knew it was he that I had seen murdered in my dream; and though I did not hear how my brother died, I told my cousin, whom I was staying with, that I knew he had been murdered. This dream took place on Thursday or Friday night, I do not remember which. I saw the exact spot where he was murdered, and just as it happened. u Annie Stubbing."

(" The Thursday and Friday night mentioned in this account are December 26th and 27th, [27th and 28th,] 1883. It was upon the Thursday night my dream occurred. — Walter Bruce.")

In reply to questions, Mrs. Stubbing says: —

" Yes, I saw one man cut the other. The wound was told to me to be just like what I had seen in my dream. I received a telegram announcing the death of my brother on Saturday morning. No, I never had any such dream as that before."

As a last example, I will quote in its entirety an account of a series of these quasi-clairvoyant impressions, occurring to a single percipient in connection with the same agent. The narrative is from Mrs. Vatas-Simpson, now residing at New Town, near Brisbane. Though parts of it may appear fanciful and subjective, cross-examination made it hard to doubt that these dreams, and others closely corresponding with facts, took place before the facts were known. But in the absence of written records, mere stray fragments have survived.

" 82, Akerman Road, Brixton.

"September, 1884. (145) " My eldest son and firstborn child left me to go to Australia in 1851. The compact between us was that at a certain time we were mutually to think of each other every day. He arranged the hours for himself, which arrangement caused my hours to be from 2 a.m. until 4 a.m. He did not appear to notice that it might interfere with my night's rest, nor did I say so, but most truly can I state as a /act, that during all these years there has not been one night that I have not been awake at the time specified; in sickness, under the power of soporifics, or weary from exhausted activity, still I started up as the hour arrived. This may, perhaps, in some measure account for the close communion we have had

together, for not only have I seen him and been with him, but have heard the words he uttered.

(1) "I saw my son on his horse in a wild part of the country, and saw him dash into a foaming torrent. The horse could with difficulty stem the turbid river, and my son kept cheering him on by word and hand. After struggling on for some time I saw them land safely on the banks of the stream, and my son put his face against the neck of his horse for a few minutes, the noble creature returning the caress, panting and dripping as he was. Then my son looked round at me, and said, distinctly, ' Mother, mother, he has saved me.' That was all, but a letter coming in due course as usual, told me of this incident, and the exact words my son said when he felt himself once again on terra firma. So our spirits had held communion.

(2) "I saw my son on an open plain. He kept looking at me. He took from his baggage some articles of clothing, spread them out, shook his head, and put them down, then looked at me; I mean by that, he looked up from the shirt or socks he had in his hands as though he gazed afar off. After disposing of these things in various ways, and seeming to be in deep thought, he slowly put them away again and started on his journey across country.

"The letter came saying, 'Oh! mother dear, that I had your precious industrious fingers to mend my things for me, my socks and flannels, and sew on my buttons,' then narrating exactly what he had done on the wide plains, thus confirming in every particular my vision of him. He had travelled from Melbourne to Carpentaria, on foot and on horseback.

(3) " I saw my son nursing a little child, then dash over the plains on horseback without a hat, then dig a hole and place with much care, and very slowly, something in it, then kneel down and with his hands slowly fill the hole with earth. He had a book from which he appeared to be reading, which, by-the-bye, I thought very remarkable. He slowly and with much solemnity left the spot, book in hand, but did not turn to look at me.

" Then came the letter. On the wild sheep plains he was living with a man and his wife and little children. His pet was taken ill. He mounted horse to go 16 miles for doctor — too late! his little favourite was dead. He dug the grave himself, and with his own hands put the little child into its last resting-place, and with prayer-book in hand read a portion at the grave.

(4) "I saw my son in a stream of flowing water. He now and then sank down out of view, but came to the surface again. It was a very distressing dream to me, because I saw two black objects near him and feared they were chasing him. I was much troubled.

"The letter from him gave me an account of the swimming across a river, accompanied by two blacks, who were travelling the same way.

" Then came a period of distress to me, because I felt that something had come between my son and me. At the usual time for dwelling upon his love for me, and his loving remembrance of all he had promised, I found an obstacle of some sort. It grieved me sadly. I could not understand it. Someone always stood between us; a shadow was always hovering about. I saw him in a cloud, or a mist rose between us, or he passed from me looking back at me. There was no longer any communion. My daughters

o -r 9

u U A

388 TELEPATHIC DREAMS. [chap.

found something distressed me, and I told them that I feared for their brother Alfred. They tried to keep me contented, but I felt deserted. The letter came. He was married; and never since have I been blessed by having communion with him."

[Mrs. Simpson has explained in conversation that there was not the slightest breach of affection; only these peculiar communications ceased.]

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Simpson adds: —

" I have never at any time made a secret of my constant communion with my loved son. All my family have heard my dreams, as they took place — often at the very time — and then have seen the corroboration of them when my letters arrived from Queensland. I have no letters in my possession, though they are only lately destroyed. Could I have foreseen the future, as it is now, I should most certainly have preserved a record of all events, with the dates.

" The dreams are purely matters of recollection. I fancy that I never wrote them, as I was very often suffering at the time. But they were always related to one or more of the family at the time they occurred.

"In my last to Ada [her daughter], I asked her as to my dreams, and she sends a few lines, which I copy from her letter: —

" ' With regard to your dreams I am not very clear, but I remember, when we were at Shanklin, you dreamt that something happened to Alfred, and there was water, and something dark kept close to him. That is all I remember of the dream. You told Mary and me about it, and you wrote it down, and said we should hear something more about it. In my heart I thought it stuff. However, by the next mail came a letter, saying that on such a day, giving the date and hour, Alfred was on horseback (I think), and something happened to the horse, and he would have been drowned but for some black men, who rescued and took care of him. It is years since I thought of it, but once set off, I daresay more would come to me.'

" Accept this at what it is worth. You see she has combined two of my dreams."

The following is an extract from the only letter of the son's bearing on these experiences that can be found; it refers to the third case.

" I arranged for the funeral this afternoon. My poor horse suffered, as you may suppose, hard riding. Twenty-third. Three times rode to Roma — 18 miles and more before 1 p.m.; then we started to the burial

ground I put Willy into his coffin, and into his grave. As

a baby I nursed him to sleep, and into his cradle; now I went down into his grave, and drew the ropes from under, so that he was not shaken. A sad day's work."

This may conclude, for the present, the subject of dreams. If with respect to some of the cases cited I have used expressions implying that we may regard them as pretty certainly telepathic, this is on the understanding, as I have explained, that telepathy is established independently of them. But though this branch of evidence can scarcely be in itself conclusive, the study of it will materially assist our future progress.

IX.]



Chapter IX. " Borderland " Cases.

§ 1. In the cases of the last chapter, the percipient, at the moment of percipience, was distinctly asleep. But the passage from sleep to waking admits of many degrees; and a very interesting group of cases remain which cannot properly be classed as dreams, and yet which do not appertain to seasons of complete normal wakefulness. The discussion of these experiences, which occur on the borderland of sleeping and waking, will form the natural transition to the waking phenomena with which we shall be occupied during the remainder of our course. The whole set of cases in which telepathic impressions take a sensory form really belong to one large genus; whatever the state of the percipient may be, percepts or gucm-percepts which are not originated by anything within the normal range of his senseorgans are and must be hallucinations. For convenience, however, that term is confined to luaking experiences, for which there is no other designation. Accordingly, as I have before spoken of veridical dreams, I shall in future have to speak of veridical hallucinations; and we are now to take the step which leads from the one class to the other.

There are certain reasons why this borderland might be expected to be rich in telepathic phenomena. An impression from a distant mind may or may not originate a sensory hallucination; but if it does so, this seems more specially likely to occur at any season, or in any state of the organism, which happens to be favourable to sensory hallucinations in general. Now the state between sleeping and waking has this character. Persons who have never had hallucinations of the senses at any other times, have experienced them in the moments which immediately precede, or immediately follow, actual sleep. And though neither form of experience is common, an examination of a number of instances seems to show that conditions

390 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

which come nearest to those of sleep are more favourable than those of ordinary waking life, for the bodying forth of subjective phantasms.1

Of the hallucinations which precede sleep, the best-known class have received the name of " illusions hypnagogiques." They have been carefully described by Miiller, Maury, and other writers, who have themselves experienced them. For the most part they seem to begin with an appearance of bright points and streaks, which then form a more or less complicated pattern, or develop into a scene or landscape.2 In these cases, it is probable that the origin of the phenomena is a slightly abnormal condition of the retina, and that elements of actual sensation from this peripheral source form the basis of the phantasmagoria which the mind elaborates. But there is another form, involving no peculiarity of the external organ, where some object that has been actually seen during the day seems to reappear before the eyes with all the vividness of reality. Maury gives a case of an " after-image " of the sort, which well exemplifies the stage between reality and dream. After a fatiguing day, his eyes had been gladdened by the sight of a beefsteak, which was to form his dinner. After dinner he became drowsy; and in this state he had a distinct vision of this very steak, apparently as real and palpable as ever. Lapsing then into actual sleep, he had a vivid dream, in which the steak again reappeared. Here it is clear that the " hypnagogic " hallucination was as truly the projection of the percipient's own mind as the dream.

The hallucinations which immediately follow sleep are not infrequently the result of a previous dream, some feature of which is prolonged into waking moments, and becomes temporarily located among the objects that meet the eye. An Oxford undergraduate tells me that, having had a very vivid dream of being chased by a figure in green, he woke and saw the green figure in the middle of his room. " I had no doubt that I was awake, for I saw the light from the street lamp shining on my door. The figure was not in this light but nearer the bed, and the green tinge was very perceptible." The Rev. E. H. Sugden, of Bradford, writes to me: " Once I had a most

1 The same seems to hold good in distinctly morbid cases. (See Dr. Pick's remarks in the Vienna Jahrbuch filr Psychiatric for 1880, Vol. ii., p. 50.) Dr. Maudsley says that, in recovery from chronic alcoholism, the hallucinations continue to occur between sleeping and waking, when they have ceased to occur at other times. (The Pathology of Mind, p. 485.)

2 See some excellent examples in the next chapter, p. 474, note.

vivid dream about a man whom I knew well. On suddenly waking, I saw him, in the light of early morning, standing at my bedside in the very attitude of the dream. I looked at him for a second or two, and then putting my foot out, I kicked at him; as my foot reached him, he vanished." Another informant had a dream, in the train, of looking at her watch, and on waking saw the dial before her eyes " larger than the real one, and blue: after a few moments it flickered and went out like a candle." In these cases the impression was scarcely more than momentary; but other informants — among them Professor Balfour Stewart — have told me of similar experiences of their own which lasted a good many seconds; and in the stock example of the books, the dream-baboon remained grinning in a corner even while the percipient was sufficiently himself to walk across the room — a striking illustration of the psychological identity of the dreaming and the waking image.1

More striking are the cases where the images, though immediately following sleep, are not a continuance of a dream, or at any rate of a dream of which the slightest memory survives. Of course these experiences may not all have been hallucinations in the strict sense, but only misinterpretations of actual sensation — that is to say, some article of furniture or real object in the room may have served as the basis for the delusive image; and momentary illusions of this sort are perhaps not very uncommon.2 But even so, the mind has imposed

1 An attempt to ascertain the frequency of such experiences formed part of the statistical inquiry mentioned in the last chapter. But unfortunately, I cannot record an exact result. The question as first asked was — Have you experienced dream-images which persist into waking moments? — but on making further inquiry of a good many of the persons who answered "yes," I found that they had not understood persist to mean persist as visible objects. After these words were introduced, very few yeses were received; and I think it would be safe to say that the persons who can recall such a visible persistence do not amount to 1 per cent, of the population.

