pp. 762-3. The account is part of a letter written by the Rev. Samuel Medlicott, from Pau. Our attention was called to it by the Rev. Canon Eyre, of Bray, a very intimate friend of Mr. Medlicott, who adds that Mr Medlicott had been enabled to go to Pau for his health through the kindness of the Archbishop of Tuam.

"An interesting circumstance connected with the death of the dear servant of God, our late venerated and truly beloved Archbishop, I will simply relate as follows. I was at my brother's house in Wiltshire, whither I made my first move in search of health early in March last year. There at a very early hour on Monday, (I think 4 o'clock,) the dear Archbishop (I shall never forget his sweet face), though pale as death, stood at the foot of my bed and said, ' I am tired of, and I will leave (or I have left) Tuam, and will never return there.' This greatly distressed me, and of course roused me. I thought I had, as it were, seen a vision, and mentioned what I did hear to Mrs. Medlicott as soon as she awoke. But how was I disturbed! how painfully cut down, when, in due course of time, the heartrending tidings reached me that on that very day, and at that very hour, his Grace had departed this life."

We find from the Memoir that the Archbishop died at Tuam, of typhoid fever, on March 26, 1839, at 3.10 a.m.; the coincidence was therefore probably close to within an hour.

(511) TvshQ.&l-AtedivoTo. Schriften fiir und an seine Liehen Deutschen, by E. M. Arndt (Leipzig, 1845), Vol. III., pp. 524-5. (See case 467.)

Arndt describes how, in the winter of 1811, when staying in a friend's house, he was sitting up working one night, after a fatiguing day, and was half asleep in his chair — " when lo! my dear old Aunt Sophia, my second mother, stood before me with a kind smile, holding on each arm a little boy. They were children whom I dearly loved. She held them out to me with a gesture which seemed to say ' Take the children to your care.' " The next day at noon, while Arndt was sitting talking with his friends, " the carriage of my brother William drove up with a letter, saying, ' Brother, come back at once in the carriage; we must cross the water to Buchholz to-morrow, and bury our dear old Aunt Sophia, who died last night.' "

(512) From Works of the Rev. John Wesley. A.M. (Edition of 1856), Vol. II.. pp. 350-1. The account, on the face of it, is in the words of the percipient; but we cannot be absolutely sure of this.

The passage is from Wesley's Journal for Thursday, June 3rd, 1756.

" I received a remarkable letter from a clergyman with whom I had been a day or two before; part of it ran thus: ' I had the following accovmt from the gentlewoman herself, a person of piety and veracity. She is now the wife of Mr. J. B., silversmith in Cork.'

" ' " About 30 years ago, I was addressed, by way of marriage, by Mr. Richard Mercier, then a volunteer in the army. The young gentleman was quartered at that time in Charleville, where my father lived, who approved of his addresses, and directed me to look upon him as my future husband. When the regiment left the town, he promised to return in two months and marry me. From Charleville he went to Dublin, thence to his father's, and from thence to England; where, his father having bought him a cornetcy of horse, he purchased many ornaments for the wedding,

476 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

and returning to Ireland, let us know that he would be at our house in Charleville in a few days. On this the family was busied to prepare for his reception, and the ensuing marriage, when, one night, my sister Mary and I being asleep in our bed, I was awaked by the sudden opening of the side curtains, and starting up, saw Mr. Mercier standing by the bedside. He was wrapped up in a loose sheet, and had a napkin, folded like a nightcap, on his head. He looked at me very earnestly, and lifting up the napkin, which much shaded his face, showed me the left side of his head, all bloody, and covered with his brains; ^ the room, meantime, was quite light.2 My terror was excessive, which was increased by his stooping over the bed, and embracing me in his arms. My cries alarmed the whole family, who came crowding into the room. Upon their entrance, he gently withdrew his arms and ascended, as it were, through the ceiling.^ I continued for some time in strong fits. When I could speak I told them what I had seen.

" ' " One of them a day or two after, going to the postman for letters, found him reading the newspapers, in which was an account that Cornet Mercier, going into Christ Church belfry, in Dublin, just after the bells had been ringing, and standing under the bells, one of them, which was turned bottom upwards, suddenly turned again, struck one side of his head, and killed him on the spot. On further inquiry, he found he was struck on the left side of his head." ' "

[The death of Mr. Mercier does not appear in the Dublin Gazette, which is the only Dublin paper of that date that we can obtain; and we know of no other publication where it would be likely to be mentioned.]

The remarkable narrative of Elizabeth Hobson, of Sunderland, given by Wesley in his diary, under date May 25, 1768, is too long to quote in full. It is complicated by matter which does not belong to the subject of this book, and by much that looks like subjective hallucination. But it is almost certain that the cases were given in good faith by a witness of good character. The apparently telepathic incidents (which I include under a single evidential number), taken down by Wesley from E. Hobson's lips, are as follows: —

(513) (1) "John Simpson, one of our neighbours, a man that truly feared God, and one with whom I was particularly acquainted, went to sea, as usual. He sailed out on a Tuesday, The Friday night following, between 11 and 12 o'clock, I heard someone walking in my room, and every step sounded as if it were stepping in water. He then came to the bedside in his sea-jacket, all wet, and stretched his hand over me. Three drops of water fell on my head, and felt as cold as ice. I strove to wake his wife — who lay with me; but I could not any more than if she were dead. Afterwards I heard that he was cast away that night.

(2) " A little before Michaelmas, 1763, my brother George, who was a good young man, went to sea. The day after Michaelmas Day, about

1 These details of the vision are, no doubt, difficiolt to account for telepathically. It is possible that they were " read back " after the reality was known (see the remarks on case 25, Vol. i., p. 206); but compare cases 130 and 134.

2 See the two following pages, and Vol. i., pp. 437, 550-1.

3 Compare cases 203, 204, 205.

midnight, I saw him standing by my bedside, surrounded with a glorious light, 1 and looking earnestly at me. He was wet all over. That night the ship in which he sailed split upon a rock, and all the crew were drowned.

(3) "On April 9th, 1767, about midnight I was lying awake, and I saw my brother John standing by my bedside. Just at that time he died in Jamaica.

(4) "On Friday, July 3rd, [1 1767), I was sitting at dinner, when I thought I heard someone coming along the passage. I looked about, and saw my aunt, Margaret Scot, of Newcastle, standing at my back. On Saturday, I had a letter informing me that she died on that day.

(5) "When I was about 16, my uncle fell ill, and grew worse and worse for three months. One day, having been sent out on an errand, I was coming home through a lane when I saw him in the field coming swiftly towards me. I ran to meet him, but he was gone. When I came home, I found him calling for me. As soon as I came to his bedside, he clasped his arms round my neck, and bursting into tears,... kept his hold till he sunk down and died; and even then they could hardly unclasp his fingers. I would fain have died with him, and wished to be buried with him, dead or alive."

§ 4. The remaining cases are second-hand. I will first give a considerable group where the narrators are very near relatives of the first-hand witnesses, and have no sort of doubt that what is recorded is the genuine experience of their respective informants.

(514 and 515) From Lieut.-Colonel Fane Sewell, care of Messrs. H. S. King and Co., 45, Pall Mall, S.W. "Wolfelee, Hawick, N.B.

"August 4th, 1885.

" My mother and Anne Hervey were schoolfellows together at a Madame Audibert's, in Kensington, and they were bosom friends; and, as was not unusual in those days with young girls, they exchanged rings, with the promise that whichever of the two died first she was to send back to the other her ring.^

" During the following holidays, for which my mother went to her home, North Berwick, Anne Hervey remaining at Madame Audibert's in Kensington, the following incident occurred: —

" My mother suddenly awoke in the night, to find Anne Hervey standing by her bedside, holding out the ring she had given her. The apparition lasted a few seconds, and then faded away. My mother was much frightened, and in the morning told her mother what had happened to her in the night, adding that she was quite convinced Anne Hervey was dead, although she had left her perfectly well a fortnight before at Madame Audibert's.

" The event proved my mother to be right, for in course of post (not so rapid as in these days) a letter reached her from Madame Audibert telling her of Anne Hervey's death from scarlet fever, and enclosing the ring which she said Anne Hervey had begged, on her deathbed, might be sent to my mother.

1 Compare the last case and case 205.

2 As to compacts of this sort, see p. 66.

478 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" The above is exactly as I have received it from my mother's lips. The ring referred to was in my own possession for many years.

"My mother, when at Bangalore, as nearly as I can remember about the year 1845, was one night awakened by the feeling of something unusual happening, and saw as she thought a very favourite sister of my father's, my Aunt Fanny (Mrs. John Hamilton Gray), standing in her night-dress at the foot of the bed, with her hair falling loosely round her. There was a peculiar light upon her, though no light of any kind in the room.^ Another peculiarity about my aunt that my mother noticed was, that a large lock of my aunt's hair had been cut straight off close to the temple.^ The apparition appeared to gaze steadily at my mother for some little time, and then gradually disappeared.

"My mother, to whom such appearances were not altogether unknown, felt so convinced something serious had happened to my Aunt Fanny, that, fearing a shock to my father, she took measures to intercept the letters to my father which she was satisfied must bring him sad news of some sort relating to my aunt. The event proved her right, for in due course of post from home came the letter bearing intelligence of my aunt's unexpected death at sea (Mrs. Gray was journeying from the Cape of Good Hope to England when she died), on the night above mentioned, and in the letter was enclosed a large lock of my Aunt Fanny's hair which had been cut ofi" to send to my father.

" I was a child of 5 or 6 years of age when the above took place, and I remember the circumstance distinctly, though not the particulars, which are, however, exactly as I have often heard my mother relate them to different people. I have often heard my mother relate both these experiences, as nearly as my memory will serve me, in the exact words I have used. " Fane Sewell."

In a later letter Colonel Sewell says that he has failed to get the exact dates, and adds: —

" In writing out the two accounts I sent you, I purposely excluded from the second anything of my own personal recollections of the occurrence, which took place at Bangalore, that you might have the story exactly as related to me by my mother.

"Let me reply to your questions as given.

" (1) ' Did my mother always speak of the incidents as waking experiences, not mere dreams "? '

" My mother never spoke of either but as ' waking experiences.' She was very distinct upon that point. She was quite sure of having been, in both cases, wide awake when she saw what she described.

" (2) ' Was I old enough to recollect whether I heard of the second experience before the news of death arrived 1 '

" I have a distinct recollection (for the scenes made a great impression upon me) of the news of my Aunt Fanny's death being taken and broken to my father by my mother; his great grief; and of my mother's anxiety before and about the coming of the letters, and of her depression (she was naturally of a bright, cheerful disposition) before the letters came, which I could not at the time understand, but which I have since felt was due to

1 See Vol. i., pp. 550-1.

2 Compare cases 194, 449, and see Vol. i,, p. 555,

her anticipation of coming sorrow. I was seldom away from either my father's or mother's side in those days, and must have been about 5 years old, and could well recollect things of a striking character which took place then. My earliest recollection is of the death of my eldest, and, then, only sister, which took place when I was a child of between 2 and 3 years of age. Of this I can of course only dimly remember the circumstances, and merely mention it here to show that I was very impressionable as a child, and began to remember much earlier than the date of my Aunt Fanny's death. I have no doubt in my own mind, therefore, of the phenomenon having occurred to my mother as described by her.

" (3) ' (a) Am I aware as to whether my mother was in the habit of having similar visitations or visions which did not correspond with anything 1 or (6), of her being subject to hallucinations? '

" (a) I am not aware of any such. I do know, however, of one occurrence which took place in February or March, 1857, whilst I was staying, en route to India, with my father and mother at Pisa.

" I remember my mother came down to breakfast one morning greatly agitated, and told us (my father and me) that she had been awakened during the night by something uniisual occurring, and saw distinctly a curious flame-like light^ at the end of her bed, which took no definite shape but faded away and left the room again dark. She said she was quite sure that something had happened to a near relative who was then in London. My father tried to reassure my mother, but she was not to be dissuaded from her presentiment of evil. A few days afterwards we received letters from England informing us that the relative in question had had a sudden and dangerous illness — in fact, a dangerous miscarriage — on the night in question.

" (6) I never heard of any other case of vision, or otherwise, occurring to my mother, nor am I aware of my mother having been subject in any way to hallucinations of the senses.

" The occurrences I have mentioned were wide apart as regards time. The first when my mother was a girl about 16 or 17; next, as a woman of about 33; and last when she was 47 years of age."^

Before this account was received, the second of the two incidents had been described to us by a clergyman, distantly connected with Lady Sewell, who had heard her narrate it, and had himself seen the lock of hair. Though correct as to the main fact, his version, when compared with the above, illustrates the difference which intimate connection with the original witness makes in the value of second-hand testimony (see pp. 322 and 539, note). The figure is represented as having appeared "in her shroud, dripping wet, and with her black hair cut quite short "; and " on allowing for difierence of longitude, it was found that the hour of the vision corresponded with the hour of the death." Colonel Fane Sewell's account, it will be observed, merely states that the night corresponded.

(516) From the Rev. H. C. D. Chandler, Waterbeach Vicarage, Cambridge. His sister, whose experience is recorded, is out of health, and he would prefer not to have her troubled for a first-hand account.

1 Compare cases 253 and 553, and see pp. 193-4.

2 With respect to the occurrence of several telepathic experiences to the same percipient — exemplified in E. Hobson's and Colonel Fane Sewell's cases — see p. 22, note, and p. 77.

480 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" 1883.

" The following occurred about 5 o'clock a.m., on October 28th, 1853. My sister, then Eliza Chandler, was visiting friends in the neighbourhood of Killarney, County Kerry, Ireland. Her mind was quite composed, and her health perfectly good. She was surrounded by kind friends and was of a gay and bright disposition, not in the least inclined to morbidness. She had known that her mother was in declining health generally.

" She retired to rest on the Thursday evening as usual. About 5 o'clock on Friday morning she awoke suddenly, and as it seemed without cause, when she immediately became conscious of her mother's form at the foot of her bed. She sat up and gazed intently. She describes her mother's form as though she had risen from her couch, and the face was fixed with an earnest and loving gaze upon her child. The length of time the form remained I do not remember, or whether that time was mentioned I do not remember. My sister could not rest, but rose and dressed, greatly agitated. She at once wrote to inquire if all was well, and begging to hear from us.

" At the hour above named, I was watching by my mother's bedside [at Bristol], she having been seized with hernia during a severe fit of coughing. My mother had sunk rapidly, and a letter of mine, stating the nature of the illness and its probable issue, had crossed my sister's letter to me. At the hour of 5 o'clock, I was struck with the change of my mother's appearance, and ran to call a sister, who was sleeping near. On applying a glass to the mouth, we found that the breathing had ceased, and our mother was gone to her rest. The same morning I wrote to Ireland telling the sad news, receiving the next day my sister's letter telling of the strange apparition she had seen.

" My sister is married and settled in Australia; but she could add but little more to the above account, for each particular was written indelibly on my memory. " H. C. D. Chandleb."

In answer to inquiries as to whether he was certain that the apparition had preceded the arrival of his letter announcing his mother's critical condition, he replied: —

" Our letters crossed — mine containing the details of my mother's last days, and my sister's telling the story of the apparition. Her letter must have been written — as far as we could calculate, I remember — the morningafter my mother's death, and solely in consequence of the apparition."

The Bristol Times confirms the fact that Mrs. Chandler died on Friday, Oct. 28, 1853.

(517) From Lady Miles, Leigh Court, Bristol.

"August 1st, 1885.

" My mother. Lady Roche (wife of the late Sir David Roche, of Carap Croom, County of Limerick, Ireland) was very much beloved by her cousin, the [Right] Hon. John Vandeleur, and at the moment of his death he came to say good-bye to her. She woke from sleep at 4 a.m., and saw him, wrapped up in something black, standing near the lower curtain of her bed. She woke her husband, and said, ' Why, there is the Hon. John at the bottom of the bed! ' Sir David told her she was dreaming, and to rub her eyes; but, as she still afiirmed it, he got up and pulled the curtain away, lit the candles, and stood where she said the appearance was. She

said, ' I see him now, standing next you, waving his hand in farewell to me.' He faded away, and disappeared. It was afterwards known that this gentlemen died 50 miles off, of a paralytic seizure.

" A brother of this lady, Mr. George Vandeleur, of Ballynamona, Co. Clare, also saw his servant at the moment of his death. The man was sent to Limerick on an errand, got drunk, and fell off a cart, the wheel of which passed over his throat.

" These two cases are quite authentic, and known to many people.

" F. E. Miles."

We find the date of Mr. J. Vandeleur's death given in Saunders' Newsletter as November 9, 1828.

In answer to inquiries. Lady Miles says: —

" With regard to my mother seeing the Hon. John Yandeleur. She saw him a few minutes after his death. She was living at a house in Limerick, and he died at Kilrush. I heard the account from my father and mother dozens of times when a girl. My mother was not an imaginative woman, or inventive. She died in 1841. I have been living over 30 years in England, and have a good deal lost sight of anyone who could authenticate all this, though everyone knew about it at the time.

" My uncle who saw his servant is dead. It happened at Carap, Oo. Limerick, about the year 1836."

In conversation. Lady Miles told me that her uncle was dressing in the morning, when, looking round, he saw the figure of his servant, with blood about it, and addressed it, thinking it was the man himself. She was in the house at the time, and later she heard the account from her uncle's own lips.

(518) From Mme. Vavin, nee Girard, a relative of our friend, M. Ch, Richet, who copied the account from a letter addressed to himself.

" 1885.

" Ma mere, etant veuve, avait ete tres aimee et demandee en mariage par un jeune professeur de Caen. Ayant quitte la ville et epouse M. Caillaux, elle avait cesse toute relation avec M. Roger, et n'en entendit plus parler depuis trois ou quatre ans. Une nuit, ^tant absolument dveillde, elle vit une forme blanchatre, comme une vapeur,^ se pencher trois^ fois sur son lit, comme pour lui dire adieu. Elle eut alors, sans pouvoir s'en rendre bien compte, le sentiment que c'etait M. Roger qui lui disait adieu. Tres emue, elle ne parla de la chose a personne; mais, une huitaine de jours apres, elle apprit la mort de M. Roger, mort survenue la nuit m^me ou elle avait eu cette apparition. Elle ne le savait pas malade."

Mme. Vavin adds the following experience of her own: —

" Pour moi, mes souvenirs sont plus vagues, ^tant plus lointains. Mon pere est mort a pen pres subitement. Je I'avais quitte la veille, au soir, gai et bien portant. Dans la nuit une voix, comme un soufile, et pour ainsi dire sans parole, ^ me fit comprendre que mon pere etait mort Le lendemain, lorsque on entra dans ma chambre, je me jetai en pleurant dans les bras de ma bonne en lui disant, ' Je sais que papa est mort.' Je n'avais vu ni forme, ni apparition d'aucune sorte. J'avais neuf ans.

" Marguerite Vavin."

^ See case 193, and the first note thereto. ^ gee p. 229, note.

^ This was probably an instance of the inward and soundless form of hallucination described in Vol. i., p. 480.

482 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

(519) From Miss Osborne, 10a, Cunningham Place, N.W. u 1883.

" This story I have heard my mother relate, but as she and my aunt (to whom this incident occurred) are both dead, I can only tell it as I remember it. I was a child when it happened. My aunt, Mrs. Fairman, was living in Portugal, and had not been in London for some years. Her half-sister (with whom she had no especial sympathy) married a Mr. Moore, whom Mrs. Fairman had never seen. About a year after that marriage, Mrs. Fairman was making arrangements to give a party. One night she awoke, and saw her sister sitting by her bedside, and a gentleman standing by her.^ She heard her sister say, 'I shall die, I shall die! ' She woke her husband, and told him what she had seen. He, angry at being disturbed, said it was all nonsense. At last she slept, but woke again, seeing the same thing. ^ She again woke her husband, who used stronger language than before. So impressed was Mrs. Fairman with the feeling she should hear of the death of her sister, that she ordered all arrangements for the proposed party to be stopped; and in the time a letter could reach her, one came to say Mrs. Moore had died at the time she had seen her.

" I think it was about two years after this, Mrs. Fairman returned to England. She had never seen any portrait of Mr. Moore, who was a very ordinary person, with no marked characteristics. She was walking with my mother in Oxford Street, when she suddenly said, ' Mary, that is the man I saw with Julia at my bedside.' It was really Mr. Moore."

[The final incident here recalls the conclusion of the Wynyard case (No. 357), where there is some doubt what the exact facts were; but the point is not one likely to have crept into either narrative without some foundation. The fact that Miss Osborne's mother was a witness of the recognition makes the account a second-hand (not a third-hand) one, as far as that item is concerned.]

(520) From a lady, known to the present writer, who prefers that her own name should not be printed. The evidence is on a par with secondhand (Vol. I., p. 158, note). "Aug. 25th, 1886.

" My father was a marine officer on board his Majesty's ship.

Crossing the Atlantic, in the course of the voyage, the medical gentleman told him that his mother had appeared to him and distinctly said, * Andrew, Andrew, mend your ways, or you will never be where I am.' Sir James Malcolm [the narrator's father] advised him to write down the date and hour, which Dr. Douglas ^ did, and afterwards wrote that his mother had died the day and hour precisely as she appeared to him. I have often heard my father mention the circumstance."

Another daughter of Sir J. Malcolm's writes (Sept. 23, 1886), "I have often heard the story of Dr. Campbell's vision — it was not a dream — told to Sir J. in the morning, who advised him to note it down." She thinks that the incident took place in the West Indies, in 1806 or not long after, and gives the name of the ship as the " Canopus." We have ascertained from the Record Office that the " Canopus " was in the West

1 As to the appearance of the second figure, compare case 511 above, and see Vol. i., pp. 545-6.

2 Compare case 503, and see p. 237, note.

3 The name seems to have been Campbell. The mistake is due to the fact that Sir J. Malcolm had another medical friend, named Douglas, to whom this incident was knowm.

Indies at that time, but that no doctor of the name of Campbell was officially attached to her during the years 1806-12.

[We may charitably hope that the words heard were a contribution of the percipient's own mind, and merely betokened a wholesome sense of parental superiority. I have drawn attention to the suspicious exactitude of the coincidence in many of the second-hand cases.]

From Mr. Edward Butler, 7, Park Square, Leeds. I do not number the case, as the evidence is possibly third-hand. " June 21st, 1884.

" The enclosed account of my brother's apparition has been read by my cousin Fanny, a lady of singular accuracy of mind and entire trustworthiness, who was one of the first (if not the first) to hear the tale, from my mother herself, I think. It exactly agrees with her recollection, and may, I fully believe, be relied on as accurate.

" In the year 1857, my brother was in the Civil Service of India, and was stationed in Bengal as a judge or magistrate and collector. For anything we knew he was perfectly well, and had very good prospects in his profession. One morning early — it was the height of summer — my mother was lying awake, and it was clear dawn. She saw my brother stand at the foot of her bed. There was nothing noticeable in his dress. His face wore an exceedingly tranquil and pleasant expression, and my mother felt no fear. I do not know how long the vision lasted. When it disappeared my mother woke my father, and said, 'I have seen Wells.' They made a note of the day and hour. There was no Indian telegraph in those days, and some weeks elapsed before they received from an official source in India news of my brother's sudden death, which must have taken place just about the time of the apparition. My brother's appearance was always regarded by my mother as a merciful and kindly thing. It prepared her for the news, and broke the shock.

" I think my mother was by organisation open to delicate impulses or impacts from subtle exterior agencies, if such there be; for I remember her telling me, amongst other things now forgotten, that once she had an unaccountable conviction that she ought to go and see an old schoolfellow, who had been long separated from her, and whose very name, indeed, she had almost ceased to recall. She subsequently heard that this old schoolfellow had died about that time, and on her deathbed had said, ' Oh, I wish

I could see Anne,' naming my mother's maiden name.

" Edwaed Butler."

We find from the East India Service Register and from Allen^s Indian Mail, that Mr. Wells Butler died on June 20, 1859 (not 1857)— which accords with the above statement that the time was " the height of summer."

Miss Frances Butler, of 11, Gloucester Road, Teignmouth, on being asked whether she heard the account from the percipient's, Mrs. H. Butler's, own lips, replied (on April 19, 1886) that she could not recollect whether she heard it from Mrs. H. Butler or from her own mother, Mrs. H. Butler's sister. A sister of Mr. Butler's tells Professor Barrett that she remembers being told of this incident shortly after it took place. Mr. Butler regrets not having questioned his mother on the subject, but he feared to make her uncomfortable.

(521) From Mr. David Crombie, 2, Breakspear Road, St. John's, S.E.

484 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" 1884.

" My eldest brother, John, left home when I was very young, to become an apprentice to Captain Wallace, trading to the East Indies. [He had been away for about three years, but was returning, and was daily expected, when] my mother had a vision in which she saw him, wearing a most careworn and anxious look, enter the bedroom, and so distinct was the vision that she awoke my father, who was sleeping at her side, exclaiming, ' John,' (my father's name), ' there's Johnnie.' He immediately sat up, and subsequently got out of bed, and went out on to the landing to see if his boy had really arrived; finding all quiet, and having gone downstairs to see if the front door were fastened, he returned to bed, not over well pleased at having been sent on this wild-goose-chase.

" Next night, about the same time, my mother declared she again saw Johnnie, looking so flushed and ill, and again called my father's attention to the apparition, which, however, he did not see,^ and on this occasion he did not leave his bed. On the third night she again saw the apparition, this time as white as a sheet; it smiled and passed away. My father saw what a deep impression these visions had made on her mind; and, without her knowing it, he made an entry in cypher on the flyleaf of the old folio family Bible, to see if it were possible that his death could have been foretold in this extraordinary way.

" The visions had indeed made an indelible and sorrowful impression on my mother's mind, and, as the saying goes, she was full of it; and to her immediate and most intimate friends she had related all the circumstances, and her own fears in connection with them. Of those to whom she had communicated the facts were Mrs. and Miss Wallace, mother and sister respectively of the captain with whom my brother sailed; Misses Jarvis, two maiden aunts; Miss Bartlett and Mrs. Lowe, widow of a sea-captain.

" As time wore on the vessel at length arrived, and shortly thereafter a letter was delivered with a black seal, announcing my brother's illness and death, which, on reference to the memorandum, occurred at the very time the dreams were dreamed. The captain, in writing, gave an extract from the entry in the log. Then my father, who had no faith in dreams, for the first time in his life was compelled to admit that in this case there seemed to be good grounds for believing in them.

" On the morning following the announcement of my brother's death, I was requested to deliver a number of notes with intimation of his death to many of our personal friends; amongst them were those whose names I have given above. On my return home, I was naturally asked what they had said after reading the notes. Mrs. Wallace said, ' Dear me, then Elfie's ' (my mother's name) ' dream has come true.' A similar remark was made by her aunts, the Misses Jarvis. Mrs. Lowe sent condolences, and said my mother's fears had been too well founded.

" As I did not understand what they referred to I asked what they meant, and for the first time I learned all the particulars; and although I could only have been between 6 and 7 years old, [55 years ago] the facts left an impression on my mind that time has not effaced. Of course, the story was often repeated in my presence afterwards, thereby keeping it fresh in my memory, and I can vouch for the truth of the details so far as came under my personal knowledge. " D. C."

^ See p. 105, second note.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Crombie says: —

" The parties named are dead from 25 to 40 years ago. My brother died of scarlet fever, which ran its course with remarkable swiftness. The death occurred on the day my mother had the third dream."

[In conversation on July 28th, 1884, Mr. Crombie told me that he remembers seeing the entry in the Bible, after the news arrived, and that it was pointed to as proof of the correspondence of dates. He describes his mother as the very opposite of a visionary. The visions were naturally enough regarded as dreams by the persons to whom they were told; but Mr. Crombie is convinced that his mother was awake, and points to his father's conduct, on being woke, as evidence of this. I must point out that a repetition of the sort here described, on three successive nights, has not been alleged in any of our first-hand telepathic cases; ^ and it is the kind of detail that may very naturally have got imported into the narrative (see p. 229, note; but see also p. 237, note). But it is not, of course, vital to the evidence.]

(522) From Miss J. Connolly, of 21, Wickham Road, New Cross, S.E., head-mistress of a high school for girls. u ^pj-ij 4^}^ 1885

" One Christmas my father was invited to spend his college vacation with a very dear and valued friend, a Mrs. Brown. However, as he was also invited by my grandfather, he preferred to accept that invitation, glad of the opportunity of meeting my mother. The house was a large one, and full of Christmas guests. One night there was a dinner-party of friends from the neighbourhood. After dinner such a storm arose that my grandmother found herself obliged to provide everyone with beds for the night.... My grandmother, to arrange for her unexpected company, gave up the young men's bedrooms to the ladies, and turned the library into a sort of barrack room for the night.

"At 3 o'clock, my Uncle William spoke to my father, who was sleeping near him, and said, ' James, who are you talking to; what are you saying? ' My father raised himself up, looked at his watch, and replied, 'I have seen a vision. Mrs. Brown has been standing at my feet, and she said, " Good-bye, James! I wished greatly to see you, to say good-bye to you before I left this world, and I have now come to you. Serve God and be a good man, and He will prosper and bless you. I have loved you so dearly from the time you were a boy, that I had to say good-bye. But let us meet again." She waved her hand and disappeared.'

" Both the young men were much impressed, and in the morning my father told my grandmother of the dream or vision. She advised him to write an ordinary letter, just inquiring about Mrs. Brown and her daughters. Letters then cost tenpence, and were not written on slight

1 Since this was written, however, I have received an account from Mrs. Perryn, of 27, Adrian Square, Westgate-on-Sea, in which she states that, when crossing the Atlantic in November, 1863, she dreamt with unusual vividness, on three successive nights, that a fire broke out in the cellar of her brother's house, and that he was wrapped in flames — the fact being that on the first of the three nights he was fearfully injured by an explosion of some chemicals with which he was experimenting in his cellar. Mrs. Perryn did not know that he experimented with chemicals; can recall no other instance of dreams repeated on successive nights; is not in the habit of having distressing dreams; and described the accident in writing to her sisters " exactly as it happened," before hearing the news. But a dream-experience is, as we have seen, indefinitely weaker evidence than an analogous case of the "borderland " or the waking class.

486 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

occasions. My father did write, but a letter crossed his, saying that at 3 o'clock on the very night of his dream, Mrs. Brown had died, and her last conscious words were regrets that she had not been able to see him to say good-bye.

" My father never much liked telling this story. He firmly believed he had seen a vision. I have heard it from his lips, and I have seen the two letters which crossed each other in the post. My father was the Rev. James Campbell Connolly, Chaplain of Woolwich Dockyard."

In reply to inquiries. Miss Connolly writes, on April 9, 1885: —

(1) " The two letters that crossed in the post were among my mother's papers, and I have failed to find them. She died when I was quite a child, and I heard her tell the story and show the letters, not thinking that I was listening. My dear father died just two years ago, in the full possession of his faculties, and I heard it twice from his own lips.

(2) " The date is difiicult. My father married in 1840, and I should say, judging from his ordination, &c., that it must have been between 1830 and 1835. Mrs. Brown's daughters are both dead — Mrs. Daly, who married the last Warden of Galway, and Mrs. Foley. Both these ladies told me the story. They were present at their mother's deathbed.

(3) " I am certain my father described the apparition as speaking directly to him."

[In no first-hand case has the sensory impression included so long a remark as that here recorded. If accurately remembered, it probably indicates that the percipient was more asleep than awake; but his experience must apparently have been very unlike an ordinary dream.]

(523) From Mrs. B., an Associate of the S.P.R., whose full name we are at liberty to mention, but not to print. u October 30th 1884

"When I was about 16 years old, my father came down to breakfast one morning, and, after saying he had been awake a long time, he said,

' and about 5 or 6 ' (I forget the exact time) ' I saw old Mr.; he

came and stood by the bed a minute or two, and then went.' In the course of the day we heard of the death of this old gentleman, of whose illness we had previously known, but whose death we had not anticipated, as it was not thought his complaint was one likely to cause death. On inquiry, we learnt that he had died at the hour that my father had said he had had a visit from him.

" My father was a merry, strong-minded man, with a scientific turn of mind and a great scorn of superstition. He is, alas! now dead some years, and I don't think we any of us thought more of the circumstance than that it was odd, but I remembered it."

We find from the Register of Deaths that Mr. died on January

10th, 1866, aged 58, the cause of death being a contused wound on the skin, which brought on erysipelas.

(524) From Mrs. Field, 16, Clifton Road, Brighton. Her mother being old, we did not press for a first-hand account. "June 1884

"In the year 1840, my grandfather, Sir L. S., was appointed Governor of the Island of Mauritius; and my mother went to see him and take leave of him. My grandfather was getting old, and my mother was in a

very delicate and precarious state of health, so the probabilities were strong that she would never see her father again, and so it turned out.

" My mother [who was living at Cheltenham] had been sitting up late one night, writing her Indian letters, intently finishing one to her husband, which for some reason she had rather delayed finishing, and which, as next day was mail-day, must be finished that night. It was winter time, and the fire was burning quite brightly in the grate for some little time after my mother went to bed, which, on account of her Indian letter, she had not been able to do till past 12 o'clock. She was lying broad awake, and the room was lighted quite well by the firelight. She had not been thinking of anything but her Indian letter, and she could not have had the least notion or fear her father was dead, as he had died suddenly, after a kind of seizure, from which he only recovered to speak a few articulate words — but the fact that he had been ill never reached England until the public official news arrived giving the news of his death, together with the usual private letters giving all the details. My mother was wide awake. The bed — an old-fashioned fourpost — faced the fireplace, and on the side next the window the curtains were closely drawn. Suddenly my mother saw a very tall figure of a man (my grandfather was unusually tall) pass the foot of her bed slowly. She called out, ' Who's there? ' in great fright, and as she called a hand opened the curtains on the side where they closed, and the same figure was there. My mother sprang out of bed and ran into the next room, where the dear old ' C [a head-nurse] slept with my two little sisters, almost babies. One of these little sisters had given the old faithful servant the name of ' Tootoo.' My mother rushed into the babies' room calling out, 'Tootoo, there's a man in my room, please get up and call the servants. There are robbers in the house.'

" After going back with her mistress, and putting her to bed, the nurse got a scrap of paper, and wrote down the hour and minute my mother had rushed into the night-nursery — she, ' Tootoo,' feeling some bad news was coming, and that my mother had seen no living man. The very next Mauritius mails brought the public papers, stating that at such a time, giving the minutes even, the guns from the fort gave notice to the Island that the Governor's late illness had ended fatally. It appeared that his last words had been of his daughter. The time noted down by ' Tootoo ' and the official announcement of his death exactly agreed.

" Charlotte E. Field."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Field says: —

"1. I have often heard my mother's experience from her own lips; but I was only a child at the time, and she went back to India about three years after, to rejoin my father, who was a Bombay Civilian, and I did not hear her speak of this experience of hers till she came home again. This would be in all quite 10 years after my grandfather's death, but ' Tootoo ' used often to talk to me about it, when she was with us, as I have mentioned in the account I sent you. I never saw the entry of date. ' Tootoo ' used often to say to me it was a pity perhaps she had not kept it. She did keep it for some little while, but in moving house she lost it. It was just hastily pencilled down on a morsel of paper.

"2. The difference of longitude was carefully accounted for. My mother's 'apparition,' or whatever it was, came to her between 12 and 1 at night — nearer 1 than 12.

488 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" 3. No, I have never heard that my mother ever saw any other vision. She is, I should say, not an imaginative person, and, besides, as she had no idea her father was even ill, she could not have imagined she saw him, and no one ever mentioned to her the fact of ' Tootoo's ' entry of date till the official date came home in the public papers; and then my mother remarked to 'Tootoo,' who often told me what she had said, 'Oh, then, 'Tootoo,' that must have been my father I saw that night I was so frightened — not a robber as I thought.' My mother has often told us she had made this remark to ' Tootoo.' "

The Army List confirms the date of Sir L. S.'s appointment, and gives January 2nd, 1842, as the date of his death. The Mauritius Register and the Times add that he died suddenly.

(525) Mr. Thomas Young, of Elsinore House, Robert Road, Handsworth, Birmingham, sent us an account of the following incident, as "often related" to him by his mother (resident at 71, Highbury Hill, N.). We asked him to apply to her for a first-hand account, which she gave in the following letter to him, and afterwards viva voce to the present writer. Her version, which was given independently, corresponds exactly with his; which is some proof that the facts have not been distorted, in recent years at any rate, through lapse of memory.

"January 10th, 1885.

" My Dear Son, — You ask me to relate Aunt Lucy's dream % it was not a dream, but a reality. You must know that Uncle Bennet was a small farmer, with a large family of 12 children, consequently some had to go away from home. They lived in a small village, Trelyon, near St. Ives, Cornwall. Now, what I am going to relate is about their daughter Betsy, who had taken a situation — I think at St. Ives. One morning aunt woke up and saw, standing by her bedside, this daughter, with her hair streaming all over her face, dripping wet, and she, poor thing, looking half drowned. Aunt said, ' Betsy, where have you come from? ' The weather being frightfully bad, she thought she had walked home through the wet. She told her to go and dry herself, but she vanished away. Poor aunt was dreadfully alarmed. They sent to her place, and it appears she would go to Plymouth, and went in a little saiKng-vessel, and that very morning the vessel was lost and all hands perished. Now, my dear son, I can vouch for every word being true, for aunt was a true Christian woman. I was a girl when she told me the unhappy incident, but it always made a most vivid impression on me. — Believe me, dear son, your loving mother, "C.Young."

In conversation Mrs. Young mentioned that she heard of this incident within a day or two of its occurrence, and that from her aunt's manner it made a very strong impression on her. She was about 14 at the time, which would make the date about 1825. Her aunt was a busy, practical woman, with no turn and no time for fancies. The cause of the girl's sudden departure, Mrs. Young thinks, was not known. We have endeavoured to find a record of the accident, but have failed, not knowing the name of the vessel.

(526) From Miss Caulfield, 1, Hyde Park Mansions, N.W. Her father was Commander Edwin T. Caulfield, of Raheendufie, Queen's Co., and of Beckford House, Bath.

"December 8th, 1883.

"When my father was at sea in H.M.S. ' Lavinia,' he was very intimate with two midshipmen, John Frederick J., and T. [The full names were given in confidence.] They had as yet formed but few opinions as to the truth of Divine Revelation; although all more or less religiously disposed, and anxious to learn. The fact of there being a future state, and that one of probation or retribution, was more especially under discussion between them. To solve this mystery for the survivors, they pledged themselves to one another, that were it permitted to give an intimation of the reality of an existence after death, the man that died first should show himself to the others.^

" My father was taken prisoner, and was by great interest placed on his parole, during two years in France; and one night, — whether waking or sleeping, he said he could not tell — he saw T. appear. At once he realised the fact that he was dead, and that he had come to redeem his promise. He asked him whether he was happy; to which the apparition replied by slowly swaying his head to and fro, with a sad expression, and a sound as of the clanking of chains accompanied the gesture. He then vanished. How soon afterwards my father received news of his friend, I am unable to say; but he was informed of his having been killed on board ship by the fall of a ' block ' from the rigging (I think during action), which caused instantaneous death.

" John Frederick J. had passed his examination, and was a lieutenant at the time of his death. My father was again in bed — whether awake, in a trance, or sleeping, he could not say; he believed he was dreaming, but it seemed like being awake. His friend and shipmate J. appeared to him. At once recognising the fulfilment of the agreement made between them, he knew that he was dead; and asked him the same question as he did his friend T.; to which an exactly similar reply was made, i.e., by the slow swaying of the head, accompanied by the sound as of the clanking of chains. In due time my father was apprised of the death of this friend also; who had had his arm and shoulder blade torn away by a cannon ball, at the storming of Algiers. My sister and I both perfectly recollect hearing this story from our father on several occasions.

Miss Caulfield's sister also signs her initials, " L. L. A."

From an examination of the ship's books of H.M.S. " Lavinia," at the Record Office, we find that " T." joined that vessel in the same year as Miss Caulfield's father, 1806, and that he was killed by the fall of a toprail on July 14, 1808. "J." has also been traced on the books of the " Lavinia," and seems to have left that ship in 1810. We have received from the Record Office a certificate to the efiect that he was dangerously wounded in the attack on Algiers on Aug. 27, 1816, and that his " left arm was removed at the shoulder-joint." We find from the Gentleman^ s Magazine that his death followed on Oct. 3.

If the clanking of chains ^ really formed a feature in both these

1 As to compacts of this sort, see p. 66. On the telepathic theory, the apparent fulfilment of the compact is of course due to a telepathic impulse transmitted before, not after, death.

2 1 must point out that this sound, being a common feature in ghostly legends, is one not unlikely to get imported into a second-hand version even of a genuine telepathic case See the remark on the prevalence of the number three, p. 229, note.

490 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

experiences, it seems an excellent instance of the percipient's investiture of the telepathic impression with his own dream-imagery (YoLL, p. 539).

The next case ought perhaps to be classed as a dream. But the sense of someone's entrance into the room, and presence by the bed which the perceiver is conscious of actually occupying, is very characteristic of a semi- waking state, and is not, I think, a common feature in dreams which are afterwards distinctly recognised as such.

(527) From the Rev. S. W. Hanks (District Secretary of the American Seamen's Friend Society, and well known to Professor William James, of Harvard, a Corresponding Member of the S.P.R.).

" Congregational House, Boston.

"April 25th, 1884.

" Two of my three brothers were sailors. The eldest (D wight) went to sea when he was 1 1 years old, and was at sea most of the time until his death, at the age of 25 years. On one of his voyages he was wrecked, and remained on the wreck nine days without food or drink. After this my mother never saw him, though by a letter from him to my other brother she had heard the particulars about the wreck, from which he was taken off by a passing vessel. On the night of December 5th, 1829, my mother dreamed that he was dead. When she arose in the morning she was much affected, and during the day she was weeping nearly all the time. When asked what made her think that Dwight was dead, she said that in the night he came into her room, trembhng, and looking very pale, and said, ' Mother.'' She said, ' Dwight, what is the matter "? I will get up, and do you come and lie down upon my bed.' He rephed, ' No, mother,' and walked out of the room. From that time she always spoke of his death with the utmost confidence.

"In July, 1830, my other sailor brother was in New York, where he was met by a stranger who asked him if he knew a sailor of the name of Dwight Hanhs.? He replied, ' I have a brother of that name from whom I have not heard for a long time.' The stranger then said to him that a man by the name of Dwight Hanks, about 25 years old, a little shorter than himself, and a little lame from having broken one of his legs when he was a boy, as he said, was killed on board the barque, ' Four Sons,' of a fall from aloft during a storm, on the night of December 5th, 1829. 'The vessel is now in port, and if you will go with me on board I will tell you just where he fell. We buried him at sea, and his chest is on board the vessel.' My brother went on board and found the statement of the stranger corroborated. When my mother heard of it she said, ' This is no news to me. I have never had a moment's doubt about Dwight's death since the time of my dream.'

" These facts are well remembered by myself and my sister, now 80 years old. " S. W. Hanks."

Mr. Hanks writes to us on March 27th, 1885: —

" I inquired of my sister if any memorandum of the date of my mothers's dream was made at the time. She informs me that none has

been preserved. She informs me that a cousin of ours was visiting the family at the time, who said of the dream: ' This is so remarkable that I will make a memorandum of it.' He did so. He is now dead, and the memorandum is lost. My sister is very confident about the date, as she has letters which she thinks fix it. She is now in such a state of health that she cannot attend to the matter. / did not keep the date, but distinctly remember theyac^."

(528) From Mrs. Monteith Brown, Oak Cottage, Hythe.

" 1884.

" The following is an account told me by my aunt, then Mary Noble, of the appearance of her brother, Edward Meadows Noble, at the time of his death. It took place in the night, and she was awoke by the sound of water dripping, ^ and saw, at the foot of her bed, her fourth brother, a lieutenant in the navy, and then serving in China. She sprang up exclaiming, ' Ned, what are you doing here 1 ' when the figure vanished. In due course of time, the news came of his having been drowned ofi" Amoy, in China, about the time of the appearance.

" E. Adela Beown."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Brown adds: —

" I heard the story direct from my aunt, who is since dead. On referring to a naval biography, I find the date of my uncle's death was January 22nd, 1843." This date is confirmed by the United Service Magazine.

[This is perhaps a case of hereditary susceptibility (see p. 137, note);' for Mrs. Brown tells us that her grandfather, Admiral Noble, when flag-lieutenant to Lord Nelson, had a vision, coinciding with death, of his cousin, Jefiery Wheelock, who was serving with the Duke of York in 1794. But this is only family tradition.]

(529) From Mrs. Martin, housekeeper to Miss Anna Swanwick, 23, Cumberland Terrace, Regent's Park, N.W., who considers that her memory is accurate and trustworthy, in spite of advanced age.

" January, 1884.

"When I was about seven years old [about 1807], my cousin, Joseph Newton, a youth of about 17 years of age, whose mother and stepfather occupied a farm near Ha warden, and were tenants of Sir Stephen Glynn, came to visit my mother in Liverpool. He was so delighted with the shipping that he left the farm and entered the establishment of a shipwright. About two years later, his mother, who rarely left home, presented herself at my mother's house and said, ' I shall never again see Joseph. As I lay awake last night, he appeared to me naked and dripping with water. I know that he is drowned.' This proved to be the case. He had gone with a companion to bathe in the Mersey, and had been carried away by the current. Seven or eight days afterwards his body was seen floating in the water, and was picked up by a packet.

" I remember my aunt's visit, and I remember attending my cousin's funeral. I cannot say that I actually heard my aunt relate her dream, but I have often heard my mother tell the story. My mother and aunt are both dead. I never heard that my aunt had any similar dream at any other time. " Susan Maetin."

1 Compare the next case, and cases 513, 535, 537; and see p. 26.

492 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

Mrs. Martin further states that this was the only occasion on which her aunt visited Liverpool.

It has been impossible to trace the date of this death, as it occurred before the days of registration.

[If the narrator has really a recollection of her aunt's visit, which both preceded the news of the death and was a consequence of the vision, her evidence is not very far from being on a par with first-hand (Vol. I., p. 148).]

(530) From Miss Jameson, 6, Leamington Villas, Acton. She is the youngest daughter referred to in the narrative, being at the time (1839) 10 years of age. Her father was residing in Norfolk.

" April 30th, 1884.

" On a bright moonlight night in January, 1839, an elderly gentleman was lying dangerously ill. He was being carefully watched that night by a daughter. During the hours of from 1 2 midnight to 2 o'clock, so peculiar were his symptoms, the daughter thought her father dying or dead, and yet there seemed anguish. In the morning, about 10 o'clock, the gentleman came downstairs. His youngest daughter was frightened to see her father so altered, and well remembers his resting his elbow upon the mantelpiece, with his forehead on his hand, and also saying, ' May my Lord and Almighty Father in His Infinite mercy grant that I never may pass through another such night.'

" On the same evening in Boulogne, the eldest son of the above thought he would go home early that night; bright and moonlight; retired to rest (but not to sleep) shortly after 12; the room quite light. Not feehng sleepy, he half reclined, resting his head upon one hand. Presently he saw his bedroom door gently open. He roused himself to look and see who could be coming so quietly into his bedroom, when he saw his father in his night-dress, with a silk handkerchief, which he distinctly recognised, bound round his head. His father came to the foot of the bed, and stood and gazed at his son, who steadily looked at him, pained to see his father looking so ill. The father quietly withdrew, the door closed, the son jumped out of bed, and dressed himself quickly, walked about the streets of Boulogne with the watchman, to whom he related occurrence, at 6 a.m. returned home, and wrote immediately to his sisters to inquire how his father and all at home were. The letter caused great surprise, as it was an unusual one. Some months after, he came home upon a visit, when he alluded to letter, related above incident, and said ' Wait one minute. Just recollect which silk handkerchief father had round his head. I will tell you which I saw, and then you will see if I am right.' And he was right. My father was never told of it. My brother died over 10 years since."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Jameson wrote: —

" The handkerchief which was round my father's head was, as well as I can describe it, of an undecided pattern — colours blended — scarcely a scroll, and yet a scroll pattern is the best name I can give; an Indian style; a border round, with the colours less mixed; red and yellow, but not glaring; it had been given him at High "Wycombe. No two handkerchiefs the same pattern. I remember two others very well; both larger in size; one used to be called brindled; no decided pattern, but the colours woven in; a lady would understand by my saying something of a Paisley

shawl pattern; perhaps you will understand me better if I say the colours were so mixed as to somewhat resemble the tapestry curtains of the present day — where there is not a decided pattern.

"E. M. Jameson."

In conversation Miss Jameson told me that she distinctly remembers the arrival of this letter, and the sensation it caused. It was the fact of its arrival that impressed on the minds of the family the coincidence of the father's distress and the brother's anxiety. Miss Jameson gave a vivid description of her father's aspect and words.

Miss Jameson has forwarded to us the following letter from her sister, Mrs. Large.,, Grange Cottage, Taplow.

"November 15th, 1884.

" In answer to your request about dear father and William, it was this, as near as I can remember. One night William woke up, whether from any noise or influence I do not know, and saw a figure at the foot of his bed, like father, with a countenance of extreme misery. He was frightened, and covered himself up with bedclothes till daylight; whether he slept or not I know not. Upon comparing notes when he wrote to know how we all were, it seems that night was the one father suffered so intensely with the abscess, and thought he should not live. I remember when he came down in the morning how haggard he looked; he quite upset us. But he roused no one in the night — why I do not know. From a remark he made, he was thinking of William during the night. That is all I know. u ^ Large."

Miss Jameson adds: —

" I think my own version is correct, for I am singularly correct in all things bearing upon events of my childhood. I was 10, my sister 18. I think the impression made upon my mind was more unmixed, as my brother was anything but timid; the covering himself up, I think, is mixed with another matter. " E. M. J."

(531) From Mrs. Harvey, 1, Rochester Road, Camden Road, N.W.

"February 26th, 1884.

" On February 8th, 1882, my eldest brother died at Croydon, at a quarter past 6 in the morning. About 6 o'clock in the evening I received notice of his death. I wrote that same evening to my aunt and uncle, at Billericay, in Essex. My letter was received by them the next day. In the following July, I visited my aunt, and on speaking of my brother's death she said: —

" ' On the morning before I received your letter I was lying awake, when I distinctly saw the form of a tall man appear at my bedside, and slightly bend over it.' I said, ' Did you really? ' She said, ' That I certainly did, and I awoke your uncle, and told him; I could not discern features, but I saw the form of a man as plain as could be. I did not know what to think it meant.' My aunt had not heard of his illness, for it was not made known to even his wife that it was so serious; his death was therefore unexpected. " M. Harvey."

We have confirmed the date and place of death by the Register of Deaths.

494 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

We are requested not to publish the aunt's name. Mrs. Harvey, at my request, wrote to ask her some questions, and I have seen the reply, in which Mrs. Harvey's uncle, speaking of his wife, says, " All she can say is that it was so "; but he expresses the strongest dread and dislike of the whole subject.

(532) Prom the late Mr. G. Wadsworth, the narrator of case 496 above.i

" October 21st, 1882.

"In 1837 my uncle was living in Birmingham. My father, then living in Jersey, one morning got up in great perturbation, having seen his brother dying, and said to my mother that he must go at once to Birmingham. Communication was at that time not very convenient, and, moreover, expensive, so that my mother naturally dissuaded a journey upon such an extraordinary assumption; but so convinced was my father of the force of his vision, that he packed up his portmanteau ready for the summons which he felt certain to receive; and when a few days after he got a letter from me, and a parcel from the executor notifying the death, he at once started by return steamer.

" My uncle at the time, and for some short time previously, was known to be ailing — not what could be called really dangerously. The cause of his death occurred after I left him in the evening, and before my calling in the morning, so that he may be said to have died suddenly, so far as was known in Jersey."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death took place, very suddenly, on July 29, 1837.

[Here again it is possible that the experience was a dream; but the impression made by it seems to have been of a very unusual kind.]

(533) From Mrs. Harnett, a near relative of our friend. Miss Porter, who thinks that her memory may be fully trusted; but the case is very remote. « HoUybank, Kenley, Surrey.

"December, 1884.

" Having been requested to write down the particulars of an event which occurred in the lives of my parents, I do so.

"In 1820, my father and mother, both being under 50 years of age, and in perfect health, were staying in Liverpool (their residence being at Whitehaven, in Cumberland), names, Joseph and Ann Mondel.

" One night, the latter, sleeping peacefully, was awoke by the former calling out: —

" ' Ann, I feel sure Anthony Mathers is dead.'

" ' What makes you think so *? '

" ' He has just been at the bedside, and laid an icy -cold hand on my cheek.'

" ' You must have been dreaming.'

" ' Oh, but my cheek is still cold.'

" The old and much-esteemed friend was, at the time, sojourning in one of the West Indian islands. The season was known to be more than usually sickly, so the thought of his danger might have engendered morbid

1 These two cases perhaps afford an example of family susceptibility (p. 132, note).

feelings. My father, as well as my mother, was content to rest in that hope, during the weeks that must elapse ere the news of that night's occurrences in Jamaica could reach England. News did arrive, and stated that on the night referred to Mr. Mathers succumbed to a sudden and most severe attack of yellow or other West Indian fever.

" As a child I first heard the tale, but often in my presence was it repeated or referred to, later in life, without any change or amplification of detail. " Janet Harnett."

[We have failed to trace the exact date of the death.]

(534) From Miss Crommelin, 1, Edinburgh Mansions, Victoria Street, S.W. u ^prii^ 1883.

" My brother, when at school, having gone to bed one summer's night in

a dormitory with several other boys, heard young C, who slept next

to him, call out, ' Crommelin! Look, there is my sister standing at the foot of my bed — see! ' My brother saw nothing, though he sat up.^ It was after nine, but still light, if I remember rightly. Young C still persisted he had seen her, in white. Next day came a telegram: the child in question had died of heart disease, whilst saying her prayers at that very hour — she had presumably also been wearing her white night-gown. As my brother is now dead, and as we have no knowledge of the schoolfellow in question, this cannot be more fully authenticated.

"May Crommelin."

In conversation, Mr. Podmore learnt that the boy's name was Close, but Miss Crommelin does not know to what family of Closes he belonged. The incident took place in 1858, or about that date, when her brother was 12 years old, and she a little younger. She heard of it from her brother soon after the event.

(535) From Mr. Arthur Bedford, Ant's Hill, Laugharne, St. Clears, S. Wales. This account might have been included with the first-hand evidence, but is placed here on account of its resemblance to the last.

"March 10th, 1884. " At a large public school, one winter's morning, about dawn, all in our dormitory were roused up by a fearful cry from one of my schoolfellows, who declared that his father, dressed in a pea coat, with high boots on, had appeared at his bedside, dripping wet. Some days afterwards an account of the foundering of the vessel he commanded in Yarmouth Roads reached him, and, as well as could be ascertained, the time of the loss of the vessel corresponded with the appearance of this double of my schoolfellow's father at his bedside. The body was recovered and found to be dressed as described. I would like to give name and other circumstances, but the widow of my schoolfellow is alive, and I do not know her present residence, to ask permission for disclosing it. " Arthur Bedford."

(536) From Mrs. Gardiner, 30, Skene Street, Macdufi", N.B., who heard of the incident from her sister soon after its occurrence. The account was written in 1883. After narrating that about 40 years before, when her father was tenant of Mill of Boyndie, a large farm about two miles west of Banfi", three men who had left his service one morning got

1 See p. 105, second note.

496 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

drunk, pushed out to sea in a boat, and were drowned, Mrs. G-ardiner continues: —

" In the meantime nothing whatever of the movements of these men was known at the Mill of Boyndie; but all the household retired to rest at the usual hour. My sister, as was her custom, locked all the doors, and placed the keys on a table beside her bed. She was awakened in the middle of the night by one of the domestics coming to her, and asking for the key of the kitchen door, as two of the three lads who had left in the morning had just looked in at her bedroom window, as if they were in want of something. She said she had asked them what they required, but they had returned no answer, and having slowly moved down, left the back of the house, where they were joined by the third one. [The premises were searched without result.] A messenger arrived early next morning, saying that the three young men had been drowned. My sister is now dead, but I am certain, if she had been alive, she would have corroborated the whole of the foregoing statement."

[The evidence here of course depends, not on the mere tale of a frightened servant, but on the assurance of Mrs. Gardiner's sister that the fright related to the apparition of certain persons whose death was not known of till next day. A mistake of identity seems improbable; as though a servant, startled from sleep in the middle of the night, would be likely enough to mistake friends seeking admittance for tramps or burglars, she would not be likely to mistake tramps or burglars for friends. It must be observed, however, that a joint apparition of three persons who were all dying at the same time is not a type of which we have any first-hand specimens; and though such an event would quite admit of a telepathic explanation, it suggests a certain infusion of the mythical element. Clearly, a genuine telepathic incident may be unconsciously exaggerated and improved, just as much as a spurious one.]

§ 5. The remaining second-hand cases are from narrators who were not relatives of the original witnesses, but for the most part were thoroughly intimate with them. None of the cases are the mere recitals of stories casually picked up without any warranty as to their bona jides}

(537) Mr. Colchester, of Bushey Heath, Herts, sends us the following case from a MS. work entitled Reminiscences of the Bermudas, written by his late father, who at the time of the occurrence narrated was assistantsurgeon in the Royal Artillery. The names of the two officers. Lieutenants

1 At the same time, these are specially the cases in respect of which the drawbacks to transmitted evidence, which were described in Vol. i., pp. 149-57, must be carefully borne in mind. For example, the narrator of the last case described to us how a friend of hers, the late Dr. Smith, of Banff, when a medical student, woke and "distinctly saw 'a brother," who, it proved, died at the time. But we afterwards obtained an accoimt from Mrs. Findlater, of Dufftown, N.B., a daughter of the percipient, in which it was stated that he always expressly denied having seen any apparition, or recognisable form. He was only conscious of his bed-curtains shaking, and of a shadow passing before him. The point remains that a strong impression of his brother's death was conveyed to him (though the death was quite unexpected), and that he rose and marked the time in vvTiting, and next day mentioned his experience to a friend, Mr. Falconer. Still the case, already second-hand and remote, is so much weakened by the correction that we do not include it in our evidence.

Creagh and Liston, were given in initial in the MS. The author heard of the occurrence from Lieutenant Creagh (whom he describes as "a highly honourable man "), and made a written note of it, some months, or perhaps a year, after it happened. The account is somewhat abridged.

" The passage from Bermuda to Halifax is in certain seasons hazardous, and in 1830 a transport, containing over 200 men, foundered at sea between these two ports. Two officers of the regiment to which the detachment had belonged had, in a half -jesting way, made a sort of promise that whoever died first should come back if he could, and let the other know whether there was another world.^ This conversation was heard by the narrator, as it took place in his presence, perhaps a year before the events happened, though not remembered till afterwards. Liston embarked in charge of the detachment, and had been gone about a fortnight, when Creagh, who had one night left the mess early and had retired to bed, and was beginning to close his eyes, saw his door open and Liston enter. Forgetting his absence, and thinking he had come to pull him out of bed (for practical joking was then more common in the army than it is now),

he cried, ' No, no; d n it, Liston, don't, old fellow! I'm tired! Be

off! ' But the vision came nearer the bed foot, and Creagh then saw that Liston looked as if very ill (for it was bright moonlight), and that his hair seemed wet, and hung down over his face like a drowned man's. The apparition moved its head mournfully; and when Creagh in surprise sat up, rubbed his eyes, and looked again, it was gone. Still Creagh avers that all this time he had no idea of its being a spectre, and believing that he had seen Liston himself, he went to sleep. In the morning he related the occurrence, when he recollected, but not till then, Liston's absence on duty from the island. He asserts he had not lately been thinking of Liston; neither had the vessel been away long enough, nor had bad weather occurred to cause fears for her loss to be entertained. That he was wide awake, or at least not dreaming, is shown by his sitting up and addressing the apparition."

We find from the Army List that Lieut. Liston was " lost on passage home from Bermuda, on board the brig ' Bulow,' April, 1831," not 1830.

[It is impossible to say whether the vision occurred at the hour, or even on the day, that the transport foundered.]

(538) From Miss Ann Hunt (a member of the Society of Friends), 9, Brunswick Square, Bristol.

"May 15th, 1884.

"At the time of Joan Pince's death, her son was in the employ of Philip D. Tuckett, of Frenchay. I well remember hearing this son, John Pince, relate how he had been aroused by the sound of his mother's voice, calling him by name. It was early in the morning, but so strong was his impression that his mother's decease was thus notified to him, that he got up and went into his employer's room, saying that his mother was dead, and that he must go at once to her home. At first endeavours were used to dissuade him from his purpose, but finding how strong an impression had been made on his mind, P. D. Tuckett kindly acceded, and John Pince set off" for his mother's residence, which was, I believe, in Devonshire. On arriving, he found the event had taken place as he apprehended. I

1 See p. 66, and p. 489, first note.



Vol. Ii. 2 K

498 - SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

hoped to procure a written account of this circumstance, as a granddaughter of his, now living in Bristol, thought she had it in the handwriting of her mother, who is lately deceased. She has been unable to find it, but fully confirmed the particulars I have given.

" John Pince died in 1854, aged 87 years; and it may have been 7, or possibly 10, years before that I heard him relate the occurrence" — at which time, as Miss Hunt has stated in conversation, he was in complete vigour, with senses unimpaired, and an excellent memory.

The following account of the same incident is from Miss Bowden, a cousin of Miss Hunt's.

" One night in March, 1793, my grandfather, John Pince, was awoke by a voice, which he believed to be his mother's, calling him by name, ' John, John! ' He was so impressed by the feeling that his mother, Joan Pince, whom he dearly loved, was ill or dying, that he immediately arose and went to the Friend with whom he lived, and told him he must at once set out for home, stating his reason for doing so. On reaching Newton Bushel, he found that his mother had departed this life after a few hours' illness, at the time which he had heard her call.

" These few particulars are all I know about the occurrence, but I believe them to be correct, having heard them from my mother and aunt, daughters of John Pince. «« E. Bowden."

Miss Bowden has in her possession a letter written to Mr. Tuckett by a friend of Joan Pince's, describing her short illness, and requesting that her son's mind may be prepared for the intelligence of her death. It is thus evident that he was not aware of her danger.

(539) From the Rev. Chas. C. Starbuck, M. A., Andover, Mass., U.S.A., who wrote in January, 1884. The account was communicated to him by the late Hon. Richard Hill, of Jamaica, a Privy Councillor of the island, the most eminent naturalist of the West Indies. Mr. Starbuck mentions Mr. Hill's having quoted to him, with just gratification, a sentence from a letter which he had received from Charles Darwin — " you are an observer after my own heart."

" When Mr. Hill was yet young, he began to work against African slavery, the curse of his native West Indies. Among others he visited the Duke of Kent, in the hope of securing his influence; and I may remark that he lived to receive from the Duke's daughter, as his sovereign, the Companionship of the Bath, as a token of appreciation of his many and signal services both to science and humanity.

" Being a Jamaican born, and of mixed blood besides, he soon found that it would be as much as his life was worth to return to his native island. For a number of years he was an exile. White Englishmen, however, though zealous abolitionists, though liable to much persecution, and sometimes in considerable danger, could manage somewhat better to keep their hold in the island. There was one friend and colleague of Hill, an Englishman, I believe, named Lundy,i who was working in Jamaica, when his friend started from England in a sailing vessel for St. Thomas,

1 I may remark that, as it is easier to be sure of facts than names, I give the latter only as they lie in my memory. — C. C. S.

intending to proceed to Hayti. Hill and the captain occupied the main cabin together, having their state-rooms on each side of it. One evening when the vessel was about in the latitude of the Azores, the captain and he were both in their state-rooms, while a large globe-lamp, swinging over the table, partially lighted each. Hill was lying still awake, when he heard a step in the cabin, which, he told us, he recognised the instant he heard it. It passed through the cabin, and his friend Lundy appearing in the door of his state-room, came up to the berth, and leaning on it, said: ' Well, Hill, I have served the cause as long as I could be useful; and now it has pleased God to take me.' He remarked that the words sank ineffaceably into his mind, and the more so as they afforded so pleasing an evidence of Lundy's readiness to go. The next morning the captain said to him: ' Why, Hill, you look as if you had had a day's hard raking.' But his passenger kept his counsel.

" Just as they landed at St. Thomas, a vessel came in from Kingston, and a young friend of Hill's sprang ashore. Saluting him, Hill said: ' I need not ask how Lundy is, for I know he is dead.' ' Why,' exclaimed his friend, in astonishment, ' how could you know that? I had but time to see the funeral company into the church, and as the wind was fair, I was obliged to hasten off to the vessel without going in.' ' No matter how I know it,' replied Hill, ' you see I know it.' They soon parted, and Hill, having completed his visit to Hayti, returned to England.

" Some two years later, Mr. Hill met in England a gentleman who first had been a missionary in Jamaica, and subsequently in Africa. They fell into talk about Lundy, and this gentleman remarked, ' I was with Lundy when he died; and I remember that his last words were: " The only wish I have left is, that I might be permitted to see Hill once more, and say to him — ' Well, Hill, I have served the cause as long as I could be useful; and now it has pleased God to take me.' " ' ^ It seems that his wish was granted, and that he was permitted to go to Heaven by way of the Azores."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Starbuck writes to us: —

" Feb. 22, 1884.

" The narratives [this and another] are throughout communications made to me directly by Mr. Hill. And I saw him so frequently and so familiarly during my 10 years' stay in Jamaica that they may be relied on as thoroughly accurate reports. a Chaeles C. Starbuck,

" Ten years missionary in Jamaica in connection with the American Missionary Association."

(540) From Mr. F. J. Jones, Civil Engineer, Heath Bank, Mossley Road, Ashton-under-Lyne. "March 1884.

" The following story was told me by an old friend [name given], to whom it happened when an undergraduate of Peterhouse College, Cambridge. I will try and put it in his own words as nearly as possible.

" ' I had arranged to stay up part of the long vacation to grind in quiet, and to make the best of lost time.

" 'The event occurred on a Tuesday, in 1843, and I well remember

1 It will be observed that the evidence for this remark of the dying man is thirdhand; arid the exact correspondence of part of it with what Mr. Hill heard is the sort of point which is very likely to creep into a story of this class as it passes from mouth to moi^th.

500 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

feeling very lonely and wretclied., for the weather was miserably wet, and all friends had gone down the day before. My greatest chum, a man named Bohun, I had seen off by the London coach, on his way to Dover, from whence he was to cross the Channel, to visit the friends of the girl to whom he was engaged. When saying good-bye, I little thought we should never meet again, at all events in the flesh. The first 24 hours of my solitude passed well enough, for I had a lot of lost time to make up. The evenings, however, hung very heavily on my hands.

" ' On the second (Tuesday) evening, I turned in about 10 o'clock, meaning to get up early to work the next morning. Instead of undressing, I threw myself down on my bed in my clothes, and soon fell asleep. How long it lasted I don't know, but before very long I woke with a sudden sense of chilliness,^ and was startled to hear a sort of choking sound at my back. Turning round quickly, I was surprised to see, by the light of the reading lamp, my friend Bohun, half sitting up in my arm-chair beside the bed, and apparently gasping for breath. For a few seconds I looked at him in bewilderment, and then called him by name. In an instant the chair was vacant, and jumping off the bed I found the door locked, and the oak sported, as I left them.

" ' Thinking it only a dream, though even then I must confess I was considerably startled by the vividness of it all, I undressed and got into bed, dozing ofi" again in a few minutes. My sleep cannot, however, have been of long duration, and a second time I woke with the same curious sensation, and again saw Bohun gasping in the chair beside my bed.^ Moving cautiously to that side of the bed, I made a sudden dash — at nothing: for a second time he was gone.

" ' Now thoroughly awake, and, I must confess, not liking it all, I left my room, and calling the porter, we went through the empty place, only to find everything right and secure. The man seemed to think I had been taking rather more than perhaps was wise, and, much to my disgust, hinted it rather plainly; so in him I found only a Job's comforter. Being unable to sleep any more that night, I made up my mind to read for the remaining hours before daylight.

" ' The next day nothing transpired, and I began to feel I had rather made a fool of myself, and did not at all relish the porter's inquiries after my health. Wednesday passed, and a lot of reading was accomplished, and on Thursday I walked out a short distance to meet the London coach, which brought my weekly papers. After a short chat the driver suddenly said " Have you heard, sir, of poor Mr. Bohun's sad death 1 As he was going on board the packet at Dover he slipped on the gangway, falling into the water, and was never seen again."

" ' The shock to me was so great that for several weeks I was laid up in my room, and in my delirium I was afterwards told I was always raving about my poor friend and his mysterious visit to my rooms.'

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Jones says: —

" My friend about whom you ask has been dead now about nine years. He first told us the story in the year 1867, and has since often alluded

1 See p. 37, first note.

2 Compare cases 503 and 519, and see p. 237, note.

to it." In conversation I learnt that this friend was Mr. Jones's tutor, living in the same house, for several years, and was most deeply respected by him. We have ascertained that he was at Peterhouse in 1843; but the name Bohun does not appear in the Cambridge Calendar of that date, and is probably a mistake. We have not been able to discover any public notice of the accident, and the death was probably not registered.

[It ought to be observed that the percipient was probably falling ill at the time of his vision; and that in his subsequent delirium the order of events may have become confused. Still, it seems unlikely that his recollection of the anxiety that succeeded the vision and preceded the arrival of the news is a piece of pure imagination.]

(541) Erom Mr. George M. Barker, Brynderw, Dolgelly.

"July, 1884.

" Travelling by train from London to Brighton in company with my tutor, we sat opposite an elderly lady, who seemed to doze. About halfway, she awoke with a cry, and was much agitated. My tutor soothed her, and asked her what was the matter. She stated that she had seen her son (who was in the navy) drowning before her eyes, and that it was so horribly real, even to the minutest detail of dress, &c., that she could not believe that she was travelling in a railway carriage. She vowed that she had not been to sleep. My tutor, with her permission, called upon her next day, and an acquaintance struck up, which lasted for some time. About a fortnight after the scene in the carriage, news duly arrived of the death of the son at sea, while rowing from the ship to the shore. This event occui'red in the year 1870 or 1871.

" George M. Barker."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Barker says: —

" I am unable to furnish you with the address of my old tutor. His name was Alfred Downes, 64, Upper Brunswick Place, Brighton, but I have heard recently that he has left Brighton. The name of the old lady I heard mentioned by my tutor years ago, but I have no recollection of what it was, or where, exactly, she lived. The bald facts are, therefore, all that I can give you. To me, at the time, this event was of considerable interest. I may mention that I am a thorough disbeliever in everything unnatural and ghostly.

" I have no doubt that the time was exactly the same, and for this reason: my tutor and I were travelling by a very fast train between London and Brighton, the total journey only occupying Ihr. lOmin.; we were just passing, or had just passed (I really forget which) Redhill Station, which is about half way, so that we could easily fix the time. My tutor, seeing the condition of the poor lady, asked, and was allowed, to call upon her to inquire after her state, and it was during one of these calls that the news was confirmed. The time of the upset of the boat was, allowing for the change between the two distances, as nearly corresponding as possible."

We cannot trace Mr. Downes; the postmaster at Brighton has no later address than that given.

(542) From Mr. S. Alfred Steinthal, The Lunes, Nelson Street, Manchester.

502 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

"March 21st, 1884.

" A lady of my acquaintance, Mrs. Ashton, now deceased, the wife of Mr. Alderman Ashton, of this city, had a son who was the Unitarian minister at Glossop, in Derbyshire. One night she distinctly saw her son in his night-dress in her room (she lived then at Cheetham Hill, Manchester), and woke her husband, telling him what had occurred. Neither she nor her husband knew of anything being wrong with their son, but next morning they were informed that he had been taken suddenly ill, and had died at the time when Mrs. Ashton saw the appearance she described. Neither Mr. Ashton nor Mrs. Ashton were Spiritualists.

"S. Alfred Steinthal."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Steinthal adds: — u _^pril 1st 1884.

" Both Mr. and Mrs. Ashton are now deceased. I heard the story, a short time after the death, from Mrs. Ashton. It was told me in the presence of her husband, who confirmed the part of the story that she had awakened him, and had told him of the appearance she had seen. Mr. Ashton died about seven years ago, but I cannot give you the exact date. I am sorry I cannot be more definite."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the Rev. Frederick Ashton died at Glossop on April 15, 1878.

(543) From the late Mr. Myddleton, Leasingham Hall, Sleaford.

"September 1st, 1884.

"Mrs. Onslow was suddenly awakened one night by her son, who was in the Royal Marines, and afloat on board a man-of-war. She awoke suddenly and saw her son standing at the foot of the bed. She exclaimed

to her husband, ' Oh! Onslow, here is ' (the son's name) ' come

back.' Onslow awoke, but the son (or vision) had disappeared. They noted the exact hour, &c., and when time allowed them to hear from him (his ship was off Madeira or St. Helena) a letter arrived saying he was dead, and had died at the very time he had appeared to his mother.

" This is to certify that the above is a perfectly correct account, as I have heard Mrs. Onslow often relate; but alas! both she and her husband have long been dead, and I cannot ask for a written confirmation.

" Rd. Wharton Myddleton."

(544) From Mrs. Bryant, Ladymeade, Tyndall's Park, Bristol. The evidence is of the sort which may be regarded as on a par with first-hand (Vol. I., p. 148); but it cannot be regarded as certain that the figure seen represented the supposed agent. a iggl.

" One morning one of the upper servants came to my father. Captain Beadon, R.N., and in my presence said that she felt sure he would soon hear of a death in the family, for in the night she awoke to find an old lady standing by her bedside, and gazing steadfastly at her. She was dressed in her shroud, and Stapleton (the maid) especially noticed the fine old lace on her cap. My father laughed at her, and jokingly asked a description of her features, which Stapleton gave. I said, ' That is so like Aunt F.' (Stapleton had never seen Mrs. F.) The maid said at first she was frightened, and covered her head with the bedclothes; but she was a religious woman, and prayed for courage to ask the spirit what it wanted.

On looking again, she found the old lady still there. Stapleton spoke to her, and gradually and slowly the figure faded away. The next day's post brought news of the death of my father's aunt, Mrs. F.

In May, 1884, Mrs. Bryant writes:— " <^eorgina Bryant."

" I have sent my father your letter, and asked him to write out the story, and see if I have remembered it correctly. I have not compared notes with him in any way. I don't think it is worth much in point of evidence — however, what there is is to be relied on.

" In answer to your questions: —

" (1) The date would be nearly 40 years ago.

" (2) I do not at all know if the servant is living.

" (3) I do not know if she had ever seen anything of the kind before.

" (4) She said: 'A noble-looking old lady with her night-dress on and beautiful lace on her cap.' "

We find from the Register of Deaths that Mrs. Franklin died on March 8, 1846.

On May 26th, 1884, Captain Beadon wrote to Mrs. Bryant as loliows: u Creechbarrow, Taunton.

" Dear Georgina, — When we lived at No. 8, Pavilion Place, Battersea Fields, Sarah Stapleton, who lived with us as housemaid, informed your mother and me that an old lady was sitting on her box in her bedroom when she was getting out of bed in the morning, about 7 a.m.

" The apparition remained some time, and did not disappear until she addressed it in the name of the ' Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.' She said she did not know any person like the apparition, but, from her exact description I said it was my aunt, Mrs. F., whom I then supposed to be living at No. 5, Hammett Street, Taunton.

" The next post brought me a letter from my cousin, Robert Beadon, stating that Mrs. F. had died about the time of Stapleton's vision. I do not remember the exact date of Mrs. F.'s death. Stapleton was a very respectable, steady young woman — a Wesleyan. Your mother often said after, she was the best servant she ever had; she married a young artificer, then employed at Woolwich Dockyard, in 1845 or 1846. I have never heard of, or from, her since.

" I lived some two years with my aunt. — I am, your afiectionate father, " George Beadon."

[If the death was on the night preceding the apparition, as Captain Beadon stated in conversation that he believed it was, the news probably arrived not by the " next post," but (as Mrs. Bryant says) by "next day's post "; but Captain Beadon cannot be absolutely certain that it did not occur before night on the preceding day.]

As to the next case, see the remark which prefaces case 527 above. The standing " at the foot of the bed " — it will have been observed — is a point which occurs in a large number of these borderland cases.

(545) From Mrs. Harper, Cotham, Bristol.

"December, 1883. " I was at school at Miss Smith's, Portland Street, Kingstown, with the

504 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

daughters of the Hon. James P., of Jamaica. He was expected home, and a house in Gotham Park, just opposite my present residence, was being prepared for him. One night, Hannah P. woke screaming, saying her father was dead. Miss Smith asked her why she said so, and she stated that her father had come and stood at the foot of her bed, and then went and looked at her sister Isabel in another bed. The father died at that time, and it seems he had a presentiment that he should not live to return, and had ordered a quantity of rum to be put on board to preserve his body in if he should die on the way."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Harper adds: —

