1 Those whose dreams are habitually of the more ideal and impalpable sort have sometimes a difficulty in realising the extreme sensory vividness of dreams at the other end of the scale, dreamt often by persons who have no exceptional power of visualising when awake. I myself lately dreamt that, meeting a stranger in Bond Street, I was arrested by a certain familiarity in the face, which I continued to scrutinise with puzzled eagerness, till I at last identified it with a portrait in the Grosvenor Gallery of the preceding year. Awake, I can scarcely recall the portrait at all.

I have also heard it asserted that (apart from actual external sounds) the sense of hearing is never distinctly exercised in dreams. I never had a more vivid dream than one of a few nights back, where some rifle-shooting, in the midst of which I found myself, caused me again and again precisely the same dread before the sound came, and the same intense irritation when it came, as I associate with the firing of a pistol on the stage. I could distinctly trace this dream to a similar (though less acute) irritation which I had suffered from the cracking of whips in a foreign city on the previous day.

at all to our familiar space — unless, indeed, we loosely identify it with its physical conditions, and localise it in the brain. Dreams, then, have this peculiarity: they are distinct affections of the senses, which yet, in reflecting on them, we rarely or never confound with objective facts; waking hallucinations, on the other hand — spectral illusions or ghostly visitants — are often so confounded. The sleeping experiences are marked off from external reality in the minds of all of us by the very fact that we wake from them; our change of condition makes their vanishing seem natural; and thus looked back on, they will often seem to have been mere vague representations, i.e., something less than affections of the senses. The waking experiences cannot be woke from; their vanishing seems unconnected with the percipient and therefore unnatural; and thus looked back on, they will often seem to have been independent realities, i.e., something more than affections of the senses.

Now it is as affections of the senses, and not as independent realities, that our Class A, the externalised sort of " phantasms of the living," are treated in this book. In the theory that the percipient is impressed from a distance, and in the very word phantasm, it is implied that what he sees or hears has no objective basis or existence in that part of the external world where his body is situated; and whether he be asleep or awake, his relation to what he perceives, and of this to reality, is the same. But I shall be proceeding by the easiest route if (so far as the evidence will allow) I first trace the occurrence of the telepathic phantasms in the region of experience where sensory phantasms of some sort are normal and familiar, and are habitually judged of rightly as affections of the inner sense,1 before passing to the region where phantasms of any sort are abnormal and unfamiliar, and are perpetually judged of wrongly as affections of the outer sense. The rapprochement which will thus be established between the sleeping and the waking cases will receive further and interesting illustration in certain intermediate stages which we shall encounter on the way. We shall find that one set of phenomena merges into the other by gradual steps, and that this "borderland " is itself a region specially rich in the telepathic impressions.

1 This term implies that sensation, from a physical point of view, is inverted; that the initial stimulation takes place in the higher tracts of the brain, and that the stimulation of the special sensory apparatus is produced by a downward centrifugal current. The point will be further noticed in connection with waking hallucinations (see pp. 487-8).

298 THE RELATION OF DREAMS [chap.

§ 2. But though dreams thus present a logical point of departure, they also form in many ways the most assailable part of our case. They are placed almost in a separate category by their intimate connection with the lowest physical, as well as the highest psychical, operations. The grotesque medley which constantly throng through the gate of ivory thrust into discredit our rarer visitants through the gate of horn. And before proceeding further, it will be well to examine with some care the general evidential value of dreams, in relation to a theory of transferred impressions. The field may seem a fair one enough, as long as we keep to general expectations; if telepathy is a reality, here is a probable scene of telepathic events. But what opportunities does it afford for confirming these expectations by accurate and convincing evidence? This is a question which may rapidly convert our hopes into doubts.

The first objection to dreams, as evidence for transferred impressions of distant conditions or events, is this — that dreams being often somewhat dim and shapeless things, subsequent knowledge of the conditions or events may easily have the effect of giving body and definiteness to the recollection of a dream. When the actual facts are learnt, a faint amount of resemblance may often suggest a past dream, and set the mind on the track of trying accurately to recall it. This very act involves a search for details, for something tangible and distinct; and the real features and definite incidents which are now present in the mind, in close association with some general scene or fact which actually figured in the dream, will be apt to be unconsciously read back into the dream. They make part of the original, of which the mind conceives the dream to have been a picture; and the picture, when evoked in memory, will only too probably include details drawn from the original. After we have once realised the matter in its full distinctness, it becomes almost impossible to recall with due indistinctness the distant and shadowy suggestion of it.1 Dreams in this way resemble objects seen in the dusk; which begin by puzzling the eye, but which, when once we

1 The possibilities referred to may be illustrated by the following cases.

Mr. R. O'Shaughnessy, M.P., writes to us: —

" House of Commons, April 20th, 1883.

" One night, when I was in my teens, I dreamt that I was passing by the house of Mr. J., who lived near us; that I saw his nursery maid coming down the steps, carrying a baby in her arms, and preceded by a boy five or six years old; that I asked her if this boy was Mr. J.'s eldest son; that she said ' Yes,' and that I then said, ' Well, he's not a beauty, but he promises to be a fine fellow. He is very like his father.' Such was my dream. A few minutes after I awoke, my father, in whose room I slept, told me, without my having made any allusion to Mr. J., that he had on the previous day passed by Mr. J.'s house; had seen the nurse and baby coming out, and the boy preceding

know or think we know what they are, seem quite unmistakeable and even full of familiar detail. For our purposes, therefore, it is of prime importance that the dream shall be told in detail to some one on whose memory we can rely; or, better still, written down, or in some way acted on, at the time, and before the confirmation arrives. Nearly all the evidence to be brought forward has, at any rate, this mark of accuracy.

But there is a more general and sweeping objection. Millions of people are dreaming every night; and in dreams, if anywhere, the range of possibilities seems infinite; can any positive conclusion be drawn from such a chaos of meaningless and fragmentary impressions? Must not we admit the force of the obvious d priori argument, that among the countless multitude of dreams, one here and there is likely to correspond in time with an actual occurrence resembling the one dreamed of; and that when a dream thus "comes true," unscientific minds are sure to note and store up the fact as something extraordinary, without taking the trouble to reflect whether such incidents occur oftener than pure chance would allow? Can the chances be at all estimated? Are any valid means at hand for distinguishing between a transferred impression and a lucky coincidence? What degree of exactitude of date and circumstance

them; had addressed to the nurse the very questions and remarks I had dreamt I addressed to her, and received the answer I had dreamt she made me."

In a case like this, one realises how a vague dream, excited, perhaps, by some remark heard over night, may have fallen into definite shape as the details of the real scene were one by one recounted.

Mrs. Nind, of Midleton House, Westcombe Park, Blackheath, tells us how, when about 20 years of age, she saw in a dream a brother, of whose whereabouts his family had long been ignorant, "lying on the deck of a ship, greatly exhausted. I saw in my dream the name of the ship, 'Zenobia.' A few days after, in the morning paper, I read the ' Zenobia ' was picked up at sea waterlogged, near the south coast of Ireland, the crew and passengers suffering from great exhaustion, having been many hours working at the pumps, exactly as I had dreamt. I told it at once, and was impressed by the facts coming true in the course of a few days."

The brother was actually on that ship. But the whole pith of the statement is that the name of the ship was correctly seen; and this is just a point where unsupported memory cannot be relied on. The name might so easily seem to have been seen, when once it became associated with the reality; and a coincidence which is striking to begin with is all the more likely to become perfect in memory. (It is fair, however, to mention that the same lady has had at least two other dreams which strikingly corresponded with reality, and were mentioned by her before the reality was known; one of the bursting of a gun on board the "Viper," of which her brother was master; the other of her sister "lying faint in someone's arms," at a time when the sister had fallen and severely sprained her ankle.)

Again, Mrs. Liddell, of 18, Brae Street, Liverpool, tells us that in November, 1882, her brother, an engineer employed on a steamer, appeared to her in a dream, looking a good deal knocked about, and with some teeth out, and said, "It is all for the best "; and her husband testifies to her immediate mention of the dream. The brother had actually been wrecked at the time: " when he arrived home he had lost some of his teeth, and had been well knocked about. " But everything depends on the detail of the teeth, which the husband does not mention. They were lost in reality; were they lost in the dream? In the absence of notes or corroborative testimony, we cannot be sure. This list could be easily extended.

300 THE RELATION OF DREAMS [chap.

must be reached, before we consider even a striking correspondence as worth attention? And what proportion of striking correspondences are we to demand, before we consider that the hypothesis of chance is strained in accounting for them?

In the first place, it is to be noted that there has, so far, been a complete lack of the statistics which alone could form the basis for an answer to these questions. It has never been known with any certainty what proportion of people habitually dream, what proportion of dreams are remembered at all, in what proportion of these remembered dreams the memory is evanescent, and in what proportion it is profound and durable. This latter point may be specially hard to establish satisfactorily in a particular case, as it is affected by the question whether a person's attention is habitually directed to his dreams, and also by the question whether he has happened to recount a particular dream to others, and so to stamp it on his own memory. By making inquiries on a large scale, however, a considerable approximation to certainty may be attained on these and various other points of importance. A good deal has been done in this way during the last three years; and though I cannot say that the results are such as would allow us to base a theory of telepathy upon the facts of dreams alone, I think that they do much to diminish the a 'priori plausibility of the theory of chance, as a sufficient explanation of all cases of marked correspondence between a dream and an external event.

§ 3. The points to be considered have to do both with the intensity and with the content of the dream; let us consider them in order.

First as to intensity. An exceedingly small proportion of dreams are remembered with distinctness several hours after waking. Even of the dreams which dwell in the memory, an exceedingly small proportion produce any appreciable amount of distress or excitement. And of these more impressive dreams, an exceedingly small proportion prove their intensity by being in any way acted on. What I have termed intensity may be indicated in another way, by the rapid repetition of a distinct dream two or three times on the same night; and this, too, when there is no apparent cause to prompt the dream, seems to be a comparatively rare occurrence (see p. 357). The dreams to be cited in this book will nearly all, I think, be distinguishable by one or other of these tests of exceptional intensity. And in proportion

as the dreams which coincide with the event dreamed of are thus found to be in some other way exceptional — in proportion as the class to which they belong is found to form a small and sparse minority among the swarming multitude of unmarked dreams — in that proportion does it clearly become unreasonable to argue that the coincidences are sufficiently accounted for by the law of chances. The argument which might seem effective so long as we had the whole multitude of dreams to range over — that multitude seeming sufficient to give the law of chances ample scope — assumes quite a different aspect when we find ourselves limited to the comparatively small group of intense dreams.

Next as to content. Before we can give weight to a dreamcoincidence as pointing to anything beyond the operation of chance, we should inquire whether the event dreamed of is distinct, unexpected, and unusual. If it combine all three characteristics in a high degree, its evidential value may be very considerable; in proportion as the degree falls short, or the combination fails, the evidential value sinks; and none of the characteristics taken alone, even though present in a high degree, would lead us to include a dream in the present collection. Thus, the dream-content must be neither a vague impression of calamity nor of happiness; nor a catastrophe on which the sleeper's mind is already fixed; nor some such ordinary event as has frequently occurred in waking experience. It may, indeed, be not the less significant for being trivial; but in that case it must be of a bizarre or unlikely kind.1 Then again, amount of detail, and the number of connected events, are of immense importance, as each subsequently verified detail tells with ever-mounting strength against the hypothesis of accidental coincidence. Once more, dream-content must be considered to some extent in relation to the dream -habits of the particular dreamer. Before estimating the value of the fact that a person has dreamt of the sudden death of a friend on the night when the death took place, we should have to ascertain that that

1 It is not easy to draw the line here. How, for instance, ought the following case to be regarded? We received the account through the kindness of Mr. James Sime; the narrator is Mrs. Bell, of Windmill Road, Hamilton.

"July 21st, 1884.

" In the autumn of 1875, my father and I left home for Perthshire, giving the use of our Hamilton house to an uncle. On Wednesday night previous to our return home, I dreamt that my cousin had broken the handle of a vegetable-dish, and said to her sister, ' Don't tell, for I see the soup-tureen handle has been mended, and I shall mend this too. ' I told this dream to my father at breakfast on Thursday morning. He laughed, and begged me not to speak of it to my cousins, lest they should say I had been thinking evil

302. THE RELATION OF DREAMS [chap.

person is not in the habit of dreaming of distressing or horrible events.1 In respect of these various points, the instances to be cited, here and in the Supplement, are the sifted survival of many less definite coincidences in which the popular imagination would find a marvel. And in the case of this residue, where we have complete fulfilment of some of the above conditions, over and above the close proximity in time, or (it may be) absolute synchronism, of the event and the dream, the question as to a causal connection between the two is, at any rate, not to be swept out of court by a mere general appeal to the doctrine of chances.

But there is a further point in the content of the dreams that correspond with real events — true dreams, as we may for brevity call

of them. However, when we got home on Friday, just as my friends were leaving, I said in joke, ' Oh! you didn't tell me you had broken the handle of the vegetable-dish.'

" My cousin at once turned to her sister, and said, ' Did you tell? ' I was amazed, and said, ' You don't mean to say you broke it. ' She said, ' Yes, I did, on Wednesday, and I told my sister to say nothing about it to you, and I would mend it like the souptureen. '

"Agnes J. Bell." In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Bell says: —

" I have to state that I am not a great dreamer, but the dream in question struck me as so exceptional that I repeated it in detail to my father in the morning." Mrs. Bell's father corroborates as follows: —

" Auchingramont Road, Hamilton.

"August 2nd, 1884. "I recollect, in the autumn of 1875, while at Comrie, my daughter telling me one morning of a dream she had about one of her cousins breaking a vegetable-dish. " On returning to Hamilton we found the dream verified.

"Daniel Clarke."

Another informant tells us — and her statement is corroborated — how she announced to her family one morning, on the strength of a dream, that a cousin of theirs bad been in bed with a quinsey, but would come to see them that day. He came, and said he had been kept away by a quinsey, a malady from which he had never suffered before. But on inquiry we find that quinsey was a familiar idea in the dreamer's family, as a governess had frequently had it; and the coincidence thus seems too clearly within the range of chance.

1 For example, we have not admitted the following case, which was sent to us by the Rev. T. C. Skeggs, of 14, Fitzwarren Street, Pendleton, Manchester.

"June 17th, 1884.

" In the year 1872 I was in China. I dreamed that a lady friend in England was in great trouble. For about two days I could not rid myself of the thought of her distress. The nature of her trouble was not at all defined to my own mind, only that she was prostrate with grief. About six weeks later the mail brought me news of her father's death, of whom she was passionately fond, and of course she was proportionately distressed. The painful impression caused by my dream led me to note the date at which it occurred, and when I compared it with the news contained in my letter, I found it tallied with the date of her father's death.

"The lady was an intimate friend, 12 years older than myself, and we had many interests in common with each other; these formed a bond of sympathy.

"T. C. Skeggs."

In another letter Mr. Skeggs adds: — " I do not often dream of personal friends. One point connected with that dream was exceptional, viz., the duration of the impression." The mere fact of the friend's distress, however, hardly affords a definite enough coincidence for the case materially to help the telepathic argument; and inquiry brought out a " dream -habit " which still further lowers its ralue in this connection. " Am I a great dreamer? I am. I frequently dream of horrors that are so vivid to my mind as to leave me quite exhausted in the morning."

them — which cannot but strike the attention as soon as we begin to examine actual specimens. It is that, among true dreams, by very far the largest class is the class where the truth is death — i.e., where the event dreamt of as happening to another is of that most restricted kind which can only happen once in each individual's experience. Out of the 149 coincident dreams which are included in this book — as at least clearly finding in telepathy, if it exists, their most natural explanation — no less than 79 have represented or suggested death. This, it will be seen, is entirely in accordance with a theory of causal connection between event and dream, where the abnormal state of the person dreamt of is regarded as part of the cause; but it is not at all in accordance with what we should expect accident to bring about. Nor could this argument well be met by the assumption that it is only in the case of a very grave event that the accidental correspondence attracts attention and gets recorded. For this would mean that the dreams of death which happen to correspond with reality are one specially-remembered class among the total number of accidentally-true dreams. Now it will be admitted that dreams of death constitute a minute proportion of all dreams; it would follow, then, on the above assumption, that accidentally-true dreams of death constitute a similarly minute proportion of all accidentallytrue dreams. But at this rate the total number of" true dreams" — in other words, the number of coincidences which the doctrine of chances will have to cover — swells to a most prodigious and unmanageable figure. It is just because a " true dream " is a very exceptional occurrence, that it was possible even to attempt to account for it as an accident; if the " accident " is for ever " coming off," so much the worse for that attempt.

§ 4. But the fact that a singular and marked event, such as death, is in so large a proportion of cases the central feature of the " true " dreams, supplies more than a general argument; it supplies the means for an actual numerical estimate whereby the adequacy of the chance-hypothesis may be tested. For dreams of so definite a character, and which admit of being so clearly and briefly described, are quite a fit subject for statistics; there is a possibility of finding out approximately what the actual frequency of a dream of this sort is; and we shall then have the first necessary datum for deciding whether the frequency of the cases where it coincides with reality, is, or is not, greater than chance would fairly allow. If it turned out that

304 THE RELATION OF DREAMS [chap.

all of us about once a week had a marked and distressing dream of the death of some friend or other, then, since people who are somebody's friends are perpetually dying, the coincidence of such a dream with the real event might be expected to occur by pure accident in a large number of cases. But if only a small minority of us could recall ever having had such a dream at all, the case would be reversed. The object, then, is to ascertain from a number of people, large enough and promiscuous enough to be accepted as a fair specimen of the whole population, what percentage of them have had the experience in question. With this view, efforts have been made, dating from the winter of 1883, to obtain a large number of answers to the following question: —

Since January 1st, 1874, have you ever had a dream of the death of some person known to you, which dream you marked as an exceptionally vivid one, and of which the distressing impression lasted for as long as an hour after you rose in the morning?

This question has been put to 5360 persons, as to whom it was not known beforehand whether their answer would be " Yes " or "No." Of these persons, 173 answered "Yes." Excluding 7 of these cases, in which the dreamer was at the time in a state of distinct anxiety as to the person whose death was dreamt of, we have a remainder of 166. These include a good many cases where it proved, on further inquiry, that the terms of the question had not been exactly met, as the impression had not endured in any vivid or distressing way. They also include 3 cases where the mind of the dreamer had been exceptionally directed to the person dreamt of; and 3 cases where the person dreamt of was in the same room as the dreamer, which may have had some tendency to produce the dream — one gentleman expressly stating his suspicion that his dream was caused by some sound made by his companion. We may, therefore, accept the 166 as a liberal estimate. But 18 of these persons professed to have had a dream of the sort inquired about more than once. It will be again a ^liberal estimate if we suppose each of these to have experienced 3 distinct examples within the specified time; and the most convenient way of taking account of these repetitions will be to add 36 to the 166, making 202. With this substitution, JL of the whole number of persons asked may be taken to have given an affirmative answer. Now, the persons asked were a quite promiscuous body, and a body large enough to be safely regarded as a fair average

sample of the population; just as a similar number of persons, taken at random, would be accepted as a fair sample for purposes of statistics on short sight, or colour-blindness. We may conclude, then, that the number of persons who can recall having had — during the twelve years 1874-1885, and without special assignable cause — the experience named in the question, amount to about 1 in 26 of the population of this country.

The question next occurs, ought we, in making our calculation, to assign any limit to the area of acquaintances from whom the person dreamt of may be drawn, and of whom a certain proportion will, in the natural course of things, die within a period of 12 years? On general grounds it may fairly be argued that the slightness of connection between two persons would diminish the chance that one would dream accidentally, no less than the chance that he would dream telepathically, of the death of the other j1 and that therefore a vivid dream of the death of a stranger, or of a slight acquaintance, when it coincides with the death, tells neither more nor less in favour of the action of something beyond chance than a similarly vivid and coincident dream of the death of a near relative. It will be seen, moreover, that, as far as the numerical estimate goes, it is unimportant how large or how small we take the area to be; because whatever number of persons we include, on the average the same proportion of the number will die within any given time. Thus assuming this proportion who die to be one-fourth of the whole number, then, if we took a very large circle of acquaintances, say 400 — the death of any of whom, if dreamt of when it occurred, would count as one of our coincidences — we should have to reckon that 100 of them actually die in the course of the time; and if we took a very small circle of just the immediate relatives of the dreamer, say 4, we should have to reckon that 1 of them dies in the course of the time. And the chance of an accidental coincidence in the specified period between the single dream of death and the death itself is practically

1 It is not always easy to find out, from a brief description, the strength of the bond that has existed between two persons. But I think I am safe in saying that the dreams of death in which the person dreamt of is not linked to the dreamer by a rather close tie of kinship or affection, do not amount to 10 per cent, of the whole number. In other respects the dreams do not seem to follow any line of a priori likelihood — e.g., they concern the death of young persons quite as much as of old ones.

I may point out that a different estimate would have to be made for dreams dreamt by several dreamers about the same person: e.g., an accidental coincidence of dream and death is less improbable than usual where the person dreamt of is a prominent public character, because he is (so to speak) within the dream-horizon of an immense number of people. But the proviso has no practical importance, as no cases of the kind occur in my statistics.

w

306 THE RELATION OF DREAMS [chap.

the same in both these cases. For though there will be, on the one hand, much less chance of its being the right individual that is dreamt of when the choice is among 400 than when it is among 4, on the other hand the 100 deaths will give 100 (or nearly 100) nights on which the coincident dream will have its chance of being dreamt, instead of only 1 night. Logically, therefore, there is no necessity for limiting the area in question. Let the number of any one's acquaintance be called x. Then, whether x be large or small, all that concerns us is the proportion of the x persons who die within the specified period of 12 years; and this proportion, since the death-rate per year is about '022, may be taken as "264, or a little more than one-fourth.

The estimate from the above data is as follows. The probability that a person, taken at random, will have a vivid dream of death in the course of 12 years is ^g-; the probability that any assigned member of the general population, and therefore that any particular dreamtof person, will die within 12 hours of an assigned point of time is ifoo X ^bt; hence the probability that, in the course of 12 years, a vivid dream of death and the death of the person dreamt of will fall within 12 hours of one another is w X r§§o X 3<h = T^iise*. (If x, the number of the dreamer's circle of friends, be taken into account, we then have, as the probability that any one of the dreamer's circle should die within the particular 24 hours defined by the dream, x x rr X iooo X 365; and as the probability that, if some one of the dreamer's circle dies within the particular 24 hours, it should be the particular one dreamt of, |; whence the probability of this double event =^ X x X -h X rufo X tnh, i.e., the result is unaltered.) That is to say, each group ot 431,363 persons in the population of the United Kingdom will produce one such coincidence in the given time. Now let it be supposed for a moment that our appeal for evidence has effectively reached as large a section of the population as this: let it be supposed, that is to say, that the number of persons from whom we should, directly or indirectly, have received examples of such coincidences, if they had had them to communicate, amount to 431,363. In that case, then, the number of such coincidences which we ought, by the doctrine of chances, to have encountered is 1. The number which we have actually encountered, of vivid dreams of death, narrated to us at first-hand,1 dreamt since January 1st, 1874, by persons free from anxiety, and falling within 12 hours of the death of the person dreamt

1 In three cases the evidence, though not actually from the dreamer, is of the sort described in Vol. i., p. 148, as on a par with first-hand.

of1 — is 24: that is, a number 24 times larger than the doctrine of chances would have allowed us to expect.2 And this number is very much below what we are justified in assuming. For while my colleagues and I are probably disposed rather to overrate than to underrate the extent to which the world is acquainted with our proceedings, we cannot suppose that the actual number of persons from whose collective experiences our examples are drawn really approaches half a million, as above supposed. (In Chap. XIII., I shall show grounds for thinking that a quarter of the number assumed would still probably be much above the mark.) Moreover, 7 of the 24 coincidences are represented as having been extremely close; in 3 other cases the interval was at any rate not more than 4 hours, and in another was from 3 to 6 hours; while in 9 more, where death and dream are merely stated to have fallen on the same night, the coincidence may have been exact, and is not likely to have been inexact to the extent of anything like 12 hours. Again, dreams are excluded where the actual fact of death was not in some way presented, even though the dying person was dreamt of in a remarkable way.3 But most markedly have I understated the case in this respect, that I

1 With 5 possible exceptions, where the 12 hours' limit may not have been nearlyreached, but where it may have been exceeded. In 2 of these cases, the death took place in the afternoon and the dream followed the same night; in the 3 others, the death was either on the night of the dream or on a day contiguous to that night, but its hour is not known. Two dreams are excluded which are known to have followed the death by a very little more than 12 hours, the death not having been heard of in the interval.

2 Nos. 23, 114, 116, 118, 126, 127, 134, 141, 283, 309, 423, 426, 427, 428, 443, 448, 450, 452, 454, 455, 456, 458, 459, 702. No. 23 is included, though not literally a dream of death, on account of the very strong impression that it produced of the death of the person represented in it. No. 138 (p. 376) is excluded for the reason stated in " Additions and Corrections." I am excluding 6 cases where some ground for anxiety as to the condition of the person dreamed of existed, even though no special anxiety is remembered to have been felt; the person who died, in one of these cases, was old and infirm; in another was known to be slightly unwell; and in two others was at sea. Another dream is excluded which was not literally of death, though interpreted as such by the dreamer; and yet another where the fact of the coincidence of the dream with a sudden death was stated, but the witness found the subject too painful to give details. Of the 24 included dreams, 10 were of the deaths of near relatives; and 4 or 5 concerned persons who were outside the circle of intimate acquaintance.

3 I would draw special attention to this point. For when we come to deal with the waking cases, where a phantasm of a person is seen or heard at the time of his death, they may seem to present a marked difference from the dreams that will be quoted as haying coincided with death,— these last being distinctly dreams of death, whereas it is only in a minority of the waking cases that any idea of death was conveyed. The waking percipient may have surmised the death, from the fact that he had seen or heard the phantasm; but the phantasm itself, more often than not, was simply the natural-looking appearance or natural-sounding voice of the "agent." We must remember, then, that for aught we know, telepathically caused dreams of just this type may occur; but unless they present specially remarkable features (as in case 23, p. 199 above,) we should not cite them as having even aprimd facie claim to be considered telepathic, just because of the immense scope for chance-coincidence that dreams afford. We demand more of a dream — that it shall suggest the right event, and not merely the right person— before we think it worth considering; and the dreams to be quoted correspond with the rarer type of waking cases, where the phantasmal representation has in some way distinctly suggested death.

w 2

308 THE RELATION OF DREAMS [chap.

have introduced nothing but the bare fact of death, and have neglected the points of detail which in some instances add indefinitely to the difficulty of regarding the coincidence as a chance.

The above is a tolerably clear computation; and its validity could only be rebutted in two ways — (1) by impugning, on evidential grounds, the cases of coincidence that are alleged; (2) by impugning the approximate accuracy of the initial datum — that within the last 12 years not more than 1 person in 26 has, without clear cause, had a markedly distressing and haunting dream of the death of an acquaintance.

The evidential value of the alleged coincidences will be better estimated when we consider some of the actual specimen's. But as regards the initial datum, on which the calculation depends, there are objections the force of which must be at once admitted. Dreams in general, it may be said, fade away from our memory because there is nothing to stamp them there; but if it happens that some real event recalls a recent dream, then, by the principle of association, this dream will obtain a more permanent lodgment in our mind. Now the death of relatives or friends is the sort of real event which it is practically certain that we shall hear of very soon after it occurs. A dream of such an occurrence is therefore practically certain to get stamped in the way described, if it has been at all synchronous with the fact. And it is thus allowable to suppose that a large number of such dreams may occur which lapse unnoted from the mind, but any one of which, had news of the real event been received immediately afterwards, would have been recalled and associated with it, and would have then added a case to the list of "remarkable coincidences."

This argument is to a considerable degree met by the terms of the question. What is asked is not merely whether people have had a dream of death; but whether they have had one which has haunted them for at least an hour after rising in the morning; and it will not be maintained that an experience of that sort is so likely to vanish utterly from the memory as an ordinary dream. But it might, no doubt, be rejoined that perhaps a good many of the coincident dreams were not marked at the time by any special vividness or impressiveness; and that the dreamer came to imagine this peculiarity of character in his dream, after it had come to assume importance in his eyes from the discovery that it had coincided with the reality. And I most fully recognise that when the argument begins to turn on such a point as the degree of vividness which a dreamer, looking back

to a dream through the medium of subsequent impressions, can swear that it possessed, anything like positive proof becomes impossible. A dream so looked back to may get charged with an emotional character, just as we saw above that it might get filled in with a precision of detail, which it did not really possess. But I must here draw special attention to the safeguards already mentioned. Our collection includes a remarkably high proportion of cases where the coincident dream was marked as exceptional in character — at the time, and before the real event was known — by being immediately narrated as such to someone else, (who, if accessible, has of course been questioned as to his memory of the fact); or by being noted in writing; or by being in some way acted on. Of the 107 dream-examples recorded in this book on the first-hand testimony of the dreamer, 72 are alleged to have been described, 11 more to have been recorded in writing (in one instance by a relative of the dreamer's), and 9 more to have been in some marked way acted on, before the corresponding event was known; and in 46 of the 72 cases where the dream was at once described, we have also the independent testimony of the person to whom it was described. In 18 other cases, we have the testimony of the person to whom the dream was described before the corresponding event was known, but not the dreamer's own account. Of the 24 dreams used in my numerical estimate. 3 were noted in writing, and 20 (including 2 of the previous 3) are alleged to have been mentioned, before the fact of the death was known; and in 15 of these 20 cases, we have independent testimony to this mention from the person to whom it was made. And I must further point out that, in order to explain awajr the result of the above computation in the way suggested, it would have to be assumed not only that a great many dreams of death pass unnoted and leave no impression, while still of such a nature that a vivid impression of them would revive if news corresponding to them were subsequently heard; it would have to be assumed that such an experience befalls very nearly every adult in the country at least once within the twelve years. For our conclusion was that coincident dreams of death in this country were 24 times as numerous as the law of chances — according to the datum which the census gave us — would allow. Therefore to make the law of chances applicable as an explanation, we must multiply our initial datum by 24; that is, instead of assuming 1 person out of every 26 to have had the required dream, we must assume 24 out of every 26 — that is nearly every one — to have had it; nay, on the more probable estimate of

310 THE RELATION OF D BEAMS [chap.

our area of inquiry (p. 307), we must assume that on the average every one has had it as many as four times within the given period; though 96 per cent, of them forget all about it.1 A good many of my readers will, I think, altogether repudiate such a supposition in their own case. I believe, indeed, that a perfectly impartial census would have given a decidedly smaller proportion than 1 in 26. For it is practically impossible to carry out a census of the sort required without getting an unfair proportion of Yeses. Persons who have only No to say in answer to such a question as was propounded, are apt to think that there is no good in saying it; and if they receive a printed form, instead of writing their answer on it and returning it, they are apt to consign it to the waste-paper basket — probably often with a vague notion that what was wanted was a Yes, and that sensible people, who do not have exceptional experiences, ought not to encourage the superstitions of those who do.2

§5. As pointed out above, it is only where the coincident dream exhibits some sort of unique event, such as death, that we can obtain the statistical basis necessary for an arithmetical estimate of chances. A very few remarks, however, seem worth making on dreams which offer less hope of a definite conclusion.

Certain other marked events, such as unexpected dangers and accidents, are comparable to death, though standing much below it, in the two main points — the comparative infrequency of their forming the subject of a markedly distressing dream, and the comparatively large proportion (though absolutely, of course, a very small proportion) of cases in which such a dream, when it does occur, coincides with reality. And even when we come down to unusual events of a more commonplace type, or to a detailed nexus of more or less familiar incidents — where it is, of course, out of the question to get any sort of numerical basis for computation — the same sort of argument may still be cautiously applied. It is true that the coincidences do not now occur among any comparatively small group of dreamers, such as the dreamers of death — the order of dream which is now in question being common to all who dream at all;

1 If it be objected that such an extreme assumption would not be required, as persons who have the dream may have it repeatedly, I can reply that hardly any of the persons from whom we have received accounts of " coincidental " dreams of death recall having dreamt of death except on that one occasion; and it would be even odder that many of them should have completely forgotten a number of such vivid experiences than that they should have completely forgotten one.

2 A further account of the census of which the above inquiry formed part will be ound in Chapter xiii.

but they still occur among a comparatively small group of dreams. In the cases which form a considerable proportion of our collection, where the dream was at once narrated as an exceptionally odd or vivid one, the proof of its exceptional oddness or vividness is at once supplied. And further, an immensely large class, the purely fantastic dreams, to which no real event could possibly be recognised as corresponding, are excluded; as also are the commonest class of all where the dreamer is not the spectator but the hero of the dream, and no unusual incident or precise series of incidents is presented as occurring independently to others — who, if present, merely make a necessary background, or take their share of speech and action in conjunction with the dreamer. The distant event, or series of events, with which the dream corresponds, must both be possible (for it actually occurs), and must centre round some one other than the dreamer; and the consequent necessity that the marked point or points of the dream shall both be possible and shall centre round some one other than the dreamer, immensely reduces the list of dreams which come into the reckoning; and to the same extent reduces the prima facie plausibility of the hypothesis that the coincidence is due to chance. No doubt, after all deductions, the number of dreams which remain to be taken into account, before we can decide as to the chances of accidental coincidences with reality, is here many times larger than our former restricted class, which was concerned with a single unique event: it may conceivably be many thousands of times larger. But, whatever the multiple, it is hard to believe that the number of events — even of more or less curious events — which it is possible to dream of as occurring to other people, does not bear an even larger ratio to the single event of death. For what limit can we so much as conceive to the sum of the details of circumstance which the whole dreaming population of the country can connect in imagination with the various members of their respective acquaintance?

Such considerations do not, of course, amount to an argument for telepathic correspondences on this wider ground — the data are far too indefinite for that. But they at least suggest that the adequacy of the chance-theory is not quite so obvious as is sometimes assumed.

This preliminary sketch of the evidential aspect of dreams may, perhaps, prevent misunderstanding. Among considerations so complex and data so uncertain, it is not easy to sum up a view in very precise terms; but our general position has been made sufficiently clear by my

312 RELATION OF DREAMS TO THE ARGUMENT. [chap.

statement that we should not, with our present evidence, have undertaken to make out a case for telepathy on the ground of dreams alone. The question whether a case could be completely made out on that ground, though it may be worth debating, seems incapable of final settlement, until a very large section of the population takes to keeping a daily record of their dream-experiences. A much larger number of examples is needed for which, even taken in isolation, a high evidential rank could be claimed — whether from the amount of detail in the coincidence, as in cases 134, 138, and 142, or from some such exceptional features as marked Mr. Wingfield's case (p. 199). But meanwhile an argument of a quite different sort can be imported from the department of evidence on which we mainly rely — the evidence of telepathic impressions of distant events received in the waking state. The probabilities of some real causal connection between event and impression in the less conclusive cases. cannot be fairly weighed without regard to the existence of the more conclusive; and that dreams form, on the whole, the less evidentially conclusive class can be no ground for tabooing them, unless we can assign special reasons why sleep should be a condition adverse to telepathic influence. In the conception of telepathy which it is hoped that the reader will by degrees come to share, no such reasons appear; while the resemblances and the transition-cases, already referred to, between the sleeping and the waking phenomena, make it practically impossible to reject in the one class an explanation which we admit in the other. The examples which I shall proceed to give require no further justification. They are not needed to prove our theory; but many of them almost inevitably fall under it as soon as it is proved; and we have no right to disregard any light which they may throw on it.

viii.] TELEPATHIC DREAMS. 313

Part II.— Examples of Dreams which may be reasonably

REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC.

§ 1. On surveying a large number of cases where a dream has corresponded in time with the real occurrence of the event or events which it represented, in such a way as strongly to suggest that it had its source in a telepathic impulse, we find that they at once fall into distinct classes. In the first class, the agent is in a normal state, or is himself also dreaming: the external event here is simply the occurrence to the agent of a particular thought or dream; and the percipient's impression is concerned simply with the content of that thought or dream, not with the agent himself. In all other classes the agent is in some condition or situation which is more or less abnormal; and the percipient has an impression of the agent as in this situation, but an impression which may take various forms. Not infrequently the central fact is dreamt of merely as a fact — as something the dreamer hears of, or becomes aware of, as having occurred, without himself in any way coming into contact with it. In another class of cases, he perceives the principal actor in the matter dreamt of — the dying person, if death is the occasion— in such a manner as to suggest the actual catastrophe; this suggestion being often connected with some special imagery or symbolism. And in yet another class, he seems himself transported into the actual scene — to be an actual spectator of the event.

I will begin then with some specimens of the first class, where the dream has close relation to something that is in the agent's mind, but the agent's own personality does not specially figure in it.1 These are, of course, the cases which come nearest to experimental thoughttransference; and an additional point of resemblance is that they are especially apt to occur when the agent and percipient are in tolerably close proximity. One marked group of these cases is the simultaneous occurrence of the same dream to two persons. Such an occurrence would not be likely to be heard of except when the two dreamers

1 We must insist on the fulfilment of at least one of two conditions: either the thought, or the personality, of the agent must be distinctly represented iti the dream. This is, of course, a mere evidential rule; but, owing to the immense scope for accidental coincidences that dreams afford, it must be strictly applied. For example, Mrs. Sidney Smith, of 7, The Terrace, Barnes, tells us of an extraordinary and indescribable horror which she experienced in sleep, on the night of a brother's very tragic death; but as she did not connect the impression with her brother till she heard that he was missing, the case cannot be even provisionally admitted.

314 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

were nearly related or were living in the same house; indeed, unless the correspondence were extraordinarily close and detailed, it is only the fact of the dreamers' belonging to a narrowly restricted circle that could justify one in attaching the slightest importance to it. In a wider circle, coincidences of the sort might obviously happen, and perhaps often do happen, by pure accident. But relationship or habitual propinquity involves, of course, the chance that some item of joint waking experience has been the independent source of both dreams; and no case would be admissible where any recent cause of this sort could be traced.1 One of the strongest evidential features would be the repetition of the occurrence with the same two persons; as recorded, for instance, in a communication read to the Psychological Society on February 15th, 1877, Mr. Serjeant Cox presiding.

(88) " Mr. E. P. Toy stated that he and his wife were in the habit of dreaming upon the same subject at the same time; this did not arise from mere coincidence, or in consequence of certain matters being naturally uppermost in their minds, for trifling things were dreamt of which had not been in their thoughts previously. One night he dreamt that he had been charged by a bull, and so did she; on another occasion he dreamt that he was at the funeral of a favourite child, and he did not grieve, although he liked the child very much; his wife dreamt the same thing; and they often had similar experiences."

Mr. Toy wrote to us, from Littlehampton, in November, 1883: —

" The circumstances occurred some 8 or 10 years ago and the particulars have faded from my memory, as also from Mrs. Toy's. I can only confirm the general facts as related in my note to Serjeant Cox.

" While writing, I may mention a still more extraordinary dream. I dreamed that for some reason or other I had poisoned a woman, and the same night Mrs. Toy had a very vivid dream, in which she thought I was going to be tried for having committed a murder. I do not think I am of a blood-thirsty disposition, and do not remember to have been reading anything to have suggested the dream, so the coincidence was, to say the least, very striking.

"Edmund Toy."

[The force of these coincidences is diminished but not destroyed by the fact, which Mr. Podmore elicited in conversation, that both Mr. and Mrs. Toy have frequent and vivid dreams.]

1 For example, we have a quite recent case where a brother and sister (Mr. and Miss Dawson, of Richmond Cottage, Worthing) dreamt, on the same night, and, apparently, at the same hour, 3 a.m., that their dog bit the brother in the foot. The brother's dream was a very vivid one, as he woke with a scream, whicn was heard by his mother; and both dreams were independently described next morning. The dog had never bitten anyone before, and had been perfectly friendly with Mr. Dawson, and no mention had been made of any risk connected with him; so that the coincidence seemed a striking one. But on making' more precise inquiries, we found that soon afterwards he did actually bite Mr. Dawson, who had since been "unable to approach him." It is possible, therefore, to suppose that the idea of risk may have been latent in the family.

viii.] REGARDED AH TELEPATHIC. 315

The following case is from the Rev. J. Page Hopps, of Lea Hurst,

Leicester.

"September 15th, 1884.

(89) "Last week I dreamt of a 'dead' friend, and of this friend doing an exceedingly strange thing. It impressed me very much, but I said not a word concerning it to any one. Next morning, at breakfast, my wife hastened to tell me that she had dreamt a singular dream (a very unusual thing for her to say anything about), and then she staggered me by telling me what she had dreamt. It was the very thing that I had dreamed. We slept in different rooms, she having to attend to a sick child, and I not being very well. I do not care to tell you the dream; but the special action in both dreams was something extremely curious and monstrously improbable. My wife ended her description by saying, ' Then she tried to say something, but I could not make it out.' I heard and remembered what was said, and that was the only difference in our dreams. We had not been in any way talking about our ' dead ' friend.

" J. Page Hopps.

"Mary Hopps." In answer to inquiries, Mr. Hopps says: —

" I would rather not go into details, especially in writing, though I think Mr. Gurney is right in wishing for them. Some day I may give them, but what I told him in my first letter is literally true. The dream was an intensely improbable one. One curious thing about it was that, while looking at the appearance, I knew perfectly well I was lying in the particular bed I was in, and on the left-hand side, with my head towards the door. When I awoke, I was in precisely that position."

Mrs. Fielding, of Yarlington Eectory, near Bath, writes: —

"November 1885.

(90) " The other night my husband and I dreamt at the same hour, the same dream — a subject which neither of us had been thinking of for months. It was a dream of wandering about our first home, and in it looking at the same spot. « jANE g. Fielding."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Fielding adds: —

" I do not remember anything more about the dream I spoke of. It was 17 years since we left Linacre Court, near Dover, the place my husband and I dreamt of at the same hour. We both dreamt of walking about the old place — and the old woodman — just before we awoke; and we had not been either of us thinking of it in the least.

" My husband laughs at all such things as having any import, but to please me wrote the enclosed."

The enclosure was: —

" I remember awaking one morning about three weeks ago, and my wife telling me she had had a long dream about our first married home. I said ' How strange, as I have been dreaming the same just before I awoke.'

"J. M. Fielding."

Asked as to the detail of the woodman, Mrs. Fielding replies, " We both saw the woodman in our dream."

316 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

Mr. Merrifield, of 24, Vernon Terrace, Brighton, tells us that, about 1865, he had a most distressing dream (with one exception totally unlike may other that he can recall), in which his death was foretold to him as about to happen within 24 hours. The impression was so painfully acute that he could not shake it off during the following day; and he actually had an irrational feeling of relief when he woke on the second morning, and realised that the 24 hours were over. He then told the whole story to his wife.

(91) " She immediately said, 'I noticed that you woke up the night before last, and I had awakened from the same cause. I had dreamed most vividly that I was a widow, and the pillow was actually wet with tears. I never had such a vivid dream before, and it has troubled me ever since. I would not tell you, but it was a relief to me when I saw you coming home to dinner last night.' "

Mrs. Merrifield adds: —

" I saw myself dressed in weeds. — M. A. M."

In answer to inquiries, she says that she dreams a great deal, but that her dreams " are almost always of a pleasant nature. I never had any dream which was as vivid and the remembrance of which lasted as did that one. My pillow was quite wet with the tears I had shed."

The following example — from Mrs. Willmore, of 33, Castellain

Road, Maida Hill, W. — is curiously similar, but depends on a single

memory.

" 1884.

(92) " The dream you ask me to narrate took place in 1856, at Neuilly, near Paris. I had a vivid impression that I was dying, and awoke with a start to hear my husband sobbing so painfully that I aroused him to ask what was the matter, upon which he said that he had dreamt that I was just on the point of dying. These two dreams must have occurred to both of us simultaneously, and seem to me to be a curious instance of thought-transference. I may add that there was such great sympathy between my husband and myself that, one day not long before his death, I well remember his saying that we should soon not need the communication of speech."

The next example is peculiar in that the percipient's impression seems due to a dream of the agent's of which the latter retained no memory. It will be seen that the amount of information conveyed exceeds what we can reasonably account for by the agent's having talked in his sleep. It is from our friend Mr. F. Corder, of 46, Charlwood Street, S.W., a gentleman of very high reputation in the musical world. He was at one time in the habit of hypnotising his wife for her health; and " at the time," he says, " she gave me repeated proofs that she was able to ransack my mind and memory

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 317

far better than I myself could; but this was when desired to do so " — whereas the case to be cited was spontaneous.

(93) Extract from Mr. Corder's diary, August 19th, 1882:— " Health symptoms much the same. Put her (Mrs. Corder) to sleep before she got up, in order to know the exact hours at which restoratives were to be given. She first said, ' I can't attend yet to those things; I am thinking out your thought.' I requested an explanation. ' About Jimmy B.; it is so strange, because I never saw him in my life; but you were thinking about him.' I was ready to swear that I had not been thinking of my old schoolfellow for many a long day, and was about to say so when she went on: ' You were dreaming of him last night, and said, " Poor Jimmy " in your sleep, so I was obliged to follow out your thought this morning.' She then went on to remind me how the said Jimmy had gone to a party with my brothers, sisters and self (this was at Christmas, 1865, long before I knew her); how he drank too much, and was ill for several days at our house, my mother nursing him. Not only had I absolutely no remembrance of the dream (nor indeed of having dreamed at all), but the incident itself had so completely faded from my mind that it was only by the greatest effort of memory that I could recall it."

Mr. Corder further says: —

"On questioning my eldest sister some weeks later, all these details, which I had absolutely forgotten, were corroborated. It is impossible, of course, that my wife can, even in casual talk, have ever heard of this trivial incident of my boyhood, any more than of other matters connected with the same event which she also detailed. But more curious than anything is the fact — for fact I suppose it is — that I could have dreamed of these entirely forgotten matters, that they should again have passed away, leaving no trace, and that yet she should read them in my mind the next morning! "

In another communication Mr. Corder adds: —

"March 19th, 1884.

" I may say that I was absolutely incredulous both as to the truth of the dream-incident, and my having dreamed it; but the moment I asked my sister about J. B. having been ill in our house, she (whose memory for youthful scenes is very strong) said unhesitatingly, ' Of course; don't you

remember it was at the Mc s' ball 1 He drank too much wine and

came home in our cab. M. and C. carried him up to bed.' Those are nearly my sister's very words. There was no discrepancy whatever between her account of the matter and my wife's, but I cannot now remember whether the latter related it with especial minuteness of detail. Certainly the least discrepancy in the two accounts would have struck me, as — the incident being so entirely forgotten by myself — I applied every word uttered by both to my mind, to revive the dormant recollection."

Miss Corder corroborates as follows, in a letter to her brother: —

" The Rocks, East Bedfont, near Feltham, Middlesex.

"April 4th, 1885. " As you ask me to give you an account of the incident so strangely

318 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

referred to by Pauline, I will put down what I remember. One night when we were living either at Haddo or Canterbury Villas (the latter, I think) the boys went to a party at the Mc s', and there, it appeared, our youngfriend Jimmy B. took too much refreshment. I forget if he was still with the Rev. G. M. or in rooms; but at all events they were afraid to take him home, and brought him to our place. I and R. were awakened by the noise the boys made in conveying J. up to C.'s room on the floor above us; so we listened, and became aware of the proceedings, which we did not then fully understand. Next day J. had to keep in bed, and the mother went up and waited on him. He was very unwell, and if I remember rightly only got up at tea-time, when he took a cup of tea with us, and then returned to his place. I have an impression that the mother sent for Dr. Burton, who administered something. As to the notion that I or R. could ever have told Pauline this story in any of our former talks, I am certain that we have never done so. J. left England so long before we met Pauline that he was only mentioned once or twice, as the chief instigator of our dramatic performances in early days. Moreover, this story is not at all what I should relate about a friend; and I can safely swear that it was never mentioned to anyone.

" This is all I remember, and it is quite distinct in my remembrance now. " Charlotte Coedee."

[In spite of what Miss Corder says, it is, of course, within the range of possibility that the incident had been described in Mrs. Corder's presence; but it would then be extremely odd that, on its recurring to her, it should not have recurred as a thing previously heard of, but should have seemed to her like entirely new information. We have, moreover, in Mr. Corder's exclamation, " Poor Jimmy," a considerable presumption that his dreaming thoughts did actually revert to his old friend. The case, however, would hardly have been included, had we not felt able to rely on Mr. Corder's statement as to the peculiar rapport which at that time existed between himself and his wife.]

The next case is perhaps best regarded as one of simultaneous dreams, though the one of the two parties who would most naturally be regarded as the percipient feels positive that she was awake. It belongs in one respect to a later class, since the agent's personality and presence distinctly figured in the percipient's experience.

Miss Constance S. Bevan, of 74, Lancaster Gate, W., says: —

"February 18th, 1884.

(94) "On June 10th, 1883, I had the following dream. Someone told me that Miss Elliott was dead. I instantly, in my dream, rushed to her room, entered it, went to her bedside and pulled the clothes from off her face. She was quite cold; her eyes were wide open and staring at the ceiling. This so frightened me that I dropped at the foot of her bed, and knew no more until I was half out of bed in my own room and wide awake. The time was 5 o'clock a.m. Before leaving my room I told this dream to my sister, as it had been such an unpleasant one.

"Constance S. Bevan."

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 319

Miss Elliott says: —

"February, 1884.

"I awoke on the morning of June 10th, and was lying on my back with my eyes fixed on the ceiling, when I heard the door open and felt some one come in and bend over me, but not far enough to come between my eyes and the ceiling; knowing it was only C, I did not move, but instead of kissing me she suddenly drew back, and going towards the foot of the bed, crouched down there. Thinking this very strange, I closed and opened my eyes several times, to convince myself that I was really awake, and then turned my head to see if she had left the door open, but found it still shut. Upon this a sort of horror came over me, and I dared not look towards the figure, which was crouching in the same position, gently moving the bed-clothes from my feet. I tried to call to the occupant of the next room, but my voice failed. At this moment she touched my bare foot, and a cold chill ran all over me and I knew nothing more till I found myself out of bed looking for C, who must, I felt, be still in the room. I never doubted that she had really been there until I saw both doors fastened on the inside. On looking at my watch it was a few minutes past 5.

" E. Elliott."

The following corroboration is from Miss 0. S. Bevan's sisters: —

" Before leaving our room, my sister Constance told all about the dream she had had in the early morning.

" C. Elsie Bevan."

" The first thing in the morning, Miss Elliott told me all about her unpleasant dream, before speaking to anyone else.

"Antonia Bevan."

In answer to inquiries, Miss C. S. Bevan says: —

" This is the first experience I have ever had of the kind, and I have not walked in my sleep more than three times in my life • the last time was about a year ago; on no occasion have I left the room. I do not have startling or vivid dreams as a rule. I did not look at my watch after waking, but the clock struck 5 o'clock."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Elliott says: —

" Although I am accustomed to have very vivid dreams, I have never had one of this kind before. When I found my friend was not in the room, and that the doors were securely fastened on the inside, I looked at my watch; it was a few minutes past 5.

" I have never, I believe, walked in my sleep. There are two doors to my bedroom. One was locked on the inside; the handle was broken off the other on the outside. Thus it was impossible for anyone to open it except from the inside."

[No one, probably, will regard this as an accidental coincidence; but the hypothesis of sleep-walking had to be carefully considered. I have seen the rooms, and examined the door of which the handle is described as having been broken off. Miss Bevan had been (as was often the case) in

320 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chaf.

Miss Elliott's room over-night, and on her shutting the door at her departure, the outside handle fell off. She remembers its doing so; and Miss Elliott heard it fall, and saw it on the floor outside when she left her room in the morning. Miss Elliott says that it remained unscrewed, and so liable to be shaken off every time the door closed, for about two months that summer. I unscrewed it, and tried to move the latch by turning the stump, but found it utterly impossible; and to fit the handle on again without pushing the stump inwards, and so losing all chance of opening the door, was a work of very considerable care. But even on the violent supposition that Miss Bevan left her room noiselessly in her sleep, picked up the handle, deftly adjusted it, turned it, and entered — there remains an additional difficulty. For, in departing, she must have shut the door after her in such a way as to jerk the handle off again. This would make a loud sound; yet it was not heard by Miss Elliott, who, on the hypothesis in question, was awake; nor did it wake Miss Bevan herself, nor an aunt of hers who was sleeping in a room with which Miss Elliott's communicated. It seems almost incredible that she should have shut the door carefully after her, taken off the handle, and deposited it on the floor. Both the door of communication between Miss Elliott's and the aunt's rooms, and the free door of the latter room were locked, the former on Miss Elliott's side. Miss Bevan has never left her room, or anything like it, on the three occasions on which she has walked in her sleep. Moreover, she was sleeping in the same room as a sister who is a very light sleeper, and she considers that it is absolutely impossible that she should have left her room without waking this sister. Her room is separated from Miss Elliott's by a passage and a long staircase. Miss Bevan is not a " dreamer," and very rarely has a dream which she thinks it worth while to mention.]

Two points in this case deserve special notice. In the first place, whatever we call Miss Elliott's experience, it was wholly unlike an ordinary" dream; it was in itself as unusual in character as a " spectral illusion," or distinct waking hallucination of vision. Evidentially, this is very important; for it at once renders irrelevant the theory of accidental coincidence, so far as that theory depends on the scope for accident which the vast number of dreams affords. The second point is the possibility, at any rate, that the two experiences were not only simultaneous but reciprocal; that is to say, that Miss Bevan's dream may not have been simply the independent source of Miss Elliott's impression, but may have itself been modified by that impression.

| 2. Passing now to examples where the supposed agent was awake, but in a perfectly ordinary and unexcited state, we must still, of course, reject cases where any normal cause for the dream can be plausibly assigned. Thus Mr. F. J. Jones, of Heath Bank,

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 321

Mossley Road, Ashton-under-Lyne, tells us how his little daughter astonished him by starting up from her sleep, saying, " Something has gone wrong with the ' Gogo's ' boilers." The " Gogo " belonged to a firm with which Mr. Jones was connected, and it was afterwards discovered that the boilers had at that very time suffered an accident in the Bay of Biscay. The coincidence remains, therefore, an odd one; but we should certainly be inclined to refer the child's dream to some scrap of grown-up conversation that had been forgotten. Mr. E. W. P., of Barton End Grange, Nailsworth, describes how in a half-wakeful state he had been imagining himself to be reading " The Book of Days," till it seemed to become too dark to see — when all at once his wife said in her sleep, " You should not read in bed, it is so bad for the eyes." On inquiry, we find that Mrs. P. is not in the habit of talking in her sleep; but we find also that Mr. P. has often read in bed, and that his wife has often remonstrated with him about it. The following cases seem free from such objections.

Mrs. Crellin, of 62, Hilldrop Crescent, N., says: —

"January, 1884.

(95) " My husband and I often find our thoughts occupied by the same subject, though there has been no apparent direction given to our thoughts by surrounding circumstances, and the subject of our thoughts may be distant in time and place. This rather curious incident occurred 12 years ago. In the middle of the night I awoke, and remaining awake I tried to recall one of Tennyson's poems, but was puzzled as to the first word. Was it ' Home they brought,' or ' Back they brought her warrior dead "? My husband had been soundly asleep, but suddenly turned round, and on my saying ' Are you awake 1 ' he replied, ' Yes, and I awoke with the words on my lips, ' " Home they brought her warrior dead." ' As we had not been reading the poem together, it seemed a curious occurrence of sympathy. I am quite sure that I had not uttered a word of the poem aloud, for I was very anxious not to disturb my husband's rest in his then rather delicate state of health."

Mr. Crellin corroborates as follows: —

"January 19th, 1884.

" I have a distinct recollection of the incident, reported to you by my wife, referring to Tennyson's lines, - Home they brought her warrior dead.'

" On my awaking from sleep she asked me, ' Are you awake? ' I replied, 'Yes, and with these words on my lips, " Home,'" &c. She said, ' Those are the very words I want to be sure about. I have been trying to recollect whether " Home " or " Back " is the word with which the poem begins.'

322 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

" I had not recently been reading Tennyson, and cannot account for what I have just narrated.

" Philip Crellin."

[It is, no doubt, possible to suppose that Mrs. Crellin unconsciously recited the line aloud; but not only is she certain that she did not, but she had at the time a special reason for silence.]

The next incident concerns the same two persons; but here possibly it was the dreamer who was the agent. Mrs. Crellin says: —

"August, 1884.

(96) "I mentioned to you my husband's awaking from sleep and repeating the line from Tennyson which I had been trying to remember. That seemed to me a brain- wave, and it was immediate in its action; but what of a deferred brain-wave? Thus, three weeks ago, I was unable to sleep during the early hours of the night. I thought, amongst other things, of a rather comic piece of poetry which my husband used to repeat years ago. I stuck at one line and could not recall it. However, I fell asleep, and three or four hours after awoke, to find it was time to rise. My husband, after a good night's rest — undisturbed by poetry or prose — awoke also; he stretched out his hand towards me, and repeated the line I had failed to remember in the night, and which did not occupy my thoughts when I awoke in the morning. This seemed a strange delay in giving the response." 1

Mr. Crellin says: —

" 62, Hilldrop Crescent, N.

" August 20th, 1884.

" My wife has told you of an incident which I am able to confirm. I awoke one morning recently, and immediately said to her, ' And his skin, like a lady's loose gown, hung about him' — this being a line of some humorous verses learnt by me when a youth, and which I have occasionally recited for the amusement of my friends, but which I had not repeated or thought of for a long period. My wife at once said that whilst lying awake during the night (I being asleep) she had been trying to recall this very line. I know of nothing that can have brought the line to my mind and lips at the moment. « pHILTp Crellin."

§ 3. We come now to cases where the agent's mind was in a more or less disturbed state. The following account is from our friend Miss Mason, of Morton Hall, Ketford, Notts. It was first printed in connection with a record of some thought-transference experiments, in Macmillans Magazine for October, 1882.

(97) "The most remarkable case I have ever come across was an accidental one, where I had no intention of experimenting. During the summer of 1878 I happened to be staying at Oban, and on the 1st of August went to see the Falls of Lora, so well-known that I shall not

1 We need not regard it as specially strange. See pp. 201-2.

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 323

undertake a long description of them. Loch Etive, which is a branch of the larger Loch Linnhe, is on a lower level. This difference in level occurs at its mouth, and is so abrupt that, when the tide is out, it leaves an irregular waterfall between the two. The mass of sea-water rushes from Loch Linnhe into Loch Etive, shaped into all kinds of cataracts and hollow whirlpools, and is approached either by standing on rocks of some height above the Falls, or on lower ones, almost on a level with the eddies below them.

" It is natural, on looking into such whirlpools and watching how irresistibly anything thrown into them is sucked down, to wonder whether anyone who fell in could possibly be saved. I was at the time in extreme anxiety about some friends of mine who were in great trouble, of which I alone knew, and might not tell; and without intending it, I applied the picture metaphorically to the case, fancying my friends in the whirlpools and myself trying to save them. The picture impressed me so forcibly in this state of mind, that for the rest of the day I never got rid of it. Soon after I returned to a place where I had left my maid, more than 120 miles from Oban, and on the 7th of the same month something brought my anxiety and its accompanying picture before me even more vividly than before. I could think of nothing else the whole evening. To speak absurdly, I felt possessed by that scene to my fingers' ends. All night long I never closed my eyes, but lay awake, seeing my friends in the whirlpools and trying to pull them out. My maid, who slept in a room above mine, had undressed me as usual, but I hardly spoke to her, for I could not tell her of my anxiety, and had not another idea in my head to talk about. When she called me in the morning, she at once began to say that she had never passed so strange a night, for every time she fell asleep she awoke dreaming of the same place — 'Water rushing over rocks, and the most dreadful whirlpools,' and that she was ' standing on high rocks, trying to save people out of them with ropes.' ' And,' she said, ' it was not a waterfall of a river, it was a waterfall of the sea.'

" This expression is remarkable, for there is perhaps hardly a place in the world, except the Falls of Lora, to which it would exactly apply. Without telling her why, I questioned her in detail as to all the features of the place she had dreamed of, and anyone who wishes for the full and minute description she gave me has only to look at that given by any local guide-book of the Falls of Lora. The only part of her dream which did not reflect my thoughts was that the persons whom she was trying to save from drowning were not the same that I was thinking of. It was not until she had told me all she could, that I gave her my reason for wishing to know so much about her dream, and said I had been thinking of the place she had described. Now she had never been to Oban, and had never heard or read anything about the Falls. I had never so much as mentioned them to her, and she had seen no one else at any time who had been there, nor had she ever seen a picture or a photograph of the place. Of this, both she and I were absolutely certain. If, therefore, the picture was not impressed by my mind directly upon hers, the only possible alternative is that of coincidence; and the coincidence of her dreaming of such an unusual scene and circumstances at the same time that I was thinking of them so intently, would be doubly extraordinary, because it was not a single dream, but one repeated

T 9

324 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

throughout the night, her anxiety to save the drowning persons waking her again and again. The maid is a matter-of-fact, middle-aged woman, who has lived nearly all her life in my family, and was my nurse. Though a Welshwoman, she has none of the imagination supposed to be an endowment of her race, and has displayed no talent for thought-reading; her position enables her to dispense with ceremonies, and she refuses to ' be bothered with such nonsense.' She still lives with us, is in the house at this moment, and wishes she did not remember the circumstances. I am not trusting to memory alone, for I not only entered the facts in my diary, but wrote a full account of them the next day in a letter to a friend, and, having told the story at the time, have other witnesses to prove that I do not exaggerate."

The dreamer says: —

" This account of the circumstances is correct. I had never heard Miss Mason mention her trouble. But I have forgotten many of the details of the dream.1

" Margaret Herbert."

Miss Mason's mother says: —

" I have heard both my daughter and my maid speak of the occurrence and describe it.

"M. Mason."

To pass from water to fire — the evidential force of the following

case is not easy to estimate, without knowing how frequent dreams of

conflagrations are; but this particular dreamer, at any rate, can recall

no similar experience, and has never in his life made a written

note of a dream except on this occasion. Mr. D. B. W. Sladen, of 26,

Campden Grove, Kensington, W., writes: —

"January 4th, 1886. (98) "In December, 1881, we were living at 6, George Street, (East) Melbourne, Victoria. My father resided then, as he does now, at Phillimore Lodge, Kensington, W. In those days I always went to bed about midnight. I awoke suddenly, tremendously startled by a dream that my father's house was on fire. The dream impressed me so vividly that I felt convinced that a fire had actually happened there, and, striking a light, I walked across the room to the dressing-table, on which my diary lay (I used generally to jot down the events of the day just before turning in), and made a brief entry of it, there and then, first looking at my watch in order to be able to set down the time, which I found to be 1 a.m. I had, therefore, been in bed less than an hour, which of itself seems to add an extraordinary feature to the case (I refer to my sinking to sleep, dreaming,

1 With regard to these words, Miss Mason says: —

" April 12th, 1885.

"My old nurse has such a dislike to the subject of thought-transference, which she considers ' nonsense,' that she would never have told me of her dream if she had known that it afforded an instance. And when I told her afterwards how her dream had answered to my thoughts, she was so angry at having unconsciously supplied me with an instance, that she always refused to talk of it again, though I have often tried to make her do so. It is, therefore, not surprising that she should have forgotten some of the details of a dream nearly 7 years ago."

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 325

and waking up, as after a long sleep, in so short a space of time). The entry in my diary is, as it was likely to be when standing out of bed, very brief: 1 At night I dreamt that the kitchen in my father 's house was on fire. I awoke and found that it was 1 a.m.' I kept my diary in a plain paper book; and the entry comes below what I did up to midnight on December 22nd. What I further still remember distinctly of the vision is this — that in it, the servants' bedrooms (which are really at the top of my father's house, while the kitchen, &c, are at the bottom) were adjoining the kitchen suite, all on one floor, and that the smoke and blaze seemed general. Further, I remember distinctly, though I just made a bare entry in my diary and hurried back to bed, that two of my father's maids, named Coombes and Caroline respectively, were the only persons except myself present in the vision, and that I seemed to have no impulses and no power of moving, but was merely a spectator; nor did the idea of any risk to myself form part of the impression.

" Six or seven weeks afterwards (mail contract between London and Melbourne is 42 days) I received a letter from my father, dated December 2-2nd, 1881. He wrote, ' We had a fire on Sunday evening while we were at church. Coombes went with a wax-taper to tidy her room, and, I suppose, blew it out and put it down with sparks. Very soon after she left, a ring at the bell that the attic was on fire put Caroline on her mettle, while the other lost her head. She dashed it out with water before the window-frame was burnt through, and subdued it. Fifteen pounds will repair the damage — two chests of drawers much burnt, wearing apparel, &c. I gave her a sovereign for her pluck, as the roof would have been on fire in another five minutes.'

" Now I wish to draw your attention to what has attracted my attention most. The Sunday before December 22nd, 1881, was December 18th. I had the communication, therefore, in my sleep, not on the actual day of the fire, but on the day on which my father wrote the letter. At Kensington, where my father was writing, Australian letters have to be posted in the branch offices about 5 p.m. My dream was at 1 a.m. Time in Victoria is 9 J hours ahead of English time. When I was having the communication, therefore, it was about 3.30 p.m. in Kensington. Now with the mail going out at 5 p.m., 3.30 would have been a very natural — I think I may say a most natural time for my father to be finishing a letter to me. [Mr. Sladen, sen., confirms this.] I, therefore, had my magnetic communication when he was at once focussing his mind on me, and focussing his mind on the fire, in order to tell me about it.

" I have asked my wife, and she remembers perfectly my waking her up, and telling her that I had dreamt that my father's house was on fire, and was so convinced of its betokening an actual occurrence that I should make a note of it in my diary there and then."

"Douglas B. W. Sladen."

[Mr. Sladen has kindly allowed me to inspect the diary and letter.]

In the next example the correspondence is of a more distinct kind. Mrs. Walsh, of the Priory, Lincoln, writes: —

"February, 1884. (99) " The gentleman who teaches music in my house tells me that

326 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

if anything sad or terrible happens to anyone he loves, he always has an intimation of it.

" I am very fond of him, and I know he looks on me as a very true old friend, and one of my sons, now in India, is the dearest friend he has.

" I went out one morning about 9 o'clock, carrying books for ^the library, and being very busy, took the short way to town. On some flags in a very steep part of the road, some boys had made a slide. Both my feet flew away at the same moment that the back of my head resounded on the flags. A policeman picked me up, saw I was hurt, and rang at the Nurses' Home close by, to get me looked to. My head was cut, and while they were washing the blood away, I was worrying myself that I should be ill, and how should I manage my school till the end of the term. I told no one in my house but my daughter, and no one but the policeman had seen me fall. I asked my daughter to tell no one. I had a miserable nervous feeling, but I pretended to her it was nothing. The next morning after a sleepless night, I could not get up. It was my habit to sit in the drawing-room while the music lessons were giren, so my daughter went in

to tell Mr. that I had had a bad night, and was not yet up. He

said, ' I had a wretched night, too, and all through a most vivid dream.' ' What was it? ' she asked. ' I dreamed I was walking by the Nurses' Home, and I came on a slide, both my feet slipped, and I fell on the back of my head. I was helped to the Home, and while my head was being bathed I was worrying myself how I should manage my lessons till the end of the term, and the worrying feeling would not go.' "

The percipient, Mr. T. J. Hoare, writes: —

" 12, St. Nicholas Square, Lincoln.

"March 3rd, 1884.

" I shall be very pleased to relate the account of a dream, as described by Mrs. Walsh most accurately, which took place on a Tuesday evening early in November, 1 882. The dream consisted of this: I supposed I was going down the G-reystone Stairs, when I had a fall at the first flight, was picked up, and helped by a policeman to the Nurses' Institute, about 20 yards from the imaginary fall, being there attended by a nurse. I was much perplexed as to how I should manage to finish my work during the term. This was followed the next morning by a severe headache in the region of the imaginary blow.

" On seeing Miss Walsh the following morning, I was told by her that Mrs. Walsh was unwell, but not the cause. I replied I too felt unwell and accounted for it through the dream. Mrs. Walsh related to me the same evening her own adventure, which in every detail exactly coincided with my dream as happening to myself. I in no way knew of Mrs. Walsh's mishap till the evening after, when told by herself.

" In another instance, whilst staying in Devonshire, I received an impression, or felt a conviction, that something had happened to Mrs. Walsh. I think I wanted to write, so confident was I of something having taken place, but desisted because I had left Lincoln through an outbreak of small-pox in the house next my rooms, only the previous week, so was unwilling to correspond. On my return here, I found out

viil] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 327

that both my day [i.e., the day of the impression] and the accident — a fall — were true.

" In many other instances have I received similar experiences, and so confident have I been always of their accuracy that I have written to the persons and places, and always received confirmation of my impressions. I have had, I think, 10 or 12 impressions. They are quite unlike fits of low spirits and indigestion, and I can easily distinguish them from such, as in every case I have been most conscious of outside action.

"T. J. Hoare."

In conversation Mr. Hoare stated that he undoubtedly had a positive pain at the back of his head, as if from a blow, on the day following this experience.

The following case is an interesting dream-parallel to the waking

cases of the last chapter where the impression on the percipient's

mind was of being wanted. (See especially Mr. Rowlands' case,

p. 291.) The account is from Mr. Joseph Albree, of 40, Wood Street,

Pittsburgh, Pa., U.S.A.

"September 25th, 1884.

(100) " In the winter of 1863-4, a captain in the regular army of the

United States came to P on recruiting service, accompanied by a

second lieutenant. Very soon after his arrival the captain was taken sick with inflammation of the lungs. As I had known him intimately since his boyhood, he sent for me. I had him removed to a private house, and cared for him until he died, two days after. His companion, the lieutenant, remained in the city for 10 days after the captain's death, awaiting orders. He was a man of unusually reticent disposition; and being an entire stranger in the city, and knowing no one but the person who had been at the death of his associate officer, he spent much time in my company. At length he received orders to proceed at once to a distant point. 1 bade him good-bye one evening, he intending to take an early train on the following morning, and I never expecting to see him again.

" Three nights after that, on Saturday, I awakened suddenly with the idea that some person was calling me, and that I was wanted immediately. I was conscious of having had a very vivid dream, but could not recall any part of it. There was present in my mind the very uncomfortable feeling that I was wanted at once. While sitting up in bed, endeavouring to collect my thoughts, the city bell struck midnight. After looking into the rooms where the children were, and finding them all asleep, I lay down again, striving unsuccessfully to recall a single incident of the dream. All Sunday and Monday I was impressed with a consciousness of some duty unperformed.

" On Tuesday evening, on my way home, an almost irresistible impulse came over me to turn aside from my direct way, down a little street leading in another direction. Standing a moment on the street corner at the parting of ways, I turned off, walked a few blocks, and came to the hotel where the lieutenant had lodged. I went into the office, and having no business or object in going there, I asked the clerk when Lieutenant O. left. The clerk said, ' There he sits, in the reading-room.' After a very brief greeting he asked me to go to his room. Following him up the

328 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

stairway, the corner of a panel on the landing seemed to bring clearly to my mind the full details of my Saturday night's dream. From that point the stairs, hall ways, the room into which he led me, the furniture and general appearance, all were strangely familiar, although I had never been there before. The lieutenant's first words on closing the door were ' J., did you ever faint V He then told me that his transportation order not having arrived, he had not been able to leave at the time fixed; that on the preceding Saturday, while reading in the reading-room, he glanced at the clock, and noticing it was 5 minutes of 12 o'clock, took a light, went immediately to his room, placed the lamp on the table, fell on the bed, losing consciousness and knowing nothing until broad daylight on the Sunday winter morning, when he found himself dressed, lying across the bed, suffering intense pain in his forehead. His last conscious thought had been, ' If J. was here he could help me.' All that he told me was just what I had dreamed on the preceding Saturday night — the exact hour of the occurrence with the lieutenant, and the vivid dream with me, being fixed at midnight.

" I have seen or heard nothing of the lieutenant since that evening.

"Joseph Albree."

[As the details of the dream were not independently remembered, we should not be justified in attaching any importance to the apparent recognition of the scene when the percipient actually saw it.]

