" Je me souviens parfaitement que le dimanche, 4 avril, 1880, etant arrive de Paris le matin meme pour passer ici quelques jours, j'ai ete dejeuner avec vous. Je me souviens aussi parfaitement que je vous ai trouve fort emu de la douloureuse nouvelle qui vous etait parvenue quelques jours l auparavant, de la mort de l'un des messieurs vos freres. Je me rappelle aussi comme si le fait s'^tait passe hier, tant j'en ai 6te frappe, que quelques jours avant d'apprendre la triste nouvelle, vous aviez un soir, dtant deja couche", vu, ou cru voir, mais en tous cas tres distinctement, votre frere, celui dont vous veniez d'apprendre la mort subite, tout pres de votre lit, et que, dans la conviction ou vous etiez que c'etait bien lui que vous perceviez, vous vous e"tiez leve" et lui aviez addresse" la parole, et qu'a ce moment vous aviez cesse de le voir comme s'il s'^tait evanoui ainsi qu'un spectre. Je me souviens encore que, sous l'impression de l'emotion bien naturelle qui avait ete la suite de cet evenement, vous l'aviez inscrit dans un petit carnet ou vous avez l'habitude d'ecrire les faits saillants de votre tres paisible existence, et que vous m'avez fait voir ce carnet. Cette apparition, cette vision, ou ce songe, comme vous voudrez l'appeler, est inscrit, si j'ai bon souvenir, a la date du 24 ou du 25 feVrier,1 et ce n'est que deux ou trois

1 The words " quelques jours auparavant, " coupled with the fact that the number of the day is right, suggest that fevrier is a mere slip of the pen for mars.

jours apres que vous avez recu la nouvelle officielle de la niort de votre frere.

" J'ai e"te" d'autant moins surpris de ce que vous me disiez alors, et fen ai aussi conserve un souvenir d'autant plus net et prdcis, comme je vous le disais en commencant, que j'ai dans ma familledes faits similaires auxquels je crois absolument.

" Des faits semblables arrivent, croyez-le bien, bien plus souvent qu'on ne le croit gemeralement; seulement on ne veut pas toujours les dire, parceque Ton se mefie de soi ou des autres.

" Au revoir, cher ami, a bientot, je l'espere, et croyez bien a l'expression des plus sinceres sentiments de votre tout devoue

" Faucigny, Prince Lucinge."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Wingfield adds: —

" I have never had any other startling dream of the same nature, nor any dream from which I woke with the same sense of reality and distress, and of which the effect continued long after I was well awake. Nor have I upon any other occasion had a hallucination of the senses."

The Times obituary for March 30th, 1880, records the death of Mr. R. B. Wingfield-Baker, of Orsett Hall, Essex, as having taken place on the 25th. The Essex Independent gives the same date, adding that Mr. Baker breathed his last about 9 o'clock.

It will be seen here that the impression followed the death by a few hours — a feature which will frequently recur. The fact, of course, slightly detracts from the evidential force of a case, as compared with the completely simultaneous coincidences; inasmuch as the odds against the accidental occurrence of a unique impression of someone's presence within a few hours of his death, enormous as they are, are less enormous than the odds against a similar accidental occurrence within five minutes of the death. But the deferment of the impression, though to this slight extent affecting a case as an item of telepathic evidence, is not in itself any obstacle to the telepathic explanation. We may recall that m some of the experimental cases the impression was never a piece of conscious experience at all; while in others the latency and gradual emergence of the idea was a very noticeable feature (pp. 56, 63-71, 84). This justifies us in presuming that an impression which ultimately takes a sensory form may fail in the first instance to reach the threshold of attention. It may be unable to compete, at the moment, with the vivid sensory impressions, and the crowd of ideas and images, that belong to normal seasons of waking life; and it may thus remain latent till darkness and quiet give a chance for its development. This view seems at any rate supported by the fact that it is usually at night that the delayed impression — if such it be — emerges into the percipient's consciousness. It is

a ■■<

202 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

supported also by analogies which recognised psychology supplies. I may refer to the extraordinary exaltation of memory sometimes observed in hypnotic and hystero-epileptic " subjects "; or even to the vivid revival, in ordinary dreaming, of impressions which have hardly affected the waking consciousness.

Mr. Wingfield's vision had another unusual feature besides the violence of its effect on him. It represented a single figure, without detail or incident. It was, so to speak, the dream of an apparition; and in this respect bears a closer affinity to " borderland " and waking cases than to dreams in general. It will be worth while to quote here one dream-case of a more ordinary type so far as its content is concerned, but resembling the last in its unusual and distressing vividness. The supposed agent in this instance experienced nothing more than a brief sense of danger and excitement, which, however, may have been sufficiently intense during the moments that it lasted. The account is from Mrs. West, of Hildegarde, Furness Road, Eastbourne.

"1883.

(24) " My father and brother were on a journey during the winter. I was expecting them home, without knowing the exact day of their return. The date, to the best of my recollection, was the winter of 1871-2. I had gone to bed at my usual time, about 1 1 p.m. Some time in the night I had a vivid dream, which made a great impression on me. I dreamt I was looking out of a window, when I saw father driving in a Spids sledge, followed in another by my brother. They had to pass a cross-road, on which another traveller was driving very fast, also in a sledge with one horse. Father seemed to drive on without observing the other fellow, who would without fail have driven over father if he had not made his horse rear, so that I saw my father drive under the hoofs of the horse. Every moment I expected the horse would fall down and crush him. I called out 'Father! father! ' and woke in a great fright. The next morning my father and brother returned. I said to him, ' I am so glad to see you arrive quite safely, as I had such a dreadful dream about you last night.' My brother said, ' You could not have been in greater fright about him than I was,' and then he related to me what had happened, which tallied exactly with my dream. My brother in his fright, when he saw the feet of the horse over father's head, called out, ' Oh! father, father! '

" I have never had any other dream of this kind, nor do I remember ever to have had a.nother dream of an accident happening to anyone in whom I was interested. I often dream of people, and when this happens I generally expect to receive a letter from them, or to hear of them in the course of the next day. I dreamt of Mrs. G. Bidder the night before I received her letter asking me for an account of this dream; and I told Mr. West, before we went down to breakfast, that I should have a letter that day from her. I had no other reason to expect a letter from her, nor had I received one for some time, I should think some years, previously.

" Hilda West."

Mrs. West's father, Sir John Crowe, late Consul-General for Norway, is since dead; but her brother, Mr. Septimus Crowe, of Librola, Mary's Hill Road, Shortlands, sends us the following confirmation: —

"I remember vividly, on my return once with my father from a trip to the north of Norway in the winter time, my sister meeting us at the hall-door as we entered, and exclaiming how pleased she was to see us, and that we were safe, as she said at once to me that she had had such an unpleasant dream the evening before. I said, ' What was it 1 ' She then minutely explained to me the dream, as she related it to you, and which is in accordance with the facts. It naturally astonished my father and myself a good deal, that she so vividly in her sleep saw exactly what happened, and I should say, too, she dreamt it at the very time it happened, about 11.30 p.m. " sEPTIMUS Crowe." l

This, again, is a good example of a weak class. But in the present instance we at any rate possess Mrs. West's testimony that her experience was unique; and we have, further, Mr. Crowe's testimony that the dream was accurately described before the facts were known. It was described, no doubt, in a conversation with him — a person whose mind was full of the facts, and he probably did not keep silence during the whole course of his sister's narration: I have already noted that the unprepared actors in these cases are not likely to conduct themselves at the moment with a deliberate eye to the ^lawlessness of their evidence for our purposes some years afterwards. But it would be straining a sceptical hypothesis too far to assume that his interposed comments formed the real basis of the scene in Mrs. West's memory, while he himself remained completely unconscious that he was supplying the information which he appeared to be receiving.

§ 5. We now come to an example of the " borderland " class (E) — the class where the percipient, though not asleep, was not, or cannot be

1 Our friend Mrs. Bidder, the wife of Mr. G. Bidder, Q.C., sends us the following recollection of the narrative as told at her table by Mr. S. Crowe, who is her husband's brother-in-law.

" Ravensbury Park, Mitcham, Surrey.

" 10th January, 1883.

"The following was related at our table by my husband's brother-in-law, Mr. Septimus Crowe. His father, since dead, was Sir John Crowe, Consul-General for Norway.

" ' My father and I were travelling one winter in Norway. We had our carrioles as sledges, and my father drove first, I following. One day we were driving very quickly down a steep hill, at the bottom of which ran a road, at right angles with the one we were on. As we neared the bottom of the hill we saw a carriole, going as quickly as ourselves, just ready to cross our path. My father reined in suddenly, his horse reared and fell over, and I could not, at first, see whether he was hurt or not. He, luckily, had sustained no injury, and in due time we reached home. My sister, on our approach, rushed out, exclaiming: ' ' Then you are not hurt? I saw the horse rear, but I could not see whether you were hurt or not." ' "

It will be seen that if Mrs. Bidder's report is strictly accurate, there is a discrepancy as to which of the two horses it was that reared. But even eye-witnesses of a sudden and confusing accident might afterwards differ in such a point as this.

204 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

proved to have been, in a state of complete Dormal wakefulness. The case was first published in the Spiritual Magazine for 1861, by Dr. Collyer, who wrote from Beta House, 8, Alpha Road, St. John's Wood, N.W.

"April 15th, 1861.

(25) " On January 3rd, 1856, my brother Joseph being in command of the steamer 'Alice,' on the Mississippi, just above New Orleans, she came in collision with another steamer. The concussion caused the flagstaff or pole to fall with great violence, which, coming in contact with my brother's head, actually divided the skull, causing, of necessity, instant death. In October, 1857, I visited the United States. When, at my father's residence, Camden, New Jersey, the melancholy death of my brother became the subject of conversation, my mother narrated to me that at the very time of the accident, the apparition of my brother Joseph was presented to her. This fact was corroborated by my father and four sisters. Camden, New Jersey, is distant from the scene of the accident, in a direct line, over 1,000 miles, and nearly double that distance by the mail route. My mother mentioned the fact of the apparition on the morning of the 4th of January to my father and sisters; nor was -it until the 16th, or 13 days after, that a letter was received confirming in every particular the extraordinary visitation. It will be important to mention that my brother William and his wife lived near the locality of the dreadful accident, now being in Philadelphia; they have also corroborated to me the details of the impression produced on my mother."

Dr. Collyer then quotes a letter from his mother, which contains the following sentences:— « Camden, New Jersey, United States.

"March 27th, 1861.

"My beloved Son, — On the 3rd of January, 1856, I did not feel well, and retired to bed early. Some time after, I felt uneasy and sat up in bed; I looked round the room, and to my utter amazement, saw Joseph standing at the door, looking at me with great earnestness, his head bandaged up, a dirty night-cap on, and a dirty white garment on, something like a surplice. He was much disfigured about the eyes and face. It made me quite uncomfortable the rest of the night. The next morning, Mary came into my room early. I told her that I was sure I was going to have bad news from Joseph. I told all the family at the breakfast table; they replied, ' It was only a dream, and all nonsense,' but that did not change my opinion. It preyed on my mind, and on the 1 6th of January I received the news of his death; and singular to say, both William and his wife, who were there, say that he was exactly attired as I saw him. " Your ever affectionate Mother,

Dr. Collyer continues:— "Anne E. Collyer."

" It will no doubt be said that my mother's imagination was in a morbid state, but this will not account for the fact of the apparition of my brother presenting himself at the exact moment of his death. My mother had never seen him attired as described, and the bandaging of the head did not take place until hours after the accident. My brother William told me that his head was nearly cut in two by the blow, and that his face was dreadfully disfigured, and the night-dress much soiled.

" I cannot wonder that others should be sceptical, as the evidences I have had could not have been received on the testimony of others; we must, therefore, be charitable towards the incredulous.

" Robert H. Collyer, M.D., F.C.S., &c."

On our applying to Dr. Collyer, he replied as follows: —

" 25, Newington Causeway, Borough, S.E.

" March 15th, 1884.

" In replying to your communication, I must state that, strange as the circumstances narrated in the Spiritual Magazine of 1861 are, I can assure you that there is not a particle of exaggeration. As there stated, my mother received the mental impression of my brother on January 3rd, 1856. My father, who was a scientific man, calculated the difference of longitude between Camden, New Jersey, and New Orleans, and found that the mental impression was at the exact time of my brother's death. I may mention that I never was a believer in any spiritual intercourse, or that any of the phenomena present during exalted conditions of the brain are spiritual. I am, and have been for the last 40 years, a materialist, and think that all the so-called spiritual manifestations admit of a philosophical explanation, on physical laws and conditions. I do not desire to. theorise, but to my mind the sympathetic chord of relationship existed between my mother and my brother (who was her favourite son), when that chord was broken by his sudden death, she being at the time favourably situated to receive the shock.

"In the account published in the Spiritual Magazine, I omitted to state that my brother Joseph, prior to his death, had retired for the night in his berth; his vessel was moored alongside the levee, at the time of the collision by another steamer coming down the Mississippi. Of course, my brother was in his nightgown. He ran on deck on being called and informed that a steamer was in close proximity to his own. These circumstances were communicated to me by my brother William, who was on the spot at the time of the accident. I do not attempt to account for the apparition having a bandage, as that could not have been put for some time after death. The difference of time between Camden, New Jersey, and New Orleans is nearly 15°, or one hour.

" My mother retired for the night on 3rd January, 1856, at 8 p.m., which would mark the time at New Orleans 7 p.m. as the time of my brother's death."

Mr. Podmore says: —

"I called upon Dr. Collyer on 25th March, 1884. He told me that he received a full account of the story verbally from his father, mother, and brother in 1857. All are now dead; but two sisters — to one of whom I have written — are still living. Dr. Collyer was quite certain of the precise coincidence of time."

The following is from one of the surviving sisters: —

"Mobile, Alabama, 12th May, 1884.

" I resided in Camden, New Jersey, at the time of my brother's death. He lived in Louisiana. His death was caused by the collision of two steamers on the Mississippi. Some part of the mast fell on him, splitting his head open, causing instantaneous death. The apparition appeared to my mother at the foot of her bed. It stood there for some time gazing at her,

206 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

and disappeared. The apparition was clothed in a long white garment, with its head bound in a white cloth. My mother was not a superstitious person, nor did she believe in Spiritualism. She was wide awake at the time. It was not a dream. She remarked to me when I saw her in the morning, ' I shall hear bad news from Joseph,' and related to me what she had seen. Two or three days 1 from that time we heard of the sad accident. I had another brother who was there at the time, and when he returned home I inquired of him all particulars, and how he was laid out. His description answered to what my mother saw, much to our astonishment.

" A. E. Collyer."

Here we have no direct proof of the exactness of the coincidence; but Dr. Collyer is clear on the fact that the matter was carefully inquired into at the time. As to the alleged resemblances between the phantasm and the real figure, we shall find reason further on to think that the impression of the white garment may have been really transferred. But the criticism made above in respect of Mrs. Bettany's narrative again applies: we cannot account it certain that points were not read back into the vision, after Mrs. Collyer had learnt the actual aspect which the dead man presented. It will be observed, too, that the more striking details — especially that of the bandage — could not in any case help the telepathic argument. For if the son who was killed was the " agent " of his mother's impression, any correspondence of the phantasmal appearance with features of reality which did not come into existence till after death must plainly have been accidental. We shall afterwards encounter plenty of instances where the percipient supplements the impression that he receives with elements from his own mind, and especially, in death-cases, with elements symbolic of death; and it is not impossible that in the present instance the white garment and bandaged head were a dim representation of grave-clothes.

Mrs. Collyer would probably have affirmed that at the time of her vision she was completely awake. That the percipient in the next example was completely awake is, I think, nearly certain; but as he was in bed, the account may serve as a transition to the cases where the matter admits of no doubt. Mr. Marchant, of Linkfield Street, Redhill, formerly a large farmer, wrote to us in the summer of 1883: —

1 This is probably incorrect, as it differs from Dr. Collyer's and the mother's statement; but the point does not seem important. For a piece of independent testimony respecting Captain Collyer's death, see the "Additions and Corrections " which precede Chap. I. The hour there mentioned is 10 p.m.; but this can hardly weigh against Dr. Collyer^s evidence. After 30 years' interval, a mistake of 3 hours might easily be made as to the time of an event which occurred after dark on a winter's night.

(26) "About 2 o'clock on the morning of October 21st, 1881, while I was perfectly wide awake, and looking at a lamp burning on my wash handstand, a person, as I thought, came into my room by mistake, and stopped, looking into the looking-glass on the table. It soon occurred to me it represented Robinson Kelsey, by his dress and wearing his hair long behind. When I raised myself up in bed and called out, it instantly disappeared.1 The next day 2 I mentioned to some of my friends howstrange it was. So thoroughly convinced was I, that I searched the local papers that day (Saturday) and the following Tuesday, believing his death would be in one of them. On the following Wednesday, a man, who formerly was my drover, came and told me Robinson Kelsey was dead. Anxious to know at what time he died, I wrote to Mr. Wood, the family undertaker at Lingfield; he learnt from the brother-in-law of the deceased that he died at 2 a.m. He was my first cousin, and was apprenticed formerly to me as a miller; afterwards he lived with me as journeyman; altogether, 8 years. I never saw anything approaching that before. I am 72 years old, and never feel nervous; I am not afraid of the dead or their spirits. I hand you a rough plan of the bedroom, <fec."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Marchant replied: —

" Robinson Kelsey had met with an accident. His horse fell with him, and from that time he seemed at times unfit for business. He had a farm at Penshurst, in Kent. His friends persuaded hin to leave it. He did, and went to live on his own property, called Batnors Hall, in the parish of Lingfield, Surrey. I had not been thinking about him, neither had I spoken to him for 20 years. About 3 or 4 years before his death I saw him, but not to speak to him. I was on the up-side platform of Redhill Station, and I saw him on the opposite down-side. In the morning after seeing the apparition, I spoke about it to a person in the house. In the evening, I again spoke about it to two persons, how strange it was. It was several days after our conversation about what I had seen that I heard of the death. These people will confirm my statement, for after I heard of his death I spoke of it to the same people, that my relation died the same night as I saw the apparition. When I spoke to these three persons I did not know of his death, but had 'my suspicions from what I had seen. As the apparition passed between my bed and the lamp I had a full view of it; it was unmistakeable. When it stopped looking in the glass I spoke to it, then it gently sank away downwards.

"Probably it was 10 days before I found out, through Mr. Wood, the hour he died, so that these persons I spoke to knew nothing of his death at the time. " George Marchant."

We have received the following confirmation of this incident: —

"July 18th, 1883. " We are positive of hearing Mr. Marchant one day say that he saw the apparition of Robinson Kelsey during the previous night.

" Ann Langeridge, Linkfield Street, Redhill. " Matilda Fuller, Station Road, Redhill. " William Miles, Station Road, Redhill."

1 As to the disappearance on sudden speech or movement, see Vol. ii., p. 91, first note.

2 This means the day following the night of the experience; but, two lines lower, that day should no doubt be the next day, as Oct. 21, 1881, was a Friday.

208 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

Mr. Anthony Kelsey, of Lingfield, Surrey, brother-in-law and cousin of Robinson Kelsey, has confirmed October 21st, 1881, as the date of the death (which we have also verified in the Register of Deaths), but he has forgotten the hour; and Mr. Robinson Kelsey's widow having since died, Mr. Marchant's recollection on this point cannot now be independently confirmed. As to the hour of the apparition, again, Mr. Marchant's statement is only a conclusion, drawn from his regular habit of waking once in the middle of the night at about 2. But there can be no reasonable doubt that the day of the death and of the vision was the same.

On February 12th, 1884, I had an interview with Mr. Marchant, who is a very vigorous and sensible old man, with a precise mind. He went through all the details of his narrative in a methodical manner, and his description corresponded in every particular with the written account, which was sent to me many months before. Mr. Marchant was positive that he never had any other hallucination of the senses, and laughed at the very idea of such things. He quite realised the ordinary criticisms which might be made about a nocturnal vision, e.g., that he had had a glass too much, and also realised their absurdity as applied to his own case. I cannot doubt his statement that he has been a most temperate man. He showed me in his bedroom the precise line that the figure took; appearing at his right hand, then passing along in front of a lamp which was on the washhand-stand, and finally standing between the foot of his bed and the dressing-table. He described Kelsey's long and bushy black hair as a very distinct peculiarity. In answer to inquiries on this point he says: " I have not any doubt whatever that Robinson Kelsey did have that peculiarity of the hair at the day of his death. My recollection of him is as clear as if I had his photo before me." ' The figure was visible, he thinks, for nearly a minute; but the length of time in such cases is of course likely to be over-estimated.

I likewise saw Mrs. Langeridge, a sensible person, without any belief in " ghosts," who at once volunteered the remark that Mr. Marchant described his vision to her next morning.

This case is remarkable from the fact that there was no immediate interest between the two parties — though it is of course possible that the dying man's thoughts reverted to his kinsman and old employer. But comments on this point must be reserved.

| 6. We now come to examples of the most important class of all, Class A — externalised impressions, occurring to persons who are up, and manifestly in the full possession of their waking senses. Of this class the most important examples are visual impressions, or apparitions. But I will first give a case which is on the line between Classes A and B, a vision not absolutely externalised in space, but where the mental image took on a sort of vividness and objectivity which the percipient believes to have been unexampled in his experience. The coincidence with the death of the agent was

apparently quite exact; and we have the testimony of a third person

to the fact that the percipient mentioned his impression immediately

on its occurrence. The narrator is Mr. Rawlinson, of Lansdown

Court West, Cheltenham.

" September 18th, 1883.

(27) " I was dressing one morning in December, 1881, when a certain conviction came upon me that someone was in my dressing-room. On looking round, I saw no one, but then, instantaneously (in my mind's eye, I suppose), every feature of the face and form of my old friend, X., arose. This, as you may imagine, made a great impression on me, and I went at once into my wife's room and told her what had occurred, at the same time stating that I feared Mr. X. must be dead. The subject was mentioned between us several times that day. Next morning, I received a letter from X.'s brother, then Consul-General at Odessa, but who I did not know was in England, saying that his brother had died at a quarter before 9 o'clock that morning. This was the very time the occurrence happened in my dressing-room. It is right to add that we had heard some two months previously that X. was suffering from cancer, but still we were in no immediate apprehension of his death. I never on any other occasion had any hallucination of the senses, and sincerely trust I never again shall.

" Rob. Rawlinson."

The following is Mrs. Rawlinson's account: —

"June 18th, 1883.

" My husband was dressing, a few months ago, one morning about a quarter to 9 o'clock, when he came into my room, and said: ' I feel sure X.' (an old friend of his) ' is dead.' He said all at once he felt as if there was someone in the room with him, and X.'s face came vividly before his mind's eye; and then he had this extraordinary conviction of X.'s death. He could not get the idea out of his mind all day. Strange to say, the next morning he had a letter saying X. had died the morning before, at a quarter to 9, just the very time my husband came into my room. About two months before, we had heard that X. had an incurable complaint, but we had heard nothing more, and his name had not been mentioned by anyone for weeks. I ought to tell you that my husband is the last person in the world to imagine anything, and he had always been particularly unbelieving as to anything supernatural." l

A reference to the Consul's letter, and to the Times obituary, has fixed the date of the death as December 17th; but the date of the vision was not written down at the time: we therefore have to trust to Mr. and Mrs. Rawlinson's memory for the fact that it took place on the day before the letter was received. Not, however — be it observed — to their memory now, but to their memory at the time when the letter was received; and considering the effect that the

1 See p. 199, note. " X." in the above accounts is our own substitution for the real name.

210 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

occurrence had on their minds, we can scarcely suppose them to have agreed in referring it to the preceding day, if several days had really intervened.

In the next case the coincidence was certainly close to within a very few minutes, and may have been exact. The impression was again completely unique in the percipient's experience, and was at once communicated to a third person, whose testimony to that point we have obtained. " N. J. S.," who, though he uses the third person, is himself the narrator, is personally known to us. Occupying a position of considerable responsibility, he does not wish his name to be published; but it can be given to inquirers, and he " will answer any questions personally to anyone having a wish to arrive at the truth." The account was received within a few weeks of the occurrence.

(28) " N". J. S. and F. L. were employed together in an office, were broughtinto intimate relations with one another, which lasted for about eight years, and held one another in very great regard and esteem. On Monday, March 19th, 1883, F. L., in coming to the office, complained of having suffered from indigestion; he went to a chemist, who told him that his liver was a little out of order, and gave him some medicine. He did not seem much better on Thursday. On Saturday he was absent, and N. J. S. has since heard he was examined by a medical man, who thought he wanted a day or two of rest, but expressed no opinion that anything was serious.

" On Saturday evening, March 24th, N. J. S., who had a headache, was sitting at home. He said to his wife that he was what he had not been for months, rather too warm; after making the remark he leaned back on the couch, and the next minute saw his friend, F. L., standing before him, dressed in his usual manner. N. J. S. noticed the details of his dress, that is, his hat with a black band, his overcoat unbuttoned, and a stick in his hand; he looked with a fixed regard at N. J. S., and then passed away. N. J. S. quoted to himself from Job, 'And lo, a spirit passed before me, and the hair of my flesh stood up.' At that moment an icy chill passed through him, 1 and his hair bristled. He then turned to his wife and asked her the time; she said, ' 12 minutes to 9.' He then said, 'The reason I ask you is that F. L. is dead. I have just seen him.' She tried to persuade him it was fancy, but he most positively assured her that no argument was of avail to alter his opinion.

"The next day, Sunday, about 3 p.m., A. L., brother of F. L., came to

the house of N. J. S., who let him in. A. L. said, ' I suppose you know

what I have come to tell you 1 ' N. J. S. replied, ' Yes, your brother is

dead.' A. L. said, ' I thought you would know it.' N. J. S. replied,

' Why V A. L. said, ' Because you were in such sympathy with one another.'

N. J. S. afterwards ascertained that A. L. called on Saturday to see his

brother, and on leaving him noticed the clock on the stairs was 25 minutes

to 9 p.m. F. L.'s sister, ongoing to him at 9 p.m., found him dead from

rupture of the aorta.

1 See Vol. ii., p. 37, first note, and the addition thereto in the " Additions and Corrections " at the beginning of Vol. ii.

" This is a plain statement of facts, and the only theory N. J. S. has on the subject is that at the supreme moment of death, F. L. must have felt a great wish to communicate with him, and in some way by force of will impressed his image on N. J. S.'s senses."

In reply to our inquiries Mr. S. says: —

" May 11th, 1883.

" (1) My wife was sitting at a table in the middle of the room under a gas chandelier, either reading or doing some wool work. I was sitting on a couch at the side of the room in the shade; she was not looking in the direction I was. I studiously spoke in a quiet manner to avoid alarming her; she noticed nothing particular in me.

" (2) I have never seen any appearance before, but have disbelieved in them, not seeing any motive.

" (3) Mr. A. L. told me that in coming to inform me of his brother's death, he wondered what would be the best way of breaking the matter to me, when, without any reason except the knowledge of our strong mutual regard, it seemed to flash upon his mind that I might know it.

"There had been no instances of thought-transmission between us.

" There are many slight details which it is nearly impossible to describe in writing, so I may say that I shall be most willing to give you a personal account and answer any questions at any time you should be in town.

" There is one thing which strikes me as singular — the instant certainty I felt that my friend was dead, as there was nothing to lead up to the idea; and also that I seemed to accept all that passed without feeling surprise, and as if it were an ordinary matter of course.

Mrs. S. supplies the following corroboration: —

"September 18th, 1883.

" On the evening of the 24th March last, I was sitting at a table reading, my husband was sitting on a couch at the side of the room; he asked me the time, and on my replying 12 minutes to 9, he said, 'The reason why I ask is that L. is dead, I have just seen him.' I answered, ' What nonsense, you don't even know that he is ill; I daresay when you go to town on Tuesday you will see him all right.' However, he persisted in saying he had seen L., and was sure of his death. I noticed at the time that he looked very much agitated and was very pale " Maria S."

We find from the Times obituary that F. L.'s death took place on March 24th, 1883.

In a later communication Mr. S. says: —

" February 23rd, 1885.

" In compliance with your request, I have asked Mr. A. L. to send you the statement of what came to his knowledge with reference to the time of his brother's death.

" I have often thought the matter over since. I am unable to satisfy my own mind as to the why of the occurrence, but I still adhere to every particular, having nothing to add or withdraw."

p 2

212 SPECIMEN'S OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

Mr. L.'s brother corroborates as follows: —

" Bank of England.

"February 24th, 1885.

" Mr. S. having informed me that you have expressed a wish that I should corroborate some statements made by him relative to my brother Frederick's sudden death, I beg to send you the following particulars.

" On Saturday, March 24th, 1883, my brother having been absent from business, I called about 8 p.m. to see him, and found him sitting up in his bedroom. I left him, apparently much better, and came down to the dining-room about 8.40, where I remained with my sister for about half-an-hour, when I left, and she, going upstairs, immediately upon my departure, found her brother lying dead upon the bed, so that the exact time of his death will never be known. On my way over to Mr. S. the next day, to break the news to him, the thought occurred to me — knowing the strong sympathy between them — 'I should not be surprised if he has had some presentiment of it '; and when he came to the door to meet me, I felt certain from his look that it was so, hence I said, ' You know what I have come for,' and he then told me that he had seen my brother Frederick in a vision a little before 9 on the previous evening. I must tell you I am no believer in visions, and have not always found presentiments correct; yet I am perfectly certain of Mr. S.'s veracity, and having been asked to confirm him, willingly do so, though I strengthen a cause I am not a disciple of.

An attempt to form a numerical estimate of the probability (or improbability) that the coincidence in this case was accidental will be found in a subsequent chapter on " The Theory of Chance-Coincidence " (Vol. II., pp. 18-20).

The next case again exhibits the slight deferment of the percipient's experience which I have already mentioned (p. 201). But its chief interest is as illustrating what may be called a local, as distinct from a personal, rapport between the parties concerned.1 The percipient, at the moment of his impression, was contemplating a spot with which the agent was specially connected, and which may even have had a very distinct place in her dying thoughts; and it is natural to find in this fact a main condition why he, of all people, should have been the one impressed. The case was thus narrated to us by the Rev. C. T. Forster, Vicar of Hinxton, Saffron Walden: —

"August 6th, 1885. (29) " My late parishioner, Mrs. de FreVille, was a somewhat eccentric lady, who was specially morbid on the subject of tombs, &c.

" About two days after her death, which took place in London, May 8th, in the afternoon, I heard that she had been seen that very night by Alfred Bard. I sent for him, and he gave me a very clear and circum stantial account of what he had seen.

1 As to this point, see Vol. ii., pp. 2G8 and 301-2.

" He is a man of great observation, being a self-taught naturalist, and I am quite satisfied that he desires to speak the truth without any exaggeration.

" I must add that I am absolutely certain that the news of Mrs. de FreVille's death did not reach Hinxton till the next morning, May 9th. She was found dead at 7.30 p.m. She had been left alone in her room, being poorly, but not considered seriously or dangerously ill.

" C. T. Forster."

The following is the percipient's own account: —

"July 21st, 1885.

" I am a gardener in employment at Sawston. I always go through Hinxton churchyard on my return home from work. On Friday, May 8th, 1885, I was walking back as usual. On entering the churchyard, I looked rather carefully at the ground, in order to see a cow and donkey which used to lie just inside the gate. In so doing, I looked straight at the square stone vault in which the late Mr. de Freville was at one time buried. I then saw Mrs. de Freville leaning on the rails, dressed much as I had usually seen her, in a coal-scuttle bonnet, black jacket with deep crape, and black dress. She was looking full at me. Her face was very white, much whiter than usual. I knew her well, having at one time been in her employ. I at once supposed that she had come, as she sometimes did, to the mausoleum in her own park, in order to have it opened and go in. I supposed that Mr. Wiles, the mason from Cambridge, was in the tomb doing something. I walked round the tomb looking carefully at it, in order to see if the gate was open, keeping my eye on her and never more than five or six yards from her. Her face turned and followed me. I passed between the church and the tomb (there are about four yards between the two), and peered forward to see whether the tomb was open, as she hid the part of the tomb which opened. I slightly stumbled on a hassock of grass, and looked at my feet for a moment only. When I looked up she was gone. She could not possibly have got out of the churchyard, as in order to reach any of the exits she must have passed me.1 So I took for granted that she had quickly gone into the tomb. I went up to the door, which I expected to find open, but to my surprise it was shut and had not been opened, as there was no key in the lock. I rather hoped to have a look into the tomb myself, so I went back again and shook the gate to make sure, but there was no sign of any one's having been there. I was then much startled and looked at the clock, which marked 9.20. When I got home I half thought it must have been my fancy, but II I told my wife that I had seen Mrs. de Freville.

" Next day, when my little boy told me that she was dead, I gave a start, which my companion noticed, I was so much taken aback.

" I have never had any other hallucination whatever.

_,..,..... "Alfred Bard."

Mrs. JBard s testimony is as follows: —

"July 8th, 1885.

" When Mr. Bard came home he said, ' I have seen Mrs. de Freville

to-night, leaning with her elbow on the palisade, looking at me. I turned

again to look at her and she was gone. She had cloak and bonnet on.'

1 See the remark within brackets, which follows the case.

He got home as usual between 9 and 10; it was on the 8th of May, 1885

" Sarah Bard."

The Times obituary confirms the date of the death.

[Mr. Myers was conducted over Hinxton churchyard by Mr. Forster, and can attest the substantial accuracy of Mr. Bard's description of the relative position of the church, the tomb, and the exits. The words " must have passed me," however, give a slightly erroneous impression; " must have come very near me " would be the more correct description.]

The next case is of a more abnormal type. We received the first

account of it — the percipient's evidence — through the kindness of

Mrs. Martin, of Ham Court, Upton-on-Severn, Worcester.

"Antony, Torpoint, December 14th, 1882. (30) " Helen Alexander (maid to Lady Walclegrave) was lying here very ill with typhoid fever, and was attended by me. I was standing at the table by her bedside, pouring out her medicine, at about 4 o'clock in the morning of the 4th October, 1880. I heard the call-bell ring (this had been heard twice before during the night in that same week), and was attracted by the door of the room opening,1 and by seeing a person entering the room whom I instantly felt to be the mother of the sick woman. She had a brass candlestick in her hand, a red shawl over her shoulders, and a flannel petticoat on which had a hole in the front. I looked at her as much as to say, ' I am glad you have come,' but the woman looked at me sternly, as much as to say, ' Why wasn't I sent for before 1 ' I gave the medicine to Helen Alexander, and then turned round to speak to the vision, but no one was there. She had gone. She was a short, dark person, and very stout. At about 6 o'clock that morning Helen Alexander died. Two days after her parents and a sister came to Antony, and arrived between 1 and 2 o'clock in the morning; I and another maid let them in, and it gave me a great turn when I saw the living likeness of the vision I had seen two nights before. I told the sister about the vision, and she said that the description of the dress exactly answered to her mother's, and that they had brass candlesticks at home exactly like the one described. There was not the slightest resemblance between the mother and daughter.

"Frances Reddell."

This at first sight might be taken for a mere delusion of an excitable or over-tired servant, modified and exaggerated by the subsequent sight of the real mother. If such a case is to have evidential force, we must ascertain beyond doubt that the description of the experience was given in detail before any knowledge of the reality can have affected the percipient's memory or imagination. This necessary corroboration has been kindly supplied by Mrs. Pole-

Oarew, of Antony, Torpoint, Devonport.

"December 31st, 1883.

" In October, 1880, Lord and Lady Waldegrave came with their Scotch

maid, Helen Alexander, to stay with us. [The account then describes how

Helen was discovered to have caught typhoid fever.] She did not seem to

be very ill in spite of it, and as there seemed no fear of danger, and Lord

i See p. 102, note.

and Lady Waldegrave had to go a long journey the following day (Thursday), they decided to leave her, as they were advised to do, under their friends' care.

" The illness ran its usual course, and she seemed to be going on perfectly well till the Sunday week following, when the doctor told me that the fever had left her, but the state of weakness which had supervened was such as to make him extremely anxious. I immediately engaged a regularnurse, greatly against the wish of Reddell, my maid, who had been her chief nurse all through the illness, and who was quite devoted to her. However, as the nurse could not conveniently come till the following day, I allowed Reddell to sit up with Helen again that night, to give her the medicine and food, which were to be taken constantly.

"At about 4.30 that night, or rather Monday morning, Reddell looked at her watch, poured out the medicine, and was bending over the bed to give it to Helen, when the call-bell in the passage rang. She said to herself, ' There's that tiresome bell with the wire caught again.' (It seems it did occasionally ring of itself in this manner.) At that moment, however, she heard the door open, and looking round, saw a very stout old woman walk in. She was dressed in a nightgown and red flannel petticoat, and carried an old-fashioned brass candlestick in her hand. The petticoat had a hole rubbed in it. She walked into the room, and appeared to be going towards the dressing-table to put her candle down. She was a perfect stranger to Reddell, who, however, merely thought, ' This is her mother come to see after her,' and she felt quite glad it was so, accepting the idea without reasoning upon it, as one would in a dream. She thought the mother looked annoyed, possibly at not having been sent for before. She then gave Helen the medicine, and turning round, found that the apparition had disappeared, and that the door was shut. A great change, meanwhile, had taken place in Helen, and Reddell fetched me, who sent off for the doctor, and meanwhile applied hot poultices, &c, but Helen died a little before the doctor came. She was quite conscious up to about half-an-hour before she died, when she seemed to be going to sleep.

"During the early days of her illness Helen had written to a sister, mentioning her being unwell, but making nothing of it, and as she never mentioned anyone but this sister, it was supposed by the household, to whom she was a perfect stranger, that she had no other relation alive. Reddell was always offering to write for her, but she always declined, saying there was no need, she would write herself in a day or two. ~So one at home, therefore, knew anything of her being so ill, and it is, therefore, remarkable that her mother, a far from nervous person, should have said that evening going up to bed, ' I am sure Helen is very ill.'

" Reddell told me and my daughter of the apparition, about an hour after Helen's death, prefacing with, ' I am not superstitious, or nervous, and I wasn't the least frightened, but her mother came last night,' and she then told the story, giving a careful description of the figure she had seen. The relations were asked to come to the funeral, and the father, mother, and sister came, and in the mother Reddell recognised the apparition, as I did also, for Recldell's description had been most accurate, even to the expression, which she had ascribed to annoyance, but which was due to deafness. It was judged best not to speak about it to the mother, but Reddell told the sister, who said the description of the figure corresponded

216 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

exactly with the probable appearance of her mother if roused in the night; that they had exactly such a candlestick at home, and that there was a hole in her mother's petticoat produced by the way she always wore it. It seems curious that neither Helen nor her mother appeared to be aware of the visit. Neither of them, at any rate, ever spoke of having seen the other, nor even of having dreamt of having done so.

" F. A. Pole-Carew." Frances Red dell states that she has never had any hallucination, or any odd experience of any kind, except on this one occasion. The Hon. Mrs. Lyttelton, of Selwyn College, Cambridge, who knows her, tells us that " she appears to be a most matter-of-fact person, and was apparently most impressed by the fact that she saw a hole in the mother's flannel petticoat, made by the busk of her stays, reproduced in the apparition."

Mrs. Pole-Carew's evidence goes far to stamp this occurrence as having been something more than a mere subjective hallucination. But it will be observed that there is some doubt as to who was the agent. Was it the mother? If so, we find nothing more definite on the agent's part, as a basis for the distant effect, than a certain amount of anxiety as to her daughter's condition; while the fact that Reddell and she were totally unknown to one another, would show, even more conclusively than the two preceding narratives, that a special personal rapport between the parties is not a necessary condition for spontaneous telepathic transference. Thus regarded, the case would considerably resemble the instance of local rapport last quoted — the condition of the telepathic impression being presumably the common occupation of the mind of both agent and percipient with one subject, the dying girl. But it is also conceivable that Helen herself was the agent; and that in her dying condition a flash of memory of her mother's aspect conveyed a direct impulse to the mind of her devoted nurse.

The last five cases have all been recent. I will now give an example which is 70 years old. It will show the value that even remote evidence may have, if proper care is exercised at the time; and it points the moral which must be enforced ad nauseam, as to the importance of an immediate written record on the percipient's part. The account was received from Mrs. Browne, of 58, Porchester Terrace, W. On May 29th, 1884, Mr. Podmore wrote: —

"May 29th, 1884.

(31) " I called to-day on Mrs. Browne, and saw (1) a document in the

handwriting of her mother, Mrs. Carslake (now dead), which purported

to be a copy of a memorandum made by Mrs. Browne's father, the late

Captain John Carslake, of Sidmouth. Appended to this was (2) a note,

also in Mrs. Carslake's handwriting, and signed by her; and (3) a copy also in Mrs. Carslake's handwriting, of a letter from the E,ev. E. B r, of Sidmouth.

" Mrs. Browne told me that, as far as she knows, the originals of (1) and (3) are no longer in existence.

" Document (4) is a note from Mrs. Browne herself.

" The Middleburg referred to is apparently the town of that name in the Netherlands."

(1) "Thursday, July the 6th, 1815. — On returning to-day from Middleburg with Captain T., I was strongly impressed with the idea that between 2 and 3 I saw my uncle John cross the road, a few paces before me, and pass into a lane on the left leading to a mill, called Oily Moulin, and that when he arrived at the edge of the great road, he looked round and beckoned to me.

"Query. — As he has long been dangerously ill, may not this be considered as an omen of his having died about this time 1

"John Carslake." (2) " He had not been thinking of his uncle, but talking with Captain T. about a sale where they had been; he was quite silent afterwards, and would not tell the reason. On going on board, he went to his cabin and wrote the time he saw liis uncle, and wrote to Mr. B.

"T. Carslake."

" Long, in all probability, before this can reach you, you will have been informed that, precisely at the minute in which his apparition crossed your path in the neighbourhood of Middleburg, your dear and venerable uncle expired. I think it proves, beyond all contradiction, that his last and affectionate thoughts were fixed on you. The fact you have stated is the strongest of the kind, in which I could place such full confidence in the parties, that / ever knew. — E. B."

[Judging from Mr. Carslake's own account, it seems unlikely that the writer of this can have known the coincidence to have been as close as he describes.]

" May 29th, 1884.

"I remember more than once hearing this story, exactly as it is told here, from my father's own lips. I remember that he added that the figure wore a peculiar hat, which he recognised as being like one worn by his uncle. " T. L. Browne."

The next example repeats the peculiarity that the percipient's impression, though unique in his experience, did not at the moment suggest the agent; but it differs, as will be seen, from Frances Reddell's case. We received it from the Rev. Robert Bee, now residing at 12, Whitworth Road, Grangetown, near Southbank, Yorkshire.

218 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

" Colin Street, Wigan.

"December 30th, 1883.

(32) " On December 18th, 1873, I left my house in Lincolnshire to visit my wife's parents, then and now residing in Lord Street, Southport. Both my parents were, to all appearance, in good health when I started. The next day after my arrival was spent in leisurely observation of the manifold attractions of this fashionable seaside resort. I spent the evening in company with my wife in the bay-windowed drawing-room upstairs, which fronts the main street of the town. I proposed a game at chess, and we got out the board and began to play. Perhaps half-an-hour had been thus occupied by us, during which I had made several very foolish mistakes. A deep melancholy was oppressing me. At length I remarked: ' It is no use my trying to play, I cannot for the life think about what I am doing.. Shall we shut it up and resume our talk 1 I feel literally wretched.'

" ' Just as you like,' said my wife, and the board was at once put aside.

" This was about half -past 7 o'clock; and after a few minutes' desultory conversation, my wife suddenly remarked: '/ feel very dull to-night. I think I will go downstairs to mamma, for a few minutes.'

" Soon after my wife's departure, I rose from my chair, and walked in the direction of the drawing-room door. Here I paused for a moment, and then passed out to the landing of the stairs.

" It was then exactly 10 minutes to 8 o'clock. I stood for a moment upon the landing, and a lady, dressed as if she were going on a business errand, came out, apparently, from an adjoining bedroom, and passed close by me. I did not distinctly see her features, nor do I remember what it was that I said to her.

" The form passed down the narrow winding stairs, and at the same instant my wife came up again, so that she must have passed close to the stranger, in fact, to all appearance, brushed against her.

" I exclaimed, almost immediately, ' Who is the lady, Polly, that you passed just now, coming up 1 '

" Never can I forget, or account for, my wife's answer. ' I passed nobody,' she said.

" ' Nonsense,' I replied; ' You met a lady just now, dressed for a walk. She came out of the little bedroom. I spoke to her. She must be a visitor staying with your mother. She has gone out, no doubt, at the front door.'

" ' It is impossible,' said my wife. ' There is not any company in the house. They all left nearly a week ago. There is no one in fact at all indoors, but ourselves and mamma.'

" ' Strange,' I said; ' I am certain that I saw and spoke to a lady, just before you came upstairs, and I saw her distinctly pass you; 1 so that it seems incredible that you did not perceive her.'

" My wife positively asserted that the thing was impossible. We went downstairs together, and I related the story to my wife's mother, who was busy with her household duties. She confirmed her daughter's previous statement. There was no one in the house but ourselves.

1 In conversation Mr. Bee reiterated to me his certainty as to having seen the two figures simultaneously.

" The next morning, early, a telegram reached me from Lincolnshire; it was from my elder sister, Julia (Mrs T. W. Bowman, of Prospect House, Stechford, Birmingham), and announced the afflicting intelligence that our dear mother had passed suddenly away the night before; and that we (i.e., myself and wife) were to return home to Gainsborough by the next train. The doctor said it was heart-disease, which in a few minutes had caused her death."

After giving some details of his arrival at home, and of the kindness of friends, Mr. Bee continues: —

" When all was over and Christmas Day had arrived, I ventured to ask my brother the exact moment of our mother's death.

" ' Well, father was out,' he said, ' at the school-room, and I did not see her alive. Julia was just in time to see her breathe her last. It was, as nearly as I can recollect, 10 minutes to 8 o'clock.'

" I looked at my wife for a moment, and then said: ' Then I saw her in Southport, and can now account, unaccountably, for my impressions.'

" Before the said 1 9th of December I was utterly careless of these things; I had given little or no attention to spiritual apparitions or impressions. " Robt. Bee."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Bee adds: —

" My mother died in her dress and boots; she was taken ill in the street, and had to be taken to a neighbour's house in Gainsborough a few paces from her own house. The figure resembled my mother exactly as to size, dress, and appearance, but it did not recall her to my mind at the time. The light was not so dim that, if my mother had actually passed me in flesh and blood, I should not have recognised her."

We learn from the obituary notice in the Lincolnshire Chronicle that Mr. Bee's mother died on December 19, 1873, in Mr. Smithson's shop, in Gainsborough, of heart-disease; and that her usual health was pretty good.

In answer to the question whether this is the only case of hallucination that he has experienced, Mr. Bee answers " Yes."

He further adds: —

" The gas light over the head of the stairway shone within a frosteu globe, and was probably not turned on fully.

"The fact is, there was ample light to see the figure in, but just as the face might have been turned to me, or was turned to me, I could not, or did not, clearly discern it. Many, many times, my regret and disappointment when I recall this fact have been deeply felt."

Mrs. Bee writes to us as follows: —

"January 9th, 1884.

" If anything I can say to you will be of any use, I will willingly give my testimony to all my husband has said. I remember perfectly ten years ago my visit to my mother's, and my husband's unaccountable restlessness on the particular evening mentioned, also Mr. Bee asking me, after I had been downstairs, if I had met a lady on the stairs. I said, ' No, I do not think there is any one in the house but us.' Mr. Bee then said, ' Well, a lady has passed me just now on the landing; she came out of the small

220 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

bedroom and went downstairs; she was dressed in a black bonnet and shawl.' I said, ' Nonsense, you must be mistaken.' He said, ' I am certain I am not, and I assure you I feel very queer.' I then went to ask mamma if there was anyone in the house, and she said no, only ourselves; still Mr. Bee insisted someone had passed him on the landing, although we tried to reason him out of it.

" In the morning while we were in bed, we received a telegram stating that Mrs. Bee had died suddenly the night before. I said at once, ' Robert, that was your mother you saw last night.' He said it was. When we got to Gainsborough we asked what time she died; we were told about 10 minutes to 8, which was the exact time; also that she was taken suddenly ill in the street (wearing at the time a black bonnet and shawl) and died in 10 minutes.

" Mary Ann Bee."

Mrs. Bourne, a sister of Mr. Bee's, writes to us: —

" Eastgate Lodge, Lincoln.

" October 2nd, 1885.

"My mother died on December 19th, 1873, about 10 minutes to 8 in the evening; it might be a little later or a little earlier. Her attack resembled a fainting fit, and lasted from 30 to 40 minutes. At the commencement of it, she said a few words to my sister, when I was not present; afterwards I believe she never opened her eyes or spoke again, though we tried our utmost to induce her to do so.

"Marian Bourne."

If this case is accurately reported, the figure seen cannot be supposed to have been a real person; for — to say nothing of the unlikelihood that a strange lady would be on the upper floor on some unknown errand— Mrs. Bee, who seemed to her husband to come into actual contact with the figure, could hardly have failed to observe that some one passed her on the stairs. The fact that the form did not at the moment suggest Mr. Bee's mother tends, no doubt, to weaken the case as evidence for telepathy, to this extent, — that if a person has the one hallucination of his life at the moment that a near relative dies, this singular coincidence may with less violence be ascribed to accident if the hallucination is merely an appearance — an unrecognised figure — than if it is the appearance of that particular relative. The phantasm not being individualised, the conditions for the operation of chance are so far widened. Still, there are two strong evidential points. The coincidence of time seems to have been precise; and the resemblance to the supposed agent " as to size, dress, and appearance " is described as exact. As for any theoretic difficulty that might be felt in the fact of non-recognition, I will make at this point only one remark.

If we are prepared (as experiment has prepared us) to admit that telepathic impressions need not even affect consciousness at all — if it is possible for some of them to remain completely unfelt — it does not seem specially surprising that others should issue on the mental stage with various degrees of distinctness and completeness.

§ 7. So much for visual examples. I will now give an illustration of externalised impressions of the auditory sort. The case differs in another respect from the foregoing visual examples; for though, as in most of them, the agent died, the percipient's experience 'preceded the death by some hours; and +hat being so, we must clearly connect this experience with the serious condition in which her friend actually was, not with that in which he was about to be. The narrative is from a lady who prefers that her name and address should not be published. She is a person of thorough good sense, and with no appetite for marvels.

" 1884.

(33) "On the morning of October 27th, 1879, being in perfect health and having been awake for some considerable time, I heard myself called by my Christian name by an anxious and suffering voice, several times in succession. I recognised the voice as that of an old friend, almost playfellow, but who had not been in my thoughts for many weeks, or even months. I knew he was with his regiment in India, but not that he had been ordered to the front, and nothing had recalled him to my recollection. Within a few days I heard of his death from cholera on the morning I seemed to hear his call. The impression was so strong I noted the date and fact in my diary before breakfast."

In answer to inquiries, the narrator says: —

"I was never conscious of any other auditory hallucination whatever. I do not think I mentioned the subject to any one, as I believe we had friends with us. I still have my diary preserved."

The present writer has seen the page of the diary, and the reference to the strange experience, under the date of Monday, October 27th, 1879.

We find from the East India Service Register for January, 1880, that the death of Captain John B., Native Infantry (Bombay Division), took place on October 27th, 1879, at Jhelum. (This is the gentleman referred to in the account.) The Times obituary of November 4th, 1879, mentions that the death was due to cholera.

Our informant was requested to find out the exact hour of the death, and learnt that it took place, not in the morning, as she had supposed, but at 10 p.m. (about 5 p.m. in England). She adds: " So that would not make the time agree with the hour of hearing his calL The cry may have come, however, when the illness began first."

In the last-quoted visual example, the figure seen was unrecog-

222 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

nised. I will now give a parallel auditory case, where the sound heard by the percipient suggested at the moment no particular person. The account is from a gentleman of good position, whom I must term Mr. A. Z. He is as far removed as possible from superstition, and takes no general interest in the subject. He has given us the full names of all the persons concerned, but is unwilling that they should be published, on account of the painful character of the event recorded.

"May, 1885.

(34) "In 1876, I was living in a small agricultural parish in the East of England, one of my neighbours at the time being a young man, S. B.,1 who had recently come into the occupation of a large farm in the place. Pending the alteration of his house, he lodged and boarded with his groom at the other end of the village, furthest removed from my own residence, which was half a mile distant and separated by many houses, gardens, a plantation, and farm buildings. He was fond of field sports, and spent much of his spare time during the season in hunting. He was not a personal friend of mine, only an acquaintance, and I felt no interest in him except as a tenant on the estate. I have asked him occasionally to my house, as a matter of civility, but to the best of my recollection was never inside his lodgings.

" One afternoon in March, 1876, when leaving, along with my wife, our railway station to walk home, I was accosted by S. B.; he accompanied us as far as my front gate, where he kept us in conversation for some time, but on no special subject. I may now state that the distance from this gate, going along the carriage drive, to the dining and breakfast room windows is about 60 yards; both the windows of these rooms face the north-east and are parallel with the carriage drive.2 On S. B. taking leave of us my wife remarked, ' Young B. evidently wished to be asked in, but I thought you would not care to be troubled with him.' Subsequently — about half-an-hour later — I again met him, and, as I was then on my way to look at some work at a distant part of the estate, asked him to walk with me, which he did. His conversation was of the ordinary character; if anything, he seemed somewhat depressed at the bad times and the low prices of farming produce. I remember he asked me to give him some wire rope to make a fence on his farm, which I consented to do. Returnino- from our walk, and on entering the village, I pulled up at the crossroads to say good evening, the road to his lodgings taking him at right angles to mine. I was surprised to hear him say, ' Come and smoke a cigar with me to-night.' To which I replied, ' I cannot very well, I am engaged this evening.' ' Do come,' he said. 'No,' I replied, 'I will look in another evening.' And with this we parted. We had separated about 40 yards when he turned around and exclaimed, ' Then if you will not come wood-bye.' This was the last time I saw him alive.

" I spent the evening in my dining-room in writing, and for some hours I may say that probably no thought of young B. passed through my mind. The nio-ht was bright and clear, full or nearly full moon, still, and without

1 These are not the right initials of the name.

2 The position of the house, as I found on visiting it, is particularly retired and quiet.

wind. Since I had come in slight snow had fallen, just sufficient to make the ground show white.

" At about 5 minutes to 10 o'clock I got up and left the room, taking up a lamp from the hall table, and replacing it on a small table standing in a recess of the window in the breakfast-room. The curtains were not drawn across the window. I had just taken down from the nearest bookcase a volume of ' Macgillivray's British Birds ' for reference, and was in the act of reading the passage, the book held close to the lamp, and my shoulder touching the window shutter, and in a position in which almost the slightest outside sound would be heard, when I distinctly heard the front gate opened and shut again with a clap, and footsteps advancing at a run up the drive; when opposite the window the steps changed from sharp and distinct on gravel to dull and less clear on the grass slip below the window, and at the same time I was conscious that someone or something stood close to me outside, only the thin shutter and a sheet of glass dividing us. I could hear the quick panting laboured breathing of the messenger, or whatever it was, as if trying to recover breath before speaking. Had he been attracted by the light through the shutter? Suddenly, like a gunshot, inside, outside, and all around, there broke out the most appalling shriek — a prolonged wail of horror, which seemed to freeze the blood. It was not a single shriek, but more prolonged, commencing in a high key, and then less and less, wailing away towards the north, and becoming weaker and weaker as it receded in sobbing pulsations of intense agony. Of my fright and horror I can say nothing — increased tenfold when I walked into the dining-room and found my wife sitting quietly at her work close to the window, in the same line and distant only 10 or 12 feet from the corresponding window in the breakfast-room. She had heard nothing. I could see that at once; and from the position in which she was sitting, 1 knew she could not have failed to hear any noise outside and any footstep on the gravel. Perceiving I was alarmed about something, she asked, 'What is the matter?' ' Only someone outside,' I said. ' Then why do you not go out and see? You always do when you hear any unusual noise.' I said, c There is something so queer and dreadful about the noise. I dare not face it. It must have been the Banshee shrieking.'

" Young S. B., on leaving me, went home to his lodgings. He spent most of the evening on the sofa, reading one of Whyte Melville's novels. He saw his groom at 9 o'clock and gave him orders for the following day. The groom and his wife, who were the only people in the house besides S. B., then went to bed.

" At the inquest the groom stated that when about falling asleep, he was suddenly aroused by a shriek, and on running into his master's room found him expiring on the floor. It appeared that young B. had undressed upstairs, and then came down to his sitting-room in trousers and nightshirt, had poured out half-a-glass of water, into which he emptied a small bottle of prussic acid (procured that morning under the plea of poisoning a dog, which he did not possess). He walked upstairs, and on entering his room drank off the glass, and with a scream fell dead on the floor. All this happened, as near as I can ascertain, at the exact time when I had been so much alarmed at my own house. It is utterly impossible that any sound short of a cannon shot could have reached me from B.'s lodgings,

224 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

through closed windows and doors, and the many intervening obstacles of houses and gardens, farmsteads and plantations, &c.

" Having to leave home by the early train, I was out very soon on the following morning, and on going to examine the ground beneath the window found no footsteps on grass or drive, still covered with the slight sprinkling of snow which had fallen on the previous evening.

" The whole thing had been a dream of the moment — an imagination, call it what you will • I simply state these facts as they occurred, without attempting any explanation, which, indeed, I am totally unable to give. The entire incident is a mystery, and will ever remain a mystery to me. I did not hear the particulars of the tragedy till the following afternoon, having left home by an early train. The motive of suicide was said to be a love affair."

In a subsequent letter dated June 12th, 1885, Mr. A. Z. says: —

" The suicide took place in this parish on Thursday night, March 9th, 1876, at or about 10 p.m. The inquest was held on Saturday, 11th, by

, the then coroner. He has been dead some years, or I might perhaps

have been able to obtain a copy of his notes then taken. You will

probably find some notice of the inquest in the of March 17th. I

did not myself hear any particulars of the event till my return home on Friday afternoon, 17 hours afterwards. The slight snow fell about 8 o'clock — not later. After this the night was bright and fine, and very still. There was also a rather sharp frost. I have evidence of all this to satisfy any lawyer.

" I went early the next morning under the window to look for footsteps, just before leaving home for the day. Perhaps it is not quite correct to call it snow; it was small frozen sleet and hail, and the grass blades just peeped through, but there was quite enough to have shown any steps had there been any.

" I was not myself at the inquest, so in that case only speak from hearsay. In my narrative I say the groom was awoke by 'a shriek,' I have asked the man [name given], and cross-questioned him closely on this point; and it is more correct to say by ' a series of noises ending in a crash ' or ' heavy fall.' This is most probably correct, as the son of the tenant [name given], living in the next house, was aroused by the same sort of sound coming through the wall of the house into the adjoining bedroom in which he was sleeping.

" I do not, however, wish it to be understood that any material noises heard in that house or the next had any connection with the peculiar noises and scream which frightened me so much, as anyone knowing the locality must admit at once the impossibility of such sounds travelling under any conditions through intervening obstacles. I only say that the scene enacted in the one was coincident with my alarm and the phenomena attending it in the other.

" I find by reference to the book of, chemist, of, that

the poison was purchased by young S. B., on March 8th. I enclose a note from Mrs. A. Z., according to your request."

The enclosed note, signed by Mrs. A. Z., also dated June 12th, 1885, is as follows: —

"I am able to testify that on the night of March 9th, 1876, about 10 o'clock, my husband, who had gone into the adjoining room to consult a book, was greatly alarmed by sounds which he heard, and described as the gate clapping, footsteps on the drive and grass, and heavy breathing close to the window — then a fearful screaming.

" I did not hear anything. He did not go to look round the house, as he would have done at any other time, and when I afterwards asked him why he did not go out, he replied, ' Because I felt I could not.' On going to bed he took his gun upstairs; and when I asked him why, said, ' Because there must be someone about.'

" He left home early in the morning, and did not hear of the suicide of Mr. S. B. until the afternoon of that day."

An article which we have seen in a local newspaper, describing the suicide and inquest, confirms the above account of them.

Asked if he had had any similar affections which had not corresponded with reality, Mr. A. Z. replied in the negative.

The criticism made on Mr. Bee's case will of course apply again here; the percipient's failure to connect his impression with the agent is, pro tanto, an evidential defect. But the fact remains that he received an impression of a vividly distressful and horrible kind — of a type, too, rarely met with as a purely subjective hallucination among sane and healthy persons 1 — at the very time that his companion of a few hours back was in the agony of a supreme crisis.

§ 8. Telepathic impressions of the sense of touch are naturally hard to establish, unless some other sense is also affected. In the cases in our collection, at all events, a mere impression of touch has rarely, if ever, been sufficiently remarkable or distinctive for purposes of evidence. The case, therefore, which I select to illustrate tactile impression is one where the sense of hearing was also concerned. And the example, as it happens, will serve a double purpose; for it will also illustrate the phenomenon of reciprocality, which, as I have said, we make the basis of a separate class (F). The narrator is again the Rev. P. H. Newnham, of whose telepathic rapport with his wife we have had such striking experimental proof, and who describes himself as " an utter sceptic, in the true sense of the word."

(35) " In March, 1854, I was up at Oxford, keeping my last term, in lodgings. I was subject to violent neuralgic headaches, which always culminated in sleep. One evening, about 8 p.m., I had an unusually violent one; when it became unendurable, about 9 p.m., I went into

1 See Chapter xi., § 4.

226 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

iny bedroom, and flung myself, without undressing, on the bed, and soon fell asleep.

" I then had a singularly clear and vivid dream, all the incidents of which are still as clear to my memory as ever. I dreamed that I was stopping with the family of the lady who subsequently became my wife. All the younger ones had gone to bed, and I stopped chatting to the father and mother, standing up by the fireplace. Presently I bade them goodnight, took my candle, and went off to bed. On arriving in the hall, I perceived that my fiancee had been detained downstairs, and was only then near the top of the staircase. I rushed upstairs, overtook her on the top step, and passed my two arms round her waist, under her arms, from behind. Although I was carrying my candle in my left hand, when I ran upstairs, this did not, in my dream, interfere with this gesture.

" On this I woke, and a clock in the house struck 10 almost immediately afterwards.

" So strong was the impression of the dream that I wrote a detailed account of it next morning to my fiancee.

" Crossing my letter, not in answer to it, I received a letter from the lady in question: ' Were you thinking about me, very specially, last night, just about 10 o'clock? For, as I was going upstairs to bed, I distinctly heard your footsteps on the stairs, and felt you put your arms round my waist.'

"The letters in question are now destroyed, but we verified the statement made therein some years later, when we read over our old letters, previous to their destruction, and we found that our personal recollections had not varied in the least degree therefrom. The above narratives may, therefore, be accepted as absolutely accurate. up jj Newnham "

Asked if his wife has ever had any other hallucinations, Mr. Newnham replied, ' No, Mrs. N. never had any fancy of either myself or any one else being present on any other occasion."

The following is Mrs. Newnham's account: —

"June 9th, 1884.

" I remember distinctly the circumstance which my husband has described as corresponding with his dream. I was on my way up to bed, as usual, about 10 o'clock, and on reaching the first landing I heard distinctly the footsteps of the gentleman to whom I was engaged, quickly mounting the stairs after me, and then I as plainly felt him put his arms round my waist. So strong an impression did this make upon me that I wrote the very next morning to the gentleman, asking if he had been particularly thinking of me at 10 o'clock the night before, and to my astonishment I received (at the same time that my letter would reach him) a letter from him describing his dream, in almost the same words that I had used in describing my impression of his presence.

" M. Newnham."

[It is unfortunate that the actual letters cannot be put in evidence. But Mr. Newnham's distinct statement that the letters were examined, and the coincidence verified, some years after the occurrence, strongly confirms his own and his wife's recollections of the original incident.]

In this case it would, no doubt, be possible to suppose that Mr. Newnham was the sole agent, and that his normal dream was the source of his fiancee's abnormal hallucination. But it is at least equally natural to suppose a certain amount of reciprocal percipience — a mutual influence of the two parties on one another. We shall meet with more conclusive examples of the mutual effect further on; and it need in no way disturb our conception of telepathy. For if once the startling fact that A's mind can affect B's at a distance be admitted, there seems no a priori reason for either affirming or denying that the conditions of this affection are favourable to a reverse telepathic communication from B's mind to A's. Indeed, if in our ignorance of the nature of these conditions any sort of surmise were legitimate, it might perhaps rather lean to the probability of the reciprocal influence; and the natural question might seem to be, not why this feature is present, but why it is so generally absent. Meanwhile it is enough to note the type, and observe that the telepathic theory, as so far evolved, will sufficiently cover it.

| 9. Finally, the class of collective percipience (G) may be illustrated by an instance which (since visual cases have preponderated in this chapter) I will again select from the auditory group. It was received in the summer of 1885, from Mr. John Done, of Stockley Cottage, Stretton, Warrington.

(36) " My sister-in-law, Sarah Eustance, of Stretton, was lying sick unto death, and my wife was gone over to there from Lowton Chapel (12 or 1 3 miles off), to see her and tend her in her last moments. And on the night before her death (some 12 or 14 hours before) I was sleeping at home alone, and awaking, heard a voice distinctly call me. Thinking it was my niece, Rosanna, the only other occupant of the house, who might be sick or in trouble, I went to her room and found her awake and nervous. I asked her whether she had called me. She answered, ' No; but something awoke me, when I heard someone calling! '

" On my wife returning home after her sister's death, she told me how anxious her sister had been to see me, ' craving for me to be sent for,' and saying, ' Oh, how I want to see Done once more! ' and soon after became speechless. But the curious part was that about the same time she was ' craving,' I and my niece heard the call. " John Done."

In a subsequent letter Mr. Done writes: —

" In answer to your queries respecting the voice or call that I heard on the night of July 2nd, 1866, I must explain that there was a strong sympathy and affection between myself and my sister-in-law, of pure brotherly and sisterly love; and that she was in the habit of calling me by the title of ' Uncle Done,' in the manner of a husband calling his wife

o 9

228 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

' mother ' when there are children, as in this case. Hence the call being ' Uncle, uncle, uncle! ' leading me to think that it was my niece (the only other occupant of the house that Sunday night) calling to me.

" Copy of funeral card: ' In remembrance of the late Sarah Eustance, who died July 3rd, 1866, aged 45 years, and was this day interred at Stretton Church, July 6th, 1866.'

" My wife, who went from Lowton that particular Sunday to see her sister, will testify that as she attended upon her (after the departure of the minister), during the night she was wishing and craving to see me, repeatedly saying, ' Oh, I wish I could see Uncle Done and Rosie once more before I go! ' and soon after then she became unconscious, or at least ceased speaking, and died the next day; of which fact I was not aware until my wife returned on the evening of the 4th of July.

" I hope my niece will answer for me; however, I may state that she reminds me that she thought I was calling her and was coming to me, when she met me in the passage or landing, and I asked her if she called me.

" I do not remember ever hearing a voice or call besides the above case."

On August 7th, 1885, Mr. Done writes: —

" My wife being sick and weak of body, dictates the following statement to me: —

" I, Elizabeth Done, wife of John Done, and aunt to Rosanna Done (now Sewill), testify that, on the 2nd of July, 1866, I was attending upon my dying sister, Sarah Eustance, at Stretton, 1 2 miles from my home at Lowton Chapel, Newton le Willows; when during the night previous to her death, she craved for me to send for my husband and niece, as she wished to see them once more before she departed hence, saying often ' Oh, I wish Done and Rosie were here. Oh, I do long to see Uncle Done.' Soon after she became speechless and seemingly unconscious, and died some time during the day following. « Elizabeth Done."

Mr. Done adds: —

" Several incidents have come to my mind, one of which is that, feeling unsettled in my mind during the day after having heard the voice calling me, and feeling a presentiment that my dear sister-in-law was dead, I, towards evening, set off to meet a train at Newton Bridge, which I believed my wife would come by, returning home, if her sister was dead as I expected. There was an understanding that she was to stay at Stretton to attend upon Mrs. Eustance until her demise or convalescence.

" I met my wife some few hundred yards from the station, and could see by her countenance that my surmises were correct. She then told me the particulars of her sister's death, how she longed to see me and Rosanna. I then told her of our being called by a voice resembling hers some time in the night previous, when she (my wife) said she (Mrs. Eustance) often repeated our names during the night before becoming unconscious."

The niece, Mrs. Sewill, writes as follows: —

" 11, Smithdown Lane, Paddington, Liverpool. " August 21st, 1885. " At my uncle's and your request, I write to confirm the statement of uncle respecting the voice I heard, as follows: I was awakened suddenly without apparent cause, and heard a voice call me distinctly, thus: ' Rosy,

Rosy, Posy/'1 Thinking it was my uncle calling, I rose and went out of my room, and met my uncle coming to see if I was calling him.2 We were the only occupants of the house that night, aunt being away attending upon her sister. The night I was called was between 2nd and 3rd of July, 1866. I could not say the time I was called, but I know it was the break of day. I never was called before or since. " Rosanna Sewill."

[The last words — an answer to the question whether the narrator had ever experienced any other hallucination — perhaps need correction, as I learnt in conversation that on another occasion she (and two other persons in the same house) had been woke by a voice resembling that of a deceased relative. But she is by no means a fanciful or superstitious witness.]

The percipients in this case may perhaps have been in a somewhat anxious and highly-wrought state. Now that is a condition which — as we shall see in the sequel — tends occasionally to produce purely subjective hallucinations of the senses. It is true that the impression of a call which was imagined to be that of a healthy person close at hand, and was in no way suggestive of the dying woman, does not seem a likely form for subjective hallucination due to anxiety about her to take; still, the presence of the anxiety would have prevented us from including such a case in our evidence, had only a single person been impressed. But it must be admitted as a highly improbable accident that two startling impressions, so similar in character, and each unique in the life of the person who experienced it, should have so exactly coincided.

§ 10. The above may serve as examples of the several groups classified with reference to the nature of the percipient's impression. But it will be seen that the agent has also been exhibited in a great variety of conditions — in normal waking health, in apparently dreamless sleep (pp. 103-9), in dream, in physical pain, in a swoon, in the excitement of danger, in dangerous illness, and in articulo mortis, the death being in one case accidental and instantaneous, in another the result of a sudden seizure, and in others the conclusion of a prolonged illness. And amid this variety the reader will, no doubt, have been struck by the large proportion of death cases — a proportion which duly represents their general preponderance among alleged cases of spontaneous telepathy. They constitute about half of our whole collection. Now this fact raises a question with respect to the interpretation of the phenomena which may be conveniently noticed at once since it bears an equal relation to nearly all the

1 Each of the percipients, it will be noted, heard his or her own name. This point receives its explanation in Chap, xii., § 5.

2 Mrs. Sewill, (who was 14 or 15 at the time) is certain that she is correct on this point; and in conversation with her uncle, I found that his memory agrees with hers.

230 SPECIMENS OF THE VARIOUS TYPES [chap.

chapters that follow, while such answer as I can give to it depends to some extent on what has preceded.

We are, of course, accustomed to regard death as a completely unique and incomparably important event; and it might thus seem, on a superficial glance, that if spontaneous telepathy is possible, and the conditions and occasions of its occurrence are in question, no more likely occasion than death could be suggested. But on closer consideration, we are reminded that the actual psychical condition that immediately precedes death often does not seem to be specially or at all remarkable, still less unique; and that it is this actual psychical condition — while it lasts, and not after it has ceased — that really concerns us here. Our subject is phantasms of the living: we seek the conditions of the telepathic impulse on the hither side of the dividing line, in the closing passage of life; not in that huge negative fact — the apparent cessation or absence of life — on which the common idea of death and of its momentous importance is based. And the closing passage of life, in some of the cases above quoted and in many others that are to follow, was, to all appearance, one of more or less complete lethargy; a state which (on its psychical side at any rate) seems in no way distinguishable from one through which the agent has passed on numerous previous occasions — that of deep sleep. Nor are the cases which issue in death the only ones to which this remark applies: in the more remarkable cases of Chap. III., the agent was actually in deep sleep; Mrs. Bettany's mother was in a swoon (p. 194); and other similar instances will meet us. Here, then, there appears to be a real difficulty. For how can we attribute an extraordinary exercise of psychical energy to a state which on its psychical side is quite ordinary, and in which psychical and physical energies alike seem reduced to their lowest limits?

It may, no doubt, be replied that we have no right to assume that the psychical condition is ordinary; that the nervous condition in the lethargy of approaching death, and even in a fainting-fit, may differ greatly from that of normal sleep, and that this difference may be somehow represented on the psychical side, even though the ostensible psychical condition is approximately nil. But a completer answer may possibly be found in some further development of the idea of the "unconscious intelligence" which was mentioned above (pp. 69, 70). We there noted stray manifestations of psychical action that seemed unconnected with the more or less coherent stream of experience which we recognise as a self; and a probable relation of these was pointed

out to those curious cases of "double consciousness," in which two more or less coherent streams of experience replace one another by turns, and the same person seems to have two selves. Many other cognate facts might be mentioned, which enable us to generalise to some extent the conceptions suggested by the more prominent instances. But since for present purposes the topic only concerns us at the point where it comes into contact with telepathy, I must ask the reader to seek those further facts elsewhere; and to accept here the statement that the more these little-known paths of psychology are explored, the more difficult will it appear to round off the idea of personality, or to measure human existence by the limits of the phenomenal self. 1 Now the very nature of this difficulty cannot but suggest a deeper solution than the mere connection oi various streams of psychic life in a single organism. It suggests the hypothesis that a single individuality may have its psychical being, so to speak, on different planes; that the stray fragments of " unconscious intelligence," and the alternating selves of " double consciousness," belong really to a more fundamental unity, which finds in what we call life very imperfect conditions of manifestation; and that the self which ordinary men habitually regard as their proper individuality may after all be only a partial emergence. And this hypothesis would readily embrace and explain the special telepathic fact in question; while itself drawing from that fact a fresh support. By its aid we can at once picture to ourselves how it should be that the near approach of death is a condition exceptionally favourable to telepathic action, even though vital faculties seem all but withdrawn, and the familiar self has lapsed to the very threshold of consciousness. For to the hidden and completer self the imminence of the great change may be apparent in its full and unique impressiveness; nay, death itself may be recognised, for aught we can tell, not as a cessation but as a liberation of energy. But this line of thought, though worth pointing out as that along which the full account of certain phenomena of telepathy may in time be sought, is not one that I can here pursue.

1 In addition to Dr. Azam's well-known case of Felida, I may refer specially to Professor Verriest's "Observation de trois existences cer^brales distinctes chez le meime sujet," in the Bulletin de V Academic Boy ale de Medecine de Belgique, 3rd Series,

Vol. xvi.; the case of Louis V, with his six different personalities, reported by

