" On the 19th ult., the day of Mr. George Smith's death. Dr. Delitzsch was on his way to the house of Mr. William St. Chad Boscawen, who is also a rising Assyriologist. Mr. Boscawen resides in Kentish Town, and in passing the end of Crogsland Road, in which Mr. George Smith lived, and within about a stone's throw of the house, his German friend said he suddenly heard a most piercing cry, which thrilled him to the marrow, ' Herr Dr. Delitzsch.' The time — for as soon as he got over the shock he looked at his watch— was between 6.45 and 7 p.m., and Mr. Parsons gives the hour of Mr. Smith's death at 6 p.m. Dr. Delitzsch, who strongly disavows any superstitious leanings, was ashamed to mention the circumstance to Mr. Boscawen on reaching that gentleman's house, although on his return home he owns that his nervous apprehensions of some mournful event in his own family found relief in tears, and that he recorded all the facts in his note-book that same night. Dr. Delitzsch told the story at our informant's breakfast-table, with all the circumstances mentioned above, including the hour at which he heard the shrill cry. He distinctly denied having been thinking of Mr. George Smith at the time."

In January, 1885, (having failed to elicit from Herr Delitzsch any reply to several previous applications,) we sent him a copy of this extract, telling him that we proposed to state, in reprinting it, that it had been first forwarded to him, with a request that he would contradict it if it did not truthfully represent the facts. No reply has been received; and Mr. Gortz, of the British Museum, tells us that Herr Delitzsch expressed to him a reluctance to write on the subject. We may presume, however, that, had the statement been substantially inaccurate, he would have said so.

[If the hours are correctly given, the cry was heard about 3| hours after the death.] l'^^^;- 'v:;,P;J^_^

VOL. II. 2 o 2

664 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

(616) From Miss Bushell, Hythe, Kent. u X885.

"On the evening of Feb. 18, 1863, I distinctly heard myself called, and recognised the voice as that of Dr. Harding, a retired physician, who lived in the same town [Ramsgate, and in the next street]. The voice seemed to come from the staircase. I was walking along a passage, and turned towards the stairs, so real did it appear; though I could hardly imagine Dr. Harding to be in the house. I knew him slightly. He was a kind, friendly man, and he always spoke to me if we met in the streets, addressing me as ' Bushell ' — which is the name I heard that evening. The next day, I heard that Dr. Harding had died the preceding afternoon or evening. I cannot fix the precise hour. Though out of health, he was not confined to the house, and I had met him out of doors about three days before the occurrence, so that I was not by any means expecting his death.

"This is the only hallucination of the senses that I have ever experienced. " Matilda Bushell."

We find from the Register of Deaths that Dr. Harding died (aged 50) on Feb. 20, 1863. Miss Bushell is certain (and this is a point which would be likely to be rightly observed at the time) that her experience was on the evening before the morning on which she heard of the death — that no longer interval elapsed; and she has no separate recollection of the date of her experience. It is probable, therefore, that the " 18th" in the first line of the account is wrong, and that the coincidence was a close one. Not, however, so close as was at first represented; for Miss Bushell's later impression is that the death took place in the early hours of the morning — i.e., some hours after her evening experience of (presumably) Feb. 19. In answer to an inquiry, she says that she did not mention what she had heard to anyone before the death was known.

(617) From Mrs. Fagan, Elfanwalt, Bovey Tracey, Newton Abbot.

"1883.

" I was residing in England, while my son [who was one of the percipients in case 310] was a chaplain in India. I one day experienced a prayerful and earnest desire, in going up to the altar one Easter Day, that somehow, I knew not how, my son might be permitted to communicate me; and as I received without raising my eyes to the celebrant, I felt my desire granted. In due course of post, my son asked me if I could explain what had occurred to him at about the time when he knew I must have been making my Easter Communion. While preparing for the evening service, and not thinking of me or home, he heard me call him by name, not as though in any distress, but with a tone of great urgency. Instantly remembering how I was then occupied, he was with me in spirit, and, though unconsciously, was permitted to satisfy my longing. After this, though he knew there was no one in the house, he made diligent search to prove to others that it was no delusion. The fact that Cardinal Borromeo, while preaching elsewhere, had communicated the dying Pope was not known to me for many years after."

In answer to an inquiry, Mrs. Fagan says that she made her Easter Communion between noon and 1 p.m.; which would synchronise with 6-7 p.m. in the place where her son was. The year, she thinks, was 1874.

[This clearly must not be reckoned as a reciprocal case, since there is no reason to suppose Mrs. Fagan's own impression to have been anything

but subjective. That impression is, however, of importance, as indicating the intensity of her feeling at the moment. Her son has occasionally had subjective auditory hallucinations, but not sufficiently often to diminish appreciably the force (such as it is) of the present coincidence. The case is of course not one on which much stress can be laid.]

In the following example, the fact of non-recognition tells against the supposition that the hallucination was due to anxiety. As for the sense oi feeling someone's presence, I have already pointed out that a faint auditory impression is sufficient to account for it;^ and even the " feeling someone stooping over " (which occurs again in the next case) need not imply any distinct hallucination of touch.

(618) From Miss Summerbell, 140, Kensington Park Road, W. (mentioned in Yol. I., p. 507). As the more distinct part of the impression seems to have been received after she had not only been woke, but had herself uttered a couple of sentences, the case may be fairly reckoned in the waking class. "1882.

" A lady, to whom I was much attached, and who had had partial care of me during some part of my early youth, had for some years suffered from a complaint which at last necessitated a surgical operation. This operation was performed early in August, 1877, by Dr. Spencer Wells; my friend was in a house, chosen by Dr. Wells for the purpose, in Seymour Street. The operation was successful, and we had the assurance of Dr. Wells, and of the other doctor who attended her, that she was doing well. I was staying with her nephew, at Weybridge, at the time. Every day we heard better accounts of the patient. On Saturday evening, Mr. T., with whom I was staying, received a letter saying that his aunt was out of danger, and appointing the following Tuesday for him and me to go and see her.

" We went to bed in excellent spirits, and I slept at once. I was awakened, in the dim dawn, by feeling someone stooping over me. Thinking it was Mrs. T. who had come into the room for some purpose, I said, aloud, ' Is that you, Annie 1 ' I received no answer, but I felt, though I could not see, someone close to me. I spoke again, and I distinctly heard a voice whisper, ' Soon will you and I be lying. Each within our narrow bed.' I was terrified. I looked at my watch to see if it was nearly time for people to be moving about. It was 4 o'clock. I could not sleep. I felt horrified and miserable, but oddly, I never thought of my friend. When I went down in the morning, my friends remarked that I was silent and dull. I said I was sure something was going to take place, and at length I told them what had happened. Of course they laughed. I went to church with Mr. T., and the first hymn sung was the one I had fancied I heard in the night, beginning ' Days and moments quickly flying.' This made me more depressed, but I still did not think of my friend.

" On Monday we went on the river in a small boat, and I told Mr. T. I knew we should be drowned because of my presentiment. We

1 See Vol. i., p. 528 second note; and compare case 172.

566 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

however, arrived safe at home at 7 p.m., when Mr. T. found a letter, saying that at 10 on Saturday night, his aunt had suddenly exhibited bad symptoms, and that she died at 4 o'clock on Sunday morning.

[The Times obituary records that the death took place, in Somerset Street (not Seymour Street), on Aug. 4, 1877. This was a Saturday, not a Sunday; therefore, if Miss Summerbell is correct as to the hour of her impression, the coincidence was less close than she represents, as the death must have taken place before midnight.

We cannot obtain Mr. T.'s corroboration, as he died in the year following the occurrence.]

The next two records seem to illustrate the occurrence of several similar telepathic experiences to the same percipient (compare No. 279). The cases not being strong ones, I have included each set under a single evidential number.

(619) From Mrs. E. M. Maunsell, Ballywilliam, Rathkeale, Ireland, who says of herself, " I am neither nervous nor superstitious, but a very matter-of-fact person." " October 27th, 1884.

" My eldest sister was paying us a visit, when she was taken ill with internal cramp; she called to me in a peculiar choking voice; we used remedies, and she soon recovered. About a year afterwards, she was staying with another sister, when one night I was awakened by a distinct impression of my sister stooping over me, and calling ' Eliza ' in the same choking voice. I sleep very soundly, but I started up wide awake, and again the voice seemed to call me from the open window, faint and choking, ' Eliza.' I am a rather stoical person in times of danger or fright, so I merely said to myself ' Isabella is ill,' and was soon again fast asleep. The next time I saw my sister, she told me that the very night I had heard her call, and nearly to the hour, (for I had heard the clock strike 12) she had been taken ill, and had been only able to stagger out of bed to call for help. This was my first experience of this kind, that I can remember; I was then a young girl. I was not particularly attached to my sister, for she had married young and left home; but she always looked up to me and considered me a great authority on most points.

" The second instance also concerned my eldest sister. My father, at the time of which I write, was living in Limerick, as did also my sister. One evening about 8, I left the room to make the tea; passing the foot of the staircase, I heard my sister's voice, hushed and distinct, call ' Eliza.' I listened, but the call was not repeated. I thought at once, ' Isabella is ill, and will send for me.' I hurried, and prepared tea, and I well remember taking a second slice of bread, for, I thought, I may be up with her all night. Less than half an hour after a note was brought my father, I watched him, and when he had read it asked, ' Is Isabella ill ■? ' ' Yes,' my father replied, ' she is very ill, and is calling for you.' My father, who was a doctor, accompanied me to her house; we doctored her, and she recovered after an illness of four or five days.

" My father is long dead; so is my eldest sister. The events occurred over 20 years ago, many years before my marriage."

On Dec. 19, 1885, Mrs. Maunsell wrote:—

" On another occasion, when living with my father and mother, I heard my mother call me; I found her ghastly pale, and very ill; but she assured me she had not called me; as indeed, she was too faint to raise her voice. On another occasion, my brother-in-law, who had gone to London, and was very ill, though it was kept a secret, had returned on his way home, as far as Dublin. I was not thinking at all about him; but, one day in this house, I was walking from the office to the back door of the dining-room (mid-day), when I heard him call loudly his wife's name, ' Martha.' I wrote at once to her (she had not accompanied him) to make inquiries. She had received a letter that morning, [to the effect that] he would return next evening, Saturday, and was quite strong after his trip. The following Tuesday I received a letter from my cousin saying that Mr, Caswell [the brother-in-law] was found dead in his armchair, partly dressed, at his lodgings in Dublin, on Sunday morning. I had not known he was ill at all. " Eliza Maunsell."

In answer to an inquiry, Mrs. Maunsell states positively that she has never had any hallucination of the sort except on these four occasions, (and possibly one other, when what she heard may have been a real call). She adds: —

" I regret extremely that I can procure for you no corroborative evidence about my brother-in-law. My sister is far too nervous a person for me to have told her at the time. The event [i.e., the death] occurred on the 9th of August, 1874."

[We have verified this date in the FreemarCs Journal, which describes the death as having been rather sudden. Mrs. Maunsell heard the voice 3 or 4 days before; and though her brother-in-law was probably at that time in a somewhat abnormal state, the accuracy of coincidence which (if correctly remembered) would justify us in regarding the former experiences as very probably telepathic, is lacking to this one.]

(620) From Mr. J. Augustus Edmonds, 16, Waterloo Road South, Wolverhampton. The evidence is third-hand, and is admitted by special exception (Vol. I., p. 158, note). Mr. Edmonds received the account of the second of the two incidents narrated from both his father and brother.

1883.

Mr. Edmonds j&rst describes a very serious illness which attacked his father (the Rev. T. 0. Edmonds, pastor of the Baptist Church, St. Andrew's Street, Cambridge,) in the year 1831. During the illness a letter was received from a friend of his father's, the Rev. Josiah Wilkinson, of Saffron Walden, Essex.

" It was to this effect. I don't vouch for the perfect verbal accuracy. It was addressed to my mother.

" ' I have been made aware ^ of the alarming illness of your dear husband, but I have the happiness to assure you that his sickness is not unto death.' The note concluded with a message of love, when my father

1 Mr. Edmonds does not know whether Mr. Wilkinson had heard of the illness in any normal way, or whether the first intimation of this fact, as well as the assurance of recovery, was communicated in the abnormal manner afterwards described. The assurance of recovery may easily, of course, have been subjectively imagined, and in no way concerns us here.

568 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

should be able to receive it, and of sympathy to herself. This note arrived when my father was to all appearances as near his end as at any period of his illness.

" When my father was able to see a few friends, Mr. Wilkinson came over and urged him, as soon as he was permitted to move, to come with my brother Cyrus, his second son, and visit him, which they did. These three being alone, my father mentioned this note and said it very much surprised him, on account of the singularly confident manner in which his recovery was spoken of. To which Mr. Wilkinson replied that in several instances he had been told by an audible voice of some fact specially concerning his interests or welfare, a voice which none but himself heard, and there was no visible presence. These intimations, he said, had always been made to him during his family worship, and (I believe I am right in saying) that they had never been mentioned out of his own family. He said, however, ' I will relate one such case.

" ' I was kneeling at prayer one morning with my family, when a voice said, " Your brother is dead."^ I had but one brother, to whom I was greatly attached, who lived at the West End of London. The shock was so great that I sank on the floor in a swoon. On recovery I desired my wife to put the needful things into my portmanteau, and send to stop the Cambridge coach to London, a short distance from the house, telling her that my brother was dead, and that I must go to London. On arrival I drove to the house, found the blinds closely drawn, and on coming to the door the servant expressed great relief at seeing me, saying that his master had died suddenly in the night and his mistress was in a most sad condition.

" 'Now,' Mr. Wilkinson said, ' on the morning on which I wrote that note to your wife, at morning prayer with the family, a voice said, " Your dearest friend is very ill, but his sickness is not unto death." I heard no more, but as soon as our worship was concluded I wrote that note.'

"J. A. Edmonds."

§ 2. In the next two cases, the impression, if really a hallucination, seems to have represented a sound which was actually in the agent's ears at the time.

(621) From Mrs. Malcolm, Wribbenhall, Bewdley, (mentioned above, p. 79). "August 5th, 1885.

"During the commencement of the year 1849 (I being then a young girl), I had a tedious illness. On one occasion, to relieve a congested lung, I had a blister applied, and, in consequence, was prevented on that night from obtaining sleep. One of my brothers was with the army in the Punjaub at that time, and my thoughts were constantly with him, and doubtless I followed the events of the war with intense interest. On the night in question, being, as I have said, wide awake, I was astonished by hearing the report of big guns. I raised myself in bed with some difficulty, and then continued to hear the distant firing of cannon, sometimes nearer, sometimes remote. At length the guns ceased, but were succeeded by a sharp and rapid discharge of musketry. The sounds lasted altogether about four hours. My great anxiety was that some one should hear these strange sounds of battle as well as myself; but I was forbidden at the time

1 Compare cases 153 and 284.

to leave my room, and hearing my father coughing in his bedroom opposite, I pacified myself with the assurance that he must be awake and would hear what I heard. Great was my mortification in the morning to find that neither he nor my mother were aware of anything unusual having occurred in the night past. Then my old friend the doctor came in, inquiring laughingly whether I was growing fanciful (having been told my story). I also laughed and replied, ' You shall know if my battle is mere fancy when the next news comes from the seat of war in India.'

" Whether this was my first connecting of the sounds I had listened to with an Indian battle, or whether I had done so during the continuance of those sounds, is a point I am not now clear upon. But although the doctor, when out of my hearing, desired that I might not again be left alone at night, it is observable that neither then nor at any later time was I rendered the least nervous by my strange experience, nor did I apprehend evil to the brother engaged in the campaign. In due time, tidings of the severe battle at Goojerat reached us — the day on which it was fought, and hours, allowing for difierence of time, exactly coinciding with the date of my prophetic ^ battle. My brother was in the thick of the fight, but escaped unhurt. " G-eorgina Malcolm."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Malcolm says: —

"I send you a written testimony from one of my sisters, as to my having spoken of hearing the battle at the time of the occurrence. The hours during which the sounds continued were from 1 to 5 o'clock a.m. in the morning as far as my recollection serves. At the time of the occurrence I was living in ray father's house in a very remote part of Warwickshire. The nearest soldiers' quarters to us would be at Coventry or Birmingham, at a distance of between 30 and 40 miles."

The sister's corroboration, dated October 9, 1885, is as follows: —

" I remember the incident about the battle of Goojerat. You were ill at the time, and in the morning you told us you felt as if you had been in a battle, as you had heard continual firing and report of cannon for a long time. I cannot say what time of the night it was when you heard it.

" I think you made a note of it, and we heard afterwards from Frank that the battle began on the following morning. a Lu^y Dickins "

From the London Gazette for April 19th, 1849, it appears that the battle, which took place on Feb. 21, lasted from 8.30 until midday, after which the pursuit of the enemy commenced, lasting until dusk. 8.30 a.m. at Goojerat would correspond to about 3.30 a.m. in England.

Mrs. Malcolm nas experienced no other auditory hallucination, except that twice, when overstrained by nursing a relative in a fatal illness, she had the impression of hearing her name called.

[The fact that the sounds were not heard by others, though at least one other person seems to have been awake at the time, is rather a strongproof that the experience was a hallucination; and if so, there is at least an appreciable chance that it was telepathic. I have mentioned a case of subjective hallucination of the same character in Vol. I., p. 494, second note. The long duration of the impression is, owing to its "rudimentary" character, less remarkable than that alleged in cases 300 and 590.]

1 As to the tendency to regard impressions corresponding with unknown reality as prophetic, see p. 535, note.

570 SUPPLEMENT.

CHAP.

(622) From a lady, Mrs. M., whose name and address it seems right to suppress, though she made no stipulation on the subject. The account was received in August, 1884.

Mrs. M. describes how, in July, 1874, while spending her holiday happily in the vale of Leven, and in perfect health, she " was awakened suddenly with a cry of distress ringing in my ears, and it was twice repeated after I became wide awake. The last time it seemed partly suppressed and further away. It seemed very near at first, and I recognised the voice as poor little Tom's. [Tom was a child between 2 and 3 years of age, one of several of whom she had been in charge, and whom she had known to be considerably ill-used by the lady who was acting as his guardian.] I sprang out of bed and looked out. It was a lovely still night, not a movement nor a sound disturbed the air, and it was so light that I could see the time on a small silver watch which was lying on the table. It was 12.45."

The efiect on Mrs. M. was so great that she mentioned the experience next morning to the aunt with whom she was staying, and resolved to return at once to the scene of her duties, but was prevented by a telegram giving her other instructions. When she did return, she learnt from the servants that, on the Sunday night when she had heard the cries, Tom's guardian had had him in her room all night; and that they " heard cries and moans until they fell asleep, and at midnight were awakened by three successive cries that rang through the house — the last a suppressed echo of the others." Next morning the servants found marks of cruel illusage on the child, which Mrs. M. found still very apparent.

[We have not received the aunt's corroboration, though Mrs. M. promised to try to obtain it for us. The correspondence of the three cries is a detail not unlikely to have been subsequently imagined. See p. 229, note.]

§ 8. The following is a group of non-vocal cases, of an entirely rudimentary type (see above, pp. 125-82).

(623) From a gentleman who does not feel justified in allowing his brother's, the agent's, name to appear, and is therefore obliged to withhold his own from publication. The percipient has died since 1883, when the account was written.

In the autumn of 1874, the narrator's brother, W. M., a resident in Edinburgh, was staying, with a sister, some 18 miles from that place. " He had been subject, at irregular intervals, to attacks of illness of a severe character, but, at this date, was in fair health, and attending to business.

" Two or three days after his arrival at our sister's house he was quite unexpectedly seized, late one evening, with serious illness, hematemesis supervened, and within two or three hours from the first seizure he was a corpse. The late hour, and distance from the railway station, prevented any communication during the night with our household in Edinburgh.

"Between 11 and 12 o'clock that night, my mother, aged then 72, but active and vigorous in body and mind, as indeed she is still, was alone in her bedroom and in the act of undressing. She occupied this room alone, and it was the only sleeping apartment on the dining-room flat which wa

in use that night, the only other bedroom there being the adjoining room, then untenanted, owing to my own absence in the North. My father, eldest brother, and sister-in-law occupied rooms on the flat above. The servants' accommodation was in the under or sunk flat beneath, shut off from the upper by a swing door at the foot of a flight of steps. A small dog, the only other inmate of the house, slept that night, and indeed always, in the kitchen. My mother was in her usual good health, her faculties perfectly preserved, and her mind untroubled with any apprehensions of evil tidings. She had read, as usual, a portion of her Bible, and was in the act of undressing, when she was suddenly startled by a most extraordinary noise at the door of her room, which opened directly into the inner lobby. It was as if made by a person standing directly outside and close to the door, but it was utterly unlike any ordinary summons or alarm. In her own words, it was like nothing so much as the noise of someone hastily and imperiously lashing the door with a heavy riding whip, demanding admittance. It was loud, and repeated three or four times, as if insisting on attention, with brief intervals between. Then it ceased.

" My mother, though possessed of considerable coolness, was startled; but with a resolution which many might envy, she proceeded to light a candle, knowing the hall lights were extinguished, the whole of the inmates having before retired for the night, and went to the door. ' I knew,' she said, ' that it was no one in the house seeking admission. 8uch an imperative summons would never have been made at my door.' On opening it, nothing was visible, the various doors opening on the lobby were closed, and the fastenings of the front door undisturbed. Much surprised, though retaining self-possession, my mother debated with herself as to rousing the other members of the family, but ultimately resolved not to do so unless the sound was repeated, which it was not. It was about midnight, but my mother did not note the precise hour and minute. Early next forenoon, my father and sister-in-law having left, the news came that my brother had expired at midnight, 18 miles off by road from Edinburgh.

" It may be noted that nothing in or near the door could possibly have occasioned the noise in question, the material being old, well-seasoned timber, not liable to warp or crack. It afterwards appeared that the noise in question had not been heard by anyone in the house save by my mother, which no one will wonder at who knows how perfectly ' deafened ' oldfashioned stone houses in Edinburgh invariably are.

" Speaking for my own part, I would not have placed so much reliance on the narrative which I have from my mother's own lips, had it come from any other person in the house. The others might have been imaginative or nervous, or wise after the event, or possibly wholly mistaken. But with my mother's clear and balanced judgment, little affected by matters which powerfully sway others, I have no room for hesitation whatsoever. I believe, as firmly as I believe in the fact of my own existence, that the circumstances happened exactly as she narrated them."

[The entry in the Register of Deaths, which is probably correct, shows that the death occurred on September 2, 1875 (not 1874), at 4.50 a.m., not at midnight. The coincidence was therefore not so exact as the narrator imagined. Still, if the mother's experience was a hallucination — and it

572 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

certainly does not seem easy to explain it otherwise — the identity of night makes the case a striking sample of its kind.]

(624) From Mrs. Callin, of whom her mistress, Miss Rosenberg, of Gabarrie Yilla, Sarsfield Road, Balham, says: —

" I can vouch for the accuracy and trustworthiness of Mrs. Callin, the narrator of the incident described."

"December, 1882.

" Mr. J., employed as agent by my mistress^ Miss C, resident in the Royal Avenue, Chelsea, had long suffered severely from asthma, and on Miss C. going to see him one day, when he had been unable to go out for many weeks, some time in November, 1879, he remarked he should go to see her on her birthday (having always done so for many years), if he had to take a cab for it; his wife rejoined, ' I do not think you will,' meaning his state of health would not allow him to do so, and he replied to her, ' Yes, I will:

" Miss C. retired to bed as usual on the night of December 7th. I slept in the same room, which was the front one on the first floor, with folding doors into the small dressing-room behind, no other person being in the house. In the early morning of next day (8th, and her birthday) Miss C. was awoke by a loud knock at the folding-door, and, listening, it was repeated: she then called me, but before she could rouse me, heard it again, the third time.^ I then got up, and looked outside both the doors with a light, and could see no one; I also looked at the time, which was a quarter past ybwr. We then both went to sleep again, I thinking my mistress had dreamt this, but she always persisted she heard the knocks distinctly.

" After breakfast we heard that Mr. J. had died at four that morning, and Miss C. said to me that he came to tell her, having so certainly promised to go to her on that day.

" Miss C. died the following March, aged 94, but having all her faculties clear to the last, and often alluding to Mr. J.'s visit on her birthday. His age was about 60 only, and he had frequently said he should die before her, and she used to reply ' Don't wait for me out of politeness,' being always ready with a joke. " M. Callin."

We find from the Times obituary that Mr. J. died on December 8, 1879.

[It may be conceived that Mr. J.'s previous promise of a visit on that day worked itself out in the percipient's mind, when the day arrived, in the form of a hallucination; but such accurately-timed development is, as far as I know, quite unexampled, except in some rare hypnotic cases of commands and promises a longue echeance.^

The following experiences — if hallucinations, and not due to some undiscovered physical cause — are of interest as having taken precisely the same form.^ It is one that is likely to raise a smile; but I must repeat that it is quite open to hallucinations of the senses to take peculiar forms, and that there is no reason why telepathic specimens should have an immunity in this respect (Vol. I., pp. 503, 547). Moreover, the particular form here described may without improba-1 See p. 229, note. 2 gee p. 35.

bility be traced to early associations in the percipient's mind. The grounds for doubting the telepathic origin of the impressions are, not their oddness or triviality, but (1) the fact that they did not in any way suggest the supposed agent, Avhich always greatly diminishes the force of the time-coincidence; and (2) in one case the lack of precision in the time-coincidence itself The narrator, Miss H., is, in her own words, " of a matter-of-fact disposition, and not a believer in things out of the way," and she attaches no importance whatever to these incidents. She withholds her name from publication out of deference to what she thinks would be the vdshes of her relatives,

"N Yicarage, October 26th, 1884.

(625) "A few years ago [in 1874] I was staying with some relatives at Folkestone, who had taken a house there for a few weeks and had occupied it all the previous summer. We were a merry party, with young people and children. I slept in a large room on the first floor. I was awakened one night by the sound of many mice pattering over the floor; they appeared to be running swiftly and then out at the door. Much astonished, I looked around to see where they could have come from, but no trace appeared. In the morning I inquired of the nurse, who came to call me, if she had heard anything, ' No,' was the reply. I foolishly said, ' Well, I do not mind mice, but in our family the sound of them means death or ill luck.' I complained to the landlady, who said ' she had never seen a mouse in her house '; she sent in a new trap, but nothing more was heard of the intruders. Three or four days after this, came the sad news of the death of a very dear relative from an accident, whilst abroad. The event happened a few minutes before the noise of the mice had disturbed me.

" In December, three years after this, I was at St. Leonards-on-Sea, with a relative who had been seriously ill, and on the night of the 31st December I sat up in my own room at the top of the house, to see the old year out and the new one in. I have referred to a diary kept by my sister, and I find I had spent a most quiet day. I was in good spirits, for my invalid was much better, the fire in the room was bright, and I certainly was not thinking of mice; but just before 1 2 o'clock came the sound of many mice sweeping over the floor. I heard it distinctly and with some trepidation, but no one dear to me was ill. I noted down the fact, and, having relatives abroad, awaited with some impatience the colonial mail. I received the following notetfrom my brother: —

" ' Dear L., — I write to tell you a piece of sad news. Whilst you were probably welcoming the new year, a few minutes before it arrived I went down my garden, to receive the corpse of my eldest son; he had broken his neck by a fall from his horse three hours before.'

" I had been in the house where this occurred several times before, and have stayed there several times since, but I have never seen or heard real mice there.

" I may add that my mother regarded the sound of mice as an omen of disaster, but she never would tell me why, looking upon it probably as a superstition she wished her children to be free from."

574 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

In answer to a request for her sister's corroboration, Miss H. replies: —

" I regret to say that on religious grounds Mrs. L. will not write a confirmatory note; of course she says she perfectly remembers the circumstances, and that a mouse-trap was immediately purchased for my room. That's practical."

In conversation, Miss H. informed me that she has had no other hallucination, unless hearing some unaccountable knocks on one occasion, when others heard them, be so counted. On the first occasion, in a lodging, the boards were bare to a great extent. The second time the room was carpeted. The noise was loud as well as distinct. Miss H. has since heard real mice, and was glad to identify the sound again. Her mother's superstition as to mice foreboding trouble had been constantly brought before her mind, during her mother's life: it was much on her mother's brain, so to speak.

The Army List shows that the death in the first case took place on July 22, 1874.

We find the accident in the second case described in a local paper for January 3, 1877, as having taken place on December 31; and the death is reported as having taken place " about midnight " — i.e., allowing for longitude, nearly 12 hours before Miss H.'s impression. Withoutextenuating this element of weakness in the case, I may remind the reader how frequently the emergence of telepathic percipience seems to be deferred until a season of solitary recueillement (Vol. I., p. 201).

I 4. The following are tactile cases,

(626) From Mr. W. B. Clegram, Saul Lodge, Stonehouse, Gloucestershire. "January 15th, 1884.

" I well remember a singular circumstance I have often heard my father (one of the early civil engineers of this country) relate, which occurred to himself. He was a man of very strong mind, and more free from fancies and superstitions than most people. At the time of the occurrence he was about 30 years of age.

" He was in the habit of lying with his right hand extended out of bed, and one morning, about 5 o'clock, when wide awake, he felt a firm hand grasp his, so much like the grasp of his father's hand that he immediately told my mother 'that his father had taken his hand as he usually did when saying " good-bye." ' His father died at that time that morning, somewhat suddenly. My father did not know he was ill. His father died near Sunderland; my father at that time was living in Sussex.

"W. B. Clegram."

Mr. Clegram mentioned in conversation that his grandfather had a particularly firm and strong clasp of the hand, which was also a characteristic of his father, the percipient. The latter was a strong, practical man, as far removed as possible from superstition. The incident made a deep and lasting impression upon him.

(627) From Lady Belcher, 25, Cumberland Terrace, Regent's Park, N.W. "April, 1884.

" During the great French war, when Napoleon I. was overrunning

Holland, and after the unfortunate Walcheren expedition, our fleet was ordered to the Scheldt, I believe in the severe winter of 1813. The sailo rs and marines from the various ships were landed in parties to man and defend the dykes. So severe was the cold that long wooden sheds were erected, and large fires kept up for the watch parties. All the officers in turn landed to keep the men to their posts.

" On one night when my father. Captain Peter Heywood, landed with his men from the ' Montague,' the line of battle ship he commanded, and the watch had been set, the officers stretched themselves down on some mattresses, the first lieutenant near him, then the Master of Marines. All was quiet, when the last mentioned officer cried out that some one had laid a cold hand on his cheek! Silence was ordered. Again in a few minutes he made the same complaint and challenged the lieutenant, who peremptorily ordered silence. A third time he made the same outcry, jumped up and rushed from the spot in terror. The whole party were thoroughly roused, and my father considered the circumstance so peculiar that he noted it with the date and the precise hour at which it had occurred.

'* Weeks after, when the despatches and letters arrived from England, the Master of Marines received the news of his father's death and the hour of his departure, which tallied exactly with the note which Captain Heywood had made. Up to the period of my dear father's death I have heard him mention the fact, but never reasoned on it. He possessed a calm judgment and a very religious mind. u Dj^jja Belcher "

We learn from the Admiralty that Captain Peter Heywood was in command of the "Montague" from July, 1813, to March, 1814; also that there is no such officer as " Master of Marines," but that the Masters (now styled Stafi'-Commissioners or Navigating Lieutenants) were George Dunn and J. Sanford.

[This case is very remote; and even if correct in the central fact, cannot be relied on in details — e.g., as to the absolute exactitude of the coincidence, and as to the three occurrences of the sensation, the favourite legendary number (p. 229, note).]

(628) From Mrs. Spenser, 36, Portland Street, Southport, a member of the Society of Friends. September 1st, 1871.

" I formerly had two aunts. One, my aunt De Mierre, residing at Putney, had been confined three weeks. My aunt, Mrs. Williams [who lived in London], being an invalid, was in the habit of taking a warm bath at night. When her maid had placed her in it, she retired, until the time appointed for leaving her had expired; but one night, soon after she had left, she was much alarmed by sounds of great distress from her mistress, which led her hastily to ring for assistance and summon her master, for her mistress's weeping and agitation were uncontrollable. As soon as her husband entered the room, Mrs. Williams exclaimed, ' Susan is dead. She has been to take leave of me. Her kiss was like a waft of cold air upon my cheek.' Her husband did his best to allay her agitation, telling her she had fallen asleep in the bath and dreamt it. He also told her that he had, that afternoon, seen one of her brothers who had told him that her sister was so remarkably well that her husband was going to the play that

576 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

night, with other members of her family. But nothing soothed her until he promised to send to Putney the next morning to inquire.

" The groom received orders to leave by 6 o'clock, so as to bring the answer back by 8 o'clock. When the groom arrived at the house the servant said, ' My mistress is dead. She was taken suddenly ill while sitting up, and was dead before my master got home. She died at halfpast 10 o'clock' — the exact time that her sister was thrown into such distress by her appearing to take leave of her. I remember the occurrence well. "Lucy Spenser."

Mrs. Spenser writes on March 18, 1886: " I think my aunt died about 1804. I am the only one living who heard the fact related at the time; and often, in after years, without any variation." And later, " I remember with unclouded clearness the particulars respecting my aunt's death — the first in the family that I knew of and cared about. It was a great event in the family, and the impression made on my mind was indelible." We have failed to discover the exact date of the death: Mrs. de Mierre does not seem to have been buried at Putney. In conversation Mrs. Spenser stated that she thinks that there was an appearance, as well as the sensation of the kiss.

[The narrator, who wrote the above 15 years ago, shows even now no sign of impaired memory; but the case is again far too remote for details to be trusted.]

(629) From the Rev. George Brett, The College, Weston-super-Mare, who heard the account from the percipient, a very near relative of his own.

"January 26th, 1885.

" About 40 or 45 years ago, a Miss Sophia Wallace was engaged to a Mr. Wilson. They were much attached to each other, and he seems to have been a man whose mental constitution was of a kind to make him capable of exerting a very real influence upon those among whom he was known. He died of consumption before the time proposed for their marriage; naturally, his fiancee was very anxious, and much saddened when it became evident that he would not live. On the evening of his death she was passing along a darkened passage in a house where she was staying, not more than 2 or 3 miles (perhaps less than 2) from the house of Mr. Wilson, when she felt a cold hand clasp hers. Upon comparison of time afterwards, she found this had occurred at the time of Mr. Wilson's death. " Geo. Brett."

[The anxiety here, of course, allows it to be supposed that the experience was purely subjective (Vol. I., p. 509).]

I will conclude this chapter with a case which suggests the same sympathy of physical condition as we have encountered in certain hypnotic cases (see above, pp. 330-1), where the transference is from the " subject " to the operator. The exceptional rapport (established or increased by a course of hypnotism) which existed between the two persons concerned has been mentioned in Vol. I., p. 316, and must be borne in mind in the judging of the present incident,

(630) From Mr. F. Corder, 46, Charlwood Street, S.W.

"December, 1882.

"On July 8, 1882, my wife went to London to have an operation (which we both believed to be a slight one) performed on her eyes by the late Mr. Oritchett. The appointment was for 1.30; and, knowing from long previous experience the close sympathy of our minds, about that time I, at Brighton, got rather fidgety, and was much relieved — and perhaps a little surprised and disappointed — at not feeling any decided sensation which I could construe as sympathetic. Taking it therefore for granted that all was well, I went out at 2.45 to conduct my concert at the Aquarium, expecting to find there a telegram, as had been arranged, to say that all was well. On my way I stopped, as usual, to compare my watch with the big clock outside Lawsons' the clockmakers. At that instant I felt my eyes flooded with water, just as when a chill wind gives one a sudden cold in the eyes, though it was a hot, still summer's day. The afiection was so unusual and startling that my attention could not but be strongly directed to it; yet, the time being then 1 1 minutes to 3, I was sure it could have nothing to do with my wife's operation, and, as it continued for some little time, thought I must have taken cold. However, it passed off, and the concert immediately afterwards put it out of my mind.

" At 4.0 I received a telegram from my wife ' All well over. A great success,' and this quite took away all anxiety. But on going to town in the evening, I found her in a terrible state of nervous prostration; and it appeared that the operation, though marvellously successful, had been of a very severe character. Quite accidentally it came out that it was not till 2.30 that Mrs. Corder entered the operating-room, and that the operation commenced, after the due administration of an anaesthetic, at about 10 minutes to 3, as near as we could calculate.

[If telepathy is a reality, there seems at any rate a fair probability that this incident was telepathic. But it is no doubt possible to suppose that the occupation of Mr. Corder's thoughts with his wife's condition had induced a sympathetic liability to the peculiar affection recorded, and that the reason why it came to a head at that particular time was simply the change of physical condition involved in going out into the open air. It will be observed, however, that the day was hot, which rather tells against this hypothesis.]

VOL. II. 2 p

CHAP,



Chapter VII. Cases Affecting More Than One of the Percipient's Senses.

This chapter contains some further cases in which the senses of sight and hearing were both affected.

(631) From the Story of my Life, by Colonel Meadows Taylor, Vol. II., pp. 32-33.

" This determination [to live unmarried] was the result of a very curious and strange incident that befell me during one of my marches to Hyderabad. I have never forgotten it, and it returns to this day to my memory with a strangely vivid effect that I can neither repel nor explain. I purposely withhold the date of the year. In my very early life, I had been deeply and devotedly attached to one in England, and only relinquished the hope of some day winning her when the terrible order came out that no furlough to Europe would be granted. One evening I was at the village of Dewas Kudea, after a very long afternoon and evening march from Muktul, and I lay down very weary; but the barking of village dogs, and the baying of jackals, and over-fatigue and heat, prevented sleep, and I was wide awake and restless. Suddenly, for my tent door was wide open, I saw the face and figure so familiar to me, but looking older, and with a sad and troubled expression; the dress was white, and seemed covered with a profusion of lace, and glistened in the bright moonlight. The arms were stretched out, and a low plaintive cry of ' Do not let me go; do not let me go! ' reached me. I sprang forward, but the figure receded, growing fainter and fainter till I could see it no longer, but the low sad tones still sounded. I had run barefooted across the open space, where my tents were pitched, very much to the astonishment of the sentry on guard, but I returned to my tent without speaking to him.

" I wrote to my father, I wished to know whether there was any hope for me. He wrote back to me these words: ' Too late, my dear son — on the very day of the vision you describe to me, A. was married.' "

Miss Meadows Taylor, the editor of the book from which this passage is quoted, writes to us: —

" 6, Phillimore Terrace, Kensington, W.

"December 5th, 1883. " I have received your letter on the subject of the vision mentioned in

my father's, Colonel Meadows Taylor's, ' Life.' I have heard him mention it very often, and he always related the incident precisely in the same manner, and exactly as it is in the book. I can throw no further light upon it; nor can I add any further particulars. The lady is dead, and I am not aware that she ever knew of the circumstance.

" Alice Meadows Taylor."

[We have discovered a certain amount of inaccuracy in another narrative told in the same book; otherwise the present one would not have been relegated to the Supplement. Miss Meadows Taylor's remarks show, however, that the experience was distinctly imprinted on her father's memory. The detail as to the lace, it will be observed, is of a sort very likely to have been " read back " into the vision after the news arrived which would seem to make it appropriate.]

(632) From the Rev. J. Hotham (Congregational Minister), Port Elliot, South Australia, who told us (in 1884) that the account was given to him by some friends, Mrs. Leaworthy and her daughters, and was written out by him the same evening " in nearly the same language in which it was given, and submitted to Mrs. Leaworthy, who corrected it." It may therefoi-e be taken as her account. Mr. Hotham has since died, and his son says that no more information can be obtained.

The account first describes the rescue, in 1841, of the crew of the French ship, " L'Orient," oif the coast of Devon, mainly by the exertions of Mr. Leaworthy.

" The captain, during his stay in the neighbourhood, was a constant visitor at our house, and became quite a favourite. After he had recovered from his cold and wetting, he told us that he was sure something serious had happened at home. When asked why he thought so, he said that just before the storm came on, he- had seen his wife standing close beside him, and that she had said: ' Do not grieve for me.' Well, we all tried to put this melancholy idea out of his head. We told him he was lowspirited at the loss of his ship, and that nothing but imagination had made him fancy this thing.

" Of course the captain wrote directly home, giving an account of the loss of his ship and cargo, and anxiously awaited a reply. He was detained some weeks among us, and during that time we became very intimate. In due time he received a letter informing him that his wife had been confined, and mother and child were both doing well. We then joked him about his fears, and congratulated him upon the good news he had received. During the weeks he further remained with us, we set to and made up a box of presents — small things, »fec., for the baby. After completing all his arrangements, he bid us good-bye, and started for home. A letter from him, however, informed us that the presentiment was too truly fulfilled. His wife died on that night; but when his friends received his letter mournfully detailing the loss of his vessel, they were afraid to send him word about the loss of his wife, and so replied as we have said."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Hotham added: —

" Mrs. Leaworthy, senior, has recently died. Her daughters are still living — one, Mrs. Lindsay, only a short distance from me; and the other,

VOL. II. 2 p 2

580 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

who married Mr. John Hindmarsh, only son of our first Colonial Governor, has removed to New Zealand.

"In answer to your questions — (1) The account was given me at the house of Mr. Jno. Hindmarsh, near Port Elliot, South Australia. (2) Yes. By ' died on that night ' I mean on the night he saw the apparition — the night the storm began. " Jno. Hotham."

(633) From the late General Craigie, who told us (March 11, 1883)

that he had heard the facts from Colonel and Mrs., the parents of the

percipient.

General Craigie began by describing how, in 1868, he became

acquainted with Colonel and his family, resident at Mussoorie, and

at their house saw a good deal of some relatives of his own, Mr. and Mrs. B.

"The year 1868 had come to a close. With the termination of the season, of course all European visitors had returned to their homes in the plains. In the ordinary course of relief, my regiment was ordered to Cawnpore, and from that time I lost sight of Mr. and Mrs. B., whom I left behind at Meerut. I cannot, without referring to friends at a distance, give the dates of what follows; but I believe that it was in the beginning of 1869 that society was shocked by hearing that Mr. B. had [in consequence of domestic unhappiness due to his own conduct] shot himself. He shot himself at Meerut, at about 8 o'clock in the evening.

" On that night Colonel 's wife and daughter were together in a

bedroom at 10 p.m. The former had already got into bed; the latter was brushing out her hair by her cheval-glass, and in her night attire. Suddenly the girl exclaimed: ' Oh, mamma, there's Mr. B! ' ' "Where 1 ' cried the scandalised mother, clutching and pulling up the bed-clothes. ^ ' There, mamma! Do you not see him 1 There — he says: " Good-bye, Sissy — good-bye! " There, now he's going — now he's gone! ' An immediate alarm was given; the room, the house, the garden were carefully searched, without obtaining any satisfactory clue to so extraordinary a scene in

a lady's bedchamber. Colonel closely questioned the girl, who

not only positively adhered to her previous declarations, but now detailed the clothes worn by Mr. B. as he appeared to her.

" Two days afterwards, the post, and newspapers, brought to Mussoorie the news of the suicide of Mr. B. Colonel and his wife did not communicate the fact to their daughter for some days, as they thought that since the night when she seemed to have seen Mr. B. she had been strangely depressed. When the fact was gently broken to her, it had such an efiect that never from that day was any allusion ever made to the occurrence. " H. C. Craigie,

" Major-General."

We find from the East India Company's Register that Lieut. B.'s death took place on Nov. 6, 1868, at Meerut.

[Colonel is dead. We have applied to his widow for her recol-

1 This is almost certainly an illustration of that unfortunate tendency to give spurious vividness to a scene, by virhich second-hand evidence is so apt to be disfigured. But it is often rather in adding details than in altering essential points that this dramatising tendency finds its chance; and thus the distrust which it excites, though legitimate, may easily extend too far.

lections of the incident, but have not as yet received a reply. We have ascertained that Colonel was on furlough in 1868.]

(634) Dr. Spencer T. Hall, a well-known writer on forestry, &c., in his Days in Derbyshire (1863), pp. 85-6, relates as follows: —

" Philip and his first wife, Martha, who was a cousin of mine, having no children of their own, adopted the little daughter of a young woman, who went to live at Derby. The child called them father and mother as soon as she could speak, not remembering her own parents, not even her mother. While yet very young, she one day began to cry out that there was a young woman looking at her, and wanting to come to her, and, according to her description of the person, it must have been her mother. As no one else saw the apparition, and the child continued for more than half an hour to be very excited, Philip took her out of the house to that of a neighbour; but the apparition kept them company, talking by the way. They then went to another house, where it accompanied them still, and seemed as though it wanted to embrace the child: but at last vanished in the direction of Derby — as the little girl, now a young woman, describes it — in a flash of fire.

" Derby is about 14 miles distant from Holloway, and as in that day there was neither railway nor telegraph, communication between them was much slower than at present. As soon, however, as it was possible for intelligence to come, the news arrived that the poor child's mother had been burnt to death; that it happened about the time when it saw her apparition; and, in short, that she was sorrowing and crying to be taken to the child during the whole of the time between being burnt and her expiration.

" This is no ' idle ghost story,' but a simple matter of fact, to which not only Philip, but all his old neighbours can testify; and the young woman has not only related it more than once to me, but she told it in the same artless and earnest manner to my friend, the late Dr. Samuel Brown, of Edinburgh, who once called at the cottage with me, repeating it still more clearly to Messrs. Fowler and Wells, on our recent visit."

In answer to inquiries, the narrator (since deceased) wrote to us: — " 1, Leopold Grove, Blackpool.

" November 14th, 1884.

"It is now a generation since I resided in Derby, and most of those known to me there are now dead or the addresses forgotten. Philip Spencer, my cousin, died long ago, and his second wife too. I have forgotten the young woman's name, but she may be married, or have left the neighbourhood. My poor dear friend. Dr. Samuel Brown, is dead. If anybody is living at Holloway likely to remember all the particulars of the case you mention, my cousin, Mrs. Sarah Buckle, may, but I cannot tell. [We wrote; but the lady appears to have left the place, and our letter was returned.] You may, however, refer to me as to the accuracy of the narrative in my book. Anything more carefully or clearly attested than what is written I never heard, and I could have had no motive for inaccuracy. u Spencer T. Hall."

[One may surmise that this was very possibly a case of telepathic hallucination, without placing reliance on the details.]

582 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

(635) From Mrs. Walsh, of The Priory, Lincoln. The percipient refuses a first-hand and signed account; she has risen in life, and is verysensitive as to anything which may recall her former dependent position. The Rev. J. J. Lias, who procured the narrative for us, tells us that he first heard it in the lifetime of Mr. Walsh, who " was by no means a credulous man, but a man of the world."

" February 18th, 1884.

" Some time in the year 1862 (I think) I was living with my husband and family of little children, accompanied by our English nurse, in apartments in the city of Brussels. The house we occupied was a large one, and we rented the drawing-room and the floor above. The ground floor was occupied by the owner of the house, a Belgian, and his wife and little children. We had no intercourse with this family; we had our own kitchen on the drawing-room floor, and the upper floor consisted of nursery, with nursery bedroom opening from it. We had a Flemish general servant, who went home about 9 every night. Our English nurse was a very clever girl, about 22 or 23 years of age. She read a good deal, and taught herself French. She was very matter-of-fact, and handy and useful in every way. She had been with me 5 or 6 years. Her parents were labouring people in the neighbourhood of London, and by reading and culture she had raised herself a good deal out of their sphere. We had been about 12 months away from England, when the circumstance I write of happened. M.'s mother, after having a large family — the youngest being about 9 or 10 — did not tell M., nor did any of the family, that she was again expecting an addition. The wife of our landlord had been confined two days, so was in her own room, on the ground floor of the house we lived in.

"One night my husband and myself had been out to dinner. On returning, a little after 10 o'clock, my husband was amazed to find our apartments in darkness, and he ran up to the nursery floor to complain to M. of her inattention; as the other servant had gone home it was her place to light our room. My husband found the nursery lighted, but empty, and going towards the children's room he met M. coming out. She began, ' Oh! I am so glad to see you; I have been so frightened that I was obliged to sit on Willie's bed till you carae in.' I was in the room by this time, and inquiring into the cause of fear. M. said, 'After I put the children to bed I sat down in the nursery to my work, when I heard someone coming up the stairs. I went to the door, and on the first landing by your room, I saw, as I thought, Madame N. carrying something heavy. I felt that she ought not to be out of her bed, and I called to her in French: " Je viendrai vous aider," running down the stairs to where I supposed she was. When I got there it gave me a queer sensation to find no one. However, I said to myself, it was a shadow, and made myself go back to my work. I had scarcely seated myself when a voice called: " May, May, May " (the name my children called her). I got up, went to the door, and seeing someone, ran halfway down the stairs to meet the woman, when a terrible dread came upon me, and I rushed back to the nursery and sat on one of the little beds, feeling that being with even a sleeping child was better than being alone.' My husband laughed at her, told her the vin ordinaire was too strong; that she had been dreaming, &c. We none of us thought much of it, till the first post from England

brought M. a letter to say her mother had been confined, and she and the child had died within an hour after. Then we all felt convinced that M.'s mother had been able to come and see her daughter.^

" Harriet Walsh."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Walsh says: —

" At the time, I am sure she did not connect the appearance with her own mother, nor did she recognise the voice. All she told us was that she thought it was Madame Nyo. May's mother was very much the same sort of person in appearance as Madame Nyo,^ without there being any likeness; they were about the same age, figure, and position in life. We only connected May's story with her night of terror, when she received the news from England."

[We cannot now ascertain the exact times of the apparition and of the death; but they probably occurred within a few hours of each other. If, as seems nearly certain, the call of the Christian name, as well as the visual experience, was a hallucination, that point is decidedly in favour of the telepathic explanation of the case.]

(636) From Mr. Louis Lyons, 3, Bouverie Square, Folkestone.

" 1882. " Madame Laramea Esperon, of Nantes, since dead, told me the following some 16 or 1 7 years ago. She had an only son, fond of fishing, which recreation he indulged in during the forenoon, and had been for some years most punctual to be home for dinner at 12 o'clock. One day he did not make his appearance at the usual hour. His mother opened the window to look out for him, when she heard him call her several times, and on turning round she saw her son coming through the wall, and making his exit through the opposite wall.^ An hour or so afterwards, a message was brought to her, that her son fell over the pier an hour ago, and was drowned. Madame Esperon was a most worthy woman, and told me her story bathed in tears. A mother weeping for her only son tells no lies."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Lyons adds: —

" Madame Esperon was in mourning for her son when she told me the sad story. I was very intimate with her, and my daughter, who went with me to Nantes, was a frequent visitor at her house."

(637) From Mr. John Williams, 99, Wellington Road, Dudley.

"April 7, 1884. "On December 3rd, 1849, my mother died, between the hours of 9 and 10 p.m. Her sister, living from 3 to 4 miles away, saw her on the top of the staircase, she having just gone to bed, at the same time that mother expired. Such was the effect, that she sent a messenger next morning to see if her sister was really dead."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Williams states that his mother died at The Hays, Old Swinford, Worcestershire. His aunt (Sarah Piper, formerly

1 See p. 48, note.

2 As to the mis-recognition, compare cases 170, 171, and 676.

3 See Vol. i., pp. 432 (note) and 573.

584 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

of JSTetherton, Dudley) is now deceased. He heard of her experience from his sister, Mrs. Raybould, of Stourbridge (aged 14 at the time), who, he says, " well remembers aunt coming in the afternoon, after the return of the messenger, and telling father and her as to seeing her sister at the top of the staircase. I was not at home when she (aunt) called, so I heard it from my sister, or father, when I got home the same evening of aunt's visit. My sister well remembers what her aunt said, and to-day (February 16, 1886) she told me that aunt said, mother called her by name (Sarah) 3 times -^ so she not only saw, but heard her.

"J. W."

The Register of Deaths confirms Dec. 3, 1849, as the date.

Mrs. Raybould writes, on April 7, 1886: —

" I remember well the night of December 3, 1849, it being the night of my dear mother's death, which happened about 9.40 p.m. On the following day my aunt, mother's sister, Sarah Piper, came to our house in the afternoon, and said she knew that my mother was dead, for she saw her at the top of the stairs in her bedroom, and heard her call ' Sarah,' 3 times. This, from the time she stated as having seen and heard her, was as near the time mother died as possible.

"Maey Raybould."

In answer to an inquiry, Mr. Williams says that his aunt knew nothing of her sister's illness — puerperal fever after a premature confinement— " so could not be expecting her death."

(638) From Mrs. Say Thomson, 47, Albany Villas, Brighton.^

"February, 1886.

" I will relate the incident that occurred to my late husband, Colonel Thomson, as I was with him at Brussels at the time. Colonel Thomson was with the King of the Belgians, at Brussels, and his brother, the Count de Flandres — and, I believe, very few others in the room. He was writing down instructions from the king about the volunteers that Lord Heaton and he had brought over. Someone leant over him, and said, 'Your brother wants you '; he answered, ' Tell him I am now engaged with the king, and impossible to leave him; but ask him to wait.' Being very much engaged writing down the king's directions, he said he half looked round, and saw a man in his volunteer uniform; he hardly gave him a glance, but said he would come as soon as he could. Directly he was disengaged, he went into the ante-room, and asked the many he knew there if they had heard anyone asking for him, as he heard his brother had arrived in Brussels. Of course all questions were asked, privately, and on parade, but all wearing his uniform denied having called him. Moreover, the two sentries who were on guard, outside the room the king was in, said it was impossible that any volunteer had passed in without their knowledge. In the course of a few days he heard of his brother's death.

" I cannot tell you day and date of Mr. John Sinclair Thomson's

1 See p. 229, note.

2 A very incorrect version of this occurrence was given in No. 13 of " Volunteering, Past and Present," by " Ancient," in the Volunteer Service Review, July 1st, 1882.

death, but I have no doubt my sister-in-law can supply you with correct information on that point. Colonel Thomson was commanding the Tower Hamlets Rifle Brigade, consisting of three corps; but at Brussels Lord Heaton and he took over, I think, at least 800 volunteers to Belgium. Colonel Thomson died the next year, June 8th, 1870. He was at Brussels in August or September the year before. I never heard of my husband seeing or hearing anything supernatural ^ before.

" W. S. Thomson." In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Thomson writes on March 7th, 1886: — " The hour my husband heard the voice, telling him his brother waited for him, was noon. The news of his brother's death did not come until the next day. But whether the hours of hearing the voice and the death occurred at the same time I am unable to say. We hardly ever spoke of it, as it was not a subject Colonel Thomson cared to discuss."

We learn from Miss Kate Thomson, a daughter of Mr. John S. Thomson, that her father died at about 8 p.m., on Saturday, Sept. 11th, 1869, at Aitechuan House, Ardrishaig, Argyleshire; and we have verified the date by an obituary notice in the Scotsman.

Mr. Podmore writes, February 9th, 1886: —

" I called on Mrs. John Sinclair Thomson, of 18, Gloucester Walk, Campden Hill, W., on the 9th February, and heard the narrative, as here given, from her. Her husband's death was quite unexpected, — the illness being only a sudden attack of gout; and she thinks it is certain that Colonel Thomson did not even know that his brother was ill. She herself did not see Colonel Thomson in the interval before his own death in the following June; but shortly after that event she heard, for the first time, of the above occurrence from a Dr. Walker, of Peterborough, who had received an account of it from Colonel Thomson himself. She has subsequently heard the full details from Mrs. Say Thomson."

[If the letter announcing the death really arrived at Brussels, from Scotland, on the day following Colonel Thomson's experience, the death must clearly have preceded that experience by more than 12 hours. But Mrs. Thomson admits that she has no distinct recollection of the interval that elapsed before the arrival of the letter, and indeed spoke of it, in the first letter in which she mentioned the occurrence to us, as " a few days "; and though her son, Mr. J. F. Alison Thomson, of Croxton Lodge, Clarendon Street, Leamington, mentions having heard from his father that the letter arrived "on the following morning after the warning," he adds a sentence showing that he conceives this to be tantamount to saying that the days of the death and of his father's experience were the same; and his evidence, therefore, cannot be held to decide the point.]

(639) From Mr. Williams, Summerfield, Rhyl.

"November 23, 1885.

" About 46 years ago my father went to a place near XJtica, in America, leaving my mother with myself, then six years of age, a younger brother, and a baby sister at home at Bontuchel, in North Wales. In his corre-

1 See p. 48, note.

586 SUPPLEMENT. [chap-

spondence with my mother he described the country to which he had gone, and intimated his purpose to return home and sell his property at Bontuchel, and take us all out to live there. We all slept in a two-bedded room, with windows facing each other. My brother and I were together in one of the beds, asleep, before my mother came to bed with the baby. After putting the lights out she heard a noise resembling the flapping of a bird's wing against the windows. It was a moonlight night. She got up and looked out of the window, but seeing nothing returned to bed. Immediately after this she saw my father standing in the room, dressed in his usual clothes, and looking at her and at the child lying beside her. As soon as she caught his eye he turned his back upon them, and looked at us as we lay in the other bed. My mother called him by his name, and got out of bed to go to him, fully believing that it was he, but he instantly vanished. So terrified was she now that she left the house the next day, and went to her parents, who lived at Ruthin, taking us with her. About six weeks after this removal, a letter came sealed with black, written by a friend of my father's, detailing the circumstances of his illness, of his death and burial, and specifying the time of his demise. My mother had carefully recorded the time of her vision, and now found that, allowing for difference of longitude, it corresponded exactly to that of his death. I remember my mother's sudden removal from Bontuchel to Ruthin, and heard her repeatedly relate the particulars here given. I cannot say that I heard her relate the particulars before she received the letter; but I remember distinctly that she said she gave them to her parents, at the time of her removal, as the reason why she came to them so suddenly. My brother and sister, still living, can corroborate this testimony.

" W. Williams." [The brother's and sister's corroboration has not been received in time for insertion.]

The following is the only instance known to me in which telepathy seems actually to have aided the course of the law. The story is remote, but we have the contemporary evidence; and there seems no reason to doubt that a coincidence of the kind alleged took place.

(640) The Buckingham, Bedford, and Hertford Chronicle for Nov. 1, 1828, states that on Saturday, Oct. 25, 1828, William Edden, market gardener (called Noble Edden), was found dead on the road between Aylesbury and Thame, with several ribs broken. He was discovered by Mr. Taylor, miller, who was returning from Aylesbury, and gave the alarm. At the adjourned inquest, on Nov. 5, a verdict of murder was returned against some person unknown.

The Buckingham Gazette of August 22, 1829, gives an account of the apprehension of a man named Sewell, who had stated in a letter to his father that he knew who had killed Edden. He accused a man named Tyler, and both were tried at the Aylesbury Petty Sessions, August 22, before Lord Nugent, Sir J. D. King, R. Browne, Esq., and others. On the first day of the examination, Mrs. Edden, wife of the murdered man, gave the following evidence: — " After my husband's corpse was brought home, I sent to Tyler, for some reasons I had, to come and see the corpse.

I sent for him five or six times. I had some particular reason for sending for him which I never did divulge.... I will tell my reasons if you gentlemen ask me, in the face of Tyler, even if my life should be in danger for it. When I was ironing a shirt, on the Saturday night my husband was murdered, something came over me — something rushed over me — and I thought my husband came by me. I looked up, and I thought I heard the voice of my husband come from near my mahogany table, as I turned from my ironing. I ran out and said, ' Oh, dear God! my husband is murdered, and his ribs are broken.' I told this to several of my neighbours. Mrs. Chester was the first to whom I told it. I mentioned it also at the Saracen's Head."

Sir J. D. King: " Have you any objection to say why you thought your husband had been mui"dered '? " " No! I thought I saw my husband's apparition and the man that had done it, and that man was Tyler, and that was the reason I sent for him.... When my neighbours asked me what was the matter when I ran out, I told them that I had seen my husband's apparition.... When I mentioned it to Mrs. Chester I said: ' My husband is murdered, and his ribs are broken; I have seen him by the mahogany table.' I did not tell her who did it. Mrs. Chester answered, I was always frightened, since my husband had been stopped on the road. [The deceased Edden had once before been waylaid, but was then too powerful for his assailants.] In consequence of what I saw, I went in search of my husband, until I was taken so ill I could go no further."

Lord Nugent: " What made you think your husband's ribs were broken?" " He held up his hand like this " (holds up her arm), " and I saw a hammer, or something like a hammer, and it came into my mind that his ribs were broken."

Sewell stated that the murder was accomplished by means of a hammer. The examination was continued on August 31 and September 13; and finally both prisoners were discharged for want of sufficient evidence. Sewell declared that he had only been a looker-on, and his accusations against Tyler were so full of prevarications that they were not held sufficient to incriminate him. The inquiry was again resumed on February 11, 1830, and Sewell, Tyler, and a man named Gardner were committed for trial.

The trial (see Buckingham Gazette, March 13, 1830,) took place at the Buckingham Lent Assizes, March 5, 1830, before Mr. Baron Yaughan, and a Grand Jury; but in the report of Mrs. Edden's evidence, no mention is made of the vision.

Sewell and Tyler were found guilty, and were executed, protesting their innocence, on March 8, 1830.

Miss Browne, writing to us from Farnham Castle, in January, 1884, gives an account of the vision which substantially accords with that here recorded, adding: —

" The wife persisted in her account of the vision; consequently, the accused was taken up, and, with some circumstantial evidence in addition to the woman's story, committed for trial by two magistrates, my father Colonel Robert Browne, and the Rev. Charles Ackfield. The murderer was tried and convicted at the Assizes, and hanged at Aylesbury.

588 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" It may be added that Colonel Browne was remarkably free from superstition, and was a thorough disbeliever in ' ghost stories/ He came home, and said, laughing, ' We have had a ghost called in, in court to-day. We shall see how the story is confirmed! ' "

The following narrative may be compared to the arrival examples in Chap. XIV., § 7. But if we found a difficulty, in any case, in regarding the mere fact of impending arrival as the occasioning condition of a telepathic transference (p. 96), the difficulty is intensified when the arrival is of someone with whom the percipient is in daily association, and who has only been away an hour or two on ordinary business. I think, therefore, that the chance that the experience here described was purely subjective is too appreciable to allow the account to be numbered as evidence.

A letter written to the Spectator 'by the late Rev. W. L. Clay, of Rainhill Vicarage, under date Feb. 9, 1869.

" On a Sunday afternoon, about 30 years ago (the precise date I cannot recollect), my mother and eldest sister, then about 8 years old, were sitting together in the dining-room. No one else was in the house except a younger child and his nurse, and another servant; all the rest of the family were... at church, and my father, John Clay, of Preston, was at the gaol. He was due home in about half an-hour, it then being nearly 4 o'clock. The afternoon was very wet, but very still, the rain pouring in torrents, but with an even, steady downpour. While sitting thus my mother heard footsteps approach, and presently some one opened and passed through the yard-door. (This yard-door faced on the road. The nearest house was full 500 yards distant, and any one going to the front door would have to pass this yard-door, the diningroom windows, another window, and then turn round the corner of the house, through a gate in the garden.) She was a good deal startled, more especially as this door, according to domestic regulations, ought to have been locked. She roused herself to listen with all her might, and heard distinctly — all the more distinctly as the house was so quiet — the person who had opened the yard-door enter the house by the back door, traverse a passage in the basement storey, open the door at the foot of the back stairs, mount the back stairs, and enter the front hall. But by this time she was completely reassured, for she had recognised my father's footsteps. He put his umbrella into the stand, with a rattling noise, took off his top-coat and shook it, and then came through the inner hall into the dining-room. The hall-door and dining-room door were both ajar, so she easily heard all this. He went up to the fire, and resting his elbow on the mantel-piece, and one foot on the fender, stood there for a few moments drying himself. At length she said, ' You must be very wet; had you not better go and change your clothes at once? ' ' Yes,' he replied, ' I think I had better do so,'i and so he turned, left the room, and went upstairs to his dressing-room.

" As he did not come down again for more than half -an-hour, my

^ See p. 460, second note.

mother followed him to see what was the cause of his delay. To her astonishment, she found his room empty, and no sign of his having been there. She searched all through the rooms on the same landing, but could not find him, and at length came down puzzled and frightened; but trying to calm herself with the supposition that, although she had not noticed his departure, he must have left the house again for some purpose or other. But while she sat there, still flurried and uneasy, she heard again the same footsteps approaching, the same opening of the yard-door, the same entrance by the back door, the same traversing of the passage downstairs, and mounting by the back stairs into the hall, the same putting down of the umbrella, and shaking of the coat, and then my father came into the room, walked up to the fire, and placed his elbow on the mantel-piece, and foot on the fender, just as he had done before. ' Why, where have you been? ' exclaimed my mother, as soon as she could speak after the first gasp of amazement. ' Been? ' he said, turning round and noticing for the first time her excitement and distress, ' I have been to the gaol as usual.' ' Oh! you know that's not what I mean. I mean where have you been since you came in by the back door just as you have done just now, rather more than half-an-hour ago? ' 'I don't understand you at all; I have come straight from the gaol and have never been in the house since I left this morning.' ' Oh, it's too bad playing jokes like this to frighten me, when you know I am not well.' (My mother was in delicate health at the time.) And then, in answer to his amazed questions, she poured out the story I have told you.

" I believe the incident happened exactly as I have narrated. I have heard my father tell the story repeatedly, and he was singularly accurate and truthful. My mother's account, too, tallies precisely with his. My sister cannot now, I think, distinguish between what she recollects and what she has so often heard related. But my father at the time questioned her as to what she had heard and seen, and her account was that ' I saw mamma get up suddenly, and go into papa's dressing-room, and then she went into all the rooms upstairs as if she was looking for something, and then she came down and looked as if something was the matter, but she wouldn't answer me when I asked her what it was.'

" When my mother told her story my father instantly recollected that as he left the gaol the thought occurred to him, when he saw how heavy the rain was, that if he found the yard-door unlocked he would go in that way — a thing that he very seldom did — to avoid going round the corner to the front door, and the thought having once occurred he mentally rehearsed the circumstances of his entrance — doing in spirit precisely what he afterwards did in the body. The distance from the gaol to our house at East Cliff" was rather more than two miles, and... this corresponds with my mother's ' rather more than half-an-hour.'

"W. L. Clay."

Mrs. Clay, widow of the Rev. W. L. Clay, and a friend of Professo Barrett's, writes on 24th September, 1883: —

" I have more than once heard the story related and discussed in my mother-in-law's presence by her husband. There is no doubt she firmly believed in the vision. My impression is that he thought it had been a very vivid dream. u -^ j Clay "

CHAP.



Chapter VIII. Reciprocal Cases.

The following specimens, or possible specimens, of this rare type seem worth presenting, though for the most part far from complete from an evidential point of view.

(641) From a clergyman in Yorkshire, who desires that his name may not be published.

"January, 1885.

" The following experience took place nearly 25 years ago, but there is no doubt of its correctness in every detail. I became acquainted with a young lady in London, who, I may say without vanity, fell violently in love with me. There was a strange fascination about her which attracted me to her, but, although very young, I was far from reciprocating her affection. By degrees I discovered that she had the power of influencing me when I was away from her, making me seem to realise her presence about me when I knew that she was some distance away; and then that she was able, when I saw her, to tell me where I had been and what I had been doing at certain times. At first I thought that this was merely the result of accident — that some one had seen me and reported to her — until one day she told me that at a certain hour of the day I had been in a drawing-room, which she described, when I knew there had been no chance of collusion, and that no one could have told her of my visit to the house.

" She then told me that when she began intently to fix her mind on me, she seemed to be able to see me and all my surroundings.^ At first she fancied it was only imagination, until she saw by my manner that what she described had really taken place. I had several opportunities afterwards of testing this power, and found she was correct in every instance.

" I need scarcely say that when I had satisfied myself of this, I kept out of the way of such a dangerous acquaintance. We did not meet for about 10 years, and had drifted so widely apart as to lose sight of each other. One day I was walking with my wife on the West Cliff at Ramsgate, when a strange feeling of oppression came over me, and I was compelled to sit down. A few minutes afterwards my old acquaintance stood before me, introducing me to her husband and asking to be introduced to my wife.

1 See Vol. i., p. 268.

" We met several times while they stayed at Ramsgate, and I learned that she had been married for some years, and had several children; but I have seen nothing of them since, and have no wish, even if I had the opportunity, of renewing the acquaintance. No reference whatever was made to the past, and I did not learn whether she had still the strange power she formerly possessed."

This may probably have been a reciprocal case, though we cannot now ascertain whether the impressions which suggested to each.of the two parties the other's presence were simultaneous. The only other case in our collection where a prolonged course of reciprocal action is alleged to have occurred is the following.

(642) From Miss L. A. W. (the narrator of case 140), whose only reason for withholding her name from publication is that she is sure that her family would object to its appearance.

She begins by saying that when she was 19 or 20, she had a spell of indifferent health, caused, it was thought, by over-study. During this time, from March in one year till June in the next, she was much troubled at intervals by singular dreams, which she recorded in a note-book, and also described to one of her sisters. The main feature in these dreams was the appearance of a particidar person. " I was not in love, nor indeed had I been; and certainly no feeling but that of a mysterious repugnance (and at the same time an inability to avoid or escape from the influence of the person of whom I dreamt) actuated me. He was someone I had never in all my life wittingly seen, though I had reason to think afterwards that he had seen me at a Birmingham musical festival. On that occasion I had apparently fainted, and it was attributed to the heat and the excitement of the music. I hardly knew if it were or not. I only knew I felt all my pulses stop, and a burning and singing in my head, and that I was perfectly conscious of those around me, but unable to speak and tell them so. To return to my dreams. I always knew as I slept when the influence was coming over me, and often in my dream I commenced it by thinking, ' Here it is, or here he comes again.' They were not always disagreeable dreams in themselves, but the fascination was always dreadful to me, and a kind of struggle between two natures within me seemed to drag my powers of mind and body two ways. I used to.awake as cold as a stone in the hottest nights, my head having the queer feeling of a hot iron pressing somewhere in its inside. I would shiver and my teeth chatter with a terror which seemed unreasonable, for there was, even in the subjects of my dreams, seldom anything wicked or terrifying."

The dreams ceased after a course of medical treatment. In the next year but one Miss W. was visiting in Liverpool. " I had enjoyed two or three good dances, and was sitting out one, by the lady of the house, when not suddenly, but by degrees, I felt myself turning cold and stony, and the peculiar burning in my head. If I could have spoken I would have said, ' My dreams! my dreams! ' but I only shivered, which attracted the notice of my companion, who exclaimed, ' You are ill, my dear. Come for some wine, or hot coffee.' I rose, knowing what I was going to see, and as I turned, I looked straight into the eyes of the fac-simile of the being

592 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

who had been present to my sleeping thoughts for so long, and the next moment he stepped forward from the pillar against which he was leaning behind the lace curtain, and shook hands with my companion. He accompanied us to the refreshment room, attended to my wants, and was introduced to me. I declined dancing, but could not avoid conversation. His first remark was, ' We are not strangers to each other. Where have we met? ' I fear I shall scarcely be believed when I say, that (setting my teeth, and nerving myself to meet what I felt would conquer me, if I once submitted in even the slightest degree) I answered that I never remembered meeting him before, and to all his questionings returned the most reserved answers. He seemed much annoyed and puzzled, but on that occasion did not mention dreams.

" I took an opportunity of asking my sister if she remembered my description of the man of my dreams, and upon her answering ' Yes,' asked her to look round the rooms and see if any one there resembled him, and half-an-hour later she came up, saying, ' There is the man, he has. even the mole on the left side of his mouth.' "

Miss W. subsequently met this gentleman at almost every party she went to. " He was sometimes so gloomy and fierce at my determined avoidance of any but the most ordinary conversation, that I felt quite a. terror of meeting him. He frequently asked if I believed in dreams; if I could relate any to him; if I had never seen him before; and would say, after my persistent avoidance of the subject, ' I can do nothing, so long as you will not trust me. ' "

Miss W. says that she has several pages, in her note-book, of entries of dreams in which she seemed to be accompanying her visitor in a flight, through the world.

" When conversing with him in the flesh, he asked me if I had ' ever travelled.' I said ' No.' He showed surprise, and began to dilate on the wonders of such and such a place or scene, all of which I felt sure I had. seen with him, and entered in my note-book. It was deeply interesting, and I was totally absorbed in his recitals, time after time, when heabruptly stopped, saying, ' But have you never had scenes such as these before you? ' and I replied, ' Yes, in my dreams I have.' Such, or similar remarks, I know I have noted down, and his eagerness to make me admit, similar experiences was at times almost fierce. I had a great longing at times to tell him everything, but an innate sense that by so doing I should, be as completely his slave and tool as I had been in dreams, always stopped me."

The efibrt of these conversations was so exhausting to Miss W. that, she wrote home to get herself recalled — a fact which her strange acquaintance seems to have intuitively divined, and for which he bitterly reproached her. She has never seen him since. She says, in answer toinquiries: — " You are right in your conjecture that he inferred [? implied] he had seen me in dreams. He often talked as if he were perfectly aware that I knew it, but that I would not go beyond a certain limit in admitting anything." She adds that her sister remembers all the circumstances— the dreams, their frequency, and the correct description of the' man subsequently met; but we have not been able to procure the sister's written confirmation. Miss W. says that she cannot spare the time to. make extracts from her diary for publication.

[I£ the details here are quite accurate, it would be reasonable to explain the case telepathically. But it is possible to suppose that the dreamfigure assumed the distinctness which made it seem the counterpart of the real figure, only after the real one was seen; and that Miss W. herself led the conversations in the directions where they seemed to confirm her dream-experiences. Without an independent account from the gentleman himself, the interpretation of the case must remain dubious; and as Miss W. is unwilling to mention his name, no more can be done. Should the account ever meet his eye, it is to be hoped that he will communicate with us.]

In the next case it is impossible to tell how closely the two experiences coincided.

(643) From Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood, 31, Queen Anne Street, W.

" February 10th, 1886.

" I send you a well-authenticated dream of my daughter-in-law, Mrs. Alfred Wedgwood, with the vouchers. You will see that she told it immediately after the occurrence to Mrs. K., and to me a day or two afterwards, on her return to Queen Anne Street. I have a strong recollection that it was on that occasion that she explained her noticing the ring, by saying that in her dream the stranger leant his hand on the bedside as he stooped over her. She expressed great confidence that she should know him again if ever she saw him, and I told her to let me know if ever she did. However, she never mentioned to me the fact of her having fallen in with him that autumn, and she only mentioned it incidentally, when she was with me last Christmas, as a matter well-known to me.

" If I had known it at the time, we might perhaps have been able to ascertain how far the dreams were synchronous. It is not likely that they were absolutely so, as hers was in the afternoon.

" H. Wedgwood."

" In June, '84, I went to Folkestone to look out for a house, and slept for a night or two at the West Cliff Hotel. The second day I was there, being a good deal tired, I went up in the afternoon to my room, locked the door and fell asleep upon my bed, having undressed myself and merely covered myself with the sheet, it being a warm day. After a while, I was startled out of sleep by dreaming in a very lively way that a gentleman, whom I had never seen before, was stooping over me. He was dressed in a dark grey tweed suit; he wore on his little finger a cornelian ring, and a small cameo pin which was a veiled figure. I observed that one of his eyes drooped a little. There were a number of Zulus standing behind him. When he bent down towards me he put out his hand and said, ' Poor thing, you seem tired.'

