This case again seems difficult to explain except on the reciprocal theory. It is true that there is not the same proof in the case of Mr, L. as in that of Mrs. Smith above, that the scene which he saw was transferred, and not spontaneously pictured; for the place was familiar to him, and no unusual details are mentioned. But, on the other hand, his experience seems to have been quite unlike an ordinary dream; its very unusualness is what allows us to connect it with Mrs. Parker's simultaneous and unique vision; and if we may regard it as having been conditioned by the presence in the perceived scene of his patient, Mr. Parker — who forms, so to speak, the pivot of the case — the fact that Mr. Parker himself was not consciously affected can still be accounted for on the analogy of such instances as Nos. 242 and 355.^

The next case was one of collective percipience; but its best place is in the present, chapter. The full names of the persons concerned may be mentioned, but not printed. Mrs. S., one of the

percipients, writes: —

"April, 1883.

(308) "A and B^ are two villages in Norfolk, distant about five miles from each other. At the time of the occurrence about to be related, the clergymen of these parishes both bore the same name, though there was no relationship between them; at the same time there was a great friendship between the two families. On the 20th February, 1870, a daughter, Constance, about 14 years old, of the clergyman of A, was staying with the other family — a daughter, Margaret, in that family, being her great friend. Edward W., the eldest son of the Rector of A, was at that time lying dangerously ill at home with inflammation of the lungs, and was frequently delirious. On the day mentioned, at about noon, Margaret and Constance were in the garden of B Rectory, running down a path which was separated by a hedge from an orchard adjoining; they distinctly heard themselves called twice, apparently from the orchard, thus: ' Connie, Margaret — Connie, Margaret.' They stopped, but could see no one, and so went to the house, a distance of about 40 yards, concluding that one of Margaret's brothers had called them from there. But to their surprise they

1 I should further conjecture one of the conditions of Mrs. Parker's percipience to have been the fact that she was actually contemplating the scene in which Mr. S. seemed to find himself (see pp. 267-9).

2 These letters are substituted for those actually given for the sake of clearness. The names of the villages were not suppressed in the accounts that follow; but as they were suppressed in this first one, it has been thought right to suppress them throughout.

found that this was not the case; and Mrs. W., Margaret's mother, assured the girls no one had called them from the house, and they therefore concluded they must have been mistaken in supposing they had heard their names repeated. This appeared to be the only explanation of the matter, and nothing more was thought of it.

"That evening Constance returned to her home at A. On the following day, Mrs. W. drove over to inquire for the sick boy Edward. In the course of conversation, his mother said that the day before he had been delirious, and had spoken of Constance and Margaret, that he had called to them in his delirium, and had then said, ' Now I see them running along the hedge, but directly I call them they run towards the house.' Mrs. W., of B, at once called to mind the mystery of the previous day, and asked, ' Do you know at what time that happened? ' Edward's mother replied that it was at a few minutes past 12, for she had just given the invalid his medicine, 12 being his hour for taking it. So these words were spoken by Edward at the same time at which the two girls had heard themselves called, and thus only could the voice from the orchard be accounted for.

(The "Margaret " of the narrative.)

The following statement is from Mrs. R., the " Constance " of the narrative.

"Sept. 1884.

" Margaret and I were walking in some fields at B., away from the road, but not very far from the house. Here I heard a voice call ' Connie and Margaret ' clearly and distinctly. I should not have identified it with Ted's voice \i.e., her brother's at A.], for we thought it was one of the B brothers at the time, till we found no one had called us. I remember that it was before early dinner, and that I was expecting to be fetched home that same morning, because of Ted's illness; and that Mrs. W. thought of asking mother if Ted had mentioned our names in any way, before she told her of what had passed at B. I ought to add that an explanation of the * story might be found in the conduct of some B plough-boy, playing a trick ' upon us. The situation was such that he might easily have kept out of '■. sight behind a hedge. jj p -p, -o „

Mr. Podmore says: —

" November 26th, 1883.

" I saw Mrs. R. yesterday. She told me that they recognised the voice vaguely as a well-known one at the time. She thinks that the coincidence in time was quite exact, because Mrs. W. of B made a note of the circumstance immediately. Her brother^an old school-fellow of mine — cannot recollect the incident at all."

[If a written note was made, the girls' experience must have seemed odder than the "nothing more was thought of it " in Mrs. S.'s account would imply.]

Mrs. W. of A 'says: —

" My son was about 17 years old. He had had fever and infiammation, and was weakened by illness. It was about 12 o'clock. I was sitting with him, after his washing and dressing, and he seemed quiet and

166 RECIPROCAL CASES. [chap.

sleepy, but not asleep. He suddenly sprang forward, pointed his finger, with arms outstretched, and called out in a voice the loudness of which astonished me, ' Connie and Margaret! ' with a stress on each name, ' near the hedge,' looked wildly at them, and then sank down, tired. I thought it odd at the time, but, considering it a sort of dream, did not allude to it. The next day, Mrs. W. called with Connie and Margaret, and said the girls had heard their names called; had run home; were walking by a hedge in their field, had found no one had called them from B Rectory. The voice sounded familiar, but as far as I can remember — my daughter will say — it was not distinctly thought to be Edward's. I at once told my story, as it was too striking not to be named. They said it was about 12 o'clock. Though he was constantly delirious in the evening, when the pulse rose, he was never so in the middle of the day, and there was no appearance of his being so at the time this occurred.

Mrs. W. of B says:—

"August, 1884.

" Connie was staying with us on account of the illness of her brother Edward, and had — with Margaret — been reading with me one morning. At about 11.30 they went into the garden to play (they were girls of about 1.3 and 14), and in half an hour came up to the window to know what I wanted. I said 'Nothing,' and that I had not called them, though they had heard both their names called repeatedly, I asked them where they were when they heard it, and they said in the next walk — which, you will remember, is formed on one side by the orchard hedge. Margaret said directly, ' There, Connie; I said it was not mother's, but a boy's voice.' Then I turned to look at the clock — for we had some boys as pupils then — and I said, ' It would not be one of the boys, for they are not out of the study; it is now 12 o'clock, and I hear them coming out.'

" I was to take Connie home that afternoon, ^ and, on arriving, of course my first question was, ' How was Edward V Mrs. W. told me that he had not been so well, and had been very delirious. She said that morning he had been calling, ' Margaret! Connie! Margaret! Connie! Oh, they are running by a hedge, and worCt listen to me.' I did not say what had happened at home, but asked if she knew at what time this had so distressed him. She said 'Yes;' for she had looked at the clock, hoping it was nearly time to give him his medicine, which always quieted him, and was thankful to find it was just 12 o'clock."

Here we seem to have, on the part of the two girls, a telepathic hallucination, reproducing the exact words that were in the mouth and ear of the sick boy; and, on his part, a vision reflected from their minds, and once more illustrating how what might be described as clairvoyance may be a true variety of thought-transference. The suggestion at the end of Mrs. E,.'s account must not be over-

1 The other accounts make it probable that it was not till next day that Mrs. W. of B went to A.

looked; but I should be glad to know of precedents for hidden plough-boys calling out the Christian names of clergymen's daughters and their friends. Nor do I quite see how such a freak could merit the designation of a " trick "; it would surely be a mere piece of aimless and pointless rudeness — unless, indeed the plough-boy was enjoying a telepathic chuckle at the idea that his cry might be confounded with another, which was being simultaneously uttered five miles off.

It will be seen that the number of these reciprocal cases (even with the addition of those in the Supplement) is small — so small that the genuineness of the type might fairly enough be called in question. There is some danger that our view of the rarer telepathic phenomena may be unduly affected by the sense of certainty that gradually and reasonably forms with regard to the broad fact of telepathy itself The argument for the reality of telepathy, we must remember, depends on a mass of narratives so large as to make a universal error in the essential point of all or nearly all of them exceedingly improbable; and is not available in respect of peculiar features, which are present in only a very small proportion of the alleged cases. For these, the various possibilities of error so fully discussed in the general sketch of the evidence (Vol. I., Chap. IV.) may seem quite sufficient to account; and the greater the theoretic interest of the peculiarities, the more jealously must their evidential claims be scrutinised. As to reciprocality, the reader will form his own opinion. That the examples should be few, as compared with those of the simpler telepathic types, cannot at this stage of our inquiry seem unnatural. For if, amid all the apparent opportunities that human lives present, the unkiiown and probably transient conditions of telepathic percipience and of telepathic agency only occasionally chance to coincide, so as to produce a telepathic phenomenon at all (pp. 77-8); and if, of the two, the conditions of percipience are the rarer, as experimental thought-transference would lead us to suppose; then the complete conditions of a reciprocal case must be rare among the rare. Still, if they have occurred, they will occur again. If my colleagues and I are right in supposing the type to be a genuine one, we ought to obtain, as time goes on, some more well-attested specimens of it; and to this we look forward with considerable confidence.

[chap.



Chapter XVIII. Collective Cases.

I 1. The telepathic cases quoted in the foregoing chapters have almost all affected a single percipient only; and the fact that sometimes the percipient was in company at the time, and that his sensory experience was unshared by any one present/ has confirmed the view (to which all other considerations seemed to converge) that telepathic affections of the senses are in the most literal sense hallucinations. But we have already encountered a few cases where the senses of more than one percipient have been affected f and what awaits us in the present chapter is the discussion and complete illustration of this perplexing feature.

Of course the first view which is suggested by the fact that two or more people have seen or heard the same thing at the same time is that the sight or sound, however abnormal and unaccountable, was due to some objective reality within the range of their senseorgans — in other words, that it was not a hallucination at all.^ Hence those apparently telepathic instances where a sensory experience, representative of some absent person, has been shared by more than one percipient, would imply the immediate presence of some sort of physical wraith, or at any rate of an objective human presence.

I scarcely know how far the idea of a literal wraith is seriously entertained by any educated person in the present day. Gaseous and vaporous ghosts are, I imagine, quite at a discount; but the word " ether " seems sometimes to be used as a way out of the

1 See the list of cases given m p. 105, second note.

2 Nos. 14, 36, 169, 254 (first incident), 258, 264, 279, 302 (second incident), 308; case 166 is a possible instance. See also the dream-cases 127 and 144.

<* It was in this occasional feature of collective percipience that Falck, in 1692, found the strongest argument for the production of hallucinations by an external and daemonic power. See p. 72 of his able and elaborate dissertation against Hobbes and Spinoza, in De Ucmonologid recentiorum Autorum.

difficulty. For many ears the word has, no doubt, a convenient vagueness; but, in fact, we know of no mode by which ether can affect the retina, except through waves started by luminous substances of known type. And even if etherial ghosts could be seen, the auditory phenomena would remain a hopeless obstacle to a satisfactory physical explanation of them. For even the assumption of some tenuous and elusive form of matter, which somehow hangs about in relation to the mysterious ether, seems less desperate than the assumption that such a tenuous presence could move the air in the infinitely complex vibration-patterns which correspond to speech or music — that is to say, could produce at will an effect of inconceivable difficulty and complexity on certain gross elements of the known material world.

As to the notion of an objective presence which may affect the perceptive faculty of several persons without producing changes in the external world, one sort of case is conceivable which would no doubt favour it — e.g., if two persons, situated at some distance from one another, saw the appearance in the respective relations of distance and posture which a real object of the same kind would bear to them — one of them, it might be, seeing a full face, and the other a profile. But I know of no examples of this sort. And as a mere theory, the notion in question may be left with a single general comment; for though our path skirts, it had better not enter, the metaphysical labyrinth suggested by the words " objective reality." Let it be conceded then that, where there is a consensus of perception, it becomes a nice question for Idealism to determine how far, or in what sense, the percept lacks an objective basis. To put an extreme case — suppose all the seeing world, save one individual, had a visual percept, the object of which nevertheless eluded all physical tests: would the solitary individual be justified in saying that all the others were victims of a subjective delusion? and if he said so, would they agree with him? But then in this case, or in a less extreme one of the same kind, we might at any rate ask one of the perceivers to tell us what meaning he can attach to the objectivity of his percept, beyond that it has its existence in other minds besides his own. If he fails to supply us with any further meaning, on him surely lies the onus of proving that the conditions of the percept lie outside the perceiving minds; and if no proof be forthcoming, I then see no definite way of distinguishing this " objective " view of " collective hallucinations " from the view to be considered

170 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

immediately, which regards the community of percipience as a form of thought-transference.^

" But " — some objectors may say — "the question has been begged by assuming that the collective percept eludes physical tests. True, apparitions have not yet been subjected to spectroscopic analysis, nor have phantasmal remarks been recorded by the phonograph; but suppose that the form of a dying person not only appears, but opens the door or the window, and the door or the window remains open, thus affording to the muscles of the servant who closes it a test of a physical change in the external world — what account is to be given of this? " Now clearly such phenomena, even if established, would afford no convincing analogy by which to judge of cases where no similar physical tests are included. But, as a matter of fact, no records of the sort that we have met with have reached the evidential standard which would entitle them to a place in this book (see Vol. I., p. 165); and until they are established by irrefragable evidence, there is another analogy which has in every way a prior claim — namely, the facts of telepathy as so far set forth. Cannot our further facts be explained without going beyond the purely psychical transference for which we believe that we have ample evidence?

Let us see in what ways a theory of purely psychical impressions could cover the phenomena of collective hallucination. Two possible views of what may happen present themselves. The first of these would apply only to veridical cases — cases which are "telepathic" in the literal sense. On this view the simultaneous experiences would be traced to a cause external to the percipients; but this cause would not be a real object within the range of the percipients' senses, but a real condition of an absent person. A, who is passing through some crisis at a distance, produces a simultaneous telepathic impression on the minds of B and of C, who happen to be together; both B and C project this impression as a hallucination of the senses, in the way that has been so fully considered; and the hallucinations more or less nearly resemble each other.

The second view would apply equally to the cases which are, and to those which are not, telepathic, in this literal sense of relating to a

1 A j3st/cfeica^ condition outside the perceiving minds might, no doubt, be found in " disembodied intelligence." For the present, it is enough to remark that this change of " agency " to some further mind would leave the nature of the phenomenon unchanged. Experience thus caused may be called objective, if we will, but it is still thoughttransference; just as in Berkeley's view the whole objective universe was only thoughttransference in excelsis.

xviii.] COLLECTIVE CASES. 171

distant agent. The view is that the hallucination of one percipient, however caused, begets that of the other, by a process of thoughttransference; the hallucination is in itself, so to speak, infectious. B and C are together, and B has a hallucination — it may be veridical and due to a telepathic impression from the distant A, or it may be nonveridical and due to a spontaneous pathological disturbance of B's own brain; and this experience of B's is then communicated to C, whose brain follows suit and projects a kindred image. The process in fact would strongly recall those cases of simultaneous dreaming where one dream may be regarded as the cause of the other.^ It would be a fresh example of the psychological identity between the sleeping and the waking hallucinations on which so much stress has already been laid.

Such are the two possible views; and we have now to decide how far either, or both, may be reasonably entertained. I may state at once that in my opinion the best solution that the problem at present admits of involves a certain combination of the two (see § 7 below); but I shall consult clearness by first considering each of them separately.

§ 2. First, then, as regards the theory of the simultaneous origination of two or more hallucinations by a distant agent — we certainly know of no reason why a state of the agent which is telepathically effective at all, should be bound to confine its effects to a single percipient. That it generally does so confine them, may be easily explained by supposing a special susceptibility on the percipient's part, or a special rapport between him and the agent; but that occasionally the impression should extend to others, who Jiave also been sympathetically related to the agent, may seem no very astounding fact. Now if the impression were a merely inward experience, an impression of a merely ideal or emotional kind, and did not give rise to actual hallucination, this account of the matter might be plausible enough: it would apply for instance to Mr. H. S. Thompson's case, Vol. I., p. 99. But it will be remembered that we have seen reason to regard the hallucination as distinctively the percipient's work — as something projected by him under a telepathic stimulus; and we have found these sensory projections to take various forms according to the projector's idiosyncrasies. We have found, moreover, that the time during

1 Vol. i., pp. 314-20, and the opening cases in Chap. iii. of the Supplement.

172 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

which such hallucinations may take place extends over several hours — that we cannot name an exact moment at which the telepathic message will reach consciousness, or externalise itself to the sense. It becomes, then, extremely improbable that two or more persons should independently invest their respective telepathic impressions, at the same moment, with the sarfie sensory form; that they should all at once see the same figure, or hear the same sound, in apparently the same place. We should expect to find one of them embodying it in sound, and another, perhaps half an hour later, in visible shape; or one of them embodying it in sound or shape, and another only conscious of it as an inward idea; and so on. And for divergences of this sort, the evidence, though it exists, is small in amount.

But this is not all. On the theory that joint telepathic hallucinations are all exclusively and directly due to a distant agent, there is one thing that we should not expect to happen, and one thing that we should expect to happen. (1) We should not expect the group of percipients to include anyone who was a stranger to the agent; or who was not personally in such relations with the agent as would have rendered it natural for him, had he chanced to be alone at the time, to suffer the same telepathic experience. Nevertheless, cases exist where such an outside person has shared in the perception. And (2) we should expect that in a fair proportion of cases two or more percipients would share the perception, though they were not in each other's company at the time. For on the theory that is being considered, there would be no virtue in the mere local proximity of the percipients to one another; the agent is supposed to affect them by dint of his respective relations to each of them, which have nothing to do with their being together or apart. Now, in point of fact, we have a group of cases where the persons jointly affected have been apart, but they are disproportionately rare in comparison with the experiences shared by percipients who have been together; and in several of them, moreover, B and C, the two percipients, were near each other, and had been to some extent sharing the same life — conditions which may have had their share in the effect (see pp. 266-8). However, the existence of this type might no doubt be regarded as an argument for the occasional production ah extra of several similar and simultaneous hallucinations; and our few specimens may conveniently be cited at once.

I have already given (Vol. I., pp. 362-3) a case where two vivid dreams of a quite unexpected death were dreamt by persons who

xviii.] COLLECTIVE CASES. 173

were in the same house, but not in the same room. The following is a somewhat similar instance, but only one of the experiences was a dream. Mrs. Bettany, of 2, Eckington Villas, Ashbourne Grove, Dulwich (the narrator of case 20,) writes: —

"June, 1885.

(309) " On the evening o£, I think, March 23rd, 1883, I was seized with an unaccountable anxiety about a neighbour, whose name I just knew, but with whom I was not on visiting terms. She was a lady who appeared to be in very good health. I tried to shake off the feeling, but I could not, and after a sleepless night, in which I constantly thought of her as dying, I decided to send a servant to the house to ask if all were well. The answer I received was, ' Mrs. J. died last night.'

" Her daughter afterwards told me that the mother had startled her by saying, ' Mrs. Bettany knows I shall die.'

" I had never felt an interest in the lady before that memorable night. After the death, the family left the neighbourhood, and I have not seen any of them since.

We find from the Register of Deaths that Mrs. J. died on March 23,

1883.

The following is the evidence of the servant who was sent to inquire: —

"January, 1886.

" I remember Mrs. Bettany sending me to inquire if all were well at Mrs. J.'s. The answer they gave me was that Mrs. J. was dead. Mrs. Bettany sent me to inquire, because she had a presentiment that Mrs. J. was dead or dying."

Mrs. Bettany adds: —

" My cook, to whom I had not mentioned my presentiment, remarked to me on the same morning: 'I have had such a horrible dream about Mrs. J., I think she must be going to die.' She distinctly remembers that some one (she does not know who, and I think never did) told her in her dream that Mrs. J. was dead."

The following is the first-hand evidence to the dream: —

"January 11th, 1886.

" I remember that some one in my dream said ' Mrs, J. is dead.' I do not remember the rest of the dream, but I know it was horrible. I told Mrs. Bettany at the time, and she then told me about her presentiment about Mrs. J. " M. Went."

[M. Went has occasionally dreamt of the deaths of people she knows, without any correspondence.]

This case would seem to have been in some way "reciprocal"; and it is unfortunate that we cannot obtain further details of the dying woman's impression.

174 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

The next is a waking and sensory example of the same kind. It

was first obtained in writing from Mrs. Fagan, of Bovey Tracey^

Newton Abbot, the mother of one of the percipients; and her

account exemplifies the inaccuracies which second-hand evidence may

sometimes introduce, without really affecting the case in any vital

point.

" 1883.

(310) "While the Rev. C. C. T. Fagan [Mrs. Fagan's son], then Chaplain of Sealkote, India, was dressing for dinner on Christmas Day evening, 1876, his cousin, Christopher ^ Fagan, being similarly employed in an adjacent room, both heard the name 'Fagan ' called. The Rev. C. C. T. Fagan, though thinking it strange his cousin should thus address him, yet knowing no one else was in the house, went to him asking what he wanted, why he had not called him 'Charlie ' as usual, and remarking that the voice was like that of Captain Clayton, a cavalry officer, who had been under his pastoral charge, but was then at a distant station. His cousin replied that he too had heard the voice, and probably it was that of Major Collis, whom they were expecting to dinner. Upon this they adjourned to the drawing-room, where they found the Major, but as he had only just come in, he had neither called nor heard the voice.

" While telling him of what had occurred, they all three heard the same voice repeat the same name, and Major Collis remarked, ' It is like Clayton's voice.'

" The next morning a telegram was received to the effect that Captain Clayton died at that hour from an accident received while playing at polo."

Major Collis told our friend, the Rev. A. T. Fryer, of Clerkenwell, that Mr. Fagan and his cousin were standing in the doorway of the drawingroom talking, when they heard the call, " Fagan." He himself was dressing in his room, and they called out to him to know what he wanted; but he had not spoken, nor had he heard the call. Whilst they were talking together, the voice came a second time, and all three heard it.

On being applied to with regard to the discrepancy between these two accounts, the Rev. C. C. T. Fagan writes: —

" Sitapur, August 25th, 1883.

" So far as my memory serves, the statement of Major Collis is correct as to the curious coincidence of which he has told you. He was certainly staying in my house at the time, and was not a guest merely havited to dinner — as my cousin was. I cannot now say who suggested the voice sounded like that of Captain Clayton. " C. C T Fagan "

Mr. Fagan says, however, in another letter: "I am under the impression that my cousin did not hear the voice." He adds: " At or about the time in question, and on more occasions than one, I have imagined that I heard people calling me, but, I may add, this experience is now seldom or ever happening to me."

1 By a slip, Mrs. Fagan has called her nephew by her son's name — Christopher, instead of George.

xviii.] COLLECTIVE CASES. 175

Major Collis writes to us on August 2, 1884: —

" 3, Barton Terrace, Dawlish.

" In reply to the questions you ask, I have never had experience of any other auditory hallucination: neither have I ever had any hallucinations of the senses whatever. " G. Collis."

Mr. Fagan's cousin. Lieutenant G. Forbes Fagan, of the 10th Lancers, writes to us: —

" Simla, July 31st, 1885.

" I remember that on the afternoon of the day on which Captain Clayton met his death, I was in the Rev. C. Fagan's house at Sealkote; and he said he had heard his mother's voice calling to him, and that something was sure to happen. I heard no voice myself. When news arrived of Captain Clayton's death, my cousin said the voice must have had some connection with it. " G. F. Fagan."

In an interview with Mrs. Fagan, Prof essor Sidgwick learnt that Captain Clayton was intimate with the Rev. C. C. T. Fagan, and also knew Major Collis.

The Calcutta Englishman of December 28th, contains a telegram of December 26th: " Last evening Captain Clayton, extra aide-de-camp to the Viceroy, was thrown while playing polo, and died during tlie night."

In answer to a question as to the hour of the accident, Major Lord William Beresford writes to us: —

"As well as I remember, it was 6.15 in the evening of Christmas Day, 1876, and he died in my arms exactly as the clock struck 12. He never spoke after he fell."

[The somewhat ragged form in which this evidence is presented is due to the fact that the Rev. C. C. T. Fagan and Major Collis are understood to dislike the subject, and that we have scrupled to press them. But it seems quite certain that at a time closely corresponding to that of the accident, two percipients, one of whom has never had any other hallucination, heard a voice which belonged to no one in their vicinity. As to the immediate connection of the voice with Captain Clayton, the evidence is not so clear; but as regards Lieut. Fagan's recollections, we cannot but remark the extreme unlikelihood that the two hearers should imagine Mrs. Fagan's voice as calling her son by his surname; and also the unlikelihood that, if it was her voice that her son recognised, he should have altered this interesting point in the account which he gave her. The case is, of course, to some extent weakened by the fact that the Rev. C. C. T. Fagan has had other auditory hallucinations. It is worth adding, however, i that one of these experiences, when he heard his mother's voice urgently calling him, proved to have coincided with a very sudden and exceptional longing for his presence on her part (Supplement^ Chap. YL, § 1); and it may possibly have been the mention of this fact that caused a confusion in Lieut. Fagan's memory, and led him to associate Mrs. Fagan with the present experience.]

The following case is part of a record of some singular hypnotic experiences, of which some further specimens will be given in

176 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

Chap. I., I 3, of the Supplement. Mrs. John Evens, of Oldbank,

Enniskillen, narrates as follows: —

" December 4th, 1885.

(311) " With regard to the apparition or optical illusion, I have a perfect and clear remembrance. It occurred after the experience related [i.e., after a cataleptic fit produced under hypnotic influence]. The operator had left me with an earnest request to my husband to send for, or fetch him, should anything seem to require it.

" I was wide awake, and enjoying the freedom from pain; my room being carefully darkened. The operator had, while with me, been seated on a chair midway between my bed and a chest of drawers — about three feet from each. I was thinking very gratefully of the rehef I had experienced, when I noticed a blueish-white light round the chair. It seemed to be flickering and darting in a large oval, but gradually concentrated on a figure seated on the chair. ^ The appearance did not startle me in the least; my first thought was, ' It is Mr. T., a young officer with whom we were very intimate, and who had been in the house that evening. But the expression of the mouth struck me then, and I thought ' Can it be Mr. D. 1 ' — a dear friend who had died some Httle time before. All this time the face seemed to be changing, and, as it were, settling. Suddenly it flashed into my mind ' It is Mr. B.' (the father of the operator). I did not know this gentleman at all, except from having seen his photograph, but had no doubt on the subject. (Curiously enough his mouth and that of Mr. D.'s were singularly alike in expression.) The figure sat in a kind of dim halo. I felt no surprise; nor did I speak to it, but thought, ' Oh, you have come to find P. (the son); he has been here all the evening, but has gone home now.' As I thought this the halo gradually diffused itself, as it had before become concentrated, and the figure vanished. Besides the distinctness of feature, a movement, of crossing and uncrossing the knees two or three times, struck me.

" That same night, and it must have been nearly at the same time, the friend who had magnetised me was awoke by hearing his name called twice. His impression was that I needed his aid, and he was prepared to come (he was living a mile off), if he heard the call repeated. But it was not. The next day, when I saw him, without telling him any of this, I asked, ' Has your father any noticeable habit or trick of movement?' At first he said 'No,' and then, 'unless you would describe as such a way he has of frequently crossing and uncrossing his knees. He has varicose veins, and is restless at times! '

" This was the whole matter. The father, who dislikes such subjects, would never say whether he had dreamed or been thinking intently of his son; but probably it was so. " Agnes Evens."

In a letter dated 18th December, 1885, Mrs. Evens writes that she thinks the occurrence took place in September or October, 1881. She has never experienced any other visual hallucination.

In answer to inquiries, she adds: —

1 As to the oval, see the remarks on case 220; as to the gradual appearance and gradual disappearance, see Chap, xii., §§ 2 and 3, also above, p. 73, note, and p. 97; and compare case 315 below.

(1) " I cannot be sure as to the time at which I saw the appearance, but, putting circumstances together, I should think between 12 and 1 o'clock — nearer the latter hour.

(2) "lam perfectly certain that I uttered no sound; the phantom's disappearance seemed to answer to the thought that passed through my mind, ' You want Preston; he has been here all the evening, but went back to Fort Tourgis some time since.'

(3) " I had not any wish for his presence. I was lying in quiet enjoyment of the relief from agonising pain and quivering nerves, in which condition one has no active line of thought. I very likely thought about him, with a lazy kind of gratitude to him as the author of the relief I was experiencing."

Captain Battersby, R.A., F.R.A.S., of Ordnance House, Enniskillen, son-in-law of Mrs. Evens, writes: —

"December 21st, 1885.

" I had mesmerised Mrs. E. for several months, for severe neuralgia, with the view of affording her natural sleep. One night she had been in the mesmeric trance, and had been awoke by me, and I had returned to barracks — situated about half-a-mile from her house — leaving her in her room. I went to bed, and to sleep, and was awakened with a start by hearing my name called very distinctly. I sat up in bed, and looked for the caller, but saw no one. It was too dark to look at my watch, so that I cannot say what the time may have been. It occurred to me at the time that Mrs. E. might want me for something. I did not recognise the voice, and indeed had no chance of doing so, as it did not call again. In the morning I went to see Mrs. E., in order to find out whether she had had any unusual experience. She asked me if anything had happened to me the night before. I said ' Yes,' and asked her why she put the question. She said, ' Has your father a habit of moving one leg over the other, now and then, in a restless way 1 ' This was the case. She then said, about 1 a.m. she had been roused from sleep, and saw a phosphorescent appearance on the chair near her bed, which resolved itself into a human figure, recognised by her as my father from a photograph in my possession. It did not speak, but seemed to ask her mentally ' Where is Preston? ' To which she responded, also mentally, ' He was here, but is gone home '; whereon the figure disappeared. I was somewhat alarmed at the occurrence, and wrote to ask if my father was well. He was so; and did not remember having any dream of me on that night. Mrs. E. particularly remarked his habit of crossing first one leg and then the other, of which I had not previously told her.

" T. Peeston Battersby."

In answer to inquiries, Captain Battersby says: —

" I beg to say that at no time, except on the occasion referred to by me in my previous letter, have I woke from sleep with the impression of having been called In fact this was the only occasion in my life in which I heard or saw anything unusual."

The " collective " character of these two experiences is clearly very doubtful; they may not have been due to any agency on the



Vol Ii. N

178 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

part of Captain Battersby's father, or connected with each other. But considering that the accidental coincidence of the two unique experiences would be most improbable, and that a hypnotic rapport probably existed between Captain Battersby and his patient, it is a reasonable supposition that his mind was either the source or the channel of a telepathic communication to hers.

The next case was received from Mrs. Poison, of 4, Nouvelle Route

de Yillefranche, Nice.

"January, 1884.

(3 1 2) " Some years since, when living at Woolstone Lodge, Woolstone, Berks, of which parish and church, &c., &c., my husband was clerk in Holy Orders, I left the fireside family party one evening after tea, to see if our German bonne could manage a little wild Cornish girl to prepare her school-room for the morning. As I reached the top of the stairs a lady passed me who had some time left us. She was in black silk with a muslin ' cloud ' over her head and shoulders, but her silk rustled. I could just have a glance only of her face. She glided fast and noiselessly (but for the silk) past me, and was lost down two steps at the end of a long passage that led only into my private boudoir, and had no other exit. I had barely exclaimed ' Oh, Caroline,' when I felt she was a something unnatural, and rushed down to the drawing-room again, and sinking on my knees by my husband's side, fainted, and it was with difficulty I was restored to myself again. The next morning, I saw they rather joked me at first; but it afterwards came out that the little nursery girl, while cleaning her grate, had been so frightened by the same appearance, ' a lady sitting near her, in black, with white all over her head and shoulders, and her hands crossed on her bosom,' that nothing would induce her to go into the room again; and they had been afraid to tell me over night of this confirmation of the appearance, thinking it would shake my nerves still more than it had done.

" As chance would have it, many of our neighbours called on us the next morning — Mr. Tufnell, of Uffington, near Faringdon, Archdeacon Berens, Mr. Atkins, and others. All seemed most interested, and Mr. Tufnell would not be content without noting down particulars in his own pocket-book, and making me promise to write for inquiries that very night, for my cousin, Mrs. Henry Gibbs. She had been staying with us some time previously for a few days, and I had a letter half written to her in the paper case.

" I wrote immediately to my uncle (the Rev. C. Crawley, of Hartpury, near Gloucester,) and aunt, and recounted all that had happened. By return of post, ' Caroline is very ill at Belmont ' (their family place then), ' and not expected to live '; and die she did on the very day or evening she paid me that visit. The shock had been over-much for a not very strong person, and I was one of the very few members of the Crawley or Gibbs family who could not follow the funeral.

" Georgiana Polson."

[The three gentlemen whom Mrs. Poison mentions as having been immediately informed of her experience, have since died. If the narrative

should happen to meet the eye of any near relative of the late Rev. G, Tufnell, it might perhaps be possible to find out whether the entry in the pocket-book is still existing. According to the account, it would appear that the Rev. C. Crawley had not heard of the death on the second morning after its occurrence. This may seem a little unlikely (as he was a relative living at no very great distance), but is still quite possible.]

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Poison adds: —

" I have never before or since suffered from any experience of the kind [i.e., had any visual hallucination].

" I cannot give you the date, it was so long ago. Still, the past days are often present with me, and the scenes of that night are as fresh in remembrance as if all had occurred yesterday.

"I have no idea whatever what became of the Cornish nursery girl.

" I wrote to my aunt and uncle, near Gloucester, to tell them of what had occurred. They replied they had heard Mrs. Gibbs (Caroline) was very ill, and the next communication informed us of her departure; but I do not remember whether it took place earlier in the afternoon or later at night than when I saw her."

The following is from the lady who was with Mrs. Poison as governess at the time: —

" Clarence Yilla, Church Road, Watford.

"January 11th, 1884.

" I do not in the least object to let you know what I remember of the incident you mention. Many years ago Mr. and Mrs. Poison, with the children and myself, were sitting one evening in the drawing-room at Woolstone. In the middle of the evening Mrs. Poison left the room, but soon returned; remaining silent, I looked up, and saw her drop down on the rug fainting. When she recovered, she told us she had seen Mrs. Gibbs on before her in the long passage.

" I recollect hearing that the little Cornish girl said she had seen that same apparition while cleaning her grate. As to the date of the incident I can only say that, to the best of my recollection, it happened before the year 1851. " H. L.Mackenzie."

We find from the Times obituary that Mrs. Gibbs died on February 16, 1850.

In the next case one of the experiences was emotional, not sensory, but was apparently of a very marked sort. The account is from an intelligent informant, who has been for many years in the service of a family kDown to the present writer. Neither the witness nor (he believes) his mother ever had any other experience of the sort. His mother has been dead for some years.

" 9, Blandford Place, Clarence Gate, Regent's Park.

"October 21st, 1882.

(313) "In the winter 1850-51, I, Charles Matthews, was living as butler, 25 years of age, with General Morse at Troston Hall, near Bury St. Edmunds. My mother, Mary Ann Matthews, was in the same establishment as cook and housekeeper, a very upright and conscientious woman,

180 • COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

and "was much liked by all the servants excepting the ladies' maid, whose name was Susan, but her family-name I have forgotten. This Susan rendered herself disliked by all in consequence of her tale-bearing and mischief -making propensities, but she stood in some awe of my mother, whose firmness of character kept her in check to a great extent.

" Susan fell ill of jaundice, for which she was medically treated for some months at Troston Hall, but ultimately was removed to Bury St. Edmunds Hospital, and placed in the servants' ward, at General Morse's expense, where she died about a week after admission. He used to send a woman from the village to the hospital, seven miles distant, to make inquiries, on such days as the carriage did not go to Bury St. Edmunds; and on a certain Saturday the woman went, but did not return until the Sunday evening, when she said she had found Susan unconscious on her arrival, and as death was evidently approaching, she was permitted to remain in the ward until the end.

" During this Saturday night the following mystery occurred, which has ever since been a puzzle to myself. Being asleep, I was awakened with or by a sudden feeling of terror. I stared through the darkness of my bedroom, but could not see anything, but felt overcome by an unnatural horror or dread, and covered myself with the bed-clothes, regularly scared. My room door was in a narrow passage leading to my mother's room, and anyone passing would almost touch my door. I pa,ssed the remaining portion of the night in restlessness. In the morning I met my mother on coming downstairs, and observed that she looked ill and pale, and most unusually depressed. I asked ' What's the matter? ' She replied, ' Nothing; don't ask me.' An hour or two passed, and I still saw that something was amiss, and I felt determined to know the cause, and my mother seemed equally bent on not satisfying me. At last I said, ' Has it anything to do with Susan? ' She burst into tears and said, ' "What makes you ask that question? ' I then told her of my scare during the night, and she then related to me the following ^strange story ': —

" ' I was awakened by the opening of my bedroom door, and saw, to my horror, Susan enter in her night-dress. She came straight towards my bed, turned down the clothes, and laid herself beside me, and I felt a cold chill all down my side where she seemed to touch me.^ I suppose I fainted, as I lost all recollection for some time, and when I came to myself the apparition had gone — but of one thing I am sure, and that is that it was not a dreamt

"We heard by the village woman on her return the Sunday evening, that Susan died in the middle of the night, and that previous to becoming unconscious her whole talk was about 'returning to Troston Hall.' We had had no apprehension whatever of the death. We thought she had gone to the hospital, not because she was in danger, but for the sake of special treatment.

" This is a simple relation of facts, so far as I can state them. I myself was not a superstitious or simple fellow, at the time, having seen a good deal of the world; but I have never yet been able to satisfy my own mind as to the why or wherefore of the occurrence."

1 Among transient hallucinations of the sane — alike of the purely subjective and of the telepathic class— affections of three senses are extremely rare (p. 25, note).

Mr. Matthews tells me that he has never had any similar sensation; and he believes that the hallucination was unique in the experience of his mother, who died some years ago.

In the remaining cases the percipients were much more widely

separated; but unfortunately the evidence as to identity of time is

very far from complete. The following account is from Mrs. Coote,

of 28, Duke Street, Grosvenor Square, W.

"July 29th, 1885.

(314) " On Easter Wednesday, 1872, my sister-in-law, Mrs. W., sailed with her husband and three young children from Liverpool in the steamer, ' Sarmatian,' for Boston, U.S., where they arrived in due course and settled. In the following November she was seized with, and died from, suppressed small-pox, at that time raging in Boston. About the end of November, or the beginning of December in the same year, I was disturbed one morning before it was light, as near as may be between 5 and 6 a.m., by the appearance of a tall figure, in a long night-dress, bending over the bed. I distinctly recognised this figure to be no other than my sister-in-law, Mrs. W., who, as I felt, distinctly touched me. My husband, who was beside me asleep at the time, neither saw nor felt anything.

" This appearance was also made to an aged aunt, residing at this time at Theydon Bois, near Epping, Essex. She is now alive, aged over 80 years, and residing at Hextable, near Dartford, in Kent. She is still in full possession of all her faculties. She told my husband as recently as the 4th inst., that the appearance came to her in the form of a bright light from a dark corner of her bedroom in the early morning. It was so distinct that she not only recognised her niece, Mrs. W., but she actually noticed the needlework on her long night-dress! This appearance was also made to my husband's half-sister, at that time unmarried, and residing at Stanhope Gardens. The last named was the first to receive the announcement of the death of Mrs. W., in a letter from the widower dated December (day omitted), 1872, from 156, Eighth Street, South Boston, still preserved. The death was announced, among other papers (as my husband has recently learned), in the Boston Herald. A comparison of dates, as far as they could be made in two of the cases, served to show the appearance occurred after the same manner, and about the same time, i.e., at the time of, or shortly after, the death of the deceased. Neither myself nor the aged Mrs. B., nor my husband's half-sister, have experienced any appearance of the kind before or since. It is only recently, when my husband applied to his half-sister to hunt up the Boston letter, that we learnt for the first time of this third appearance."

Mr. Coote writes to us as follows: —

" That Mrs. Coote's ' vision ' occurred within a week of the death of Mrs. W., in Boston, U.S., is undoubted; and without any efibrt to make our memories more precise, I may add, that from the first I have always thought that the most marked feature in the case was (judging, of course, from an opinion formed at the time when the circumstances were fresh in my memory) that it occurred within the 24 hours after death. I am afraid after this lapse of time that nothing conclusive can be arrived at as to ' times ' in the other two cases, beyond the general idea that still

182 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

obtains in the minds of both the aged Mrs. B. and Mrs., that the

visions occurred about the same time as that of Mrs. Coote, and after the same manner. Mrs. Coote desires me to add that to this hour she has never exchanged ideas upon this vision, even with the aged Mrs. B., which precludes all possibility of collusion in the matter.

" C. H. Coote." [It is not possible to obtain a first-hand account of the vision from Mr. Coote's half-sister at present.]

The final example of this type is from Mr. de Guerin, of 98, Sandgate Road, Folkestone, who has had another apparently telepathic experience (Vol. I., p. 424). He has had no subjective hallucinations.

" 1883.

(315) "The first instance occurred when I was in Shanghai. It was the month of May, 1854. The night was very warm, and I was in bed, lying on my back, wide awake, contemplating the dangers by which we were then surrounded, from a threatened attack by the Chinese. I gradually became aware there was something in the room; it appeared like a thin white fog, a misty vapour,^ hanging about the foot of the bed. Fancying it was merely the efiect of a moonbeam, I took but little notice, but after a few moments I plainly distinguished a figure which I recognised as that of my sister Fanny. At first the expression of her face was sad, but it changed to a sweet smile, and she bent her head towards me as if she recognised me. I was too much fascinated with the appearance to speak, although it did not cause me the slightest fear. The vision seemed to disappear gradually in the same manner as it came. We afterwards learned that on the same day my sister died — almost suddenly. I immediately wrote a full description of what I had seen to my sister, Mrs. Elmslie (the wife of the Consul at Canton), but before it reached her, I had received a letter from her, giving me an almost similar description of what she had seen the same night, adding, ' I am sure dear Fanny is gone.'

" When I promised that I would send you these particulars I at once wrote to my sister, Mrs. Elmslie, and she replies, ' I do not think I was awake when Fanny appeared to me, but I immediately awoke and saw her as you describe. I stretched out my arms to her and cried ' Fanny! Fanny! ' She smiled upon me, as if sorry to leave, then suddenly disappeared.'

" When this occurred we [i.e., Mr. de Guerin and Mrs. Elmslie] were upwards of 1,000 miles apart, and neither of us had a thought of her being seriously, much less dangerously ill. Before her death she had spoken of us both to those around her bedside. She died in Jersey, on the 30th May, 1854, between 10 and 11 at night."

The Jersey Register of Deaths confirms the date given.

Mr. de Guerin kindly applied to Mrs. Elmslie for a further account. In her reply, she rightly remarks that at such a distance of time memory of details is unreliable, and is not sure " whether that which took place was in the nature of a dream or of a vision." She desires, therefore,

1 Cf. cases 193, 194, 311, 332.

that her full description of what she saw shall not be published; but says that the face was unmistakeable. She adds: —

" I really forget whether it appeared immediately at the time of our dear sister's death; but I know my impression at the time was that it foreshadowed such an event, the news of which in due course came by mail."

In conversation, Mr. de Guerin told me that the figure appeared selfluminous (see Chap. XII., § 7). He is certain that his own and Mrs. Elmslie's visions were on the same night, and that his own was about 11 o'clock. He cannot be certain whether the death took place at 11 o'clock p.m., of the previous day, in which case it must have preceded the visions by some twelve hours; or 1 1 o'clock p.m. of the same day, in which case it must have followed the visions by about twelve hours. Mr. de Guerin further told me that, though in a decline, his sister had been very decidedly better of late, and he was in no sort of anxiety about her. The last account had been that she was gaining strength and flesh. The death was extraordinarily sudden.

§ 3. I turn now to the second of the two theories above propounded — the theory that one percipient catches the hallucination from another by a process of thought-transference. This is certainly the explanation that would suggest itself in telepathic cases where one of the percipients has previously had no relations, or only slight relations, with the distant agent. But clearly the most conclusive evidence for the theory of infection would be derived from cases involving no distant " agent " at all; cases which in their inception are pathologic, not telepathic — purely subjective delusions on the part of some one present — but which proceed to communicate themselves to some other person or persons. If it can be shown that this self-propagation is an occasional property of hallucinations as such, there will be no difficulty in extending the same explanation to cases where the hallucination is in its inception due to a distant agent. If B's purely subjective hallucination may affect C, it is only what we should a 'priori expect that B's telepathic hallucination might affect C: such communicability would merely be one more of those points of resemblance, which we have already seen to be so numerous, between the purely subjective and telepathic classes. And as collective hallucinations even of subjective or non- veridical origin {i.e., not due to the critical situation of some distant agent) would constitute in themselves a form of thought-transference, no excuse is needed for examining them here at some length.

What evidence, then, do we find that hallucinations of the senses, as such, may be infectious? It must be allowed at starting that no property of the sort has ever been attributed to them by

184 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

psychologists of repute •} the doctrine would be as new to science as every other variety of telepathic affection. This, however, is easily accounted for. We have already seen that psychologists have never made hallucinations, or at any rate transient hallucinations of the sane, the subject of careful collection and tabulation; and it is among the sane rather than the insane^ that we should expect any phenomenon of thought-transference to present itself. It is therefore not surprising that the rare and sporadic evidence for collective hallucinations should have escaped notice. But if, on the one hand, collective hallucinations have not been recognised by science, on the other hand phenomena have sometimes been described by that title which have no sort of claim to it. It is here that the real importance of distinguishing illusions from hallucinations lies; and I cannot well proceed without first making this distinction plain. Illusion consists either in perceiving a totally wrong object in place of the right one, as when Don Quixote's imagination transformed the windmills into giants; or in investing the right object with wrong attributes, as when the stone lion on Northumberland House was seen to wag its tail.^ Either sort of illusion may easily be collective. The error is not in the actual sensory impression, which is given by the real object and is common to all present, but in the subsequent act of judgment by which the nature of the object is determined; and in this act of judgment one person has every opportunity of being influenced by another. In the attitude of trying to imagine what further attributes will fit in naturally with those which the senses perceive, and will with them compose some known object, the mind is almost at the mercy of external suggestion. We see this constantly exemplified in cases where a group of people are puzzling as to the nature of some barely visible object, or of some imperfectly heard sound: as soon as someone expresses an opinion, someone else is pretty sure to endorse it, and to see or hear the thing in the suggested sense, though on nearer approach this may prove to have been incorrect. Even in cases

1 This was written before the appearance of Dr. E. von Hartmann's tract on Spiritism, (lately translated by Mr. C. C. Massey), in which he treats the apparitions seen at seances as collective hallucinations; but he regards the influence exercised on the sitters by the medium as to some extent exceptional in kind.

- As an instance of the insusceptibility of the insane to abnormal influences, it is worth noting that they are peculiarly difficult to hypnotise. On the other hand, I ought to state that the 2nd chapter of the Supplement contains two cases of what looks like telepathic affection of a person of more or less unsoTind mind.

•* I have never discovered on what authority this anecdote rests; but such an illusion is, I believe, quite possible.

where we feel as if we were right beyond the possibility of mistake, it often needs an effort to realise how little is given us, and how much we ourselves supply. A few slight sensory signs will introduce to the mind a whole array of attributes that have been associated with them on other occasions; the whole is then taken to be a single and immediate perception of the object; and since the actual sensory signs may be common to several different groups of attributes — i.e., to several different objects — it may easily happen that they suggest some group which is not the object actually present. For instance, the slight sensory signs which Scott would normally have interpreted as the folds of coats and plaids hanging in a dimly-lit hall, were interpreted by him, at a moment when the idea of Byron was running strongly in his head, as the figure of the deceased poet.^ Here the idea which happened to be dominant at the moment was what determined the false judgment; and such a dominant idea may, of course, often operate upon many minds at once; as when, in a conflagration at the Crystal Palace, a sympathetic crowd watched the struggles of an agonised chimpanzee — alias a piece of tattered blind — in the roof; or when a horrified crew recognised in a piece of old wreck, which was floating on the waves, the form and peculiar limping gait of a drowned comrade.^ The case of the proverbial crowd and the stone lion's tail is somewhat different; for there the object was clearly seen, and recognised for what it was. But we are all of us well exercised in imagining familiar objects as moving in position and changing in coatour; and the power of evoking mental pictures is often, I think, strong enough to enable us slightly to modify our visual impressions; while such devices as half-closing our eyes, or shutting them alternately in quick succession, or moving or inclining

1 An interesting case was given by Mr. W. H. Pollock, in the Christmas number, for 1884, of the Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic Neivs, under the title "The Ghost at the Lyceum." Mr. Pollock has assured me that the description is "an absolute record of fact, without a word of garnish "; and his recollection of the incident, and of the bewilderment that it caused, was quite confirmed by his companion's account, as reported to me independently by a common friend. Seated in a box at the theatre, Mr. Pollock and a friend saw, during several hours (with intermissions when the lights were turned up), the vivid appearance of a decapitated head, with a fine profile and a grey Vandyke beard, resting on the lap of a lady in the stalls. At the time, they rejected the idea that this could have been an optical effect due to the folds of the lady's garments — as they noticed that she moved more than once in the course of the evening, while the face remained the same. Mr. Pollock seems to have been unaware that, as a possible example of collective hallucination, the vision had a very high scientific interest; or he would scarcely, even for " sporting and dramatic" purposes, have taken refuge in so meaningless a designation as " ghost." It may be, however, that the case was after aU one not of hallucination, but only of illusion. It is at any rate impossible, from the record, to be quite sure that adequate means were taken to exclude this hypothesis, which, as Mr. Pollock has recently informed me, is the one that he is now inclined to adopt.

- Dr. Hack Tuke, Influence of the Mind upon the Body. 2nd Edition, p. 59; Wundt, Op. cit., Vol. ii., p. 358.....

186 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

the head, will increase the illusion. It is not surprising, then, that a strong effort to see a thing in a way in which others are professing to see it, should, for a brief period, introduce illusory elements into what seems to be a clear and complete view of the object.

These considerations will certainly suffice to explain the majority of the collective apparitions on record. The visions seen during battles, such as are especially frequent in the history of the Crusades —either signs in the heavens or phantom champions — may easily have had some objective basis. The streak of cloud, which at one moment may be " very like a whale," might at another be equally like a fiery sword; real horsemen might be unrecognised, and the first breath of rumour that they were supernatural assistants would be caught up with avidity.^ More deceptive cases however occur, which are not illusions, but yet have as little claim as the preceding to be called collective hallucinations, if that word be (as throughout this treatise it is) confined to the strict sensory meaning. Nothing, for instance, could better illustrate what collective hallucinations are not, than two cases which Dr. Brierre de Boismont^ has adduced to illustrate what they are. A battalion of infantry, after a 40 miles' march under a June sun, was quartered for the night in a dismal building which had the reputation of being haunted. The surgeon of the regiment describes how, about midnight, these soldiers rushed out of their quarters with wild cries, and declared that the devil had entered their chamber " in the form of a large black dog with curly hair, who had bounded upon them, ran over their chests with the rapidity of lightning, and disappeared on the side opposite to the one at which he had entered." Now — on the supposition

1 The reader will recall the phantom battle in the sky, described by Motley f' T/ie Mise of the Butch EepuUic, pp. 559-60), as to which the depositions of five witnesses were taken on oath. The collective vision of an army marching on terra firma, described by the Diike of Argyll in Good Words for January, 1875, would be less easy to account for as an illusion: but the record is second-hand, and was not written dovm tiU more than 50 years after the incident is alleged to have occurred. Phantom champions are not yet extinct. Mr. J. T. Milward Pierce, of Bow Ranche, Nebraska, U.S.A., has told me of a quite recent case, narrated to him by one of the witnesses — where the form of a defunct Indian Chief, " Brown Bear," led his tribe in a battle against theDacotahs. Mr. Pierce has since sent me a first-hand account of the incident from another professed witness.

A recent case of a more ordinary type is the following, from Mrs. Lane, of 49, Redcliffe Square, S.W. When at school, she was sleeping in the bed of a Miss Winch, who had been sent home ill; and waking up, she was much alarmed to see this girl standing at the foot of the bed. She addressed the figure, which nodded slowly. She then roused her companions, "and they all said they saw Miss Winch, too." The girls did not know, what was learnt next day, that Miss Winch was dying; but even supposing the first percipient's vision to have been telepathic, her terrified words, and the dim light, would probably be quite sufficient to convert a bed-hanging or a curtain into the suggested form for her companions' eyes.

2 Des Hallucinations (Paris, 1862), pp. 280, 396.

that no real dog or cat had a share in shaping the idea — what can be more likely than that the general nervousness took sudden form from one man's sudden cry, on waking from a nightmare? There is not the slightest proof that all present simultaneously saw the dog, and followed his movements. I have already drawn attention to the ease with which uneducated persons may slip into believing that they have seen what they have only heard of; and under excitement this is, of course, doubly easy. One man may have believed that he saw; the rest may merely have believed they had seen. De Boismont's second case is that of Dr. Pordage's disciples in the middle of the seventeenth century, who saw " the powers of hell pass in review before them, seated in chariots, surrounded by dark clouds, and drawn by lions, bears, dragons, and tigers. These were followed by inferior spirits, who were provided with the ears of a cat or a griffin, and with deformed and distorted limbs." But here the fact that " it made no difference whether their eyes were open or shut " renders it doubtful how far the impression was really more than a vivid inward picture; and there is nothing to contradict, and everything to suggest, the notion that one person described his impressions in language which would easily conjure up the general scene in kindred and excited minds.

But apart from such spurious types, cases undoubtedly remain of really externalised collective hallucination, which are still perfectly explicable without resorting to thought-transference. The history of religious epidemics supplies instances where a whole group of persons have professed to behold some exciting or adorable object, and probably actually projected its image into space as part of the surrounding world; but where, without proof (which has never been presented) that what was seen was independently observed and described, it would be rash to suppose any other cause for the similarity of the individual experiences than a previous common j idea and common expectancy.^ Nor is even expectancy a necessary condition; there are cases where the suggestion of the moment seems sufficient. The most marked of these are hypnotic hallucinations: it is as easy for a mesmerist to persuade a group of good " subjects " that they all see a particular phantasmal object, as to persuade one of them that he sees it. And I think it must be admitted as possible

1 A probable example is the recent remarkable delusion at Corano— starting from a peasant girl's alleged vision of the Virgin— in which a crowd of children and many adults shared. It is described in the Times for July 31, 1885.

188 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

that mere verbal suggestion may act similarly on certain minds at certain times, without the preliminary of any definite hypnotic process. I say at certain times advisedly; for all clear evidence of the sort seems to connect the phenomenon with circumstances of rather special absorption or excitement, sometimes even with a state of semi-trance.^ I do not know of any instance where the sane and healthy A, simply by saying at a casual moment to the sane and healthy B, "There is such and such an object " (not really present, and not capable of being imposed as an illusion on some object really present), has at once caused the object to be conjured up in space before B's eyes. In the most extreme case that has come to my knowledge, where something like this has proved possible, very strong insistance and repetition on A's part, of the sort that a mesmerist employs when seeking to dominate a "subject's" mind, are needed before the impression develops into sensory form. In cases, therefore, where A has himself had a hallucination of which he has spoken at the moment, and B has shared it, it is too much to assume at once that B's experience must have been exclusively due to the verbal suggestion; for if A's mere suggestion can produce such an effect on B at that particular moment, why not at other moments when he suggests the imaginary object without having himself seen it? None the less, of course, ought the /flUv- hypothesis of verbal suggestion to be most carefully considered, in relation to the special circumstances of each case, before any other hypothesis is even provisionally admitted.

I have, perhaps, said enough to define the phenomena which are really of interest for us here. Fairly to allow of explanation by

^ If (as intelligent English eye-witnesses believe,) a semi-hypnotic condition, due to abnormally concentrated attention, is in great part answerable for the extraordinary illusions of Indian jugglery, the same condition might naturally be looked for in cases of collective hallucination. Very suggestive in this respect is the following record, by Professor Sidgwick, of a scene described to him by Mazzini: —

"In or near some Italian town, Mazzini saw a group of people standing, apparently gazing upwards into the sky. Going up to it, he asked one of the gazers what he was looking at. ' The cross — do you not see? ' was the answer; and the man pointed to the place where the cross was supposed to be. Mazzini, however, could discern no vestige of anything cruciform in the sky; and, much wondering, went up to another gazer, put a similar question, and received a similar answer. It was evident that the whole crowd had persuaded itself that it was contemplating a marvellous cross. ' So,' said Mazzini, ' I was turning away, when my eye caught the countenance of a gazer who looked somewhat more intelligent than the rest, and also, I thought, had a faint air of perplexity and doubt in his gaze. I went up to him, and asked what he was looking at. " The cross," he said, "there." I took hold of his arm, gave him a slight shake, and said, "There is not any cross at all." A sort of change came over his countenance, as though he was waking up from a kind of dream; and he responded, " No, as you say, there is no cross at all. So we two walked away, and left the crowd to their cross. ' It is nearly 20 years since I heard this story; but it made a considerable impression on me, both from the manner in which Mazzini told it, and from its importance in relation to the evidence for ' spiritualistic ' f)henomena."

thought-transference, a collective case must present evident marks (1) of being a hallucination and not a mere illusion; (2) of having occurred, so to speak, in an isolated way, and not under the dominance of any special prepossession; and (3) of having been independently projected by the several percipients, and not merely conjured up by one on the suggestion of another. It is naturally not always easy to ascertain how far these conditions are met. In judging of the auditory cases, especially, great caution is necessary; for, as we have seen above (pp. 125-6), there is scarcely any sort of mere noise which may not have some undiscoverable external origin in the house or the neighbourhood. Intelligent speech, on the other hand, and certain musical sounds, such as bell-sounds or distinct melodic sequences, if externally caused, imply conditions the presence or absence of which it is usually possible to ascertain. So again in the visual cases, the fact of dim or uncertain light may favour the hypothesis of illusion; but where the light is good, the presence or absence of an adequate external cause in the vicinity can often be determined with all but complete certainty.^ One point of uncertainty often remains, owing

^ I am including only cases of hallucinations which have occurred to more than one percipient simultaneously, or very nearly so. The extremely perplexing cases, few, but well attested, where the same phantasm has been independently described by different persons who have at different times encountered it in the same locality, may possibly be also connected with the infectious character of hallucinations; for we cannot pronounce it to be indispensable that the infectious influence should act at the moment. A certain amount of evidence for this explanation is afforded by cases where the experience (not apparently due to suggestion or illusion) has sometimes occurred to one person alone, and at other times to several together. But the hypothesis, as thus extended, becomes doubtful and difficult, and is, moreover, only one out of several hypotheses, all about equally doubtful and difficult, that may be suggested. (See Mrs. H. Sidgwick's paper " On the Evidence, collected by the Society, for Phantasms of the 'Dea.d,^^ m. the Proceedings of the S. P. R., Vol.iii., especially pp. 146-8.)

Clearly no such explanation is needed for the general run of traditional appearances — the white ladies, headless horses, and phantom dogs, which are the most widely-spread forms; or the phantasms which are more or less indigenous to a particular district, like the " corpse-candles " of some Welsh counties, and the figures in shrouds of the Western Scottish islands. To account for these, we need not go beyond the latent idea in the percipient's own mind. But it seems occasionally to happen that the percipient of a traditional phantasm is a person not previously acquainted with the tradition. Thus Mr. Lowell tells me that he once saw the appearance of the " Witch-farm, " on the Massachusetts coast, though unaware of the local legend concerning it, at the very place to which he found afterwards that the legend assigned it; and in Dyer's English Folk-Lore, p, 208, a case is reported where a phantasm, coinciding with and possibly originating in a death, took a form that exactly accorded with the ideas of death-apparitions current in the place, though the percipient was a transient sojourner whom no rumour of those ideas had reached.

Another type (recorded by Aubrey, Martin, Dalyell, Napier, Gregor, and other writers on "second-sight," and possibly genuine), which seems to strain the hypothesis of infection somewhat less, is that where physical contact with the percipient of an abnormal sight or sound has enabled^a second person to share it. Our own collection contains a couple of modern instances — one first-hand from Mrs. Taunton, of Brook Vale, Witton, near Birmingham, the other from two daughters and ason-in-law of the late Mr. and Mrs. George Whittaker,of the Bowdlands,01itheroe, the first-hand witnesses. Such a phenomenon might at least be compared with the favouring effect of contact in certain "thought-reading" results, which (by rare exception among results where contact is a condition) seem not to be explicable as "muscle-reading."

190 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

to the way in which the evidence reaches us: we cannot be sure how far the mere verbal description of one percipient, after the occurrence, may not have caused another to fill in or modify his own recollection with details which he did not himself observe. But if both clearly shared in the experience, it is not important that their percepts may not have been so precisely similar as is sometimes alleged. So far, indeed, from telling against the theory of mental transfer, such want of identity is rather what we might have expected, both from the numerous approximate successes in experimental thought-transference — e.g., in reproducing drawings— and from the evidence that a telepathic impression is liable to be reacted on in various ways by the person whom it affects.

§ 4. I fear to weary the reader by yet further explanations and distinctions before examples are given. But difficulty of exposition and risk of misapprehension alike culminate in this final chapter; and the patience which has been able to accompany me thus far must be so considerable that I venture to make one more demand on it.

I have propounded the question, what evidence do we find that purely subjective hallucinations of the senses may be infectious? and I have implied that I am able to produce some evidence of the sort. And, in fact, I am about to cite examples which I think that the majority of my readers — or of such of them at any rate as accept the substantial accuracy of the facts — will regard as going some way to establish the point. But there are those, I am aware, in whose minds some of my instances will produce a doubt whether the experiences were really subjective — whether they may not have had some unknown origin external to any of the perceiving minds; and I admit, though the doubt weakens my argument, that it is one which I in some measure share. To explain this, I must recur to a point that was very briefly touched on in Chap. XI. (Vol I., p. 512, note). It may be remembered that the question there arose whether postinortem appearances of persons some time deceased were necessarily subjective hallucinations, or whether they might not be amenable to a telepathic explanation; and I observed that, while telepathy — being a psychical and not a physical conception — was quite able to embrace these phenomena as possibly due to the action of human minds continuing after bodily death, yet the evidence for them (of a sort that would preclude their being regarded as purely subjective experiences) was scanty and inconclusive; and I dismissed the topic

as not germane to an inquiry concerning telepathic transferences between the minds of living persons. But the topic which was rightly thus dismissed when we were considering affections of a single percipient, forces itself on us again when we encounter cases of joint percipience. For suppose that the object which B and C both simultaneously behold is the form of the deceased A. Then, if (1) the idea of B's and C's affection by the still continuing mind of A be rejected — as it would be by disbelievers in survival after physical death — yet B's and C's simultaneous affection remains a fact which demands recognition in this book; because, if A does not affect them, then one of them must affect the other, i.e., the case is one of transference between the minds of living persons. And if (2) the idea of A's continuing power to affect B or C be admitted as tenable, but the joint affection of B and C by A be regarded as improbable, (owing to the difficulties already pointed out of conceiving the projection, under a telepathic impulse, of exactly simultaneous and corresponding hallucinations) yet again a fact remains which demands recognition in this book; because, if A affects B and not C, then C's vision of A must be obtained from B, and the case is again one of transference between the minds of living persons.

The reader will now, perhaps, divine why I hesitate to apply the '^^^U words " purely subjective " to some, at any rate, of the cases in the group that awaits us. Though no absent living person was concerned in them as agent, I think it would be rash and unscientific to prejudge the question (deliberately left open in Chap. XL) whether they had an origin in psychical conditions which have survived the change of death. I have shown that alike on either of the above hypotheses — i u^ /alike, whether the dead (1) have not, or (2) have, minds which can influence the living — cases of collective percipience suggestive of the dead fall within the legitimate scope of the present inquiry; but I am anxious to avoid any appearance of dogmatic decision between (1) and (2). I am about equally dissatisfied with the arguments adduced for the former, and with the evidence adduced for the latter. But in my view the cases, whatever else they involve, at any rate involve an element of quite mundane thought-transference between the minds of the living persons concerned; and I must beg the reader to bear in mind that it is simply as probable or possible cases of thought-transference, and not as manifestations from the dead, that those of them which may seem to have reference to the dead are here adduced. If the senses of B and C are similarly and simultaneously

192 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

affected without the presence of any material cause, then alike whether there is or is not a real immaterial cause outside their two selves, I believe that the joint phenomenon still depends (partly, if there is such a cause, wholly, if there is not) on psychical communication between their two minds. As to the point that is left in abeyance — the existence or non-existence of the said cause — all varieties of opinion will be allowed for by defining the group, not positively, as cases of " purely subjective " origin, but negatively, as cases which do not apparently originate in the condition of any absent living person.

I 5. I will begin with visual examples. The following is a collective hallucination of what I have called a rudimentary type, as not suggesting any special form or human presence; but it is a remarkably prolonged and elaborate specimen of the sort.^ The narrator is Mrs. Ward, of Glen Aray Lodge, Windsor.

1 Another striking rudimentary hallucination, of the cloud type, in which two persons (out of the four who were present) shared, is described in Notes and Queries for September 8th and 22nd, and November 10th, 1860, and for January 5th, 1861. The narrator is Mr. E. L. Swift, who was Keeper of the Jewels in the Tower at the time when the event occurred, in the Jewel House. An incorrect version was given, without authority, in Gregory's Animal Magnetism.

In Vol. i., p. 483, 1 drew attention to a particular kind of impression, which, without

actually developing into a sensory form, yet strongly suggests a particular person's

presence. It is interesting to observe that such an impression — which seems a sort of

potential hallucination — may be collective. Mrs. Easton, of 14, The Crescent, Taunton,

writes, in January, 1884: —

i^^'^'t^'^' "I have been, on one occasion, impressed with the certainty that a sort of — so to

y^^^TlJ^ speak — invisible presence was in the room, and my sister, who was in the same room, told

f^ me some hours after, that she had the same impression at that particular moment, I not

having spoken of the matter to her. This took place about two or three days after the

death of a near relative."

In reply to inquiries, Mrs. Easton adds: —

" In answer to the first question as to whether we ever had such an impression at any other time, for myself I can answer 'No,' decidedly, and my sister cannot remember anything of the kind.

" The second question was, did we connect the impression with our deceased relation at the time? For myself, I can answer, 'Yes'; my sister has described her thoughts at that praticular moment in the enclosed letter. ■ ^ " The third question, ' Was there a strong bond of affection? ' Yes.

St/iu" "Fourth question, 'Can we be sure that the impression in each mind exactly

corresponded in time? ' I am quite certain that, whatever produced this unusual f eehng, we both experienced it at the same moment, although perhaps in a different way, being so unlike in temperament; I remember looking at my watch on awakening, to know the time. "Fifth question, 'How long did the impression last?' For some seconds; the impression on my mind was that some unusual presence, something not material, was near." The enclosure, from Mrs. Welch, of 5, Colleton Crescent, Exeter, was as follows: — " In August last, I was sleeping in the room with my sister. I think it was the third night after our father's death, and he was lying in a room below. I was aroused out of my sleep with a feeling as if some person had entered the room, and come as far as the foot of the bed when I awoke.

" I am particularly nervous at all times, of course after the recent event more so than usual; yet when I awoke, I did not feel the slightest fear, and only wished I could see the time, as I instantly thought I should hear of something having happened at that moment — the more so as our step-mother, we knew, was in a veiy precarious state.

"My sister awoke at the same time, and on my telling her of my sensations she told me she had felt the same, although she is not in the least of a nervous temperament."

In reply to a question whether such an impression was unique in her experience, Mrs.

Welch says: —. - <>

" T never experienced the same feelings before, that I can recollect." c^r i-^--^-'-^-^— ■

(316) " In May, 1851, I and my husband, the late E. M. Ward, R.A., /,, ^ ^ had a curious experience which we were at a loss to account for, though it, /'/.^^^ became a subject of frequent conversation, and every effort was made to '; find for it a fitting and rational explanation.

" We were living at No. 33, Harewood Square. It was in the month ^'^''^* of May, and my husband and I had been to a quiet gathering of friends in the neighbourhood; we returned about 1 2 o'clock, letting ourselves in, for the servants were in bed, and went straight to our bedroom. Having passed such a quiet, unexciting evening, there was nothing much to talk about, and my husband was quickly in bed and asleep. I very soon followed him, and was just getting into bed, having put out my candle, with my face towards the door, when, much to my surprise, I saw, as though suspended a little distance from the top of the door, a strange, flickering flame; it was about six inches high, and four inches across the widest part, pear-shaped, and of a blueish lilac tint. I was considerably startled and must have been much agitated, for my husband (as he informed me afterwards) was roused by the sound of my fast beating heart. In reply to his inquiries, I drew his attention to the strange flame which I still saw suspended from the door frame, and whilst we were both wonderingly speculating as to what it could be, it was joined by another flame, similar in every respect, but smaller. Greater still was our surprise when we observed these two mysterious little lights slowly advancing, side by side, towards us; they came right on to our bed, and then, determined to analyse their nature, we both sat up, and my husband grasped them with his hands, rubbing them and endeavouring to rid us of their society. But, to our astonishment, this treatment had no more efiect upon them than to break them into small luminous grains, which ran all over the bed- covering like quicksilver. Gradually, however, this bright inundation began to fade, and, as we still continued our efforts to extinguish it, it disappeared.

" Such is the account of the occurrence. That it actually did occur to us we never entertained the slightest doubt. I was certainly wide awake at the time, and my mind was troubled in no way, and I was in good health — otherwise there might be some ground for the belief that the appearance was the hallucination of a disordered mind, or of an over-wrought brain. My husband, too, was undoubtedly wide awake, and retained a perfect recollection of all the details of the vision the next day. We discussed it, and tried to fathom its meaning, over and over again, but could never arrive at any conclusion about it at all — except that as it did not act as a forewarning to any coming event, did not correspond to any important event, and did not appear to serve any purpose at all, its appearance was utterly meaningless.

" Henrietta Mary Ada Ward."

In a later letter, Mrs. Ward adds: —

" As the lights were coming to the bed, there were two streaks of moonlight on the counterpane, which could not come from any window, as the room was darkened. They also when touched, with the two lamps, merged into a mass of diamonds."

In conversation, Mrs. Ward told us that she had never experienced any other hallucination of the senses

VOL, II. O

194 COLLECTIVE CASES. [chap.

We have several other examples of collective hallucinations of light. In one (described to us by Mrs. G. T. Haly, of 122, Coningham Eoad, Shepherd's Bush, W., as having occurred a few days after her husband's death, and assumed by her to be connected with him), a flame as of a candle, but bluer, passed and repassed the bed on which the two percipients were lying, at about 18 inches height from the floor. In another, a luminous ball was seen in a corner of the room. A fourth very remarkable instance, of the brilliant illumination and then sudden darkening of an empty room, is described to us by the Rev. Edward Ram, of Norwich, as a personal experience of himself and his wife — but this was in a house where other unaccountable phenomena have been observed; as was also the case in a fifth instance, where a light is described by one percipient, Mrs. W. B. Richmond, as a glow over the whole room, out of which (according to her recollection) two bright little balls of light seemed to flash out; and by the other (her mother) as " flickering about " specially in a particular part of the room. In none of these cases does it seem possible that the light was in any way cast or reflected iato the room from outside.^

Coming to instances of a more developed type, we have a considerable group of cases as to which it might be a possible — though I think a rather desperate — assumption that what was seen was a real object, most strangely misinterpreted, or else appearing in most improbable circumstances; and which I do not therefore number as evidential items. Specially baffling are some of the cases where a carriage, as well as human beings, has appeared. For instance, Major W., resident near Conon Bridge, Ross-shire, writes: —

" February 9th, 1882.

" It was the month of August; rather a dark night and very still; the hour, midnight; when before retiring for the night I went, as is often my custom, to the front door to look at the weather. When standing for a moment on the step, I saw, coming round a turn in the drive, a large close carriage and pair of horses, with two men on the box. It passed the front of the house, and was going at a rapid rate towards a path which leads to a stream, running, at that point, between rather steep banks. There is no carriage-road on that side of the house, and I shouted to the driver to stop, as, if he went on, he must undoubtedly come to grief.

1 In the last case, the second percipient suggests the lantern of thieves trying to rob the pigeon-house. But in the first place, the pigeon-house was not robbed, and no vestige of thieves was found; and in the second place, the light would have had to penetrate a very dark green blind, and thieves are not wont to require for their work an advertisement of such preternatural brilliancy.

The carriage stopped abruptly when it canie to the running water, turned, and, in doing so, drove over the lawn. I got up to it; and by this time my son had joined me with a lantern. Neither of the men on the box had spoken, and there was no sound from the inside of the carriage. My son looked in, and all he could discern was a stiff-looking figure sitting up in a corner, and draped, apparently, from head to foot in white. The absolute silence of the men outside was mysterious, and the white figure inside, apparently of a female, not being alarmed or showing any signs of life, was strange. Men, carriage, and horses were unknown to me, although I know the country so well. The carriage continued its way across the lawn, turning up a road which led past the stables, and so into the drive again and away. We could see no traces of it the next morning — no marks of wheels or horse's feet on the soft grass or gravel road; and we never again heard of the carriage or its occupant, though I caused careful inquiries to be made the following day. I may mention that my wife and daughter also saw the carriage, being attracted to the window by my shout. This happened on the 23rd of August, 1878."

