The next case — a recent one — is of a very unusual type as regards the effect on the percipient, and, perhaps, on that very account suggests the telepathic explanation rather more strongly than the facts warrant. But as regards the facts themselves, there can be little doubt. The evidence, though it does not come from the percipient, is of the sort which is as good as first-hand; and this is the more fortunate, in that, as it happens, there never was a moment at which the first-hand evidence could have been given. The account is in the words of Mr, H. King, of the Koyal Military College, York

Town, Famborough, Hants.

"March, 1885. (227) " On Thursday night, October 30th [1884], H. M. and I went to dine at Broadmoor. We stayed till 10 p.m. or so, and on leaving the house were talking of different things, M. being quite as usual; when, after five minutes' walk, M suddenly stopped, and said, ' Look, look! oh, look! ' We thouglit nothing of it at first, but he still kept pointing with his finger at some imaginary thing in the darkness. The spot we were in was very dark, with a wood on our right and a field on our left,

1 Tor this feature, compare the dream-case, No. 118.

separated from us by a railing. Thinking M. saw somebody hiding behind a bush I went forward, but saw nothing. M. now, still saying ' Look at her, look at her,' fell back against the railing and lay motionless with his back against it. We ran to him, asking him what was the matter, but he only moaned. After a while he seemed better. We wanted him to come on, but he said, ' Where is my stick 1 ' — which he had dropped. ' Oh, never mind your stick,' I said, for I was afraid of not being at the college before the shutting of the doors; but he would look for his stick, which he found by lighting a match. We walked on together, M., notwithstanding all my efforts to get him into conversation, not saying a word. After walking for about a quarter of a mile, he suddenly said, ' Where were they carrying her to? I tell you they were carrying her; didn't you see them carrying her? ' I tried to quiet him, but he kept on saying, ' I tell you they were carrying her.' In a short time he was pacified and walked quietly on for half a mile or so, when he said, looking round in surprise, ' Hullo! we must have come a short cut. I know this house.' I said we hadn't; but he said, ' We must have run then. It seems only a minute ago since we left the house.' He several times expressed his surprise at the quickness we had done the last halfmile in. He was all right from this to the college.

" On Sunday morning he told me that something very bad happened on Thursday night. An old lady who was very fond of him, but whom he hadn't seen for a long time, had died suddenly of heart disease. She had been out somewhere and had come home, when, as she was receiving some friends, she fell dead, and, to use his words, she was carried out. I immediately asked him at what hour did she die? He said at between 10 and 11. (It was a little after 10 when he saw his vision.) I could not get the exact hour of the lady's death, as he didn't like the subject. When he told me this, he knew nothing of what occurred on the walk home. When he was told of it, he didn't remember a thing about the vision; but said if he hadn't known that he hadn't drunk anything (which was true), he would have said he had been drunk. He seemed to have been in a sort of stupor all the time. I think I ought to mention that he told me long before this that he had seen a vision of a girl who had been drowned. ^ This is a true account of what happened.

(Signed) " H. King (the writer of the above).

"A. Hamilton-Jones."

Mr. H. King adds, " My friend [Mr. Jones] remembers perfectly M.'s not being surprised at the news [of the death], and his saying it seemed to have happened before."

[Mr. R. A. King, of 36, G-rove Lane, Denmark Hill, uncle of the narrator, through whose kindness we obtained this account, says: " M. has such a horror of the whole affair that my nephew does not let me write to ask him about the old lady's death." We are thus unable to verify the date of the death independently. M.'s name is known to me. He has left the Military College.]

The next case is from the Rev. F. Barker, late Rector of Cottenham, Cambridge.

1 This other vision followed closely on an accident which had much distressed the percipient.

44 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

"July 2nd, 1884.

(228) " At about 11 o'clock on the night of December 6th, 1873, I had just got into bed, and had certainly not fallen asleep, or even into a doze, when I suddenly startled my wife by a deep groan, and when she asked the reason, I said, ' I have just seen my aunt. She came and stood beside me, and smiled with her old kind smile, and disappeared.' A much-loved aunt, my mother's sister, was at that time in Madeira, for her health, accompanied by my cousin, her niece. I had no reason to think that she was critically ill at this time, but the impression made upon me was so great that the next day I told her family (my mother among them) what I had seen. Within a week afterwards we heard that she had died on that very night, and, making all allowance for longitude, at about that very time.

" When my cousin, who was with her to the last, heard what I had seen, she said, ' I am not at all surprised, for she was calling out for you all the time she was dying.'

" This is the only time I have experienced anything of this nature. I think, perhaps, this story first-hand may interest you. I can only say that the vivid impression I received that night has never left me.

" Febdbeick Barker."

We find the date of death confirmed in the Times obituary.

Mrs. Barker's account is as follows: —

" I recollect the circumstances well, upon which my husband wrote to you. It must have been somewhere about 11 o'clock. He was not asleep (for he had only just spoken), when he groaned deeply. I asked what was the matter, and he said his aunt, who was then in Madeira, had appeared to him, smiling at him with her own kind smile, and then vanished. He said she had ' something black, it might have been lace, thrown over her head.' The next day he told many relations of the occurrence, and it turned out she died that very night. Her niece. Miss Garnett, told me she was not at all astonished that he should have seen her aunt, for that while she was dying she was calling out for him. He had been to her almost like a son.

"P. S. Barker."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Barker says, " My recollection is of some lace-like head-gear, as of a black lace veil thrown round the head."

The following statement is from Miss Garnett, who was with Mr. Barker's aunt at the time of her death: —

" Wy reside, near Lancaster.

"October, 1885.

" I beg to certify that I was with my aunt. Miss, at the time

of her death in Madeira, December 6th, 1873. On hearing that my cousin, the Bev. F. Barker, now living in Stanley Place, Chester, had had some kind of a vision of my aunt at a time almost exactly corresponding with that of her death, I told my uncle, from whom I heard of the occurrence, that I was not surprised, since my aunt had so frequently expressed a wish to see Mr. Barker during the last few days of her life

" Louisa Garnett."

The following case was first published in Burma, Past and Present, by Lieut.-Gen. Albert Fytche, C.S.I, Vol I, pp. 177-8.

(229) "A remarkable incident occurred to me at Maulmain, which made a deep impression upon my imagination. I saw a ghost^ with my own eyes in broad daylight, of which I could make an affidavit. I had an old schoolfellow, who was afterwards a college friend, with whom I had lived in the closest intimacy. Years, however, passed without our seeing each other. One morning I had just got out of bed, and was dressing myself, when suddenly my old friend entered the room. I greeted him warmly; told him to call for a cup of tea in the verandah, and promised to be with him immediately. I dressed myself in all haste, and went out into the verandah, but found no one there. I could not believe my eyes. I called to the sentry who was posted at the front of the house, but he had seen no strange gentleman that morning; the servants also declared that no such person had entered the house. I was certain I had seen my friend. I was not thinking about him at the time, yet I was not taken by surprise, as steamers and other vessels were frequently arriving at Maulmain. A fortnight afterwards news arrived that he had died 600 miles ofi', about the very time I had seen him at Maulmain."

General Fytche writes to Professor Sidgwick as follows: —

" Durling Dean, West Clifi', Bournemouth," "December 22nd, 1883."

" A paper containing answers to your list of questions is enclosed. I don't think I have anything further to add, except to reiterate my conviction that my friend's etcJw^ov did appear to me as stated. My friend's death was a sudden one; I had never heard of his previous illness, nor had I been thinking about him in any way. In animistic philosophy, savage or civilised, I believe it is admitted that an apparition of the kind bears the likeness of its fleshly body.

" Answers to questions as to the apparition at Maulmain: —

(1) "The printed narrative was written from memory. I kept no diary after my papers were burnt at Bassein (see p. 24 of book). There are no letters extant which I am aware of which were written at the time of the occurrence.

(2) " The news of my friend's death was conveyed by the public newspapers, which arrived at Maulmain by the mail steamer about a fortnight after the incident in question. They stated that the death of my friend occurred in the early morning of the day his spirit appeared to me.

(3) " When the apparition was addressed by me, it did not respond by word or sign, at least so far as I observed. I was not thinking of an apparition. I took it for my friend in the flesh.

(4) "The event occurred some 26 years ago, and the persons who resided near me at the time, and whom I visited on the morning of the occurrence, are dead. The year following I visited England, and mentioned the circumstance to several members of my family, and amongst others, I think, my cousin, Louis Tennyson d'Eyncourt, one of the London magistrates, but it was not a matter that I ever talked much about.

(5) " I have had no similar experience. I have had no hallucination of

1 See p. 48, note.

46 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

sight or hearing, and have always been considered as a person of the strongest nerve. " A. Fytche (General)."

Mr. d'Eyncourt writes from 31, Cornwall Gardens, S.W., on Dec. 21, 1885:—

" General Fytche paid me a visit at Hadley a year or two^ before he published his book — I should say from 15 to 18 years since, and told me the story as narrated afterwards in his book; and it made a great impression on me and my family. I cannot remember what year he told me, but certainly not 25 years since; perhaps 20 would be nearer the mark."

[General Fytche is under a promise not to disclose his friend's name; which prevents us from ascertaining the exact date of the incident.]

The next case is from Mr. Evans, of Byron Cottage, Chalford, near Stroud.

"April 17th, 1884.

(230) "In the fall of 1867, I took a trip to Canada; and one evening, the early part of October, the same year, I was sitting with a merchant of Toronto, in the dress-circle of the theatre; and during the evening my attention was attracted towards a portion of the pit, which was, through shadow, slightly obscured, by a face looking up at me in an intent, weird, and agonising manner, that caused a feeling of awe to overpower me, as I recognised in the features my twin brother,^ who at that time was in China. The figure, although in shadow, appeared lighted up supernaturally, and revealed itself plainly, so that I could not be mistaken about the face. I instantly exclaimed to my friend, ' Good God! there is my brother,' pointing at the same time to the figure. He said, 'I cannot see anyone looking up here.' However, I was so excited I rushed down to the pit where he stood, but could not see anyone resembling him in features whatever. I am not superstitious or a Spiritualist, but could not get over the startling circumstances for some time.

" On my return home to England, shortly afterwards, much to my grief and sorrow, I found my brother had died at the French Hospital, Shanghai, on the 6th October, 1867. The incident in the theatre flashed into my thoughts, and impressed me I had seen his apparition, and I took the trouble to ascertain date of performance, and found it corresponded. I could not be mistaken, as it occurred the first week I was in Toronto, and the patronage of the military placed the performance precisely on the 6th October, 1867.

" I am prepared to make an afiidavit that such are the facts.

"J. Evans."

We find from a certified copy of the Register of Deaths kept at the British Consulate, at Shanghai, that the death took place on October 6th, 1868 (not 1867), at the General Hospital.

I wrote to Mr. Evans, explaining that it would be the evening, (10.37 p.m.) not of October 6th, but of October 5th, at Toronto, that would correspond with October 6th, midday, at Shanghai. As I anticipated, it

1 The interval must have been longer than this, as the book was published in 1878.

2 Other cases where the agent was a twin brother are Nos. 76, 77, 78, and 134.

turned out that he had assumed that October 6th in one place would be October 6th in another, and had simply asked which opera was performed on October 6th. He says: —

" I wrote to my friend in Toronto, asking him if the ' Grand Duchess ' were performed on October 6th, and he replied in the affirmative; but at the same time it was performed on the 5th, I am sure, as well as on the ■6th. The company was performing opera houffe during the entire week.

" I have never had any hallucinations before or since."

We have procured from Toronto a copy of the Daily Globe, which shows that the " Grand Duchess " was performed on both nights.

[Mr. Evans has had no recent communication with his companion of the evening, who was only an acquaintance; and corroboration cannot be obtained. The uncertainty as to the day of the apparition seems irremovable. If it was the 5th, the coincidence may have been quite exact; if it was the 6th, the 12 hours' limit must have been exceeded, unless the death took place in the hour or two preceding midnight.]

Here we have to notice once more the luminous appearance of the phantasm (Chap. XII., § 7).

The following narrative appeared in the Daily Telegraph, in October, 1881. Unfortunately we have been unable to obtain corroboration or further details, as we have failed to discover the writer's present address. We learn from the War Office that he resigned

his militia commission in August, 1880.

" West Brompton.

"October 25th, 1881. (231) " Sir, — Of many comrades who gave up their lives for Queen and country in Zululand and Natal, for none have I, or those who knew him, felt a keener pang of regret than for Rudolph Gough. In November, 1878, Gough, having retired from the Coldstream Guards, proceeded as a volunteer to Natal, where on arrival he was given a company in Commandant Nettleton's battalion of the Natal Native Contingent, with which regiment he served in the first advance into Zululand. The Etshowe relief column commenced its advance on March 29th, and reached the Inyone River on the evening of that day. To all our astonishment, Gough, who had risen from a sick bed in Durban, accompanied by Lieutenant George Davis of his own regiment, arrived in camp at dusk, having ridden through from Durban, a distance of 82 miles, in little over a day. Gough, who had suffered badly en route, was again severely attacked by that curse of South African Armies — dysentery — and was ordered to one of the ambulances, where he remained until the morning of the action of Gingihlovo. The moment the alarm sounded, the poor fellow staggered out and took command of his company, and afterwards actually led his men over the shelter trench, when the cheer was started and the charge sounded. The excitement and exertion proved too much for my poor friend's enfeebled frame, and utter collapse followed.

" On April 17th, just before ' tattoo,' I was sitting in the gipsy-looking edifice that the officers of the King's Royal Rifle Corps had rigged up,

48 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

which we dubbed the ' mess house ' or ' banqueting hall,' finishing a letter to a newspaper for which I acted as correspondent, when the brigade bugler rang out ' last post.' I walked to the door, outside of which I saw standing the man who, two days ago, I had been told was dying on the other side of the Tugela. I could not describe on paper the extraordinary sensation that Gough's unexpected appearance gave me.

" Some few days after I returned to Fort Pearson to re-assume command of the Natal Native Pioneers. After reporting my arrival, I made my way to the post-oiiice, where I was much shocked at being told of my friend's death. The postmaster handed me a telegram, which had been suffered to remain in a pigeon-hole for some days, instead of being sent on to the front. It was from the civil surgeon, who helped to soothe the last moments of my friend, and ran as follows: ' Captain the Hon. H. E,. Gough is dying. He has been asking for you all day. Come down here if possible.' On subsequent inquiries at the hospital, I found that he had died at exactly the hour I fancied I had seen him outside the mess house at Gingihlovo. Prior to the occurrence I have narrated, I never had the faintest belief in the actuality of supernatural ^ phenomena of any nature.

"Stuart Stephens. " (Late Lieutenant 4th Battalion Royal Dublin Pusiliers.)"

Miss I. F. Galwey writes to us from 5, Earlsfort Terrace, Dublin: —

"May 18th, 1885.

" I met two of young Gough's cousins on Saturday; and they assure me that the account given by Mr. Stephens i? a perfectly authentic one, and is fully believed by all the family; but they know nothing of Mr. Stephens, except that he was a comrade of poor Rudolph's, and that just before his death he had expressed an earnest desire to see him."

[The London Gazette for July 22nd, 1879, gives the date of the death of Captain Gough as April 19th. It seems very probable that the " 17th " in Mr. Stephens' account is a misprint. For if he inquired at the hospital and learnt the identity of hour, it is not likely that he made so grave a mistake as to the day. But from the South African Campaign of 1879, by J. R. Mackinnon, we learn that Captain Gough had been desperately ill for some days before his death; so that even if the vision did precede the death by two days, it might still be connected with his condition. It is clear, too, from the words of the telegram that his thoughts had been directed to the percipient for some little time before his death.]

It might perhaps seem that this case ought to have been disallowed, on the principle that, when the percipient is in anxiety about the person whose phantasm appears, there is an appreciable chance that the appearance is the purely subjective creation of his own brain (Vol. I., pp. 508-9). But it would, perhaps, be a trifle pedantic to apply this principle to cases which occur in the thick of a war, where the idea of death is constant and familiar. In such circumstances, the

1 I must once again disclaim all responsibility for this and similar expressions on the part of informants.

mental attitude caused by the knowledge that a comrade is in peril seems scarcely parallel to that which similar knowledge might produce among those who are sitting brooding at home. At any rate, if anxiety for the fate of absent comrades be a natural and known source of hallucinations during campaigns, it is odd that, among several hundreds of cases of subjective hallucination, I find no second instance of the phenomenon.

The following account is from a lady, Miss H., whose name and address maybe given to private inquirers, and who would gladly have allowed its publication had friends not been unwilling. Having stated that on Thursday, November 16th, 1854, about 10 o'clock at night, she had a vision of an intimate friend, who died that evening at 7, she was asked to furnish particulars, and replied: —

"November, 1885.

(232) "I had had 16 hours' travelling in the interior of a diligence, crossing the Apennines from Bologna to Florence. I was perfectly well, but unusually tired. I was in the Hotel Europa, in Florence, and was quite wide awake, not having had the necessary moments in which to compose myself to sleep. My sister had just fallen asleep. My friend stood at the side of the bed nearest to me, near the foot, and looked at me fixedly. She was in white, and looked exactly as she did in life. She was an old lady, and had been almost bedridden for long. She had taken very keen interest in our Italian tour. I lost my presence of mind, and woke my sister. I also called out to my father, who was in the adjoining room, not yet asleep, but too tired to do more than answer, though he remembered the circumstance of my calling to him the next morning. Directly this alarm was shown, the vision disappeared. It was both vivid, and produced a supernatural sensation which I never before or since experienced to anything like the same extent. " E. H. H."

We find from the Times obituary that the death took place on Thursday, November 16th, 1854. Inquiries have been made at the hotel in Florence, in order to obtain confirmation of the date of Miss H.'s stay there: but the hotel changed hands a few years later, and the information cannot be got.

Miss H. has experienced only one other hallucination, and that was " in the height of a severe illness," when she fancied her maid was at the bedside. In answer to inquiries, she writes that the sister who was with her cannot recall the occurrence; and adds: —

" The fact is she only woke for an instant, and as she is 9 years younger than myself, and I saw she believed I had only been dreaming this, I spared her. I had not fallen asleep. I did not argue the point with her, or refer to it again for some long time after. It was the same with my father. I called out Mrs. W.'s name, and he referred to it as a dream in the morning. But I confided in a sister, then recently married to a Norfolk clergyman, who was very near my own age. I was the more led to do this as the lady who stood near me was her husband's mother. The account goes on to say how exceptionally



Vol. Ii. E

■.n f^i

50 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

interested the lady had been in the route and experience of the travellers; and concludes thus: " In those days such things were subjects of ridicule and unbelief more than they now are, and I am surprised how lightly I took what yet I felt positive was no dream."

The sister to whom Miss H. mentioned her experience writes to her as follows, on December 4th, 1885: —

" My Dear Elise, — I fully remember your naming the vision of Mrs. W. which you had on the very evening on which she died. We compared notes faithfully at the time; and it was most remarkable because she had not been visibly worse, and died at the last suddenly. She had thought a great deal about you being in a Roman Catholic country at the time of some great council, and had named in two or three letters that she should be glad when you got home; so you were on her mind. I believe you named it in a letter, but I can't find it. But I am as sure of the fact of your telling me (on your return home, and coming here on the way) all particulars as if it was yesterday — the rooms en suite, and our father hearing you call out to Memie, who had fallen asleep before you; and you naming ' Mrs. W.' to father, and he, supposing it was a dream, trying to soothe you. And you, though feeling sure you were awake, yet tried to think it was a sort of dream ' as when one awaketh.' The first news you received from England was the account of the peaceful and rather sudden death of one who was renowned for energy of spirit all her life, and who was full of imagination and great love for you. This is my statement. The dates were carefully compared, that I am sure of. My husband is as certain as I am of all I say. — Your afi"ectionate sister, "M. A. W."

The next case, like the last, seems fairly to fall among waking rather than " borderland " impressions, since a special reason is remembered for wakefulness. It is, however, still more remote, and depends on a single memory. The Rev. H. E. Noyes, of Christ Church Vicarage, Kingstown, a nephew of Mrs. G., the narrator, (formerly of the Parsonage, Kingstown,) vouches for the strength of the impression made on her. " 1883.

(233) " On February 26, 1850, I was awake, for I was to go to my sister-in-law, at Kingstown, and visiting was then an event to me. About 2 o'clock in the morning my brother walked into our room (my sister's) and

stood beside my bed. I called to her, ' There is.' He was at the time

quartered at Paisley, and a mail car from Belfast passed, about that hour, not more than about half a mile from our village. When he could get a short leave, he liked to come in upon us and give us a delightful surprise. I even recollect its crossing my mind what there was in the house ready that we could give him to eat. He looked down most lovingly and kindly, and waved his hand and he was gone. I recollect it all as if it were only last night it all occurred, and my feeling of astonishment, not at his coming into the room at all, but at where he could have gone. At that hour he died."

We have confirmed the date of death in the Army List, and find from a newspaper notice that the death took place in the early morning, and was extremely sudden.

The next account was given to us by Mrs. Swithinbank, of Ormleigh, Mowbray Road, Upper Norwood. The incident occurred about 1867. " 1882.

(234) " When my son H. was a boy, I one day saw him off to school, watching him down the Grove, and then went into the library to sit, a room I rarely used at that time of the day. Shortly after, he appeared, walking over the wall opposite the window. The wall was about 13 feet distant from the window and low, so that when my son stood on it his face was on a level with mine, and close to me. I hastily threw up the sash, and called to ask why he had returned from school, and why he was there; he did not answer, but looked full at me with a frightened expression, and dropped down the other side of the wall and disappeared. Never doubting but that it was some boyish trick, I called a servant to tell him to come to me, but not a trace of him was to be found, though there was no screen or place of concealment. I myself searched with the same result.

" As I sat still wondering where and how he had so suddenly disappeared a cab drove up with H. in an almost unconscious state, brought home by a friend and schoolfellow, who said that during a dictation-lesson he had suddenly fallen backward over his seat, calling out in a shrill voice, ' Mamma will know,' and became insensible. He was ill that day, prostrate the next; but our doctor could not account for the attack, nor did anything follow to throw any light on his appearance to me. That the time of his attack exactly corresponded with that at which I saw his figure was proved both by his master and class-mates."

The Rev. H. Swithinbank, eldest son of the writer of the above, explains that the point at which the figure was seen was in a direct line between the house (situated at Summerhill Terrace, Newcastle-on-Tyne) and the school, but that " no animal but a bird could come direct that way," and that the walking distance between the two places was nearly a mile. He describes his brother as of a nervous temperament, but his mother as just the opposite, a calm person, who has never in her life had any other similar experience.

The next account is from Colonel Swiney, of the Duke of Cornwall's

Regiment. Possibly, in this as in some other cases, publication may

lead to our obtaining corroborative evidence from persons to whom we

have as yet been unable to apply for it.

" Richmond Barracks, Dublin, July 14th, 1885.

(235) " It was some time in the latter end of September, 1864, when quartered at Shorncliffe Camp, I thought I saw my eldest brother (whom at the time I believed to be in India, where he was serving in the Royal Engineers) walking towards me, and before I could recover from my astonishment, the figure had disappeared. I perfectly well remember mentioning the fact to some of my brother ofiicers, and saying how curious it was, but never thought much about it until I received news of his death, which had occurred about (as near as I can recollect, without having made any note) the time I had imagined I had seen him — viz., September 24th, 1864 — at Nagpore, East Indies, and but for the fact of his death, I should never probably have recalled the circumstance. I do

52 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

not attach much importance to this; it might have been a coincidence, remarkable certainly, but nothing more. I am afraid it will not be of much use to you in your inquiries, as half its value is gone by my not being able to bring corroborative evidence to prove that I had mentioned the fact prior to hearing of his death, although in my own mind I am perfectly certain I did so. Richard Edgcumbe was quartered at Shorncliffe at the very time this occurred. a g q S^iney."

[It was from Mr. R. Edgcumbe that we first heard of this incident. He did not himself hear of it until some years after its occurrence.] In answer to inquiries Colonel Swiney adds: —

(1) "Years afterwards, in 1871, at the Cape of Good Hope, I wrote a long account of it to a Yorkshire gentleman who was collecting data on the subject of hallucination.

(2) "I have had a personal interview with Colonel Schwabe, who was a subaltern with me in the Carabineers, and he cannot recall the circumstances at all, indeed has no recollection whatever about it. This may be accounted for by the fact of his having gone abroad very shortly afterwards, and we did not meet for some months after I had heard of my brother's death. At the time I heard of his death I was stopping with Charles Gurney, shooting, near Norwich, some time the latter end of October, if not the beginning of November. When I received the letter I knew what was in it; and if I only knew Charles Gurney's address, I should like to have asked him if he ever remembers the morning I received the bad news before I left for London, saying ' How curious; I thought I saw him coming towards me at ShornclifFe a few weeks ago.'

(3) "The 24th of September, 1864, was a Sunday. I cannot say whether that was the day I mentioned it. My brother died some time, as far as I can recollect, after the family with whom he was stopping had returned from church; for I remember the letter saying: ' He was so much better, and asleep, that we thought it safe to leave him for an hour or so. On our return,' it went on to say, ' we found he was very feverish, and he died that afternoon.' Now the time I saw the hallucination could not have been later than 2 p.m. Allowing for the five hours difierence of longitude, that would be about 9 a.m., and would not tally."

[Colonel Swiney seems to have reckoned the difierence the wrong way, At any moment the time of day in India is four or five hours later than the time of day in England; and thus, if the days were the same, the death and the vision may have coincided exactly.]

The Army List for December, 1864, and Allen's Indian Mail for October 20th, 1864, give the date of Lieut. John D. Swiney's death as September 25th; and it was the 25th, not the 24th, that fell on a Sunday. When Colonel Swiney heard of the death he was clearly under the impression that his experience had occurred on a Sunday — which is a marked day; and his subsequent mistake as to the day of the month seems therefore unimportant.

The next case is from Miss Bale, of Church Farm, Gorleston.

"September 17th, 1885. (236) " In the June of 1880, 1 went to a situation as governess. On the first day of my going there, after retiring for the night, I heard a noise which

^^y-x-p^A.)

was like the ticking of a watch. I took no particular notice of it, but I noticed that every time I was alone I heard it, more especially at night. I even went so far as to search, thinking there must be a watch concealed somewhere in the room. This continued until I grew quite accustomed to it. It was on the 12th of July, when I was coming from the dining-room with a tray of glasses that I saw what appeared to me to be a dark figure standing just outside the door, with outstretched arms. It startled me, and when I turned to look again it was gone.

" On the 23rd September I received news that my brother was drowned on the 12th of July. I heard the ticking up to the time I had the letter, but never once afterwards.

"F. A. Bale."

Writing again. Miss Bale says: —

" I enclose the letter informing us of my brother's death, also one from the captain of the ship, for your perusal.

" I made no entry in my diary of the apparition I saw on the 12th of July, but I distinctly remember the time. I sat down a little while to recover my fright, and then I looked at the time; it was 20 minutes past 6. I enclose the address of a friend who I am sure remembers it as well as I do. You will see by enclosed where my brother was when he met with his death.

" The apparition did remind me of my brother, as I last saw him in a long dark ulster, and it was about his height, but that was all I could discover, for when I looked a second time it was gone. What made me mention the ticking was the peculiarity of its following me everywhere, providing I was alone."

The enclosed letter, written by the Rev. W. A. Purey-Cust on board the Ship " Melbourne," announced that Mr. William Bale's death occurred at 6 p.m., on July 12th, 1880, about 150 miles south of Tristan d'Acunha, longitude 12 deg. 30" W. Mr. Purey-Cust has since told us that on that day — and on that day only — the position of the ship had to be found by dead reckoning, the sun not being visible. The error in time arising in this way could not, however, have amounted to more than a minute or two, and Mr. Purey-Cust gives particulars which make it almost impossible that he can be mistaken in stating that the accident occurred at 6 p.m, by the ship's clock.

Mrs. Hart, of Baker Street, Gorleston, writes to us: —

" September 28th, 1885.

" On the night of the 12th of July, 1880, Miss Bale came to my house to supper, and she told me that she was coming from the drawing-room and she saw a dark figure standing just outside the door; she appeared very nervous. She said it reminded her of her brother, and remarked to me then that she knew something must have happened to him. I asked her if she noticed the time she saw it, and she told me that the apparition had startled her very much, and she had sat down a little time to recover the fright it gave her, and then she looked at the time; it was 6.20. She had previously told me of a ticking she heard everywhere she went, so long as she was alone, but directly anyone joined her it ceased; and she told me she heard it up to the day she received the news of her brother's death, but not afterwards.

"H. Hart."

Miss Bale adds: —

54 FURTHER VISUAL CASUS [chap.

"September 24th, 1885.

" There was one incident I did not tell you, thinking it too trivial, as I did not notice the date or hour, but I know it was shortly before I heard the news of my brother's death. I had been in bed a short time, and I heard a tremendous crash like the smashing of a lot of china. I felt too nervous to go and see what it was, but nothing was broken or disturbed in the morning, and for three nights in succession I heard the same. I am not inclined to think that it was in any way corresponding with my brother's death. I certainly have never heard imaginary voices nor seen imaginary figures except the apparition I saw the day my brother was drowned."

[There seems to be no reason for connecting the ticking sound with Mr. Bale's death, any more than the crash of china; and it is probable that it was due to a merely physical affection, to which the shock of receiving the news perhaps put an end. It seemed right, however, to mention it; since, if it was a hallucination, it would tend to show that Miss Bale was for some time in a condition favourable to purely subjective hallucinations — which would slightly weaken the force of the coincidence of the visual hallucination with her brother's death. It will be noticed that, allowing for longitude, the death occurred — according to the statements made — about half-an-hour after the apparition But as the difference is so small, it seems more probable that it is due to error in Miss Bale's observation or memory, or in the time of her clock, than that so close a coincidence was purely accidental.]

The next few cases, though depending in the first instance on

witnesses in a humbler station, are, as far as I can judge, faithfully

reported. The narrator of the first of them is Ellen M. Greany, a

trusted and valued servant in the family of Miss Porter, at 16, Russell

Square, W.C.

"May 20th, 1884.

(237) " I sat one evening reading, when on looking up from my book, I distinctly saw a school-friend of mine, to whom I was very much attached, standing near the door. I was about to exclaim at the strangeness of her visit, when, to my horror, there were no signs of any one in the room but my mother. I related what I had seen to her, knowing she could not have seen, as she was sitting with her back towards the door, nor did she hear anything unusual, and was greatly amused at my scare, suggesting I had read too much or been dreaming.

" A day or so after this strange event, I had news to say my friend was no more. The strange part was I did not even know she was ill, much less in danger, so could not have felt anxious at the time on her account, but may have been thinking of her; that I cannot testify. Her illness was short, and death very unexpected. Her mother told me she spoke of me not long before she died, and wondered I had not been to see her, thinking, of course, I had some knowledge of her illness, which was not the case. It may be as well to mention she left a small box she prized rather, to be given to me in remembrance of her. She died the same evening and about the same time that I saw her vision, which was the end of October, 1874. a Ellen M. Greany."

In answer to an inquiry, Ellen Greany adds that this hallucination is the only one she has ever experienced. She tells Miss Porter that she went to see her dead friend before the funeral, which accords with her statement that she heard the news of the death very soon after it occurred; and there is no reason to doubt that, at the time when she heard the news, she was able correctly to identify the day of her vision.

Her mother corroborates as follows: —

" Acton, July, 1884. " I can well remember the instance my daughter speaks of. I know she was not anxious at the time, not knowing her friend was ill. I took no notice of it at the time, as I do not believe in ghosts, but thought it strange the next day, when we heard she was dead, and died about the same time that my daughter saw her.

" Margaret Greany."

[I have seen Ellen Greany, who is a superior and intelligent person. She went over her story without prompting, giving an entirely clear and consistent account, and standing cross-examination perfectly. But the favourable effect of such an interview on one's own mind cannot, of course, be conveyed to others.]

The following account was first published in The Englishman, on May 13th, 1876.

(238) " A labourer named Duck, employed by Mr. Dixon, of Mildenhall Warren Farm, near Marlborough, was in charge of a horse and water-cart on the farm, when the animal took fright and knocked him down. The wheel went over his chest, and he died shortly afterwards. Immediately after the accident, Mr. Dixon despatched a woman to Ramsbury, where Duck lived, to make known the fact to his wife. On arriving at her home the messenger found her out gathering wood, but shortly after a girl, who was her companion, arrived, and without being told of what had occurred, volunteered the statement that Ria (Mrs. Duck) was unable to do much that morning, that she had been very much frightened, having seen her husband in the wood. Shortly afterwards Mrs. Duck returned without any wood, and being informed by a neighbour that a woman from Mildenhall Woodlands wished to see her, ejaculated ' My David's dead then.' Inquiry has since been made by Mr. Dixon of the woman, and she positively asserts that she saw her husband in the wood, and said, ' Hallo, David, what wind blows you here? ' and that he made no answer. Mr. Dixon inquired what time this occurred, and she replied about 10 o'clock, the time at which the fatal accident occurred."

On the appearance of this account, our friend, Mr. F. W. Percival, of 36, Bryanston Street, W., wrote to Mr. Dixon to inquire into the facts, and received from him the following confirmation: —

"May 25th, 1876.

"As soon as it happened (Duck's death), I sent one of my female servants to inform his wife of the sad occurrence, to a place called Ramsbury, about four miles from where it occurred. But when she got

56 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

there, his wife was gone to get wood at a distant wood, the woman stopping for her return at an adjoining cottage. But Maria returned without any wood, saying she had seen her husband, and asked him how he came there — telling the woman that she knew her business, that she was come to inform her of her husband's death, and that she had seen him as plain as ever she did in her life, and said to him, 'Hallo, David, what wind blew you here 1 ' but as she saw him no more, she became much frightened, and left the wood."

"June 1st, 1876. " The woman I sent told me, when she got to Ramsbury to Duck's house, her neighbour told her that she was gone to get wood and her (the neighbour's) little girl was gone with her. The girl soon returned saying Maria Duck was much frightened in the wood, and had seen her husband and spoken to him, but as he made no reply she became faint, and told the girl to go home, as she knew something had happened to David. That was before she knew the woman was sent. When she got home and found the woman waiting for her return she said she knew her errand, and asked her if her husband was not dead, and seemed much frightened, the woman telling her he was very ill, and thought he would not be living to see her again. When she got to Warren, she found him dead, and told us the time she saw him, which was exactly the time he lost his life; therefore I think the public is bound to believe it, although it seems to us quite a mystery. Duck's wife is now in Hungerford Union, her home broken up by his death. The woman I sent is Mary Holick, has been living with me some time, and her word is to be relied on.

" Benjamin Dixon."

Mrs. Duck has since died; but Mrs. Holick dictated and signed the following account: —

"January 26th, 1886.

" I well remember about poor old David Duck. I am never likely to forget it. The cart-wheel passed over his chest and killed him, and I was sent down by Mr. Dixon to tell his wife at Ramsbury. She was not at home; she was out gathering wood with the little girl of a neighbour; so I went to this neighbour's house to wait. Presently the little girl came in, and said that Mrs. Duck was in a great way because she had seen her husband in the wood, and when she spoke to him and said, 'What wind blows you here, Davie 1 ' he disappeared away, and she fell back on the bank half fainting with fright; and the little girl ran down and found her like it. So she had gathered very little wood. If the little girl had not told me first, I never could have really believed that she had seen him. But when she came back, about half-an-hour after the little girl (who had come on in front, full of what Mrs. Duck had seen), it was all true. I shall never forget her; she came in with her hands stretched out, and said, looking at me, ' She has come to tell me that my Davie is killed. I knew he was; I have seen his ghost. I didn't need anyone to tell me.' And then she told us, afterwards, how she had suddenly seen him in front of her, in his usual clothes; and how she spoke to him, and he vanished. She lived about half a mile from the woman I was waiting with; and we sent another woman to her house to tell her, when she came home, that a person from Mr. Dixon's wanted to see her. So directly she told her,

she said, ' She has come to tell me my poor Davie is killed; but I didn't want anyone to tell me, for I know; I have just seen his ghost.' And the woman said, ' Don't give way now, but come with me, there's a good woman.' And they came; and I shall never forget her as she came stumbling up the steps, and looked at me and said, ' For God's sake tell me; my Davie is dead.' She had seen him just as natural as life, every bit; but the little girl never saw anything, only she knew Mrs. Duck had, when she helped her off the bank, where she fell when he disappeared. She was a very good woman, I think, and her husband was a very quiet man; and she was as strong as any man, and worked hard from early morning."

We find from the Register of Deaths that David Duck died on March 31, 1874.

[Mrs. Holick's account fairly comes into the class of evidence reckoned: ri^lt'Seut as on a par with first-hand (Vol. I., p. 148); as, though she did not.;, 4,^4^,,^^ actually receive a description of the apparition from Mrs. Duck's own lips before Mrs. Duck heard the fatal news, she saw her in the state of agitation, and heard her express the conviction, which the apparition had produced. Mrs. Holick is quite clear that she herself was the first to communicate the news.]

In the next example accident has made the evidence for the facts very fairly strong; but the case is to some extent weakened by the percipient's knowledge that the person whose phantasm he saw was ill. The case was first described to us by a clergyman as follows: —

"March 5th, 1885.

(239) "Some 18 or 19 years ago, I remember calling on a working ^^ jjf" maltster, whose employer was living at Lincoln. His employer was ill at / ^j/> / the time, and I asked the man if he had heard from him lately. 'No,' he ' %^* said, ' but I am afraid he is dead.' And on my inquiring why he thought -^■x^'^'-'^so, he replied that on going out that morning early, he had seen his employer standing on the top of the steps that lead up to the kiln door, as; c/U"^;; #v plainly as he ever had seen him in his life. HA-w^/il!;:^

It was as he expected: the first news that came reported his.^,y^,t„^^^^— employer's death. '

"I have no doubt the man I speak of either saw this appearance, or ' ''*' 'J' \ believed he saw it." i^j».'•

In answer to inquiries, this informant says: — x l v. t

"March 12th, 1885. ^

" Since receiving your letter, I have had the curiosity to look over my old diaries, thinking I might have made a note of the occurrence, and under the date of Thursday, the 22nd of October, 1863, I find the

Dead, following: — ' Report of Mr. W.'s death. M. saw his " wraith " on

A

Tuesday morning about 5 o'clock.'

" This difiers somewhat from what I told you in my last letter, for I said that the man had seen the appearance that same morning in which I spoke with him. Here it seems it was two days before. But still he had

58 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

told me before it was known for a certainty that Mr. W. was dead. For you observe the word ' dead ' put in over the y^. This I know from my own habit was put in afterwards. There is no communication between this place and Lincoln, except on the market day, Friday. At that time of year, moreover, the carriers who go to Lincoln would not get back before night, and consequently I should most probably not have learned the certainty of the report until some time on Saturday. Then, instead of making a new note of it, I simply put in the word ' dead ' to show that the report was true when I first heard it. Moreover, I used the Scotch word ' wraith ' instead of ' ghost ' or ' spirit,' as I had an idea that the former word was applied to appearances before death.

" I observe that the man said ' about 5 o'clock.' Of course, this would be a vague expression for any time up to 5.30, or thereabouts, when the morning would not be very clear perhaps, but sufficiently so to enable one to see an object some 10 or 12 yards oflf,and I am not sure it was quite so much. " I cannot say that Mr. W. was dead at the time M. saw the appearance, but he was certainly dead at the time he told me of it, otherwise I should not have inserted the word ' dead ' where I did.

I may add that Mr. W. had formerly lived in this village, and I had known him well. He had gone to live in Lincoln only a short time before his death. His malt kiln was his only means of providing for his wife and family — five or six young children — and he had been in the habit of coming over to see how things went on, twice a week. There is nothing more natural than that his thoughts (and they must have been very anxious thoughts) should have been fixed on that one place."

The following is the percipient's own account: —

"Ridley's Yard, North Gate, Newark, Notts., March 16th, 1885.

" I have received your letter asking me to forward you what I said about my dear Mr. Wright, for he was a very good master. I said I saw him standing on the steps, with one hand on the handrail; my light went out, and I saw no more, and he died, and I hope he is at rest. That was at 4 o'clock in the morning, before he departed from us. u j_ Meerill."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Merrill adds, on April 6, 1885: — " I am very sorry to let you know that I do not remember the date that dear Mr. Wright died, but I think it was the latter end of 1863. I looked my old books over, but, with the trade being carried on in the same way, I have nothing to go by. I saw him as plain as in the middle of the day, for he stood just the same as he did when he came at noon, looking on to the house for me to go to him. I never saw anything before, to my mind." [The last sentence is in answer to the question whether the above was his only experience of a hallucination.]

We find from the Register of Deaths that Mr. Wright died on October 22, 1863, of " gastric fever." The apparition therefore took place two days before the death, but no doubt at a time of critical illness. In conversation, Mr. Merrill's wife stated that she remembered laughing at her husband's account of his strange experience when he returned home. Neither of them seems to have then connected the apparition with the idea of death.

The following case was written down by our valued helper, Miss

Porter, from the account of Mrs. Banister, of Eversley, mother of the

percipient, Mrs. Ellis, of Portesbery Poad, Camberley, who has signed

it as correct.

"August 5th.

(240) " In September, 1878, I, then residing in York Town, Surrey, three times during the day distinctly saw the face of an old friend, Mr. James Stephenson, who I afterwards heard died that day in Eversley, five miles ofi*. I saw it first about half -past 10 in the morning; the last time it was nearly 6 o'clock. I knew him to be ill.

(Signed) " Mary Ellis."

A memorial card shows that Mr. Stephenson died on Sept. 19, 1878.

Mr. Stephenson had not been on friendly terms with Mrs. Banister or her daughter; but Mrs. Banister, by his desire, went to see him just before his death.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Ellis says; —

" I told my husband, and a young man, whose name is Swiney, at the tea-table the same afternoon, and after leaving the table to go into another room I saw it again — which was the last time. I did not hear of Mr. Stephenson's death until the next day, nor did I know that he was so near death. My husband remembers it well, but the children were then too young to notice such a thing. I have never seen anything like it before or since, and I hope I never shall again.

"Mary Ellis."

Mr. Ellis writes: —

" I quite well remember my wife speaking of the figure that she had seen during the day. The next day we heard of Mr. Stephenson's death.

"E. J. Ellis."

Mr. Herbert Swiney, writing on September 29th, 1885, from Tregarthen House, Romford Road, Forest Gate, says that he only faintly recollects the matter.

If correctly reported, this case presents two of the rarer features which are common to telepathic and to purely subjective hallucinations; the fragmentary nature of the percept — a face only, — and the repetition after an interval of some hours.^

The next case must be reckoned as one of non-recognition, as the

resemblance between the phantasm and the person who died was

not remarked until the fact of death was known. The narrator, Mr.

S. J. Masters, of 87, Clifford Crescent, Southampton, will hardly be

accused of excessive sentimentality.

"December 14th, 1882.

(241) " Last Easter Sunday, I was retiring to bed, just after 11 o'clock, and had stepped off the stairs on the landing that led to my room (my parents' bedroom door being in front of me, about 10 or 12ft., and my door

1 As to the first point see above, p. 33, note; as to the second, see Vol. i., p. 445, an below p. 237, note.

60 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

being about 2£t. to the right, so that I had to pass it to get to my room). I saw their bedroom door was open, and I was rivetted to the spot by seeing standing in the room doorway in front of me, a figure of a female; although I could not distinguish the dress, I could plainly see the features, and especially the eyes. I must have stood there at least 20 seconds, for my mother, hearing me stop suddenly before reaching my room, at last opened the door (below) and asked what was the matter. I then came downstairs and stopped with them till we all retired together. The figure collapsed when my mother called upstairs, and the light I held in my hand shone through the doorway to the opposite wall, which had been obscured by the figure, as if it had had a tangible body.

" It was not till the following Wednesday that my mother, on reading the mid-weekly local paper, saw the death of a young lady with whom I had once kept company for a short time. On inquiry, I found she died about the same time as I saw the apparition. I feel convinced it was her, for the eyes had the same expression, although I could not recognise her at the time; not having seen the girl for quite six months, I had almost forgotten her existence. She died in decline, which accounts for her not being about the town before her death.

"S. J. Mastees."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death took place on March 5, 1882. This was a Sunday, but not Easter Sunday. The mention of the Wednesday paper seems also to be a mistake; as the death does not appear in the Wednesday issue of either of the two bi-weekly Southampton papers, though it appears in the Saturday issue of one of them, on March 11th. These mistakes are not important. For even apart from Mr. Masters' observation of the coincidence at the time, Easter Sunday seems a very unlikely day to have been named, if the experience had really fallen on a week-day; and if it fell on a Sunday, there is no reason to doubt that it fell on the Sunday before the announcement of the death — i.e., on the day of the death.

The narrator's mother corroborates as follows: —

" I remember, perfectly well, the circumstance, and the efiect it produced on my son at the time. He is not of a nervous disposition, nor a believer in anything at all approaching Spiritualism, as we all belong to the Church. His father and I thought it might betoken the death of some near friend or relative, having heard of such things, but never had seen so direct an appearance ourselves.

" Elizabeth Masters."

[Mr. Masters has reason to think that the young lady's attachment to him had continued. He reports that on more exact inquiry, he finds the death to have occurred within a quarter-of-an-hour of the apparition — probably after rather than before it. Asked if he had ever experienced any other hallucinations, he replied in the negative.]

The next case is one of the most singular in our collection. It is from Mrs. Gierke, of Clifton Lodge, Farquhar Road, Upper Norwood, S.E.

"October 30th, 1885.

(242) " In the month of August, 1864, about 3 or 4 o'clock in the after- ^h noon, I was sitting reading in the verandah of our house in Barbadoes. My black nurse was driving my little girl, about 18 months or so old, in her perambulator in the garden. I got up after some time to go into the house, not having noticed anything at all — when this black woman said to me, ' Missis, who was that gentleman that was talking to you just now % ' 'There was no one talking to me,' I said. ' Oh, yes, dere was. Missis — a very pale gentleman, very tall, and he talked to you, and you was very rude, for you never answered him.' I repeated there was no one, and got rather cross with the woman, and she begged me to write down the day, for she knew she had seen someone. I did, and in a few days I heard of the death of my brother in Tobago. Now, the curious part is this, that / did not see him, but she — a stranger to him — did; and she said that he seemed very anxious for me to notice him.

" May Clerke."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Clerke says: —

" (1) The day of death was the same, for I wrote it down. I think it was the 3rd of August, but I know it was the same.

" (2) The description, * very tall and pale,' was accurate.

" (3) I had no idea that he was ill. He was only a few days ill.

" (4) The woman had never seen him. She had been with me for about 18 months, and I considered her truthful. She had no object in telling me."

In conversation, I learned that Mrs. Clerke had immediately mentioned what the servant said, and the fact that she had written down the date, to her husband, Colonel Clerke, who corroborates as follows: —

" I well remember that on the day on which Mr. John Beresford, my wife's brother, died in Tobago — after a short illness of which we were not aware — our black nurse declared she saw, at as nearly as possible the time of his death, a gentleman, exactly answering to Mr. Beresford's description, leaning over the back of Mrs. Clerke's easy-chair in the open verandah. The figure was not seen by any one else.

" Shadwbll H. Clerke."

We find it stated in Burke's Peerage that Mr. J. H. de la Poer Beresford, Secretary for the Island of Tobago, died on August 3, 1863 ■ (not 1864).

If this incident is to be interpreted telepathically, it is scarcelypossible to suppose that Mrs. Clerke's own presence did not play a part in the phenomenon. The case would then be comparable to some of / the " collective " cases (to be cited in Chap. XVIII.), where one of the percipients is a stranger to the agent; the difference being that here the person who should (so to speak) have been the principal percipient was as unconscious of the impression which she received

62 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

as we have found the percipient to be in some of the experimental cases.^ Another instance of the same kind is No. 355 (p. 256, and see p. 267).

§ 3. I will now give a group of cases in respect of which the hypothesis of mistaken identity has to be taken into account. The apparition in all of them was seen out-of-doors, and in several of them in the street — which is the place where such mistakes are most liable to occur. Now, with respect to mistakes of identity, made at the time when the person who seems to be seen is really dying at a distance, one general remark has to be made — namely, that cases in which they have occurred are not thereby at once put out of court, for the purpose of my argument. For if telepathic hallucinations are facts in nature, the possibility of telepathic illusions cannot reasonably be excluded. Illusions, as I have remarked, (Yol. I., p. 460,)

1 As one more example of the psychological identity _ of hallucinations and dreams (Chap, xii., § 5), I may quote an account of a dream which is an exact parallel to the above waking case.

In the last week of February, 1885, Miss Harris, of 9, Queen Square, Bloomsbury, W.C, wrote to us as follows: —

" On Thursday night, the 19th of February, 1885, I dreamed the following dream. A servant, a Lincolnshire woman, has lived in our house for two years; and of her, whom I never see in the day, I dreamt, as portentously as if her troubles were my own. There is nothing remarkable in this young woman's character or experience. She is but an ordinary rather rough specimen of a village girl, quiet and respectable.

" In my dream a long country lane was before me; in this I walked with the Lincolnshire cook, without speaking; yet I knew that my companion was going with me as a sort of escort to some errand of my own. Then a face appeared over the hedge, a solemn, silent face, exactly resembling that of the one who noiselessly moved beside me; the sternest suffering was impressed upon the plain hard-lined countenance. From beside me the country servant instantly departed to follow the warning voiceless form through the hedge, into a little house. Only a long minute passed, and the servant rushed from the hedge, absolutely wringing her hands, crouching to the ground in dumb agony. ' 'Tis my sister called me, she beckoned me in; but she will not speak: she will not have me with her.' As she spoke the vision returned. It looked over the low hedge, with the same indescribable expression of sadness unspeakable — of a terrible woe impossible of utterance. It flung back its sleeve, and lifting one arm, pointed to a single white spot in the centre of a finger. And as suddenly as I had fallen on this dream, so suddenly I awoke. I tried to cast off the shadow the dream had cast on me. But the same evening came the news that the country cook's sister was very ill, and had prematurely been confined with a child born dead.

"Emily Makion Haekis.

In answer to inquiries, Miss Harris adds: —

" Certainly I repeated my dream even before I left my room. I asked the housemaid whether she knew of any reason her fellow-servant might have to fear, or to hear bad news. She said, 'No,' and after that I told my sister. Nothing was said about the dream during Friday. On Saturday morning, when I returiied from a class — having dismissed the occurrence from my mind for the time — my sister immediately told me that the coincidence of dream and fact were marvellously similar. The poor woman whom I saw with such dumb appeal on her countenance, was alone, unable to speak, meeting her trouble alone, her husband, who is a policeman, being on night duty. She thought it was impossible to be heard, till she found a stick of his, and contrived to knock on the floor. "

Miss Harris's sister corroborates as follows: —

" March 16th, 1885.

" It was directly I came out of my room, before I went down stairs, that ray sister told me the dream she wrote to you about, and which she had dreamed between night and

morning. tt tt.>

' Clara de H. Harris.

are merely the sprinkling of fragments of genuine hallucination on a background of true perception; and it is surely not more difficult to suppose that a mind which is telepathically affected can project its sensory delusion on some real figure which bears a general resemblance to the agent, than that it can project it in vacancy. But of course the coincidence with A's death of an illusion in which the perceiver mistook B for A would have far less force as evidence for telepathy than the coincidence with A's death of a hallucination representing him, simply because purely subjective mistakes as to identity are far commoner things than purely subjective hallucinations. To find the probability that a person will by accident make a particular mistake of identity on a particular day of his life, we must multiply the fraction,,^ber of dlys of ms me ^1 ^^e number of similar mistakes, in similar circumstances of light, distance, &c,, that he makes altogether; and we must divide the result by the number of acquaintances any one of whom, if chance alone acted, is as likely as the one who died on the particular day to be the one wrongly identified on that day. This process may reduce the probability of a telepathic explanation of the coincidence from odds of millions to 1 (as found in the case of hallucinations, pp. 18-20) to odds of thousands to 1; but in a cumulative argument, odds of that magnitude are clearly not to be neglected. However, with regard to the following specimens, or most of them, such considerations are hardly needed. They seem pretty certainly to be cases of hallucination, and stand, for instance, on different ground from the incidents mentioned above (Vol. I., pp. 123-4), where the hypothesis of mistaken identity seemed fairly plausible.

The first account is from the Chevalier Sebastiano Fenzi, of the Palazzo Fenzi, Florence, a corresponding member of the S.P.R. The peculiar melancholy described as preceding the vision may possibly exemplify the gradual emergence of telepathic impressions into consciousness, which was exemplified in Chap. XII., § 3.

"November 13th, 1883. (243) "Some months before his demise, my brother (Senator Carlo Fenzi) one day, as we were driving to town together from our villa of St. Andrea, told me that if he should be summoned first, he would endeavour to prove to me that life continued beyond the chasm of the grave, and that I was to promise him the same in case I went first; ^hut,'' said he, 'I am sure to go first, and, mind you, I feel quite sure that before the year is out — nay, in three months — I shall be no more.' This was said in June and he died on the 2nd of September, the same year, 1881.

64 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

" Now, on that fatal morning (the 2nd of September), I was some 70 miles away from Florence, namely, at Fortullino, a villa of ours on a rock on the sea, 10 miles south-east of Leghorn. Well, at about half -past 10 in the morning, I was seized with a fit of deep melancholy — -a, thing very unusual with me, who enjoy great serenity of mind. I had, however, no reason for being alarmed about my brother, who was then in Florence — as, although he had not been very well, the latest news of him was very good, as my nephew had written to say, ' Uncle is doing very comfortably, and it cannot even he said that he has really been ill ' — so that I could not account for this sudden gloomy impression; yet the tears stood in my eyes, and in order not to burst out crying like a baby before our family party, I rushed out of the house without my hat on, although it was blowing a hurricane, and the rain fell in torrents, accompanied by permanent flashes of lightning, and the loud and unceasing roar of the sea and of thunder.

" I ran and ran, and only stopped when I had reached the end of a spacious lawn, from whence are seen, close on the other side of a small stream (the Fortulla), the huge stones or rocks heaped on one another, and stretching for a good half mile along the sea coast. I there gazed to try and see a youth, a cousin of mine, who, having been born among the Zulus, retained enough of love for savage life to have yielded to the wish of going out in that terrible weather, 'to enjoy,' he said, ' the fury of the elements.' Judge of my surprise and astonishment when, instead of Giovanni (such is my cousin's name), I saw my brother, with a top hat and his big white moustachios, stepping leisurely along from one rock to another, as if the weather were fair and calm! I could not believe my eyes; and yet, there^he was — he, unmistakeably! I thought of rushing back to the house to call every one out to give him a hearty welcome, but then preferred waiting for him, and meanwhile waved my hand to him and called out his name as loud as I possibly could, although with the awful noise of wind, and sea, and thunder combined, nothing could naturally be heard. He meanwhile continued to advance, until, having reached a rock larger than the rest, he slipped behind it. The distance between myself and the rock was, as nearly as I can judge, not more than 60 paces. I waited for him to reappear on the other side — but to no purpose, and I only saw Giovanni, who was just then emerging from a wood, and stepping on to the rocks. Giovanni, tall and slight, with a broad-brimmed hat and dark beard, was altogether a very difi'erent type, and I thought that my having seen Charles, my brother, must have been a freak of my sense of vision, and felt rather annoyed, and almost blushed at the idea that I could have been so deceived by a sort of phantom of my own fancy; yet could not help telling Giovanni, ' There must be some family likeness, for I must positively have taken you for Charles, although I cannot make out how you could have gone from behind the huge rock into the wood without my seeing you cross over.' ' / never was behind the roch^ he said, '■for when you saw me, I had but just put my foot on the rocks. ^

"Meanwhile we went home, put on fresh clothes, and then joined the rest to breakfast. My melancholy had left me, and I conversed merrily with all the young people. After breakfast a telegram came, telling me and my daughter Christina to hasten home, as Carlo had suddenly been taken very

ill. We made preparations to at once depart, and meanwhile another telegram came, urging us to make all possible haste, as the illness was making rapid strides, but although we caught the nearest train, we only arrived in Florence at night; where we found, to our horror, that my brother had died just at the time when in the morning I had seen him on the rocks, when, feeling that his moments were numbered, he had been continually asking for me, regretting not to see me appear.

" In kissing his cold forehead with intense sorrow, as we had lived together, and loved one another during our whole lives, I thought, ' Poor, dear Charlie; he kept his word I ' " Sebastiano Fenzi."

In answer to inquiries. Chevalier Fenzi tells us that his "eyesight is excellent, especially at moderate distances." He has had one other experience of visual hallucination — representing an unrecognised figure — which was probably subjective.

The " Giovanni " of the narrative corroborates as follows: —

"Athens, (English address, 131, Tavistock Street, Bedford).

" May 3rd, 1884.

" My cousin, Sebastiano Fenzi, of Florence, has sent me your letter of 13th March last, with a request that I would give you my recollections of the strange circumstance attending the death of his brother, Carlo Fenzi, in September, 1881, a circumstance which made (and has left) a deep impression on my mind. I will endeavour to recall the whole circumstance. Nearly three years, it is true, have since passed, but my recollection of the event, on account of its strangeness, remains clear.

"Passing through Italy in the autumn of 1881, I profited by the occasion to visit my relatives. At Milan I learnt that the major portion were at Fortullino, my cousin's seaside villa. Thither I accordingly went, arriving the last days of August. Fortullino is a charming villa, situated on the top of a clifi" on the sea, and surrounded by deep growths of trees and shrubs. The weather, during the beginning of my stay, was very bad, rain, thunder, strong winds, and heavy sea. I remember that on the morning of my cousin's death — none then dreamed the end was near — indulging in a favourite weakness (?). — I started ofi" alone for an escapade along the shore. Descending by the hillside to the beach, I passed on, leaping from boulder to boulder, climbing over, or passing round them when too huge, past a bend, which hid me from a view of the villa, for some distance along the shore.

" Returning for breakfast, I found the rain (driven into my face by the wind) blinding, and, fearing an accident, entered the wood. The undergrowth of the shrubs, and the wet state of the ground, urged me to try the open again. This I did, emerging just inside the bend, in full sight of the house. To my surprise I saw my cousin standing on the edge of the cliff. When I approached him he remarked that there must be a strange family likeness, as he had mistaken me for his brother Carlo, being on the rocks, but wondered how I had managed to enter the wood unseen by him, and then suddenly leave it again. I replied that he had not seen me on the rocks before leaving the wood (for I was out of sight). The matter shortly afterwards dropped. Scarcely was breakfast over than a wire arrived, summoning him and his daughter Christina to Florence, — Carlo was very ill. They left at once, I staying, at their request, with

66 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

the younger members at Fortullino. Our next news was that Carlo Fenzi had died — about the very time that Sebastiano had fancied to have mistaken me for his brother. u j^^j^ Douglas de Eenzi."

i-v*^ [Even apart from the evidence that "Giovanni" was not in sight when the figure was seen, it would be difficult to regard this as a case of mistaken identity. For Chevalier Fenzi, being specially on the look out for

at. " Giovanni," would be specially unlikely to mistake him for someone else.]

Here we encounter a feature of which there are altogether nine examples in the present collection^ — a previous compact between the parties that the one who died first should endeavour to make the other sensible of his presence. Considering what an extremely small number of persons make such a compact, compared with those who do not, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that its existence has a certain efficacy. The cause of this might be sought in some quickening of the agent's thought, in relation to the percipient, as the time for fulfilment approached. But considering how often spontaneous telepathy acts without any conscious set of the distant mind towards the person impressed, it is safer to refer the phenomenon to the same sort of blind movements as seem sometimes, at supreme crises, to ■evoke a response out of memories and affinities that have long lapsed from consciousness (see Chap. XII., § 9); on which view, the efficacy of the compact may quite as readily be conceived to depend on its latent place in the percipient's mind as in the agent's.

In the next case — from Major Owen, of 4, Grove Road, Eastbourne— the tie between the two parties was, we learn, one rather of

blood than of affection.

"November 17th, 1883.

(244) " In the year 1870, I went one morning from my then home, in Clifton, to order various eatables for the day. On my way, I saw coming towards me, on the same side of the street, J. E. H., a male cousin. To avoid meeting him, I went across to the other side, and walked into a fishmonger's shop, and watched him pass on. I remained in the same place, looking into the street, and I saw him (or it) pass back again. I felt so annoyed at the idea of J. E. H. being in Clifton that I hurried home to tell my wife that I had seen J. E. H., and that he was evidently making inquiries as to our residence, and would certainly be here directly. I stayed at home all that morning, but J. E. H. never appeared.

" The next day, or day after, I received a letter from a son of J. E. H., telling me his father had died the very day I had seen the apparition.

" H. M. Arthur Owen."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Owen says: —

1 See cases 146, 165, 169, 194, 355, 514, 526, 537; also Mr. Cooper's " ambiguous " case, Vol. i., p. 507. In case 210 there had been a request, but not a compact; and in case 197 a promise on the side of the person who died.

" I have ascertained from the widow of J. E. H. that he died Tuesday, November 2nd, 1869, not as I wrote to you, 1870, between 2 and 3 p.m. I saw, as I believe to this moment, J. E. H. certainly before noon on that day. My wife can testify to the fact of my having seen J. E. H. before I heard of his death, as I went back to my house to tell her J. E. H. was in Clifton, and she must expect to see him any moment."

Mrs. Owen corroborates as follows: —

"I perfectly recognise the circumstance detailed to you by my husband of his having, as he thought, seen J. E. H. walking in the streets of Clifton; indeed, he came home on purpose to prepare me for his coming to our house, and the whole day we were expecting he would appear.

" M. Owen."

[Major Owen has had no other hallucination, and his sight is excellent. In conversation, Mrs. Owen described J. E. H.'s figure to Mr. Podmore as unmistakeable; very tall and thin, with small black eyes and a very small head.]

The next case is from the Rev. W. E. Dutton, of Lothersdale

Rectory, Cononley, Leeds. It will be seen that the impression may

possibly have been reciprocal.

" January, 30th, 1885. (245) " I am not quite clear as to the exact date, but about the middle of June, in the year 1863, I was walking up the High Street of Huddersfield, in broad daylight, when I saw approaching me, at a distance of a few yards, a dear friend who I had every reason to believe was lying dangerously ill at his home in Staffordshire. A few days before, I had heard this from his friends. As the figure drew nearer, I had every opportunity of observing it; and, although it flashed across my mind that his recovery had been sudden, I never thought of doubting that it was really my friend. As we met he looked into my eyes with a sad longing expression, and, to my astonishment, never appeared to notice my outstretched hand, or respond to my greeting, but quietly passed on. I was so taken by surprise as to be unable to speak or move for a few seconds, and could never be quite certain whether there was uttered by him any audible sound, but a clear impression was left on my mind, ' I have wanted to see you so much, and you would not come.' Recovering from my astonishment, I turned to look after the retreating figure, but it was gone. My first impulse was to go to the station and wire a message; my next, which was acted upon, was to start off immediately to see whether my friend was really alive or dead, scarcely doubting that the latter was the case. When I arrived next day I found him living, but in a state of semiconsciousness. He had been repeatedly asking for me, his mind apparently dwelling on the thought that I would not come to see him. As far as I could make out, at the time I saw him on the previous day he was apparently sleeping. He told me afterwards that he fancied he saw me, but had no clear idea how or where. I have no means of accounting for the apparition, which was that of my friend clothed, and not as he must have been at the time.^ My mind was at the moment fully occupied with other matters, and I was not thinking of him.

1 On the view of telepathic hallucinations which has been here advanced, this point of course presents no difficulty; see Chap. xii. §§ 5 and 6.

68 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

" I may add that he rallied afterwards, and lived for several montlis. At the time of his death I was far from home, but there was no repetition of the mysterious experience. " W. E. Dutton."

In answer to the question whether this was his only experience of a hallucination of the senses, Mr. Dutton replies: —

" I have never had, so far as I can remember, any other experience of the nature described in my narrative, and do not think I am a subject for such impressions. This makes the solitary experience all the more mysterious to me."

Asked as to his eyesight, he adds: — " I am not and never have been shortsighted, but just the contrary. Nor do I remember to have made a mistake of identity except on one occasion, and that in the case of a person I had seen only once."

[Here the behaviour of the phantasm is very unlike that of a stranger who found himself mistaken for someone else. The case is of course weakened by Mr. Dutton's knowledge of his friend's serious illness, which makes it more likely than it would otherwise be that the hallucination was purely subjective (Vol. I., p. 509). But the fact of his friend's mind having been distinctly occupied with him (possibly even telepathically clairvoyant of him) is a point on the other side.]

Mr. Arthur Ireland, of the School House, South Witham, near Grantham, wrote to us on January 5, 1884: —

(296) "About 14 years ago, about 3 o'clock one summer's afternoon, I was passing in front of Trinity Church, Upper King Street, Leicester, when I saw on the opposite side of the street a very old playmate, whom, having left the town to learn some business, I had for some time lost sight of. I thought it odd he took no notice of me; and while following him with my eyes, deliberating whether I should accost him or not, I called after him by name, and was somewhat surprised at not being able to follow him any further, or to say into which house he had gone, for I felt persuaded he had gone into one. The next week I was informed of his somewhat sudden death at Burton-on-Trent, at about the time I felt certain he was passing in front of me. What struck me most at the time was that he should take no notice of me, and that he should go along so noiselessly^ and disappear so suddenly, but that it was E. P. I had seen I never for one moment doubted. I have always looked upon this as a hallucination, but why it should have occurred at that particular time, and to me, I could never make out. " Arthur Ireland."

To inquiries, Mr. Ireland replies: —

(1) "I have never on any other occasion had any hallucination of the senses at all.

(2) " I mentioned the incident of having met E. P. to my mother, and remarked on the seeming slight of his not acknowledging me. Of course, when the news of his death came, mother remarked that I was mistaken,

1 This feature recurs in Dr. Leslie's narrative, p. 252. Visual hallucinations, as we have seen, often involve further the sounds that a real person would have made; but the absence of this complete development (c/. case 252) is only on a par vs^ith the common occurrence of hallucinations of voices close at hand, where no visible phantasm appears.

and although not feeling convinced, I had to assent to such a seeminglyapparent truism. My mother has since died, or we might have had this added testimony.

(3) " I am thankful to say that my eyesight is good, and I remember no instance of mistaking one person for another. Of course I could not swear that there was no mistake; but I do assert that I, without knowing he had left the town, and with nothing to make me think of him, was suddenly certain that E. P. was coming towards me on the opposite side of the street; that I watched him attentively for any sign of recognition; that I called after him, and could never explain his disappearance, or account for the unnatural noiselessness of his movements or the suddenness of his appearance.

" I conclude by assuring you that so far I have been of a very realistic turn of mind, and am not aware that I am in the least superstitious or even imaginative. That which I have written is the truth, according to my experience, placed at your disposal to help, if of any service, in the unravelling of that for which at present there seems no adequate explanation."

Mr. Ireland was in doubt as to the exact date. We learn through a sister of Mr. E. P.'s — -and have confirmed her statement by the Registerthat the death occurred on January 9th, 1869. Mr. Ireland was therefore mistaken in referring it to the summer. But he is quite certain that he " received the information of it within a week after it took place," and remarked to his mother on the exactitude of the coincidence.

[Here the words " without knowing he had left the town " somewhat weaken the case. But the mode of appearance and disappearance strongly suggests that the figure seen was not a stranger mistaken for E. P. but a hallucination; and if so, there is the strongest probability that it was telepathic]

The next case is taken from a book called John Leifchild, D.D., his Public Ministry; founded upon an Autobiography, by J. R. Leifchild, his son (published by Jackson, Walford and Hodder, 1863). The account is in the words of Dr. Leifchild himself, not of his son.

(247) "I give an account of an occurrence which soon after befell my aunt, for the truth of which, as an event, I can vouch, but of which I can ofier no solution. She was standing in a little shop fronting the street while a customer was being served. On a sudden, her absent son passed in the street before her, and, as he passed, gave her a look of recognition, which so surprised and overjoyed her that, forgetting everything else, she rushed into the street after him. When there, she could not see him, and concluded that he was gone to the alley, which led to the abbey, and meant to hide himself away. We went, as soon as we could assemble, in search of him, but could not discover any trace of the son. My aunt then concluded that she had seen his spirit, and fell seriously ill. I noticed the circumstances in writing at the time, and pondered over them.

" A few weeks afterwards my father came to see us, and my aunt truly divined his errand. He had received a letter from the captain of the ship in which her son was sailing, stating that the unfortunate lad had fallen from the mast, and fractured his skull. While lying on his

70 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

death-bed he directed the captain to write to my father, whose address he named. The dates of this misfortune and the hallucination corresponded precisely."

[This certainly cannot be proved not to have been a case of mistaken identity; for the " look of recognition " cannot be pressed, that being just the sort of detail that might creep in afterwards, and the evidence for it being second-hand. At the same time, the sense of reality seems to have been of a kind which excluded this hypothesis in the percipient's mind: people do not as a rule "fall seriously ill" as a consequence of mistaking one person for another in the street.]

The next case was thus narrated by Mr. Andrew Lang, in an article on " Apparitions," Encyclopcedia Britannica, Vol. II., p. 207.

(248) " The writer once met, as he believed, a well-known and learned member of an English University [Professor Conington], who was really dying at a place more than 100 miles distant from that in which he was seen. Supposing, for the sake of argument, that the writer did not mistake some other individual for the extremely noticeable person whom he seemed to see, the coincidence between the subjective impression and the death of the learned professor is, to say the least, curious."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Lang wrote, on January 30th, 1886: —

" Savile Club.

"^ It was when I was living in St. Giles that I saw the real or sham J. C. I was under the lamp in Oriel Lane, about 9 at night, in winter, and I certainly had a very good view of him. I believe this to have been on a Thursday, but it may have been a Friday. I think it was on the Saturday that Scott Holland did not come to a breakfast party, and sent a note that Conington was dangerously ill. I said, ' He can't have been very ill on Thursday (or yesterday, I can't be sure which), for I met him near Corpus.'

" I am constantly failing to recognise people. Conington, however, was not easily mistaken, and I know no one in Oxford who was at all like him. Whoever he was, he was in cap and gown. u j^ Lang."

Mr. Lang tells us that he has never had a hallucination on any other occasion.

The notice of the death in the Times shows that it took place on Saturday, October 23, 1869; but information received from Canon Scott Holland, who heard from Professor Conington four times in the course of the week, leaves no doubt that he knew himself to be dying on the Thursday night. The experience narrated therefore coincided with a time of critical illness, though not with the death.

[This is, no doubt, an experience which might have been without difficulty accounted for as a mistake of identity, had the person who seemed to be seen been in a noi-nial state at the time. But in any such case the coincidence is an inexpugnable fact or factor, the probability of which, as the result of accident, cannot reasonably be estimated save in relation to numbers of similar and more striking examples; and its force, as I pointed out above (pp. 62-3), is by no means entirely dependent on the supposition that the experience was a hallucination and not an illusion.]

i

The next case is from Mr. T. H. Carr, of 1, The Terrace, Carlton

Hill, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds.

"February 18th, 1886.

(249) " I cannot make you fully understand the case unless you are acquainted "a^ith the Friends' Meeting House premises. In passing through the front gate, the Meeting House is on the left, and my house, the first of 5 terrace houses, up a few steps on the right hand; but they stand back a few feet at the end of a high wall. And on account of the height of this wall we could only just see the top part of the head and hat of any gentleman coming.

" It was when I was standing at my front window on Christmas Day, 1884, that I saw the head of a gentleman walking up the yard which I thought was Daniel Pickard coming up, but on getting nearer I saw that the hair was whiter than Daniel's; and on looking again, I thought it was the head and hat of Mr. X. But to see him right, I thought he would think me rude to be standing close to the window and watching him turn the corner, so I walked backwards a couple of paces, expecting to see him pass close to the terrace. But, to my surprise, he vanished in a moment, and I saw no more. I was struck with the affair, and took out my watch, and it was just 4 o'clock.

" A couple of hours after, B. Geddard, the caretaker, came down the yard, and said, ' Hast thou heard that Mr. X. is dead 1 ' I said, ' No; when has he died? ' He replied, ' To-day at 4 o'clock.'

"Thomas H. Carr."

We find from a newspaper obituary that Mr. X. died on December 25th, 1884, after an illness of less than a week.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Carr adds that for distant objects his eyesight is excellent; that he has never on any other occasion experienced any sort of hallucination of the senses; and that, though he knew Mr. X. to be ill, he had no idea that the illness was serious.

It was impossible to judge of this case without an actual observation on the spot. Mr. Carr's house stands in an enclosure which is divided from the street by open railings; and nobody would be walking along the line which the figure appeared to be taking, unless he were coming to the small row of houses of which Mr. Carr's is the first — in which case his whole figure would be visible in a very few seconds after the upper part of it carne into view. To disappear as it did, the figure would have had to retire by the way that it came, hut closer to the wall. Mr. Carr was perfectly familiar with the aspect of Mr. X., who used frequently to come to see him, and whose head and tall hat were quite suflicient to distinguish him from other people known to enter this private enclosure. The broad brim of the hat was peculiar; and Mr. X. also walked with a peculiar droop of the head Moreover, the fact that at the first moment Mr. Carr took the person he saw for some one else, and then corrected his judgment, shows at any rate that his recognition of Mr. X. was not that of a mere hasty glance. He was extremely startled by the sudden disappearance of his friend, and at once hurried out to see what could have become of him, but no one the least resembling him was in view. The incident perplexed and disturbed him at the moment far more than the words " I was struck with the afiair " might seem to imply.

72 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

The final case of this group (procured for us by the Rev. J. A. Macdonald, of Rhyl,) is from Mr. Schofield, of 350, Belgrade Terrace, Manchester, a manufacturing chemist, and an office-bearer in the Collyhurst Wesleyan Church.

(250) " About the year 1857, while I was apprenticed at Bacup, I came:»''-' \ home to Newchurch, in Rossendale, one Wednesday evening. On arriving at.„., ■ the gate of the garden fronting my father's house, I saw Martha Mills, a young woman with whom we were well acquainted, at the gate as if coming from the house. I spoke to her, but she made no answer, and I passed on into the house. When I got into the house I remarked to my mother that I had met Martha Mills at the gate, and that she did not answer me when I spoke to her. My mother [since dead] said, ' You could not have seen her, for she is either dead or dying.' I had not heard of her illness; but she died about the same time that I had seen her.

"Richard Schofield."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Schofield tells us that he has never had

any other visual hallucination. He adds: —

^ti Ji i^». " It was in the winter, and the light would not be sufficient to enable

L,vM^. me to distinguish a living person at the distance at which Martha Mills

' appeared to me; yet I saw her very distinctly, and at the time had no

doubt that it was she. I was not astonished at the time at the vividness

with which I had seen her features; for I did not until afterwards reflect

upon the distance of the street lamp, and general darkness of the night."

The Register of Deaths confirms Mr. Schofield's recollection that the occurrence fell on a Wednesday, and in the winter, but shows that it is rather more remote than he supposed — the date of Martha Mills's death being December 15, 1852. The coincidence of time between the vision and the death was, as far as he can remember, exact. Martha Mills was just a neighbour, who would be in and out at the Schofields' without ceremony.

Here Mr. Schofield asserts that he saw the face distinctly; but afterwards adds that the light was insufficient to admit of such distinct perception, had the figure been a real person. Now, taken together, these statements might seem to tell in favour of the abnormal — the hallucinatory — nature of the vision: ^ at the same time it would be an equally reasonable inference that perhaps he did not really see the face as distinctly as he afterwards supposed. When persons whom

