" I was at school with Hannah P., but not at the time the occurrence took place to which you allude, so of course was not in the room. I heard of it afterwards from a young lady that was in the room, and saw her distress; she was a proud reserved girl, about 17, and very unlikely to make a display of feeling unless greatly moved. The younger girl sleeping in the same room did not see her father, although Hannah said that he went from her to look at Isabella. I cannot say how long it was after she went that I heard of it; it might have been a year. We were not allowed to speak of it to Hannah. " S. J. Harper."

We find from the Gentleman's Magazine that the death occurred on Sept. 4, 1825, after a 4 days' illness.

(546) From Mr. E. Keep, who first wrote from abroad, and later from 25, Phillimore Gardens, W. We owe the case in the first instance to the Oxford Phasmatological Society. u j^gQ

" Some years ago, Mr. Charles F. Smith, a gentleman living in Melbourne, became very unwell, and was recommended to go on a sea voyage. A captain of a merchant vessel going to Java ofiered him a berth upon the ship on very moderate terms; but Mr. Smith's finances being at a very low ebb, a few of his friends clubbed together and presented him with £100, and Mr. Smith started on his voyage.

" One of the friends subscribing to the fund was a Mr. Bowman, a very old friend of Mr. Smith, and some time after Mr. Smith's departure, Mr. Bowman met me in the street, and said, ' Oh, Mr. Keep, I saw Charley Smith either last night or the night before; he appeared at the foot of my bed dressed in a long black robe; and bursting into tears vanished.' I said, ' Are you joking 1 One reads of these things in the Night Side of Nature, and such rubbish, but one doesn't expect to hear of them in actual life.' ' Oh,' said Mr. Bowman, ' these things are often occurring to me — you will find Mr. Smith died last night.' I stepped into my ofiice, and made a note of the conversation and date, and said that Mr. Bowman was not certain if his dream were last night or the night before.

" In about a month the steamship ' Hero ' arrived at Sydney from Java, and reported that a passenger, Mr. Charles F. Smith, of Melbourne, had died at sea on one of the dates specified by Mr. Bowman.

" Edward Keep."

At our request Mr. Keep wrote to Melbourne, to get confirmation of this narrative; but he found that the diary in which he noted the incident had been burnt, and his friends knew nothing of Mr. Bowman, He adds that he thinks the occurrence was in 1869.

We have received the following letter from Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co., of Melbourne:— "April 28th, 1886.

" In reply to your letter of 20th Feb., we have interviewed Capt. Logan, who was commander of the s.s. ' Hero ' at the time of the death of Mr. C. F. Smith; and he advises us that, as well as he can remember, Mr. Smith died on the day after leaving Batavia, in Dec, 1886," — • apparently a slip for 1868, in which year, as we have ascertained by a search in Sydney papers, the "Hero" was trading from that place.

(547) From Mademoiselle Glinka, 1, Rue Lincoln, Champs Elysees, Paris. * "1884.

" My brother had the habit, when he went to Wiesbaden, to visit an old servant maid, who had been for 15 years in our family, when we were children, and who now lives on a pension. She is very much attached to our family. Lately she had met with an accident, having fallen from a staircase, and was laid up in her bed for several weeks, with compresses on her face. She knew of my brother's last illness, but was not aware of its gravity.

" One day, when lying in her bed in a half doze, she saw my brother enter her room, clad in his grey coat as usually. Quite confused that he should see her in that state, she exclaimed, ' Why, Excellency, I am ashamed that you have come into my room to find me here in my bed.' He answered, ' Do not mind it, Bienchen ' (the name we called her by), ' have you not been sitting at my bedside hundreds of times when I was a boy 1 ' She begged him to be seated.^ Then he looked at her with a long, fixed gaze, and disappeared at the door. Frightened and amazed, she rang for her landlady, and asked her why she had let Mr. G. enter without announcing him. The woman protested that nobody could have entered without her knowledge, as she had been on the ground floor, and that she had not seen his Excellency or anybody else. A few days later she heard of his death. But the day and hour she had seen him, and talked with him, my brother had had his arm amputated, being chloroformed. " J. G."

In answer to inquiries. Mademoiselle Glinka adds on March 7th, 1886:—

" Jacobina Riekes told me of this experience within a week after its occurrence. It had greatly astonished her, as she had never had any hallucination in her life. She was certainly awake, as she was in the act of altering the arrangement of some compresses on her face. She told the landlady of her experience immediately after it occurred; but I did not myself speak to the landlady on the subject. My brother died two days after the operation. The event occurred at Easter, 1884. My brother was in Frankfort."

This case is the only one in our collection where the supposed agent was under the influence of an anaesthetic; but it may be compared to cases where the condition has been fainting or coma (see Vol. I,, p. 563, note).

^ See p. 460, second note.

506 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

The next case resembles No. 505, above, in representing a complete scene which seems to have been conveyed to the percipient's mind some little time after its occurrence, but at a time when the agent's thoughts (certainly in this case, and presumably in the other) were directed to the percipient, and also occupied with a mental renewal of the scene itself. In the present case, however, the interval between the enactment of the scene and the percipient's experience was probably little, if at all, more than 12 hours; and it would be quite possible to regard the case as one of deferred development (Vol. I., pp. 139, 511).

(548) Slightly abridged from the account of Miss Millicent A. Page, sent to us by her brother, the Rev. A. Shaw Page, Vicar of Selsley, Stonehouse, Gloucestershire

" 1 was staying with my mother's cousin, Mrs. Elizabeth Broughton, wife of Mr. Edward Broughton, Edinburgh, and daughter of the late Colonel Blanckley, in the year 1844, and she told me the following strange story: — •

" She awoke one night and aroused her husband, telling him that something dreadful had happened in France. He begged her to go to sleep again and not to trouble him. She assured him that she was not asleep when she saw what she insisted on then telling him — what she saw in fact. First a carriage-accident, which she did not actually see, but what she saw was the result, a broken carriage, a crowd collected, a figure gently raised and carried into the nearest house, and then a figure lying on a bed, which she then recognised as the Duke of Orleans. Gradually friends collecting round the bed, among them several members of the French Royal family — the Queen, then the King — all silently, tearfully watching the evidently dying Duke. One man (she could see his back, but did not know who he was) was a doctor. He stood bending over the Duke, feeling his pulse, his watch in his other hand. And then all passed away: she saw no more. As soon as it was daylight, she wrote down in her journal all she had seen. From that journal she read this to me. It was before the days of electric telegraph, and two or more days passed before the Times announced ' The Death of the Duke of Orleans.' [Visiting Paris a short time afterwards, she saw and recognised the place of the accident, and received the explanation of her impression. The doctor who attended the dying Duke was an old friend of hers; and as he watched by the bed, his mind had been constantly occupied with her and her family. The reason of this was an extraordinary likeness — a likeness which had often led to amusing incidents — between several members of the Broughton family and members of the French Royal family who were present in the room.] ' I spoke of you and yours when I got home,' said the doctor, ' and thought of you many times that evening. The likeness between yourselves and the Royal family was, perhaps, never so strong as that day when they stood there in their sorrow, all so natural; father, mother, brothers, sisters, watching the dying son and brother. Here was the link between us, you see.

) >■>

The detailed account of the death of the Duke of Orleans was in the Times of July 15, 1842. The carriage accident took place at 12.30 p.m., on July 13. The Duke was carried into the nearest house, and attended by Dr. Bawnes and Dr. Pasquier. The King, Queen, and Due d'Aumale arrived at the spot almost immediately; and the account in Galignani's Messenger for July 14 shows that other members of the Royal family and officials of distinction were present. The death occurred shortly after 3 p.m.

[This case is so exceptional in character as to excite some mistrust. It seems very possible that the scene has assumed a more dramatic completeness in the narrator's memory than the original description would warrant; but if, as alleged, the record was immediately made in the percipient's diary, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that the correspondence was of a very striking kind.]

(549) In Recollections, Political, dsc, of the last Half Century by the Rev. J. Richardson, LL.B. (1856), Yol. I., pp. 65-8, there is a circumstantial account of the appearance of Mr. John Palmer (an actor, who died suddenly on the stage at Liverpool, on the 2nd August, 1798), on the night of his death to a person in London, named Tucker. Tucker was a hall-porter, and habitually slept on a couch in the hall which Mr. Palmer passed at night, when he let himself in with a latch-key. The account was given by Tucker himself to Mr. Richardson, who, though a gossiping writer, does not seem to be an inaccurate one.

" The fact of his absence from London was known to Tucker, but he was not aware about his arrangement for his return. On the night just mentioned. Tucker had retired at an earlier hour than usual; but the company in the drawing-room were numerous, and the sound of their merriment prevented him from falling asleep; he was in a state of morbid drowsiness, produced by weariness, but continually interrupted by noise. As he described the scene, he was sitting half upright in his bed, when he saw the figure of a man coming from a passage which led from the door of the house to the hall. The figure paused in its transit for a moment at the foot of the couch, and looked him full in the face; there was nothingspectral or like the inhabitant of the world of spirits in the countenance or the outline of the figure, which passed on, and apparently went up the staircase. Tucker felt no alarm whatever; he recognised in the figure the features, gait, dress, and general appearance of John Palmer, who he supposed had returned from Liverpool, and having the entree of the house, had, as usual, availed himself of his latch-key.... Next morning, in the course of some casual conversation, he informed Mrs. Vernon that he had seen Mr. Palmer pass through the hall, and expressed a hope that his trip to Liverpool had agreed with his health. The lady stared at him incredulously, said he must have been dreaming, or drinking, or out of his senses, as no Mr. Palmer had joined the festivities in the drawing-room. His delusion, if delusion it were, was made a source of mirth to the people who called in the course of the day. He however persisted in his assertion of having seen Mr. Palmer, and on the arrival of the post from Liverpool on the day after he had first made it, laughter was turned into mourning, and most of the guests were inclined to think there was more in it than they were willing to confess."

508 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

The following case is perhaps worth quoting, as parallel, in the form of the impression, to Nos. 175, 176, and 190; but it cannot receive an evidential number, being third-hand, and handed down by persons not likely to feel any special sense of responsibility with respect to it.

From Letters and Journals of Lord Byron, with Notices of his Wife, by Thomas Moore (1830), Vol. I., p. 193.

" Lord Byron used sometimes to mention a strange story, which the commander of the packet, Captain Kidd, related to him on the passage [to Lisbon, in 1809]. This officer stated that, being asleep one night in his berth, he was awakened by the pressure of something heavy on his limbs, and there being a faint light in the room, could see, as he thought, distinctly, the figure of his brother, who was at the time in the Naval Service in the East Indies, dressed in his uniform and stretched across the bed. Concluding it to be an illusion of the senses, he shut his eyes and made an effort to sleep. But still the pressure continued, and still as often as he ventured to take another look he saw the figure lying across him in the same position. To add to the wonder, on putting his hand forth to touch this form, he found the uniform in which it appeared to be dressed dripping wet. On the entrance of one of his brother officers, to whom he called in alarm, the apparition vanished; but in a few months afterwards he received the startling intelligence that on that night his brother had been drowned in the Indian Seas."

[The alleged touching of the clothes and feeling them to be wet is just one of those details which are met with in traditional narratives of the kind, and for which we have no first-hand evidence.]

I append a translation of a narrative which occurs in a Russian work, " Prostaia Rietch o Moudrionnykh Viestchakh," or Simple Discourse on DiffijCult Subjects, (Moscow, 1875), by the late Professor Pogodine, of Moscow, a well-known historian. It is given as from certain " memoirs " of Kelsieff, a Russian man of letters; but as the exact title of the original work is not mentioned, and the account is professedly abridgecl, I do not number it as evidence.

" Many years ago I was a pupil of the School of Commerce (St. Petersburg), and lived near it. My father with my mother and other children lived at Yasilievney Ostrov. He was a man of business, and very much occupied, and his visits to me were very rare. One evening I was lying on my bed, reading a book. Suddenly my door opened, and I saw my father, pale and triste, enter my chamber, and approach my bed saying to me, ' God bless you, my son! Don't forget this! ' And by the same way he went out. I was not in the least surprised, for I was sure that it was really my father who came to me. In a short time I locked the door and went to bed. Soon I heard a knock at my door. I opened it and saw my father's coachman; he told me that my father had expired about an hour before. It was at the time when I saw him visit me."

v.]



Chapter V. Visual Cases.

§ 1. I WILL again begin with evidence which is first-hand or on a par with first-hand. The following is a group of death-cases.

(550) From Mr. Joseph A. Chamberlain, High Garrett, Braintree, Essex.

"December, 1884.

" About 12 or 14 years ago, a little scholar in my school, named James Harrington, was very ill with diphtheria. I had been to a village about three miles off, to give a lesson on the pianoforte, and was returning on a dark night, about 7 o'clock. I was walking in a narrow footpath between two hedges, and on coming to a stile, I saw a luminous figure float over the stile,! meeting me, and gradually disappear at my left hand. I started, and said to myself, 'That's Jimmie,' then stamped my foot on the ground and said, ' How foolish I am to-night.' I reached home about 7.30 to attend to my evening school, and judge of my surprise, on entering the school, the caretaker met me at the door, saying, 'Jimmie is dead.' 'When?' I said. He answered, ' About half-an-hour ago.' "

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death occurred rather longer ago than Mr. Chamberlain imagined — on Oct. 28, 1867.

In answer to questions, Mr. Chamberlain says: —

"(1) The vision in a general way resembled James, especially as to size. The features were not clearly defined, but more like a magic-lantern view not properly focussed.

" (2) I knew that he was ill, but not that he was likely to die.

" (3) I was attached to him, but I cannot say I was particularly anxious about him. As far as I remember, I went to the house every evening, as his father and mother kept the coffee-room of which I had the superintendence; so my mind was occupied with his condition; but he was not in my thoughts before I saw the luminous figure.

" (4) I did mention it to our minister, the Rev. A. Macdougall, but I cannot say whether it [i.e., the mention] was at the time or near the time — certainly not on the same evening. The fact is, I was rather afraid of being laughed at.

" I only wish I had been more careful in recording the facts. I shall

1 As regards the movement, compare cases 203, 204, 512; as regards the luminosity, see Vol. i., pp. 550-1.

510 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

never forget the shock I received on entering my evening school half-anhour afterwards, and learning from the caretaker that James had died about half-an-hour before."

Mr. Chamberlain mentions that he has had one other visual hallucination in his life; but this was much less distinct, and occurred at a time when he was " unstrung by constant nursing and watching."

[Here the coincidence seems to have been very exact; but we cannot with certainty exclude the supposition that the hallucination was due to the observer's anxiety as to his pupil's condition.]

(551) From the Rev. C. C. Wambey, now of Paragon, Wilton Road, Salisbury, the narrator of case 129.

"April, 1884.

" My father, who was an Indian officer, retired from the service at an early age, owing to partial loss of sight, which eventuated in total blindness. He was somewhat eccentric. Among other things, he was in the habit of frequently sitting up all night, retiring to bed when the servants came down in the morning.

" We, that is my father, mother, and their six children, were living at Crossway Green, in the parish of H., 12 miles from the city of W. One morning, — how well I remember it! I was but a young child then, — a neighbouring farmer called at our house, and requested to see Mrs. W. immediately. He was shown into the drawing-room and, when my mother joined him, he mysteriously closed the door, and in an excited manner asked if it were all well with the ' Captain.' My mother replied that he was quite well when her eldest son, who had been reading the newspaper to him in his room, left him about half-an-hour ago. The farmer shook his head incredulously, and took his departure. Shortly after this, one of the servants having been guilty of misconduct, my mother, taking me with her, went to my father's room to acquaint him with the matter. As soon as she had opened the door, she started back

in horror, saying to me, ' My, here is your father.' Stretched on the

floor, his head against the bedstead, there he lay, dead!

" He was evidently in the act of preparing to dress (for a stocking was firmly grasped in his hand), when he was seized with a fit of apoplexy, death apparently having been instantaneous.

" After the funeral, the farmer disclosed to my mother this startling event, which from motives of delicacy, he forbore to mention to her sooner: —

" On the morning of his visit, he and his carter were with a waggon and team of horses crossing the common. Suddenly my father, his hand pointing to our house, appeared in front of the horses (which commenced snorting and plunging furiously), and as suddenly disappeared. When the horses had been calmed, the farmer, leaving them in charge of the carter, hastened to our house, and, as already related, requested to see my mother instantly.

" Cornelius C. Wambey."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Wambey says: —

" My father's death occurred when I was in my seventh year. It was the subject of conversation between my mother and myself from time to

time till her death in 1866, so that the apparition was no mere dream of childhood.

" I saw the farmer come into the house, and am under the impression that I was present at the interview between my mother and him, but am uncertain on this point. However, my mother forthwith mentioned to the elder children the purport of the farmer's visit; but at the time she did not attach importance to it, as my father was in his usual health when my eldest brother left him, about half-an-hour previously.

" All my brothers and sisters are dead, except one sister whom I have not seen, and from whom I have not heard, for a long time."

[Though the percipient here did not actually describe his experience before he heard of the death, Mr. Wambey's remembrance of his strange visit assimilates the case to those reckoned as on a par with first-hand. (Vol. I., p. 148). In conversation he mentioned his very strong impression that he was himself in the room during this visit.]

(552) From Mrs. Rooke, Rawdon College, near Leeds.

On September 28, 1884, Mrs. Rooke wrote that, "About October, 1882, at 9 p.m.," she had had "a visual impression of an intimate friend who was dead, though at the time the fact was unknown to me."

In answer to inquiries, she adds: — •

" Our dear friend had only died within a very short time of my seeing him. He was in Australia, and we heard of his death a few days over six weeks after I saw him. He went there for his health, but the last news we had of him was so good that we were not at all anxious. I was sorry afterwards that I had not kept a note of the exact day, but I had always so scoffed at ghost tales and such like things, that I was most unwilling to believe I had seen him. The gas was full on at the time; there was no light about the figure; he was as natural as in life, but as I came near to him vanished. I was going down a corridor, and the vision was certainly 'external and palpable.' I should think I saw him for half a minute quite, and expected him to come forward and speak. He was very much attached to us, as we were to him. u Amelia M. Rooke "

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Rooke adds: —

" I am sorry to say that I did not mention the subject of the apparition to any one at the time I saw it; indeed, not till many months ^ after our friend's death. There is nothing at all inconsistent with the supposition that the time of the ' vision ' corresponded with the time of death. I always thought it probably did so. The dress was a suit and cap I knew well,i but he died in bed. I have never had a hallucination."

[Here the coincidence is of course doubtful. It would remain a remarkable one, even if the interval exceeded the 1 2 hours' limit laid down for the cases in this book.]

(553 and 554) From Mrs. Forsyth Hunter, 2, Victoria Crescent, St. Helier's, Jersey, who sent us the accounts in 1882.

1 See Vol. i., p. 540.

2 This seems to be a mistake: see the "Additions and Corrections " at the beginning of the volume.

512 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

Mrs. Hunter had had a friend from whom she had parted in coldness, and whom she had not since seen or corresponded with. " Poor Z." (the real name was privately given) " was very far from my thoughts, when one night, in the winter of 1862 or spring of 1863, I had just got into bed. The fire burned brightly, and there was my usual night light. I was placing my head on the pillows, when I beheld, close to the side of the bed, and on a level with it, Z.'s head, and the same wistful look on his face which it had worn when we had parted years before. Starting up, I cried out, "What do you want*?" I did not fear; anger was my feeling. Slowly it retreated, and just as it disappeared in the shadow of the wall, a bright spark of light shone for a few seconds, and slowly expired.^

"A few days after, my sister wrote, 'You will have heard of poor Z.'s death on his way to the South of France.' I had heard nothing about him for years. Special reasons prevented my inquiring particularly into the precise moment of his death. Strange to say my bedfellow was his great pet among my children; she, however, slept through this strange interview."

We find from the Medical Register and the Scotsman that " Z." died at Hyeres, on Nov. 17, 1862.

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Hunter adds: —

" At Melrose, where I was a stranger, I could not have mentioned such a thing; but my sister paid me a visit about Easter, and I told her. No doubt she will confirm; but I would rather not recall the event."

" A daughter of mine in India was expecting her confinement to happen at the end of November, 1872. I was not anxious about her; indeed other important family events were occupying all my thoughts. On the 23rd of October, at noon, I was alone. All at once, a cold shivering feeling came over me, and I turned suddenly, and beheld a slight bending figure, standing near the closed door, covered over with a loose glistening robe or sheet of an ash grey colour. It looked such a sad little drooping figure, and the attitude and outline were strangely familiar to me; yet I never thought of her in connection with it. On the 1 9th November we had the startling news that she had died (eight days after giving birth to a son) on the 23rd of October, at 5 o'clock in the afternoon. It was not for some days after that I thought of what I had seen in London at that hour on that day; I have never since for a moment doubted that it was she. I was in London, and she in India; our noon was the afternoon there, and her appearance must have been at the moment of dissolution."

We have confirmed the date of death in Allen's Indian Mail.

[In both cases the degree of exactitude in the coincidence must be regarded as uncertain, in the absence of proof that the date of the vision was accurately noted at the time. Mrs. Hunter has had at least one, and possibly a second, purely subjective hallucination of vision (Yol\ I., p. 535, and p. 211, above).]

1 As regards the truncated appearance — a head only — see p. 33, note, and compare case.572 below. As regards the light, see Vol. i., pp..550-1, and p. 479 above; and as regards the gradual disapijearance, see p. 97, second note.

(555) From Mrs. Perryn, 27, Adrian Square, Westgate-on-Sea.

"April 1st, 1885. "In 1870 my mother was dangerously ill, but just before her death seemed to be rallying. I was aware of the improvement. One evening, on retiring to bed, about 10 o'clock, I was astonished to see the figure of my mother just beside my bedroom door. I immediately told my husband about it, and he made a note of the date (September 22nd). My mother died in Canada early on the morning of the 22nd of September. The figure looked as though enveloped in a faint smoke. ^ It was not recognisable in feature; but I immediately identified it as the appearance of my mother. The attire was the same in which I had last seen her several years before.2 up ^ Pbeeyn."

In answer to the question whether she had ever had any other hallucination of the senses, Mrs. Perryn replies, " This experience is quite unique in my life." She adds, " I have looked for the note but cannot find it."

Mr. Perryn writes: — •

" At this length of time I cannot feel justified in corroborating the above circumstance. I cannot find any note of the event, though I think one was made. u j^ g. Perryn."

(556) From Mrs. Richards, Spring Wood, Godalming.

" July 3rd, 1883.

" About the year 1834 or 1835, I was in a boarding school at Cadogan Place, Chelsea, kept by ladies named Horn, where, amongst other pupils, there were two sisters with whom I was very intimate. These girls came from a distance, their home being in the North of England, I believe; and travelling then being very difierent to what it is in these days of railways, they did not always go home for their holidays, and consequently were not impressed by the critical state of their mother's health.

" We slept in a large dormitory in which were several beds, the two sisters occupying a double bed. On a certain night, most of the girls were asleep, and myself in the next bed to one of the sisters, who was already in bed, and, like myself, anxious to be quiet and allowed to go to sleep; but we were hindered by the frolicksomeness of the younger sister, who sat outside the bed and facing the door at the end of the room, which, I remember, was not quite dark, either owing to moonlight or the time of year. As the elder sister was urging her to be quiet and to get into bed, the younger one suddenly exclaimed, and putting her hands over her face, seemed greatly agitated. As there seemed no cause for this sudden excitement, we, thinking it was only another form of her nonsense, and fearing the noise would bring up the governess, who also slept in the room, scolded her well, upon which she got into bed. Turning again to look towards the door, she uttered another cry, directing her sister's attention to the door; but she saw nothing, ^ and still thought the younger one was joking. But the latter buried her head under the clothes, and I, being very tired, went to sleep and thought no more about this disturbance.

1 Cf. case 210, where the lEigure was " surrounded by a light sort of phosphorescen. mist; " arid see Vol. i., p. 526, first note.

2 See Vol. i., p. 546.

3 See p. 105, second note.



Vol. Ii. ' 2 L

514 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" Next morning no notice was taken of it, and no impression seems to have been made on my mind or that of the other girls; probably, as I now think, owing to our being accustomed to the volatile disposition of the younger sister. However, about two days afterwards, the sisters were summoned into the room of the ladies of the school to receive letters. Shortly after, I was sent for, and found them in floods of tears, having just heard the news of their mother's death. Being their chief friend, I was excused from lessons that I might be with them, and try to console them. As we were approaching our room, the younger sister stopped us suddenly, and grasping my arm with violence, she said, ' Oh, do you remember the other night when I was frightened % I believe it was dear mamma that I saw. Let us go back and ask more about it,' or words to that effect. We went back to Miss Horn's apartment, and on referring to the letter, we found that their mother had died, as nearly as we could calculate, at the same hour that the incident in the dormitory occurred.

"This is what the girl said she saw: A tall, slight figure in white, resembling her mother, as she now thought, though she did not recognise features, who, with outstretched arms, seemed to beckon to her.

" Talking it over on the same day, she remarked, ' Ah, I think I see now why dear mamma appeared to me. She had often reproved me for my giddiness, and as she was dying, she wished to give me one more look and reproof. 1 will try and be very different. I shall never forget her warning,' &c. She appeared deeply impressed, but as the sisters and I were soon parted, and did not correspond, I lost sight of them.

" This is a true account, and I believe clearly remembered by me, though so many years ago. Neither I nor the sister saw the appearance, but witnessed the effect on the girl who did see it, both being quite awake."

We find from Boyle's Court Guide that Mrs. and the Misses Horn lived at 41, Cadogan Place, Chelsea, from 1836-8. Mrs. Richards has therefore antedated the incident by a year or two.

[The case is remote; but when the central fact, narrated by an eyevntness of the scene, is so precisely like that of numbers of more recent and corroborated cases, the hypothesis that it has been unconsciously invented does not seem specially probable.]

(557) The narrator of the next case objects to publicity, and takes

no interest in the subject. ^.^, /,,, mrv^

"^ "November 6th, 1884.

"When I was about 10 or 12 years old, I was sitting one evening, towards dusk, at the piano practising, when I saw an old lady, the grandmother of one of my schoolfellows, enter the room. I was in the habit of seeing her frequently, and recognised her perfectly. She was very old, and to the best of my belief had never entered our house at all, so that I was greatly surprised to see her. I heard the next day she had died on the evening I saw her. I never had any other hallucination.

" Mary C."

In conversation. Miss C. explained to Mr. Podmore that she did not actually see the figure enter the room. She looked up suddenly, and found it standing by her side. The figure was in ordinary indoor dress, with, as she particularly noticed, a large white cap, of muslin and lace, such as the old lady usually wore. The figure vanished suddenly as she

looked at it. The room, though dusk, was not dark, and she was able distinctly to recognise the features.

She cannot be certain whether she told anyone of what she had seen. She probably told the friend (the granddaughter of the lady who died) from whom she heard the news of the death next day. The time of the death she does not remember.

She knew the old lady well, and was in the habit of running in to see her nearly every day. But at this distance of time she cannot recollect whether the death was regarded as imminent.

She has lost sight of her friend, and can get no further particulars. The incident occurred about 1852; but the name of the lady who died being a very common one, our efforts to obtain the exact date have failed.

The next case seems to illustrate the heightening of the percipient's susceptibility at the approach of death. It is, of course, very rarely that there is a chance for this to be observed; as it can only comparatively rarely happen that death (or some event of critical interest) happens to A's friend or relative at a distance, at the particular time that A is dying. But I may refer to cases 372 and 416.

(558) From the Rev. J. A. Macdonald, formerly of Manchester, and now of Rhyl. The evidence may fairly be regarded as first-hand from the percipient's daughter.

"September, 1878.

" During the last illness of Mr. William Jackson, of Otley, who for 50 years had been a consistent member of the Wesleyan Methodist Church, the little son of his daughter sickened and died. Wishing not unnecessarily to disquiet the good man, this sad event was withheld from him. He was full of holy joy, and recognised the presence in his chamber of a number of his relatives who had departed this life in the triumph of faith. He pointed them out in succession — this is so-and-so, and there such another. In the course of this proceeding he suddenly started with surprise, for he discovered his grandson also among the heavenly company. Then turning to his daughter, he said, ' Well, never mind, he is all right.'

" His daughter, Miss Jane Jackson, certifies this. She says, ' It is perfectly true; I was in the room with my lamented father at the time.' "

In answer to an inquiry, Mr. Macdonald writes: —

" As to the case of William Jackson, his daughter did endorse it to me as noted in the quotation marks, but I destroyed her letter, never dreaming of a Society for Psychical Research, and I do not know now where to find her. The family evidently knew that the grandson had died, but kept that knowledge from the dying man. The information I received from the wife of Mr. Town Councillor Myers, of Hull." Miss Jackson is since deceased. We learn that Mr. Jackson died on Jan. 12, 1876.

[The central incident in a case of this type seems reasonably explicable by thought-transference from one of the bystanders (cf. case 379) — though many would of course be unwilling to regard the vision of the other relatives ■ as purely subjective. I have referred more than once to the difiiculty of making quite sure that a piece of important news, which is abroad in a household, has not reached ears for which it was not intended.]

516 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

(559 and 560) From Mr. Hickman Heather, Postmaster of Retford. The evidence in the first case is second-hand, but in the second is on a par with first-hand (Vol. L, p. 148).,, February 18th, 1885.

" In my early boyhood I have frequently heard the following story from both my parents. I may preface the story by saying that, in 1835, my father, Thomas Heather, was a miller, occupying a windmill in Westthorpe Fields, in the parish of Southwell, his house being at Westthorpe, about one mile distant from the mill. My grandfather, John Heather, occupied a farm under the late Sir Richard Sutton, at Goverton, in the parish of Bleasby, about 3 miles distant. My father, who had been working his mill until past midnight, locked up his mill and went home. On his way the apparition of his mother crossed his path, and was so clearly seen that he marked the dress, one which had been commonly worn, and on his arrival at home he at once reported the circumstance to [his wife] my mother, saying that ' he had never seen his mother more plainly in his life.' Early next morning, a man rode in with the sad news that my grandmother had been found dead in her bed.

" A second case occurred under my own notice, although the apparition was not seen by me. In the year 1854, my father, who then lived at Goverton, Bleasby, was building a house and a yard for pigs. The building and the yard were on a slope. My father was standing at the lower end with his arms resting upon the wall; the entrance to the house from the yard was directly opposite, and was open, the door not having been hung. I was in the farmyard at some little distance, but having a clear full view of my father and the building, when I was startled by my father exclaiming, ' Jack, just see what your Uncle Ned is doing in the pigsty.' I at once went, although I knew it to be impossible that my Uncle Ned could be there, he being seriously ill at the time. Having searched the place, my father told me that he had distinctly seen my uncle cross the doorway, and would scarcely believe that he was not to be found inside. In about a couple of hours, a messenger brought the tidings that my uncle had died.

" I beg to add that in the case of my grandmother there was no previous illness, she having gone to bed in apparently perfect health.

"John Hickman Heather."

We have procured a copy of an inscription of a tombstone at Bleasby, which confirms the fact that Mrs. John Heather died in 1835 (May 2).

We find from the Register of Deaths that Mr. Edward Heather died on Nov. 28, 1853, not 1854.

Mr. Heather's wife writes on May 22, 1886, to confirm these accounts, which she herself " heard from the lips of both Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Heather."

The narrator of the following cases is the brother of the narrator of No. 232; it is possible therefore to suppose some degree of familysusceptibility (p. 132, note). The first case may have been an illusion, and I give it no separate evidential number.

(561) From the Rev. H. A. H., The Vicarage.

" December 19th, 1885.

" The following occurrences took place three years ago, and had reference to parishioners here who were much on my mind, and whom I was visiting in their last illnesses.

" One was a farmer's wife who was much afraid of giving me trouble. I had given her the Holy Communion during the afternoon, and when I left, promised to come again next day. She said she should be very glad to see me, but did not like to be such a trouble, as it was some distance and I was going every day. I said it was no trouble, but the reason why I was here, and I should be sure to come.

" That evening I had a mission service, 2 miles away, in quite another direction. Mrs. H. was with me. We were walking home together, and had joked about not meeting anyone on the road. I said, ' You see if you had been alone, you would actually have met no one to alarm you.' It was rather dark, but you could see a form 15 or 20 yards away. We walked on, talking about various things, and then I saw someone coming. I said ' Here we meet someone at last.' She said, ' I don't see anyone.' ' There,' I said; ' look, there comes an old woman, and she is twisting her shawl round her neck.' My wife, however, could see nothing,^ but I thought to myself she will see her plainly enough directly. However, it melted away. There was no one. I said, ' It is very odd; I certainly did see an old woman. Let us go into C.'s house' (the village carpenter's) ' and see if there is anyone dead.' We went in, and he said, ' I have just got orders to make a coffin.' I looked at Mrs. H. and said, ' Indeed, who is it for?' He said, 'For Mrs. B.,' naming the farmer's wife I had seen that very afternoon. I said, ' There must be some mistake. I only left her at 4 o'clock, and there were no signs of immediate death.' ' No,' he said, ' it is so.' I went next day, and found she had died from a sudden stoppage of the heart, about half-past 8, and that almost the last words were, ' I am sorry to give Mr. H. the trouble of coming again to-morrow.'

" The other occasion was about two or three months afterwards. A very respectable young farmer broke a bloodvessel on the brain, and I visited him some three or four times. The last time he was quite unconscious, and evidently could not live long. He was very anxious to see me as much as possible before becoming unconscious, often saying, ' Send for the vicar.' On the morning that he died, I was awoke by what I thought was Mrs. H. in her white dressing-gown. We were sleeping, for some reason, in separate rooms that night. I was very sleepy when awoke, and said, ' Is it time to get up? I must have another 10 minutes,' and fell asleep again. I did not look at the face of the form, being very sleepy and feeling sure it was Mrs. H. However, by-and-bye, Mrs. H. did come in, and said, ' Young R. is dead; the girl who brings the milk brought word.' I said, 'Is it very long since jom first woke me?' Then she assured me it was the first time she had been in the room. He had died about 5 that very morning, just as I fancied I had been called by Mrs. H. My regret is, I did not look at the face, but, being tired and sleepy I only saw the figure up to the waist, and went ofi" to sleep with it standing there, never imagining it was not my wife. This is my last hallucination. I have visited scores of deathbeds since, but have had no further visions.

^ See p. 105, second note.

518 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" I may add I am in no way nervous, but a strong, middle-aged man, in excellent health, and very temperate in eating as well as drinking. I don't quite know how to account for these things, except that both these people were much in my mind, and both of them people for whom I had much respect and sympathy. " H. A. H."

In conversation, Mr. H. mentioned that he has had two experiences of apparently subjective visual hallucination; but these both occurred when he was a boy. He adds in subsequent letters: —

" I may add, as regards the first of the two curious visions, that I was very constantly walking that road at that hour, as I had a weekly service; but that was the only occasion my eyes misled me. When I first saw the figure, it appeared to be crossing the road, but in our direction, like a person changing from the footpath to the middle of the road. It was, of course, somewhat shadowy, as a person is in the dusk. Still, it had the look of an old woman; I could distinguish the sex. The road is a country one, but on nearing the village there are some lamp-posts, but we were some distance from them. It was a cloudy and rather windy night, and there were, of course, shadows from clouds and trees cast about; it was not deej> dark, but more than dusk. I am so accustomed to these walks that it would be difficult for any natural object to have caused such an illusion. I was quite sure that an old woman was there, in the middle of the road — so sure that I did not keep my eye upon her, and as we came up she was gone. Mrs. H. has ordinary eyesight, much like my own, neither remarkable for great acuteness of vision nor the reverse.

" I may add, too, regarding the second case, that I was fully awake, though heavy with sleep, and did not dream Mrs. H. awoke me. I am personally convinced of this, for I wondered, as I went ofi" to sleep again, that Mrs. H. did not go, and thought she would tell me in another minute or two that I really must get up. I fell asleep with the sensation of her presence after my eyes were closed again."

Mrs. H. writes:— a December 23rd, 1885.

" As you wish to have some corroboration of two curious statements of facts made to you by my husband, I write a few lines to tell you my remembrance of the occasions. We were walking home from a week-night service, from a hamlet some distance from here, when I remarked I would not walk here alone for anything. Mr. H. said, ' It is curious we have never met anyone.' Not long afterwards, as we were nearing the village, he said, ' Well, here comes someone at last; who is it? ' I said, ' I don't see anyone.' He said, ' Oh you must, by the lamp-post ' [there is a discrepancy here from Mr. H.'s account]; ' she is putting a shawl over her head, and coming to meet us. Do you know her % ' I said, ' Certainly not, for there isn't anyone.' He said, ' Anyhow she is coming quickly towards us; then you must see.' In another minute we were both sure it must have been some appearance, and went into the carpenter's close by to see if we could hear anything, and his first words were, ' Well, sir, I have orders for a coffin for Mrs. B.' We both said, ' Impossible! she seemed nicely this afternoon.' I know she was anxious to spare my husband any trouble, as it was a long walk, and we naturally connected it with this.

" As regards the young farmer, he had been much on our minds, as it

was a distressing case in many ways. Word was brought early in the morning that he was dead; but owing to one of the children not being well, and having to be in my room, Mr. H. was in an adjoining one, and I would not disturb him until later. When I went in I said, ' Well, poor J. R. is gone.' He said, ' I knew he would be; but why didn't you tell me when you came in before 1 ' I said, ' I have not been in before.' He said, ' Yes, when you came in to wake me, and I begged for at all events 10 minutes more.' He then told me what he had said to me — as he thought, and he was surprised I did not answer. It must be three or four years ago, but I remember these facts distinctly. " E. H."

[Neither of these cases would be very striking alone, but they are of interest as occurring to the same percipient. There can hardly be a doubt that the experience in the second instance was a hallucination, not an illusion; and the same account of the first experience is rendered to some extent probable by the fact that Mrs. H. did not share it, though any moving object should have been as visible to her as her husband. And if the experiences were hallucinations, the improbability that Mr. H. should subjectively evolve the only two hallucinations of his adult life at those particular moments remains enormous, however much allowance be made for the fact that he was aware that his two parishioners were in a dying state.]

In the following case the percipient was a young child. It is a phantasmal case which may be compared to the merely impressional cases, Nos. 47 and 48, and the dream-case, No. 456. See also cases 345, 352, 607, 634, 652.

(562) From Mrs. Skyring, Admiralty Offices, Spring Gardens, S.W. The account was procured for us by Mr. A. W. Lafone, M.P., o Hatton, Bedfont.,j^^^^ jgg3

"In or about the year 1832, my husband, Captain Skyring, R.IST., left England on a surveying expedition in command of H.M.S. ' Etna'; our little son, Willie, was about 2 years old at the tune of his departure. The child was very fond of carrying about a miniature portrait of his father, and on the 23rd of December, 1833, the child being about 3 years old, he was playing in a curtained recess in the nursery when I heard him call out in an excited tone ' Papa, papa, come to me.' On my questioning him he declared he had seen his father, and was so agitated that I was afraid to allude to the subject again. Shortly afterwards I received news from the Admiralty that Captain Skyring had been murdered by the natives at Cape Roxo on the day in question. My son, who is now dead, lived to be a man, but had no recollection of this episode.

"I may add that Captain Skyring, when lieutenant of H.M.S. ' Beagle,' related that his mother appeared to him as he was lying in his cot, and that he entered the occurrence in his log-book at the time; and discovered, on his return to England, that she had died on the date of the apparition. "S. L. Skyring."

[This case is again very remote; it is, moreover, impossible to be sure that independent note was taken of the date of the cry. But the incident of the child's agitation is not likely to have been unconsciously imagined

520 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

and the coincidence must have been, at any rate, close enough to excite remark. The last paragraph in the account once more suggests that the capacity of percipience was hereditary; but the detail as to the log-book is not one that can be relied on (Vol. I., p. 161, note).]

(563) Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood took down the following deposition, in September, 1876, from Jane Barford, the confidential servant (since deceased) of a friend. Miss Stephen.

"My father died the 11th January, 1848. My mother had sent me away to an aunt, who lived about two miles off, in order to be out of the way while my father was so ill. On the morning of his death I was called at 6 o'clock, intending, as usual, to help my cousins in the dairy. About a quarter before 7, I was going downstairs with my candle in my hand, when I met my father in his night-shirt coming up. He put out his hand, as if to take the candlestick, which I dropped in my fright, and was left alone in the dark. I knew it could not be my living father, and was convinced that he was dead, and had come to bid me good-bye. I told my cousins what had happened, and said that I must immediately go home. They tried to persuade me to stay till after breakfast, saying it was only my fancy, but I set off at once, and on my way I met my aunt, who had been sitting up with my father, and was coming back to tell me of his death, which had taken place just at a quarter before 7.

" Jane Barford."

[The cousins cannot now be traced; and as Miss Stephen has no clue to Jane Barford's family, the date of the death cannot be independently verified. The case is one which could have had little force, since the percipient had no doubt been in anxiety about her father (Vol. I., p. 509), but for the extreme closeness of the alleged concidence.]

(564) From Mrs. Poulter, wife of a retired Baptist minister at Leeds.

"1883.

" When I was a young woman, I lived for some time at Sevenoaks, and attended a Wesleyan class conducted by an elderly lady to whom I became warmly attached. After that (in 1835) I went to live at Bourne, in Lincolnshire, and one day, while sitting in my front room, I was startled at seeing my dear old friend from Sevenoaks pass the window, and go towards the front door. I hastened to receive her, but on opening the front door there was no one to be seen in the whole length of the quiet street. I afterwards learnt that at that hour my friend died."

Mrs. Boulter's son-in-law, Mr. J. L. Cherry, of Rowley Park, Stafford, writes to Professor Barrett: — " It is some 20 years since Mrs. Poulter first told me the story, and since I had the pleasure of seeing you, she has certified to the accuracy of the draft which I submitted to her."

[The account is very incomplete; but Mrs. Poulter is old, and must not be troubled further.]

(565) From Mr. Louis Lyons, 3, Bouverie Square, Folkestone.

" October 8th, 1883. "In 1854 we resided in Hanau. We kept two servants. One winter's

evening, just before going to bed, Gretchen came pouncing into the dining-room where we were sitting, in great excitement, declaring that her father, whom she had left in good health at Gelhihausen, had just appeared to her with such dejection in his countenance that she must go to him that moment; and off she started in the snow, and reached Gellnhausen in time to close her parent's breaking eyes. I cannot procure further evidence."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Lyons says: —

" It made a deep impression on me, and is now quite fresh on my mind. I certainly was in the room, and there is not a shadow of doubt in my mind."

(566) From Mrs. Morris, Pentrabach, Trecastle, Breconshire.

" September l7th, 1884.

" Early in 1881, I had just returned from a drive with my aunt, whom I had seen off by train to what we felt sure was the death-bed of a little cousin. It must have been about 6 in the evening. I was standing at my dressing-table taking off my hat, when I heard someone try my^ door. I crossed the room and opened the door at once and saw, standing in the doorway, the figure of little G., looking very, very white, and dressed in a white night-dress. What struck me most was that his hands were crossed, and in the fingers of his right hand were two lilies and a leaf. The face smiled at me; and, as I stood looking, the figure disappeared.

" The following day I went up to join my aunt, and heard that G. had died about 4 o'clock the afternoon before, and that she had seen him soon after her arrival. I immediately asked if he had lilies of the valley in his hand, and she said, ' Yes.' I then described his figure, as I had seen it, and she said it was precisely as he looked and was lying at the time; that his sister had bought him, at a florist's, the lilies, and sent them up to him; that he had been delighted with them, and had held them until he died; and that they were now in his hand.

" Of course, my mind was full of him, and wondering whether my aunt would find him alive, &c. But if that would have made me imagine I saw him, why should it have caused me to imagine lilies of the valley in depth of winter (it was the time of the deep snow), and of which I had not heard 1 " Mary Ethel Morris."

We find from two obituary notices that the child died on Jan. 26, 1881, aged 7 years.

In reply to inquiries, Mrs. Morris writes, on October 22, 1884: —

" I will write to my aunt and ask her to confirm my account of my little cousin's appearance, as I feel sure she will not hesitate to do so.

" I did distinctly see lilies of the valley in the child's hand."

Mrs. Morris's aunt writes, in a portion of a letter enclosed to us on Nov. 7, 1884:—

" As regards poor little G., I quite remember your saying that you saw him outside your door, and I do remember something about your saying you saw him with the lilies. I have an idea you said so, but it was such a sad thing altogether that things are misty, u ]\^ary Selwood."

Mrs. Morris adds, on Jan. 26, 1886: —

522 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" As far as I can recollect I did not mention my seeing my cousin at the time. I was alone in the house with two very nervous servants, so that I hardly think it likely I should speak to them about anything ' ghostly.' But I told my aunt, describing the child's appearance, before she had told me any particulars of the death, the flowers, &c."

Mrs. Morris has had two other hallucinations representing a figure, which in both instances was unrecognised; one of these occurred at the moment of waking; the second may have been due to nervousness or expectancy, as another member of the household had been similarly affected just before. But Mrs. Morris is certainly not of a nervous or fanciful temperament.

[It is no doubt possible that the hallucination in this case was purely subjective, and connected with anxiety on the child's account; but it is difiicult to believe that the correspondence of the lilies was accidental. Mrs. Morris is certain that there was no association in her mind between the child and this particular flower; and the idea of getting the lilies for him had been a sudden one.]

(567) From the late Mrs. Amos, Hythe. "October 1884

" I was living at Faversham at the time when my mother was taken ill, who lived at Hythe, Kent. I went to see her on a Friday and returned home on Tuesday. On Thursday I retired to rest at about 10 o'clock, when, on looking at the foot of the bed, I saw my mother standing dressed in white; her features were very distinct. I spoke to my husband and asked him to look at the foot of the bed, as mother stood looking at me. He said, ' I don't see her; can you see her now 1 ' ^ My reply was, ' Yes.' After that she vanished slowly away. My husband said it was very odd, and at breakfast he asked me if I was afraid to be alone. My reply was, I would rather be by myself. The next day we had a letter to say my dear mother was at rest. I can still see her as plain as at that time. The date was November, 1846. I have never had another vision but this one. u Sar;^h Amos."

We find from the obituaries in two Dover papers that Mrs. Amos' mother, Mrs. Wiles, died on ISTov. 21, 1846.

Our friend. Miss Porter, who knew and questioned Mrs. Amos, says: —

" I am quite persuaded of the truth of her statement. In describing the apparition to me, she told me that the room was quite dark, but that there seemed to be a sort of cloud of light behind the figure which enabled her to see it distinctly.^ She was very particular in telling me that it remained all the time she was talking to her husband, and that she looked at it fixedly the whole time. She thinks that it must have remained several minutes."

[The percipient's previous state of anxiety has again to be noted, as possibly the cause of the hallucination.]

(568) Quoted " from the Memoirs of F. Th. Engelhardt" in the work of Professor Pogodine, of Moscow, Simple Discourse on Difficult Subjects,

1 See p. 105, second note.

2 See p. 459, note, and compare case 210.

mentioned on p. 508. We have been unable to procure the original Memoirs; and Mr. T. Bruhns, of Simferopol, a Corresponding Member of the S.P.R., who has translated the passage, has been equally unsuccessful. " In 1858, I lived in Moscow, and was ordered to go for some time to Arkhangelsk. On February (5th-17th,) before leaving, I wrote a congratulatory letter to my mother in Petersburg, who was about to celebrate (on February 8th-20th) the 80th anniversary of her birthday. I congratulated my dear mother, and entreated her to bless me for my long journey. Without her blessing I feared that my journey would be unhappy. I sent my letter and departed. Up to laroslavsk the road was tolerably good. In this town I spent a day. But from laroslavsk to Vologda the road became so terribly bad that I was obliged to stop at one station, to rest till the morning. Having taken out my pelisse, I lay dressed on the sofa. I don't belong to that happy class of men who fall asleep as soon as they lie down. I took a book and tried to read, but my fatigue was so great that I could not read. I rose from the sofa and extinguished the candle, thinking that in darkness I should fall asleep more quickly. Scarcely had I again reached my bed when I saw, to my great astonishment, my mother with her sister, who had died in 1846,^ standing a few feet from me. Vividly impressed by this extraordinary vision, I looked, motionless, at these dear ones. My mother was standing before me as though alive, and she blessed me with a sign of the cross. But her sister, though perfectly recognisable, had, so to speak, a more light, ethereal aspect. I took the matches and lighted the candle — but the apparitions had already faded away. This incident took place in the night of 12th-24th, 13th-25th February, 1 858, between 2 and 3 o'clock in the morning. About a week after my arrival at Arkhangelsk, I was informed by my brother-in-law that my mother expired in the night of 12th-13th February."

I 2. In the next group of cases, first-hand or on a par with firsthand, the conditioning event or state on the agent's side was something other than death, though in two of them death was rapidlyapproaching.

(569) From Mr. Algernon Joy, 20, Wilton Place, S.W.

"August 16th, 1883.

" About 1862, I was walking in a country lane near Cardiff by myself, when I was overtaken by two young colliers, who suddenly attacked me. One of them gave me a violent blow on the eye, which knocked me down, half stunned. I distinctly remembered afterwards all that I had been thinking about, both immediately prior to the attack, and for some time after it. Up to the moment of the attack, and for some time previously, I was absorbed in a calculation, connected with the Penarth Docks, then in construction, on which I was employed. My train of thought was interrupted for a moment by the sound of footsteps behind me. I looked back, and saw the two young men, but thought no more of them, and immediately returned to my calculations. On receiving the blow, I began speculating on their object, what they were going to do next, how I could best defend myself, or escape from them; and when they ran away, and I

1 As to the appearance of a second figure, see Vol. i., pp. 545-6.

524 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

had picked myself up, I thought of trying to identify them, and of denouncing them at the police-station, to which I proceeded, after following them till I lost sight of them. In short I am positive that for about half an hour preAdous to the attack, and for an hour or two after it, there was no connection whatever, direct or indirect, between my thoughts and a person at that moment in London, and whom I will call ' A.' Two days afterwards, I received a letter from ' A,' written on the day after the assault, asking me what I had been doing and thinking about at half-past 4 p.m., on the day previous to that on which he was writing. He continued: ' I had just passed your club, and was thinking of you, when I recognised your footstep behind me. You laid your hand heavily on my shoulder. I turned, and saw you as distinctly as I ever saw you in my life. You looked distressed, and, in answer to my greeting and inquiry, " What's the matter 1 " you said, " Go home, old fellow, I've been hurt. You wiU get a letter from me in the morning telling you all about it." You then vanished instantaneously.'

" The assault took place as near half -past 4 as possible, certainly between 4.15 and 4.45. I wrote an account of it to ' A ' on the following day, so that our letters crossed, he receiving mine, not the next morning, as my double had promised, but on the succeeding one, at about the same time as I received his. ' A ' solemnly assured me that he knew no one in or near Cardiff, and that my account was the only one that he received of the incident. From my intimate personal knowledge of him, I am certain that he is incapable of uttering an untruth. But there are reasons why I cannot give his name, even in confidence.^

" Algernon Joy."

[Mr. Joy having received an account of the phantasm written before the news of his accident reached the percipient, his evidence is on a par with first-hand (Vol. I., p. 148).]

(570) From Mrs. McMuUin, formerly Miss HammiU (now in India).

" 9, South wick Place, Hyde Park, W.

" 1883. " Many years ago an old nurse, Mary Vivian, who was living with us, thought she saw one of the De Lancys, whom she had lived with, walk through our nursery. She was so certain she had seen him that she was quite overcome, and said she was sure some harm had befallen him. Some time after, she heard that on his way to the Crimea (I think, but am not quite sure when it was,) this young De Lancy had jumped overboard to save the life of a soldier who had fallen overboard, and had been nearly drowned, the very same evening she thought she saw him in our nursery; and he told her he had thought of his old nurse when he was in the water."

Mrs. McMuUin adds, " I know it was told me at the time." Lady Bates, of 2, Sussex Place, Hyde Park, writes: —

" March 14th, 1885. " Twenty-eight years ago an elderly woman, named Vivian, lived as nurse in the service of Mr. Hammill, police magistrate, at 34, Sussex Gardens, Hyde Park. She had previously been for many years in the

1 These reasons have been privately communicated.

family of Colonel De Lancy, one of whose sons in May, 1857, was on his voyage to India with his regiment, the 22nd. One evening, towards the end of that month, Yivian told Miss Constance Hammill (then about 18) that when sitting in the nursery, between 6 and 7 p.m., she had seen Oliver De Lancy enter and pass through the room, and that she felt sure that some misfortune had happened to him. I heard of the occurrence the next day, and well remember, even at this distance of time, the words in which it was related to me: — ' Yivian has seen a ghost in the nursery, and it has made her so ill that she is not able to do her work and has gone to bed.' Some weeks after, Mr. Priaulx, young De Lancy's uncle, called to tell Yivian that a letter had been received from him, in which he said that he had nearly lost his life in an unsuccessful attempt to rescue a private soldier of the 22nd, who had fallen overboard between Gibraltar and Malta, adding: — ' When I was in the water I thought of old Yivian.' He gave no date, but Mr. Priaulx, at Yivian's request, inquired at the War Office, and found that the man had been drowned on the 27th of May — the day on which, according to a note made at the time, she had seen the apparition.

" Captain De Lancy and Yivian have been long dead; and Miss Constance Hammill is married now in India; but I have written down the story exactly as I remember to have heard it. ^'■M.. M. Bates."

The following notice is from Hart's Army List for 1865: —

" Captain Oliver De Lancy received the medal of the Royal Humane Society for gallant conduct in endeavouring to save the life of Private Dempsey, of the 22nd Regiment, who fell overboard between Gibraltar and Malta, on the night of May 27th, 1857."

Miss Ewart, of 3, Morpeth Terrace, Yictoria Street, tells us that when Lady Bates related this incident to her, near the time when it occurred, she mentioned that Yivian had gone to make inquiries of Mr. Priaulx the day after her vision, having received special permission from Mrs. Hammill to do so. But Lady Bates, though she says this may probably have been so, does not now remember it.

Dr. Scott, late headmaster of Westminster School, who heard of the incident soon after its occurrence, has given us an independent and substantially concordant account of it.

(571) From Mr. H. Wooderson, 2, Little Queen's Road, Teddington.

"1881.

" Like the rest of my brothers and sisters, I have always had the capacity of seeing spirits in a clairvoyant way.^ When I was a youth of 14, I ran away from Hampton Court, where my parents lived, and I went into service as under-gardener with Captain Emmett, Ditton House, the next estate to Lord St. Leonards', at Long Ditton on the othei' side of the river. One night, about 1857, when it was my turn to look after the fires in the hot^house, just as I was going down into the stoke-hole, I saw my mother standing on the top of the stoke-hole in her night-dress, and

1 Mr. Wooderson explains these "spirits" to be hallucinations representing living persons, which he has regarded as premonitory of their actual approach. His wife confirms the fact that his prognostications of this kind have often been fulfilled; but no accurate record has been kept.

526 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

her head bound up as in a turban, as if she was ill, which much frightened me; and on joining the foreman of the houses, a Scotchman, he said, ' You look frightened.' I told him I had seen my mother; he remarked that I had seen her wraith, and ought to go home, to which I agreed. It was then about half -past 1 o'clock. We used the Captain's boat that was in the boathouse to set me over the river, and I ran home. I arrived at home at 2 o'clock, and found my mother lying in bed just as I had seen her in my vision. She said, ' I knew I should bring you.' She recovered from her illness.

" Some time after this, I was employed as guard on the G. E. Railway, and I and my mate, who worked the down train while I took the up train, shared the same lodgings at Selby Street, Waterloo Town, Bethnal Green. We used to cross each other at Bishop's Stortford, where we would exchange a few words. One night I felt very heavy as if some misfortune was about to happen to my family. I spoke to my companion when I met him at Bishop's Stortford, and said I was sure that something was wrong with my mother. My companion made light of it, and said I should be all right when I went to work. The impression, however, remained with me, and when I saw my companion at night he told me there was a telegram waiting at home for me from Hampton Court. The telegram was to warn me that if I wished to see my mother alive, I must set off at once. I started as soon as I could, after showing the railway authorities the telegram, and taking the first train to Hampton Court, I arrived about 12 o'clock, and found my mother awaking from half-an-hour's sleep, which she had had after long wakefulness from fever. When she saw me she said, ' I could not depart till I had seen you, but now it is all right.' She then lay down and passed away during the day without any trouble. This was in the summer of 1866. " H. Wooderson."

We find from a newspaper obituary that Mrs. Wooderson died on Aug. 20, 1868 (not 1866).

[As Mr. Wooderson recollects the turban as the special feature in his vision which suggested to him the idea of illness, it is not so easy as it would otherwise be to suppose that he wrongly read back the turban into the vision after he had seen it in reality; and the case may be compared to those in Chap. XII., § 8, where some real feature of the agent's aspect seems to be conveyed. The case, however, besides lacking corroboration, is of course much weakened, from an evidential point of view, by its opening sentence.]

(572) From a lady who has a dread of publicity.

"September, 1884.

"In 1857, during church service, I had an impression of something being close to my face. I opened my eyes, and saw distinctly the face of a friend.^ It appeared quite solid, and I could recognise all the markings in the face. Being startled, I closed my eyes, when it was no longer visible; on re-opening them it was still present. I cannot now remember whether the news of my friend's death reached us that evening, or early the following morning. He died during the day (Sunday) on which I had the vision; but I never heard the exact hour. " H. C."

1 Compare case 553, and see p. 33, note.

On being interrogated by our friend, Miss Porter, of 16, Russell Square, Miss C. added that when she was first aware of something being near her and opened her eyes, the vision was within an inch or two of her face, too close for recognition till she drew back a little.^ It seemed to remain stationary. She cannot say how long it remained, but described how a feeling of horror came over her that it would always be there before her eyes. It was also long enough for her to make up her mind that her friend was dead, and she was not at all surprised when the news came. It disappeared suddenly — did not fade, but was there one moment and gone the next.

On inquiry. Miss C. told the present writer that she knew her friend to be ill, but was in no apprehension of his death. She preferred not to give his name, but undertook herself to ascertain from the Times obituary whether she was right in her recollection that he died on a Sunday. The result showed that she was not, and that he died on a Wednesday. ^ He had however been very ill, and delirious, for 3 or 4 days previously; and as she has never had a hallucination on any other occasion, a remarkable coincidence remains.

(573) From Mrs. Beaumont, 1, Crescent Road, S. Norwood.

" February 24th, 1885.

" One day in the '40s, when I was living in the Rectory at Marlborough, my father's house, my mother and sister had gone out, and I was lying on a sofa in the drawing-room; at about 3 p.m. I was reading a book, when the light seemed to be slightly darkened, and looking up I saw, leaning in at the window farthest from me, about three feet from the ground, and beckoning, a gentleman whom I had only seen once, about a fortnight or three weeks previously. Supposing that my father wanted me to sign my name (as a witness to a lease, or something of that kind), I got up, went out of the window (which led down into the garden), and passed along in front of the house, and up six steps into my father's study, which was empty. I then went into the yard and garden, but found nobody; so I returned to my sofa and my books. When father came in, two hours afterwards, I said, 'Why did you send Mr. H. to call me, and then go away *? ' My father replied, ' What are you talking about 1 H. is down in Wales.' Nothing more was said. I did not like to dwell on the subject to either of my parents, and I did not mention the occurrence to any one for several years. About a fortnight afterwards, I was told by my mother that Mr. H. had written, proposing for my hand (some property of his adjoined some property of my father's in Wales). I cannot fix exactly how close the coincidence was; but my strong impression is that the letter was received within 24 hours of my experience. Before I was told of the contents of the letter, I remember that I found the blue envelope of Mr. H.'s letter (with T. H. on the corner, and with the coat-of-arms on his seal, and with the postmark Llandilo) on the floor in my father's study. When the news was told me, I seemed to receive some explanation of my vision.

1 See Vol. L, p. 522, note.

2 As regards the liability to exaggerate the closeness of the coincidence, see Vol. i., pp. 140-6, and the examples given in Vol. i., pp. Ixxv-vii.

528 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" I have never had any hallucination or vision at any other time, except when I saw the ' little brown lady ' at Kintbury.i " C. Beaumont."

[Here we have the points that the hallucinatory vision of a recognised figure was unique in the percipient's experience; and that the supposed agent's thoughts must have been much occupied with her at the time. But we have no proof that, on his side, the particular time at which the phantasm was seen stood out in any way from the hours and days that preceded and followed it; and the coincidence therefore lacks precision.]

(574) From Mr. J. H. Jevons, 182, Elm Grove, Brighton.

" August, 1884.

" Whilst I was dressing, the other morning, the form of a friend passed amongst some trees opposite to my house, and so little doubt had I as to the form being his, as he looked up to my window, that I waved my hand to him to 'go on' up the road where we frequently walked. I followed in a minute or two, but only to find that I could not find him, high or low, up or down that road, or along any of three others. At length I went along an accustomed road, to a point in the town where we not infrequently met, or separated, as the case might be. But non est inventus. Subsequently I called at his house, and found him very ill indeed, as he still remains."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Jevons says: —

" September 8th, 1884.

"I think that in cases of this sort one cannot be too careful as to identity, because I know practically how apt the imagination is to outrun the judgment. But of this particular instance under notice, the most I can say is, that if it was one of self-deception or mere subjectiveness, I was most completely deceived indeed. Certainly I had reason to expect my friend, as he came past my place nearly every morning at about 1 1 o'clock, looked up at my window, and when I saw him, I waved my hand in the direction in which I implied I would follow him. As I did so on the morning to which I am referring, I saw him and nodded to him two or three times, never for an instant doubting that the figure was his. I saw, through the leaves and branches of the trees, on the walk opposite to my house, his white hat, silver-rimmed spectacles and dark grey beard, as well as his peculiar contour and gait. He is 72 years of age, tall, slow of movement, and not very quick of sight; and as he appeared at first to hesitate, I waved my hand again, when he indicated, by his head, in his usual way, that he understood me, and then he walked on. I was but a few minutes in my effort to join him; and it was when I found I could not see him, or anybody like him, in any direction, that I was struck with the remarkableness of the occurrence, and I stood fairly puzzled, as I must have shown, for I noticed a passer-by looking at me in a sort of wondering way.

" The illness was quite sudden, and neither my friend nor myself had any reason, prior to his seizure, to suppose that we should not meet, as customary, on the morning mentioned. The case has been my only experience of a visual hallucination, with the exception of one (of a difierent character) I had in my very youthful days. " John H. Jevons."

1 This was an apparition frequently seen by the residents in a particular house.

[It is against the hypothesis of mistaken identity, that Mr. Jevons remembers that the figure seemed distinctly to recognise his greeting. Still it may have been a hallucination due to expectancy. See Yol. I., p. 516.]

(575) From a lady, Mrs. W., who desires that her name and address may not be published, as she has a near relation who would much object to their appearance. u February 20th, 1885.

" When a resident near Portsmouth, during a visit made by my late mother to London in the summer of 1858, the year preceding her death, I distinctly saw her walking in the back garden at noon-day. I was not at the time thinking of her, but happening to look from my chamber window, I beheld this figure, which, but for my parent's absence from home, I should have supposed her veritable self. This incident led me to conjecture something was amiss; and this idea was confirmed when the next morning's post brought me information that my mother had sustained a severe fall, and was so badly hurt that at first fatal results was feared; and at the moment I fancied I saw her, her thoughts were bent on telegraphing for me to go to her."

The following incident is perhaps worth quoting, as having occurred to the same person: —

" A few years prior to this, when a girl of 16, an engagement was formed between myself and a young naval officer, about to sail for the African coast. He had promised my mother and self that he would write us from Ascension. It chanced, some time after his departure, I accompanied a friend in a long country walk, when all at once a strange feeling possessed me that this young officer was near. I seemed to feel the clasp of his hand upon my wrist, yet I saw nothing, I had only /elf a presence. My companion asked why I looked so pale. I made an evasive reply, and on returning home told my mother that ' Tom was dead! ' She tried to laugh away my fancy; nevertheless, she noted the date of the occurrence; and when a brother of my own, then homeward bound from the coast of Africa, arrived, the first words he spoke, after an exchange of greetings, were, ' Oh, that poor fellow you sent letters by for me is dead! He died three days' sail from Ascension, and is buried on the island.'

" M. W."

We learn from Mrs. W. that she has not had any hallucinations which there is reason to regard as merely subjective. She adds: —

" I cannot, owing to the many years that have passed since the occurrences mentioned, furnish any dates; my mother calculated that the singular impression I received was as near as possible to the time of our young friend's death. My brother who brought the tidings has been deceased several years."

(576) Obtained through Mrs. Pears, of Walton, Clevedon. The narrative was written down from the dictation of Mrs. C. — a relative of Mrs. Pears, a daughter of the well-known Mrs. Fry, and a member of the Society of Friends — who will not allow her name to be published, and entirely declines to be further questioned on the subject. u ]\/[arch 10th 1884

" On 14th November, 1837, or about that time, Mrs. C. was lyipg on a



Vol. Ii. 2 M

530 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

sofa in her drawing-room, reading attentively; the sofa was facing the light. Suddenly lifting her eyes from the book, she saw distinctly, standing at the foot of the sofa, the figure of a person whom Mrs. C. knew by sight, though she was not personally acquainted with him. She observed how the figure was dressed, and even counted the buttons on his greatcoat; five were visible above the rather high end of the sofa. The figure was opaque; Mrs. C. noticed that she could not see the piano through it. After a few seconds, the figure disappeared as suddenly as it had come.

" A quarter of an hour afterwards, Mrs. C. received a visit from one of the clergymen of the town, who came to tell her of the death, by drowning at sea, of the person whose apparition she had just seen. The clergyman had left the widow's house to come straight to Mrs. C, and at the moment the apparition was present with Mrs. C, had been listening to the widow's request that he would enlist her sympathy on behalf of herself and her children."

[The remoteness of the case is again a serious weakness; and the coincidence is of a very singular type. At the same time the fact of the news following immediately on the apparition is a striking one, hardly likely to have been unconsciously imported into the narrative.]

The two following cases seem to fall into the class illustrated in Chap. XIV., § 7, where persons are phantasmally seen or heard very soon before their actual appearance in the flesh. I have explained (p. 96) that it is to some extent uncertain whether this is a genuine telepathic type; but the examples are worth recording; and doubly so where the time-coincidence is fortified (as here and in case 262) by the further point that odd or unfamiliar details of appearance are alleged to have been noted, and have proved to correspond with reality.

(577) From Dr. Campbell Morfit, 1 32, Alexandra Road, N.W.

Writing on July 4th, 1885, Dr. Morfit first describes a couple of business visits which he received at New York, in the year 1859 or thereabouts, from a gentleman named Metarko, who then departed to his home in the West.

" For a time that disappearance took him entirely out of my world; but one evening, nearly two years subsequently, I had been passing an hour or two at a friend's, listening to some fine music. On my return, in good health and spirits, I felt unusually wide awake, as recurs to mind even at this moment, and in fact quite free from any susceptibility to hallucination. Nevertheless, scarcely had I got into bed than there, at the side, stood Metarko, looking as when he last was with me, but having two new features, one a kind of excrescence on the cheek, and the other a necktie of striking pattern. At first this sudden presence amused me as a freak of the imagination, but became an annoyance when it would not leave on my trying to dismiss it. The good part done him forbade the idea that he had come to haunt me reproachfully, yet I was somewhat disquieted; and as my brother slept in a distant room upon the same floor, I called to him through the open doors of the intermediate sitting-room,

without receiving any answer. The apparition persisted, and I turned ray face from it to the wall, by way of exorcism; and a few minutes later, seemingly, though actually perhaps only seconds, found that it had vanished.

" Seeking an explanation of the occurrence by reflecting upon it, I arrived at the conclusion that Metarko had died that night at his distant home, and the apparition was a psychological incident to announce the fact to me, though for what reason was beyond my imagination. The circumstance, however, so absorbed my thoughts all the next day, that when evening set in, I felt the need of diverting influences, and went out visiting. On re-entering, about bedtime, I was greeted by my housekeeper with the information that a stranger gentleman had called in my absence, to request that I would allow him a consultation at 9 o'clock the following morning. His name, she said, was on the slate, and there I found it — - — to be that of Metarko! — in his own unmistakeable handwriting. This fact, astounding for the moment, recalled, vividly, the apparition of the previous evening, so as to render me impatient for the actual interview; and when, at the appointed hour next day, he came in the flesh, profound was my astonishment to find him then exactly as he appeared in the vision 34 hours previously.

" After listening to the statement of his case, I asked him to call again in the evening. He agreed to this arrangement, and left, but did not return as promised; and from that moment to the present I have never seen or heard of him. Heralded by a spectre like itself, he departed.

"The incident noted was the only one of a 'psychical' character that ever occurred to me.

" My brother being an unimpressionable man, and not sharing my interest in the matter, has forgotten, most probably, all that I may have told him about it at the time. But my housekeeper, a woman of considerable intelligence and sympathetic nature, might remember. She was even then, however, 20 years my senior, and if not now dead is a very old woman, whose whereabouts has dropped out of my knowledge, and it would be difiicult to find her at present. « Campbell Morfit."

(578) From the Hon. Mrs. Pigott-Carleton, Greywell Hill, Winchfield, Hants. The percipient. Lord Dorchester, is deceased; but we have his daughter's evidence to the fact that the anxiety which his experience produced was obvious before he heard what her experience had been.

"July 5th, 1883.

"Early in September, 1872, I was with my father and husband at the former's shooting lodge in Co. Tyrone. An old friend, Captain M., was also staying there, and one afternoon it was arranged that I should accompany this gentleman and a keeper on a fishing expedition. My husband had some engagement, but my father walked a short way with us. He never cared to have me long away from him, and, upon turning back, remarked, as he left me, ' Don't get too far from home.'

"It was a brilliantly fine day; I had a book with me, and often sat down to read while the others fished. We were about four miles down the river, when, chancing to look up from my novel, I perceived a heavy cloud rising into sight above the mountains opposite. I saw we were ' in for ' a drenching, thought how it would fidget my father, and wished myself at

532 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

home with all my heart. In a few minutes the storm burst upon us. Shelter there was next to none, and as soon as the deluge had somewhat abated, we made for the lodge, looking as though we had all been barelyrescued from a watery grave. When nearly home, we were met by my father, my husband, and several men employed about the place. It seemed to me singular, not to say absurd, that my father should have turned himself and party out in such weather. Still more to my surprise, my father evidently could not get over his disturbance, spoke little that evening, and went off to bed earlier than usual.

" The next day he told me that some little time after his return from the river, he sat down to read, with his back to the (western) window; that suddenly a shadow fell across the -page; that, turning his head, he saw me standing at the half open window, my arms resting upon the push-down sash; that he said, ' Hallo! Back already! ' that I made no reply, but apparently stepped down off the low outer window sill and disappeared; that he put a mark in his book, got up, and looked ovit of the window; that, not seeing me, he first went to the servants and asked if I had come in at the back door; and then went out on to the Kttle terrace before the lodge and looked around for me; that he suddenly caught sight of the coming storm-cloud; that his bewilderment changed to uneasiness, and that my husband just then coming in they speedily started in search.

" Henrietta Pigott-Oableton."

[This may, of course, have been a purely subjective experience; but it cannot well be attributed to any special expectation in the percipient's mind; and its coincidence with his daughter's thought of him, and desire to be at home, is at any rate striking. If the detail of the shadow on the page is correctly reported, the case well exemplifies the development of a phantasm in two stages (Vol. I., p. 520).]

§. 3. A large group of second-hand cases remains. For convenience, I will again divide them into accounts received from near relatives of the percipients, and from others.

(579) From Mr. J. N. Maskelyne, originally printed as part of a letter in the Daily Telegraph.

" Egyptian Hall.

"October 21st, 1881.

" Sir, — Having for many years been recognised by the public as an anti-Spiritualist and exposer of the frauds practised by spirit media, it may surprise some of your readers to learn that I am a believer in apparitions. Several similar occurrences to those described by many of your correspondents have taken place in my own family, and in the families of near friends and relatives. The most remarkable one happened to my wife's mother some years ago. Late one evening, whilst sitting alone busily occupied with her needle, a strange sensation came over her, and upon looking up she distinctly saw her aged mother standing at the end of the room. She rubbed her weary eyes and looked again, but the spectre had vanished. She concluded it was imagination, and retired to rest, thinking nothing more of the vision, until the next day brought the

news that her mother, at about the same time the apparition had appeared,

had fallen down in a fit and expired.,, -r ^.-r -.^ „

^ " John Nevil Maskelyne.

In answer to our inquiries, Mr. Maskelyne writes that he regrets not to be able to get this case from his wife's mother in her own words. " She was a little vexed with me," he says, " for giving publicity to the circumstance. I have written it exactly as I have often heard her relate it."

(580) From a gentleman who prefers that his name should not appear.

"October 31st, 1884.

" An occurrence which happened to my father, and which I have several times heard him mention circumstantially, was as follows: —

" My father. Lieutenant W. C. B., was in command of a gunbrig stationed to keep off slavers on the West Coast of Africa, in 1834. In the October of that year, he was alone in his cabin when he noted distinctly, as he thought, my mother appear to him. He noted down the circumstance in his logbook,^ giving time and date; but the effect on his mind was so great that on his return to England at the close of the year from ill-health, he called for a file of the Times directly he landed in Portsmouth, and looked to the month in question, and there found that my mother had died that very night that the appearance came to him, but which he had no means of learning earlier, owing to the difiiculty of communication by letter in those days."

We find from the Times obituary that our informant's mother died on October 11, 1834.

(581) From Mr. E. Stephenson, School House, Market Weighton, Yorkshire. His mother's signature, attached since the account was placed in its present position, makes it really first-hand.

"November 25th, 1884.

" I am master of the boys' school and organist of the parish church at Weighton. My mother's maiden name was Jane Cooling. Several years ago (about 10 or 12) she told me a remarkable story which sank deeply into my mind. I got her to tell me the whole of her story again, and it was exactly the same as that she had told years before. I cross-questioned her, but always got the same answers. My mother is 65 years of age. Her mind is quite clear and her memory very good. The affair happened when she was about 16 or 17 years old, and she maintains that even yet she can see (in imagination) her brother as fairly as she saw him then.

" The following is the story, which I have recently taken down carefully from her own lips. Having subjected my mother to some very close questioning, I feel sure that you may depend upon the statements being trustworthy.

" Henry Cooling, the brother of Jane Cooling, was a sailor, and had gone on a long voyage. Jane was living in Hull in the house of Mr. Kitching, Mytongate. There was a large cupboard in the house, which was on a kind of landing, approached by two or three steps. Just as she was about to go up to it, she saw distinctly, about 5 p.m., her brother

1 See Vol. i., p. 161, note.

534 SUPPLEMENT. ' [chap.

Henry standing in front of the door. His eyes were fixed on her for a short time, and then he disappeared towards the left. He was dressed in his seaman's drawers and shirt. The strings of his drawers were loose; his feet were bare; his hair was untidy; and his whole appearance was like that of one roused suddenly from sleep.

" After the vision had vanished, as soon as she recovered herself, she went home to her father, and told him what she had seen. He said it was all nonsense, and told her to take no notice of it. However, some days later, a letter came from the captain of the ship, stating that Henry Cooling had been washed overboard during a gale in the Bay of Biscay, just as he was called on deck to assist in working the ship, and the time he gave as about the time of the accident corresponded approximately to that at which my mother saw the vision.

" Since the above was written, I have found the exact date of my uncle's death — March 27th, 1836. My mother would, therefore, be 17 within a few days. u ^ g_"

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Stephenson writes, on Dec. 2, 1884: —

" I remember my mother telling us the story several years ago, while her father was living in our house, and I have no recollection of anything but his fullest assent to what she told. You will remember that in my previous letter, I stated that she told her father what she had seen, several days before they knew what had happened. I could almost swear that I have heard him affirm, but will not do so as I do not exactly recollect the occasion, and do not wish to give you anything but the purest evidence in such a matter.

