" Meanwhile my daughters did not mention to me the death of my dear servant, but only that she was ill, knowing it would grieve me; but just at the time of her death (10 days before I returned home) I was sleeping in the room with my sister in Edinburgh, when, in the dusk of the morning, I was awakened by a loud knock, and saw the figure of a woman in a loose dress, standing at the side of the bed, looking towards me. I sat up, and said emphatically, ' Who are you, and what do you want? ' I repeated the question twice, which awoke my sister, who asked who I was speaking to? I replied, ' To the woman standingthere.' Immediately the figure melted away like a shadow. I was so impressed with what I had seen that I went up to the room on several successive evenings, wondering whether that shadow-like form would again appear, but it never came. On returning home, the first question I asked my daughter was about my old servant, as, thinking she was ill, I wished to go to see her. I was astonished and grieved at the news of her death. All at once the truth flashed across my mind, and I exclaimed, ' Why, 1 saw her myself,' and then related to my son and daughter the above facts. My description was so clear and vivid that they were equally impressed as to its truth, and feel as sure as I do of the occurrence being a fact.

" I never saw anything of the sort before, nor have I or my family ever believed in ghosts; but they implicitly believe this, knowing that I am in no way fanciful. I feel sure that my dear servant (who was, I find, speechless for some hours before her death) had me on her mind. I can only think that the dusk of the morning and the darkness of the room (between 5 and 6 in the morning, the hour at which she died) prevented my recognising the features, but I can truly vouch for the above facts.

" Eleanor E. Woodham."

The account of the narrator's sister (March 5, 1886) is that Mrs. Woodham awoke her in the dusk of the morning by saying twice, " Who are you?" and when asked to whom she was speaking, replied, "Don't you see that woman standing there 1 " pointing to the side of the bed; then, on her sister's remarking, " You must have been dreaming," she replied, " I have been awake for some time, and distinctly saw her there."

In conversation, Mrs. Woodham assured the present writer that she has never had any other visual hallucination. The dress of the phantasm, so far as observed, sufficiently corresponded with Mrs. Halahan's usual aspect; but the only at all distinctive point was the covering of the head — not a cap but a loose wrap or shawl. Mrs. Woodham was once, when a girl, woke in the same way by a loud knock which could not be traced to any objective source; and this experience, she says, precisely coincided with the death of a relative in the house. It is noteworthy that though her sister is a very light sleeper, and though it was very near her usual hour of waking, the loud knock did not wake her; this is at any rate some proof that it was hallucinatory. Mrs. Woodham is able to fix the hour of her experience, as she did not go to sleep again, and the work of the household began soon after. Her son and daughter

personally confirmed the narrative as to the points in which they were concerned; and Miss Woodham remembered that the hour of the death was stated to her to have been 6 a.m. At my request she went to see Mrs. Halahan's daughter, who confirmed the fact that this was the hour. Thus, supposing the days to have been the same, the coincidence was extremely close. Mrs. Woodham is not certain of the exact number of days which elapsed between her experience and her return home, but thinks they did not exceed a fortnight; and she did her best at the time, by going over the events of these intervening days, to fix the date of her vision; but all that could be fixed with certainty was a very close approximation with the death; which an In Memoriam card, copied by Miss Woodham, fixes as October 23, 1883.

The evidential weight of this case is of course reduced, not only by the uncertainty as to the day of the vision, but by the fact that the figure was not recognised. But theoretically, as I have pointed out above (p. 221), the mere lack of recognition would not be a serious difficulty. If, as we have seen reason to think, a telepathic disturbance may take place below the threshold of consciousness, if its manifestation may be delayed for hours, if it may first reveal itself in semi-automatic movements, or in an idealess cry (as in case 147) — there seems no reason why, when it takes more distinct sensory form, this form should not be itself an imperfect development, an embodiment of an idea that has only partially been apprehended. This, however, will become clearer in connection with the whole subject of the development of telepathic hallucinations (Chap. XII.).

The next and concluding case is from Mrs. Lightfoot, a lady who is none the worse witness because she takes not the slightest interest in our work. The names and dates were filled in by the present writer, immediately after a personal interview, January 30, 1884.

"51, Shaftesbury Road, Ravenscourt Park, W.

"January 11th, 1884.

(190) "In giving the following experience, I may premise that as a child, and since, I have comparatively had but little knowledge (as a personal experience) of fear; and in the existence of ghosts I have always disbelieved. Did I ever see or hear sights or sounds for which, on examination, I could not account, I have always come to the conclusion that they arose from natural causes which were beyond my reach of inquiry — hence I always refused to accept anything, without proof, and I may add, that I have rarely been convinced.

"Some 10 years ago, when in India, I contracted a great friendship, which was reciprocated, for a lady, Mrs. Reed, the wife of an officer. She had not been very strong, but when I parted from her with the intention of returning to England, no danger (the word had not even been mentioned) was anticipated, and for some few months after my return I heard from her, bright and cheerful letters enough. In them she certainly spoke of

454 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

her health not being good, but nothing more. Then after a time her letters ceased, but I heard very regularly from others at the same place, and they mentioned that her health was gradually getting worse, and that she would probably be ordered to England for a thorough change, but still I heard no sound of fatal ending, and I was looking forward to her return with a great degree of pleasure.

" It was my practice not only to go to bed very late, but also for the last half-hour to pick up a book, the most uninteresting and dry that it was possible to find, and so try to soothe the mind. The moment I commenced to really feel sleepy, I would lower the gas to almost a pin's point (for I did not care to extinguish it, as I had a child of 3 sleeping in the same room), and then I could always compose myself comfortably to a sleep into which I could then fall in a very few minutes.

"On the night of September 21st, 1874, I had followed this exact routine. I had put aside my book, lowered the gas, and at a little after midnight I was sound asleep. As I knew afterwards, I must have slept about 3 hours, when I was suddenly aroused (and was, so far as I know, perfectly wide awake) by a violent noise at my door, which was locked. I have some recollection of feeling astonished (of fear I then had none) at seeing or rather hearing within the instant my door thrown violently open, as though by someone in great anger, and I was instantly conscious that someone, something — what shall I call it? — was in the room. For the hundredth part of a second it seemed to pause just within the room, and then by a movement, which it is impossible for me to describe — but it seemed to move with a rapid push — it was at the foot of my bed. Again a pause; for again the hundredth part of a second, and the figure-shape rose. I heard it, but as it got higher its movements quieted, and presently it was above my bed, lying horizontally, its face downwards, parallel with my face, its feet to my feet, but with a distance of some 3 or 4 feet between us.1 This for a moment, whilst I waited simply in astonishment and curiosity (for I had not the very faintest idea of either who or what it was), but no fear, and then it spoke. In an instant I recognised the voice, the old familiar imperious way of speaking, as my Christian name sounded clear and full through the room. ' Frances,' it repeated, ' I want you; come with me. Come at once.' My voice responded as instantaneously, ' Yes, I'll come. What need for such a hurry 1 ' and then came a quick imperative reply, ' But you must come at once; come instantly, and without a moment's pause or hesitation.' I seemed to be drawn upwards by some extraordinary magnetic influence, and then just as suddenly and violently thrown down again.

" In one second of time the room was in a deathly stillness, and the words, ' She is dead,' were simply burnt into my mind. I sat up in bed dazed, and now, for the first time, frightened beyond measure. I sat very still for a few moments, gradually making out' the different forms in the room, then I turned the gas, which was just above my head, full on, only

1 This rather bizarre form of impression has a close parallel in the case of a purely subjective experience, described to me by Mrs. Pirkis, of the High Elms, Nutfield, Surrey, who has never had any other hallucination. She was one night sleeping with her sister — both being in perfect health — when, suddenly waking, she saw a figure kneeling over her sister, " a foot or something less above her, in reversed position, face towards the foot of the bed. It was a beautiful picture. I lay watching it, I should say, for about 4 or 5 minutes, till it melted away as I looked."

to see that the room was totally unchanged. At the foot of my bed, at some distance from it, was the child's iron cot. I got up and looked at him; he was sleeping quite peacefully, and had evidently been totally undisturbed. I went to the door, to find it fast locked. I opened it, and gazed into the passage — total silence and stillness everywhere. I went into the next room, where there were sleeping two other children and their nurse, to find equal quietness there. Then I returned to my room, and I must confess it, with an awful fear oppressing me. She had come once — ■ might she not come again? I wrote down the date and the hour, and then opening shutter and window only looked out for the welcome dawn.

" I went down to breakfast that morning, but said nothing of the details of my dream,1 only mentioning that I had had a very bad and a very vivid one. Afterwards I found I could settle to nothing, and at last was becoming positively so ill that I was obliged to go back to bed. That same afternoon, curiously enough, a sister came to see me, who had been abroad with me, and whilst there had known and liked this same friend. She saw I was much upset about something of which I did not care to speak, and, by way of cheering me up, began telling me news of various mutual friends. At last, during a slight pause, she said, ' By-the-way, have you heard anything lately of Mrs. Reed 1 when last I heard she was not very well.' Instantly came my reply, ' Oh, she is dead,' and it was only my sister's look of blank horror and astonishment that recalled me to myself. ' What do you mean, when did you hear 1 ' came from her in rapid utterance, and then I bethought me, how indeed did I hear — who had told me 1 But tell her the dream I could not, so I merely answered, ' You will see that I am right when you look in the newspapers — how I have heard of it I will tell you some other time,' and directly I changed the conversation. The visit did good, however, for I got up and went out with her, and I can only say that the impression my manner and words made upon her was so deep that, the moment she arrived home, she sat down and wrote to a lady in the West of England — one who knew us all, and who heard by every mail from her husband, who was in the same place as our friend. My sister told her exactly what I had said, and begged that she would at once send her particulars, since I had not done so. By return came the reply: —

" ' I cannot, dear Lady B., in the least understand your letter, nor what your sister can possibly mean. The last foreign mail only came in this morning ' (after the date, of course, of my dream), ' and so far from being " dead " my husband tells me Mrs. Reed is much better; therefore, where Mrs. L. (myself) can have obtained her news is beyond my comprehension, for it is quite impossible that she can have had later news than mine, in fact, not so late, since my foreign letter arrived after your visit to her.' [This is not a copy but a reminiscence of the letter.]

" And so the matter rested, but within a month from the date of my dream came the news of Mrs. Reed's death, on September 21st.

" I have but little now to add. The bereaved husband returned to England and called upon me. He gave me some details of the last days, and on my asking whether he remembered her last words, he turned to me

1 Though the narrator twice uses this word, she certainly did not regard her experience as a dream.

456 "BORDERLAND" CASES. [chap.

with quite a look of surprise, and said, ' Why, Mrs. Lightfoot, I believe your name was the last she mentioned.' Further, it was many months afterwards before my sister again broached the subject, but at last one day she said, ' I do wish you would tell me how you knew of Mrs. Reed's death.' Of course I then told her, and, I may add, that so deep was the impression produced upon her that even in her last illness, which occurred 7 or 8 years afterwards, she spoke of it. For myself I never really recovered the shock for a long time, and even now the impression is as vivid as though it only happened yesterday.

" Frances W. Lightfoot."

Both the Calcutta Englishman and the Pioneer Mail (Allahabad) give September 20th, 1874, as the date of Mrs. Reed's death. Mrs. Lightfoot has unfortunately not kept her note of the day and hour. As she has now no independent recollection of the date of her experience, but only remembers the fact of the coincidence, and as it is practically certain that she heard the correct date of the death, the 20th, which has since become converted in her memory to the 21st, it seems tolerably safe to assume that her experience fell on the night of the 20th, that is, on the early morning of the 21st — not on the night of the 21st, as stated in the account.

In answer to the question whether this was the only occasion on which she has had a sensory hallucination of this kind, Mrs. Lightfoot answered " Yes." She adds that her sister, Lady B., " mentioned the matter at once to several friends and relatives." The sister has since died.

[In conversation, Mrs. Lightfoot confirmed again the fact of having had no sort of visual hallucination on any other occasion. She once, and once only, has had another remarkable auditory experience, when the sudden hearing of her Christian name saved her from a terrible fall in the dark. The origin of the sound was carefully inquired into and could not be ascertained.

As a proof of the absolute conviction produced in her that her friend was dead, she told me that she had prepared a birthday present to send her, and the box was actually soldered up, and had been going by the next mail; but she found it impossible to send it.

She had been under the impression that the time of death exactly coincided with her vision; but she had reckoned difference of longitude the wrong way. Mrs. Reed's husband informed her, on her inquiry, that the death took place at 11, that is 11 p.m. (as she thinks of September 21st, but no doubt of September 20th); and the vision was probably, therefore, 8 or 9 hours after it.

My impression of Mrs. Lightfoot entirely corresponds with her own description of herself — that she is a practical person, and without any sort of predisposition to frights or visions. The present one gave her a most severe shock, the effects of which lasted for some time.]

In this chapter, various points of interest or difficulty have been passed over with very inadequate comment. It seemed better, however, not to forestall the more complete discussion of the relation of telepathy to sensory impressions, which will shortly follow.

X.]



Chapter X. Hallucinations : General Sketch.

| 1. We are now approaching the most important division of our subject. So far the impressions, possibly or probably telepathic, that we have considered, have been (1) the non-externalised sort (chiefly ideal or emotional, but sometimes with a physical element) occurring during the hours of normal waking life; and (2) this sort, and also the externalised sort, occurring either in sleep or in a bodily and mental state which, though not that of sleep, is yet to some extent distinguishable from that of ordinary waking life. The class, then, that remains to be considered is the externalised sort — impressions of sight, hearing, or touch — occurring to persons who are quite clearly wide awake. The reader will not now need to be told to what family of natural phenomena I am about to refer this class. Something is presented to the percipient as apparently an independent object (or as due to an independent object) in his material environment; but no such object is really there, and what is presented is a phantasm. Whatever peculiarities such an experience may present, there can be no mistake as to its generic characteristics: it is a hallucination.

It is naturally only with one particular species of the great family of hallucinations — the veridical species which psychology has so far not recognised — that I am here directly concerned. But it is not easy to treat the single species satisfactorily, without either assuming or supplying a certain amount of information with regard to the family to which it belongs. To assume this information would hardly be safe; for though most educated persons may have a general idea what hallucinations are, the idea is not always the result of very close or critical study. It seems better then, to err, if at all, on the side of excess, and to devote one chapter to a brief general sketch of the subject; in attempting which I shall endeavour to avoid side

458 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

issues, and to confine myself to points that will aid comprehension in the sequel.

Is it possible to treat Hallucinations as a single class of phenomena, marked out by definite characteristics? The popular answer would no doubt be Yes — that the distinguishing characteristic is some sort of false belief. But this is an error: in many of the best known cases of hallucination — that of Nicolai, for instance — the percipient has held, with respect to the figures that he saw or the voices that he heard, not a false but a true belief; to wit, that they did not correspond to any external reality. The only sort of hallucination which is necessarily characterised by false belief is the purely non-sensory sort — as where a person has a fixed idea that everyone is plotting against him, or that he is being secretly mesmerised from a distance. Of hallucinations of the senses, belief in their reality, though a frequent, is by no means an essential feature; a tendency to deceive is all that we can safely predicate of them.

If we seek for some further quality which shall be distinctive of both sensory and non-sensory hallucinations, the most hopeful suggestion would seem to be that both sorts are idiosyncratic and unshared. However false a belief may be, we do not call it a hallucination if it has " been in the air," and has arisen in a natural way in a plurality of minds. This is just what an idee fixe of the kind above mentioned never does: A may imagine that the world is plotting against him; but B, if he spontaneously evolves a similar notion, will imagine that the world is plotting not against A, but against himself. Instances, however, are not wanting where the idee fixe of an insane person has gradually infected an associate; x and as contact between mind and mind is, after all, the " natural way " of spreading ideas, we can make no scientific distinction between these cases and those where, e.g., the leader of a sect has instilled delusive notions into a number of (technically) sane followers. But again, hallucinations of the senses are also occasionally shared by several persons. Most of the alleged instances of this phenomenon are, no doubt, merely cases of collective illusion — an agreement in the misinterpretation of sensory signs produced by a real external object; but wide inquiries have brought to light a certain number of

1 A distinct description of folic ct, deux seems to have been first given in 1860, by Baillarger, in the Gazette des Hdpitaux. The subject was developed in 1873 by Lasegue and Falret, in an essay reprinted in Lasegue's Etudes Midicales. See also E. 0. Seguin in the Archives of Medicine (New York, 1879), i., p. 334; Dr. Marandon de Montyel, in the Annates Medico-psychologiques, 6th series, Vol. v., p. 28; and G. Lehmann in the Archiv fur Psychiatric (Berlin), Vol. xiv., p. 145.

instances which I regard as genuine collective hallucinations, neither externally caused nor communicated by suggestion from one spectator to another. If then sensory and non-sensory hallucinations agree in being as a rule unshared, they agree also in presenting marked exceptions to the rule — exceptions easy to account for in the latter class, and peculiarly difficult in the former. The conclusion does not seem favourable to our chance of obtaining a neat general definition which will embrace the two; and in abandoning the search for one, I can only point, with envy, to the convenient way in which French writers are enabled not to combine but to keep them apart, by appropriating to the non-sensory species the words delire and conception clelirante.

Let us then try to fix the character of hallucinations of the senses independently. The most comprehensive view is that all our instinctive judgments of visual, auditory and tactile phenomena are hallucinations, inasmuch as what is really nothing more than an affection of ourselves is instantly interpreted by us as an external object. In immediate perception, what we thus objectify is present sensation; in mental pictures, what we objectify is remembered or represented sensation. This is the view which has been worked out very ingeniously, and for psychological purposes very effectively, by M. Taine; 1 but it is better adapted to a general theory of sensation than to a theory of hallucinations as such. To adopt it here would drive us to describe the diseased Nicolai— when he saw phantoms in the room, but had his mind specially directed to the fact that they were internally caused — as less hallucinated than a healthy person in the unreflective exercise of normal vision. I prefer to keep to the ordinary language which would describe Nicolai's phantoms as the real specific case of hallucination. And I should consider their distinctive characteristic to be something quite apart from the question whether or not they were actually mistaken for real figures — namely, their marked resemblance to real figures, and the consequent necessity for the exercise of memory and reflection to prevent so mistaking them. The definition of a sensory hallucination would thus be a percept which lacks, but which can only by distinct reflection be recognised as lacking, the objective basis which it suggests.2

1 Be V Intelligence, Vol. i., p. 408, &e.

2 Objective basis is to be taken as a short way of naming the possibility of being shared by all persons with normal senses. But in that case, how far will the definition fairly allow for collective hallucinations? This question will be considered in Cbap. xviii. I may mention that, owing to the special difficulties which collective hallucinations present, I have not included them in the statistics given above, pp. 392-3, and below, pp. 503, 510.

460 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

It may be objected that this definition would include illusions. The objection could be obviated at the cost of a little clumsiness; but it seems sufficient to observe that illusions are merely the sprinkling of fragments of genuine hallucination on a background of true perception. And the definition seems otherwise satisfactory. For while it clearly separates hallucinations from true perceptions, it equally clearly separates them from the phenomena with which they have been frequently identified — the remembered images or mental pictures which are not perceptions at all. It serves, for instance, to distinguish, on the lines of common sense and common language, between the images of " day-dreams " and those of night-dreams. In both cases vivid images arise, to which no objective reality corresponds; and in neither case is any distinct process of reflection applied to the discovery of this fact. But the self-evoked wakingvision is excluded from the class of hallucinations, as above defined, by the point that its lack of objective basis can be and is recognised tuithout any such process of reflection. We have not, like Nicolai, to consider and remember, before we can decide that the friends whose faces we picture are not really in the room. We feel that our mind is active and not merely receptive — that it is the mind's eye and not the bodily sense which is at work, and that the mind can evoke, transfigure, and banish its own creatures; without attending to this fact, we have it as part of our whole conscious state. Dreams of the sensory sort on the other hand are pure cases of hallucination, forcing themselves on us whether we will or no, and with an impression of objective reality which is uncontradicted by any knowledge, reflective or instinctive, that they are the creatures of our brain.

But, though the definition may be sufficient for mere purposes of classification, it takes us but a very little way towards understanding the real nature of the phenomena. It says nothing of their origin; and, though it distinguishes them from mere normal acts of imagination or memory, it leaves quite undetermined the faculty or faculties actually concerned in them. And when we pass on to these further points, we find ourselves in a most perplexed field, where doctors seem to be as much at variance as philosophers. The debate, most ardently carried on in France, has produced a multitude of views; but not one of the rival theorists seems ever to have convinced any of the others. The contradictions might even seem to lie in the facts themselves; for what single guiding clue shall be found to phenomena of which some occur only in the light, others only in the

dark; some are connected with hyperesthesia of the senses, others with blindness and deafness; some are developed, others dispersed, by fixity of gaze; some are promoted by silence and solitude, others by the stir of the streets; some are clearly relevant, others as clearly irrelevant, to the percipient's mental and moral characteristics? Still progress has been made, to this extent at any rate, that it is now comparatively easy to see where the disputed points lie, and to attack them with precision.

§ 2. It was, of course, evident from the first that there was a certain duality of nature in hallucinations. In popular language, the mind and the sense were both plainly involved; the hallucinated person not only imagined such and such a thing, but imagined that he saw such and such a thing. But the attempts at analysing the ideational and the sensory elements have too often been of a very crude sort; the state of hallucination has been represented as one in which ideas and memories — while remaining ideas and memories and not sensations — owing to exceptional vividness took on the character of sensations. By the older writers, especially, it was not realised or remembered that sensations have no existence except as mental facts; and that, so far as a mental fact takes on the character of a sensation, it is a sensation. This was clearly stated, as a matter of personal experience, by Burdach and Miiller; in the French discussions, the merit of bringing out the point with new force and emphasis belongs to Baillarger.1 He showed

1 In the long and rather barren debates which took place in the Soeiete Medicopsychologique during 1855 and 1856, Baillarger, no doubt, insisted too strongly on an absolute gulf between percepts (true or false) and the ordinary images of fancy or memory. But his opponents made a far more serious mistake in so far identifying the two as not to perceive a difference of kind, at the point where the sensory element in the mental fact reaches such abnormal strength as to suggest the real presence of the object. Griesinger's statement (Die Pathologie und Therapie der Psychischen Krankheiten, p. 91), and Wundt's (Grundzilge der Physiologischen Psychologie, Vol. ii., p. 353) seem too unguarded in the same respect. In a case which I have received, a child of four stopped in her play, looked intently at the wall, then "ran to it, crying out ' My mother,' threw her little arms as if it were round a person, saying again, ' My mother, ' and seemed wonderfully surprised at the fact that there was no substance to clasp. " A child of four does not throw its arms round a memory. Nicolai's case is here very instructive. He experimented on himself, and found that however vividly he pictured in his mind the persons of his acquaintance, he could never succeed in externalising them in such a way as to make them the least comparable to his phantoms; and his testimony on this point is the stronger in that his particular phantoms cannot have been of the most vivid sort, since he was always able to distinguish them from realities. Even more distinct mental images — the result of a rarer visualising power — may fall far short of hallucination. Raphael, who saw his "Transfiguration " in the air, Talma, who asserted that he worked himself into the necessary state of excitement on the stage by peopling the theatre with skeletons, are not recorded to have ever really localised their images as objects that concealed the walls and the furniture. It is worth noting that probably no recollected visual image was ever so absolutely and flawlessly correct as a good musician's silent evocation of music, either by memory or by reading of the noted symbols; but even he is far from mistaking his vivid silent impression for actual sonority. I may add that as

462 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

that when the hallucinated person says " I see so and so," " I hear so and so/' the words are literally true. If the person goes on to say " You ought also to see or hear it," he is of course wrong; but when he says that he sees or hears it, his statement is to be taken without reserve. To him, the experience is not something like or related to the experience of perceiving a real external object: it is identical with that experience.1 To the psychology of our day this may seem a tolerably evident truth. Still it is easy to realise the difficulty that was long felt in admitting that any experience which was dissociated from the normal functions of the sense-organs could be completely sensory in character. Popular thought fails to see that the physical question which for practical purposes is all-important — whether the object is or is not really there — is psychically irrelevant; and a man who has been staring at the sun will, as a rule, think it less accurate to say that he sees a luminous disc wherever he looks than to say that he fancies it. The best corrective to such a prejudice is the following experiment of Fechner's.

Two small slits are made in a shutter, and one of them is filled with a piece of red glass. The opposite wall is therefore lit by a mixture of white and red light. A stick is now placed across the red slit; its shadow is of course cast on the wall; and the part of the wall occupied by the shadow, though illuminated only by white rays from the other slit, appears — owing to the optical law of contrast — a bright green. Let this shadow now be looked at through a narrow tube, which prevents any part of the wall external to the shadow from being seen. Nothing red is now in the spectator's view, so that there can be no effect of contrast: the red glass may even be removed; none but white rays are passing to his eye from the shadow; yet its colour remains green. And in this case the chances are that, unless previously warned, he will tell the exact truth; he will admit, and even persist, that what he sees is green. He will scout the idea that the green is a mere memory of what he saw before he applied the tube; he will assert that it is presented to him as an immediate fact.

long ago as 1832 the late Dr. Symonds, of Bristol, drew exactly the right distinction between images and hallucinations. (Lecture reprinted in Miscellanies, p. 241.) It is curious to find the same line drawn in the earliest really scientific attempt to deal with the subject that I have met with — the dissertation against Hobbes and Spinoza in Falck's Be Dcemonologid recentiorum Autorum (1692); but Falck still thinks that hallucinations are a mode in which dtemons sometimes manifest their presence.

1 It may even be superior in distinctness to the percept of a real object; as when a short-sighted person who, during the hypnotic trance, had been impressed with a hallucination representing horsemen at some distance, saw them clearly, and remarked on this peculiarity. (Richet, L 'Homme et V Intelligence, p. 234.) See also Mr. Schofi eld's case, and the remarks on it, Vol. ii., p. 72.

And such is assuredly the state of the case; but it is a state which, from the moment that he has put the tube to his eye, is kept up purely as a hallucination, and without regard to the facts of the external world. The delusion is of course instantly dispelled by the removal of the tube — when he perceives that the only light in the room is white, and that the shadow is grey; but for all that, he will probably never doubt again that a genuine hallucination of the senses is something more than " mere fancy."

It is impossible to be too particular on this point; for high authorities, even in the present day, are found to contest it. When a person who habitually speaks the truth, and who is not colourblind, looks at an object and says, " My sensation is green," they contradict him, and tell him that however much he sees green, his sensation is grey. Whether this be a mere misuse of language, or (as it seems to me) a misconception of facts, it at any rate renders impossible any agreement as to the theory of hallucinations. For it ignores the very point of Baillarger's contention — that images sufficiently vivid to be confounded with sensory percepts have become sensory percepts.

When once the truth of this contention is perceived, it is also perceived that the previous speculations had been largely directed to a wrong issue; and that the dual character of a false perception is after all no other than that of a true perception. A hallucination, like an ordinary percept, is composed of present sensations, and of images which are the relics of past sensations. If I see the figure of a man, then — alike if there be a man there and if there be no man there — my experience consists of certain visual sensations, compounded with a variety of muscular and tactile images, which represent to me properties of resistance, weight, and distance; and also with more remote and complex images, which enable me to refer the object to the class man, and to compare this specimen of the class with others whose appearance I can recall. If Baillarger did not carry out his view of hallucinations to this length, the whole development exists by implication in the term by which he described them — psycho-sensorial. The particular word was perhaps an unfortunate one; since it suggests (as M. Binet has recently pointed out1) that the psychical element is related to the sensorial somewhat as the soul to the body; and so, either that psychical events are independent of physical conditions, or that sensations are not psychical

1 Revue Philosophique for April, 1884, p. 393.

464 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

events. Ideo-sensational would avoid this difficulty; but the obverse term which M. Binet proposes — cerebro-sensorial — is on the whole to be preferred. For this brings us at once to the physical ground where alone the next part of the inquiry can be profitably pursued — the inquiry into origin. From the standpoint of to-day, one readily perceives how much more definite and tangible the problems were certain to become, as soon as they were translated into physiological terms. So far as the controversy had been conducted on a purely psychological basis, it had been singularly barren. In the vague unlocalised use, "the senses" and other ever-recurring terms become sources of dread to the reader. But as soon as it is asked, Where is the local seat of the abnormal occurrence? and on what particular physical conditions does it depend? — lines of experiment and observation at once suggest themselves, and the phenomena fall into distinct groups.

§ 3. In its first form, the question is one between central and peripheral origin. Do hallucinations originate in the brain — in the central mechanism of perception? or in some immediate condition of the eye, or of the ear, or of other parts? or is there possibly some joint mode of origin?

For a long time the hypothesis of an exclusively central origin was much in the ascendant. But this was greatly because — as already noted — Esquirol and the older writers did not recognise the sensory element as truly and literally sensation, but regarded the whole experience as simply a very vivid idea or memory. If the central origin is to be established, it must be by something better than arbitrary psychological distinctions. Hibbert and Ferriar, going to the other extreme, contended that the memory was a retinal one; if a man sees what is not there, they held, it can only be by a direct recrudescence of past feeling in his retina. " But," urged Esquirol, '• the blind can have hallucinations of vision; the deaf can have hallucinations of hearing; how can these originate in the peripheral organs? " The obvious answer, that this did not necessarily thrust the point of origin back as far as the cerebrum, does not seem to have been forthcoming; and the opposite party preferred to fall back on definite experiment. They pointed out, for instance, that visual hallucinations often vanish when the eyes are closed; or that they may be doubled by pressing one eyeball. There was not enough here, however, to show that the external organs so much as participated in

the process, much less that they originated it, even in these particular cases; while for other cases the observations did not hold. The fact that external objects are hidden from view by the interposition of our own eyelids or any other opaque obstacle, has become to us a piece of absolutely instinctive knowledge; and we should surely expect that an object which was but the spontaneous projection of a morbid brain, might still be suppressed by movements and sensations which had for a lifetime been intimately associated with the suppression of objects. And as for the doubling by pressure of one eyeball, it might fairly have been represented as telling against the theory of retinal origin. For the impression — not coming from without — would cover the same retinal spot after the displacement of the eyeball as before; and the natural hypothesis seems certainly to be that retinal identity would, in its mental effect, overpower the sensation of the moved eyeball's position.1

An immense advance was made by Baillarger, who maintained the central origin by really scientific arguments. He pointed out (1) that the external organ may often be affected by local irritants — inflammation, blows, pressure, galvanism — without the production of any more pronounced form of hallucination than flashes, or hummings; that is to say, the peripheral stimulation sometimes fails to develop hallucination, even under the most favourable conditions; (2) that there is a frequent correspondence of hallucinations of different senses — a man who sees the devil also hears his voice, and smells sulphur — and that it is impossible to refer this correspondence to abnormalities of the eye, ear and nose, occurring by accident at the same moment; (3) that hallucinations often refer to dominant ideas — a religious monomaniac will see imaginary saints and angels, not imaginary trees and houses. Hence, argued Baillarger, " the point of departure of hallucinations " is always " the intelligence "—the imagination and memory — which sets the sensory machinery in motion.2 He naively admitted that how this action of an immaterial principle on the physical apparatus takes place passes all conception; but it might be forgiven to a medical man, writing forty years ago, if

1 The obliteration by closure of the eyes is certainly not invariable. See, e.g., Dr. Voisin, Lecons Gliniques sur les Maladies Mentales, p. 72. Sir J. F. W. Herschel, in his Familiar Lectures on Scientific Subjects, p. 406, has described some hallucinations of his own, of which "the impression was very strong — equally so with the eyes open or closed." As regards the failure of lateral pressure to double the image, I do not know whether any clear case has been recorded. Brewster, indeed, speaks of the immobility of the image when the eyeball is displaced; but he made no sufficient distinction between actual hallucinations and mental pictures; while he had an odd notion that even the latter were " painted " on the retina. {Letters on Natural Magic, 1868, p. 131.)

2 Baillarger, Des Hallucinations, pp. 426, 469, 470.

2 G

466 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

he had not fully realised " brain as an organ of mind," and so did not see that what he took for a special puzzle in the theory of hallucinations, is simply the fundamental puzzle involved in every mental act. Passing him this, we may say that his treatment of the question entitles him to the credit of the second great discovery about hallucinations. He had already made clear their genuinely sensory quality; he now made equally clear the fact that the mind (or its physical correlate) is their creator — that they are brain-products projected from within outwards.

This is a most important truth; but it is very far from being the whole truth. Baillarger saw no via media between the theory which he rejected — that the nerves of sense convey to the brain impressions which are there perceived as the phantasmal object — and the theory which he propounded, that " the intelligence " {i.e., for us, the brain, as the seat of memories and images), of its own accord and without any impulse from the periphery, excites the sensory apparatus. It seems never to have struck him that there may be cases where the sense-organ supplies the excitant, though the brain supplies the construction — that irritation passing from without inwards may be a means of setting in motion the constructive activity. He took into account certain states of the organ — e.g., fatigue produced by previous exercise — as increasing the susceptibility to excitation from " the intelligence," and so as conditions favourable to hallucination; but he got no further.

The facts of hallucination absolutely refuse to lend themselves to this indiscriminate treatment. Following the path of experiment, we are almost immediately confronted with two classes of phenomena, and two modes of excitation. We need not go, indeed, beyond the elementary instances already mentioned. Fechner's experiment, where green was seen by an eye on which only white rays were falling, fairly illustrates Baillarger's doctrine — the green being produced not by an outer affection of the eye, but by an inner affection of the brain. But in the case of a person who has been staring at the sun, the " after-image " or hallucination can be clearly traced to a continuing local effect in that small area of the retina which has just been abnormally excited; and it will continue to present itself wherever the eye may turn, until rest has restored this area to its normal condition. A still simpler form of change in the external organ is a blow on the eye; and the resulting " sparks " are genuine though embryonic hallucinations.

Such cases as these last are, however, hardly typical; for in them the brain is not truly creative; it merely gives the inevitable response to the stimuli that reach it from below. They are, moreover, normal experiences, in the sense that they would occur similarly to all persons with normal eyes. Let us then take another instance, where the mind's creative role is fully apparent, while at the same time the primary excitation is clearly not central. Certain hallucinations — as is well-known — are unilateral, i.e., are perceived when (say) the right eye or ear is acting, but cease when that action is obstructed, though the left eye or ear is still free. Now this in itself could not be taken, as some take it,1 for a proof that the exciting cause was not central; it might be a lesion affecting one side of the brain. But very commonly, in these cases, a distinct lesion is found in the particular eye or ear on whose activity the hallucination depends.2 It is then natural to conclude that the hallucination was the result of the lesion, and that the one-sidedness of the one depended on the one-sidedness of the other; and the justice of the conclusion has been proved in many cases by the fact that the hallucination has ceased when the local lesion has been cured. Other cases which strongly suggest a morbid condition of the external organ are those where the imaginary figure moves in accordance with the movements of the eye. The visual hallucinations of the blind, and the auditory hallucinations of the deaf, would also reasonably be referred to the same class — the seat of excitation being then, not necessarily the external organ itself, but some point on the nervous path from the organ to the brain. In the case, for instance, of a partly-atrophied nerve, the morbid excitation would be at the most external point where vital function continued.3 It should be noted, in passing, that a distinct lesion, e.g., atrophy of the globe, of one eye may give rise to hallucinations of the sound eye i — the sight of which then receives,

1 Dr. Regis in L'Encephale, 1881, p. 51; Prof. Ball in L'Encephale, 1882, p. 5.

2 Dr. Regis in L'Encephale, 1881, p. 46; Dr. Voisin in the Bulletin General de Therapeutique, December 15, 1868, and Op. cit., p. 68, &c.; Dr. Despine, Psychologie Naturelle, Vol. ii., p. 29; Krafft-Ebing, Die Sinnesdelirien, p. 25; Dr. Koppe's paper on "Gehorsstorungen und Psychosen," in the Allgemeine Zeitschrift fur Psvchiatrie, Vol. xxiv., pp. 18-28 and 39-46.

3 Delusions due to visceral disturbances are often quoted as cases of hallucination excited from parts below the brain. Thus a woman dying of peritonitis declares that an ecclesiastical conclave is being held inside her (Esquirol, Maladies Mentales, Vol. i., p. 211). But here there is a prior and independent basis of distinct sensation; so that the experience would at most be an illusion. And it is hardly even that; for one cannot say that the false object is sensorially presented at all; no one knows what a conclave in such a locality would actually feel like; the conclave is merely a delire — an imagination suggested by sensation, but which does not itself take a sensory form.

4 Vienna Asylum Report, 1858, cited by Griesinger, Op. cit., p. 88.

2 g 2

468 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

so to speak, the rebound of the central disturbance initiated by its fellow.

§ 4. But we may now proceed a step further. The excitation may be external not only in the sense of coming from the external organ, but in the sense of coming from the external world. It may be due not to any abnormality of the eye or the nerve, but to the ordinary stimulus of light-rays from real objects. Some interesting evidence on this point has been lately described by M. Binet.1 His experiments were conducted on five hysterical young women at the Salpetriere, who, when hypnotised, could be made to see anything that was suggested to them; and also on an insane patient at St. Anne, who had a standing visual hallucination of her own. The results confirmed the rule first enunciated by M. Fere — that " the imaginary object is perceived under the same conditions as a real one "; and to this M. Binet adds the further conclusion, that a sensation derived from a real external source, occupying the same position in space as the imaginary object seemed to occupy, was an indispensable factor of the hallucination. Space fails me to describe the results in detail. It is enough to say that a prism applied to one eye doubled the imaginary object;2 that a spy-glass removed or approximated it, according as the object-glass or eye-piece was applied to the patient's eye; that a mirror reflected the object and gave a symmetrical image of it; and that the optical effect, as regards angles of deviation and reflexion and all the details of the deception, was in every case precisely what it would have been had the object been real instead of imaginary. Here then we seem fairly driven outside the patient's own organism; the conclusion is almost irresistible that some point of external space at or near the seat of the imagined object plays a real part in the phenomenon. To this point M. Binet gives the name of point de repere; and he regards it as producing a nucleus of sensation to which the hallucination accretes itself. When the 'point de repere is in such a position as to be reflected by the mirror, then the imaginary object is reflected, and not otherwise; the object is, so to speak, attached to its point de repere, and will follow the course of any optical mutations to which its external nucleus is subjected.3

1 In the Revue Philosophique, April and May, 1884.

2 This observation was first made by M. Fere'; see Le Progres Medical, 1881, p. 1041.

3 The full explanation of these phenomena seems to be as follows. If the point de repere is not at, but close to, the spot where the ^imaginary object appears (as seems to

X.]

In these cases, it will be seen, the experience was really a sort of monstrous illusion — totally different, however, from ordinary misinterpretations of sensory impressions; for we must beware of confounding the excitation that comes from the point de repere with the sensory element of the hallucination itself. The former is an unnoticed peg for the percept; the latter is its very fulness and substance, and is entirely imposed or evoked by the brain, not supplied to it. The type is too interesting to pass over: at the same time, I am bound to say that it seems to be extremely rare. I have made many endeavours to obtain the prism-effects with hypnotised (but not hysterical) "subjects"; but I have never succeeded, except when some conspicuous real object had first been put under the instrument, and the idea of doubling; had thus been prominently suggested.1 Professor Bernheim, of Nancy, tells me

have been the case in some of the experiments), there is no difficulty. The point de repere is then itself part of what is all along perceived; and in any effects produced on it by optical apparatus, it will carry the neighbouring object with it by association. If, however, the actual area covered by the object is sufficiently distinguished from its surroundings to act itself as point de repere, and no other possible points de repere exist in the field of vision, the case is different, but can still be explained. It will not be disputed that a slightly longer time is necessary for the formation of the image of a suggested object and the conversion of this image into a percept, than for the experience of sensation from an object actually before the eyes. When, therefore, the operator points to a particular place on the white table-cloth, and says, " There is a brown butterfly, " we may suppose that in the patient's consciousness a real sensation of white precedes by an instant the imposed sensation of brown. So when the card-board on which a non-existent portrait has just been seen is again brought before the patient's eyes, it is almost certain that the recognition of it as the same piece of white card-board (known by its points de repere) precedes by an instant the hallucinatory process and the re-imposition of the portrait. That there is this instant of true sensation seems to be shown, indeed, by one of M. Binet's experiments. The patient having been made to see an imaginary portrait on a blank piece of card-board, this was suddenly covered by a sheet of paper. The patient said that the portrait disappeared for a moment, but then reappeared on the paper with complete distinctness. We may thus fairly conclude that an area which was actually seen before the hallucination was induced in the first instance, will also be actually seen for a moment when vision is redirected to it (or its reflection), after the optical apparatus has been brought into play. During that moment, it will, of course, be seen under the newly-introduced optical conditions; and association may again cause the object which supplants it to follow suit. It is quite possible, however, to suppose that the supplanted area continues further to provoke the hallucination, in the same sense that the white rays provoked the green percept in Fechner's experiment. The rays which are lost to consciousness continue to excite the sensorium physically; and this physical excitation will have definite peculiarities, corresponding to the distinguishing marks of the area whence it comes. Double this excitation by a prism, or reflect it from another quarter, and the percept which it provokes may naturally be doubled or seen in the new direction. So, if both eyes were employed in Fechner's experiment (p. 462), might the green percept be artificially doubled.

1 In this connection, I may quote the following spontaneous case — where the imagination of the percipient may probably have been adequate to conjure up the reflected figure. The account is from Mr. Adrian Stokes, M.R.C.S., of 16, Howell Road, St. David's, Exeter.

" When I was living in Bedford Street North, Liverpool, in the year 1857 (I think), my wife roused me from sleep suddenly and said, ' Oh! Adrian, there's Agnes! ' I started up, crying, ' Where? Where? ' but, of course, there was no Agnes. My wife then told me that she had awoke, and had seen the form of her only sister, Agnes, sitting on the ottoman at the foot of the bed. On seeing this form she felt frightened; but then, recalling her courage, she thought if the figure were real she would be able to see it

470 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

that he has also made repeated trials, and has never confirmed the results of the Salpetriere. And one further reservation must be made. It is just conceivable that the changes wrought on the imaginary percept were due, not to the optical instruments, but to thought-transference. For M. Binet and his assistants of course knew themselves, in each case, the particular optical effect to be expected. An experimenter who has not expressly recognised the reality of thought-transference would never think of so arranging his experiment that he himself should not know, till after the result, which instrument was in use or what was its position; nor indeed is it easy to imagine how such a condition could in practice be carried out. "We have reas'on, moreover, to think that the hypnotic rapport, which enables the operator to impose a hallucination on the " subject," is a condition decidedly favourable to telepathic influence. The point seems worth suggesting, if only because thought-transference is a possibility which will assuredly need to be taken into account at many points, in that wide investigation of hysterical conditions which is assuming so much prominence in France. It would be most interesting if a state of hallucination turned out to be one in which the " subject " is specially susceptible to " transferred impressions."

§ 5. But in any case, imaginary objects which are projected on a convenient flat surface form a very outlying class. For the common run of visual hallucinations, even of those seen in good light, we cannot assume the necessity of any objective points de repere, or any definite external stimulation of the retina.1 On the contrary,

reflected in the mirror of the wardrobe, which she had in full view as she lay in bed. Directing her eyes, therefore, to the mirror, there she saw, by the light of the fire that was burning brightly in the grate, the full reflection of the form seated on the ottoman, looking at a bunch of keys which she appeared to hold in her hand. Under the startling effect caused by this sight, she called me to look at it, but, before I was awake, the form and its reflection had vanished. It was not a dream, my wife is certain.

' ' When my wife saw her sister sitting at the foot of our bed looking at the bunch of keys, she (the sister) was clad in the ordinary indoor dress of the time. I remember the start of surprise with which I awoke and exclaimed. My wife has never, that I know of, experienced any hallucination or delirium; and is a woman of excellent sense and judgment. She never saw any other vision but that one. '

1 It should be observed that light may favour, and darkness hinder, the projection of a phantasm, owing to the different effect of theone and the other on the general physiological state. The presence of light might thus be a necessity, quite apart from any distinguishable points de repere; and this may apply not only to a crucial case — as, e.g., where Professor Bernheim made a hypnotic ' ' subj ect " see a phantom -balloon in a cloudless blue sky — but to the common type of hallucinations which cease when the room is darkened. In the same way the presence of light is occasionally found to be a condition of auditory hallucinations. (Ball, Lerons sur les Maladies Mentales, p. 116.) See also the very interesting case given by Professor F. Jolly in the

they have every appearance of being centrally initiated, as well as centrally constructed. For instance, it is quite as easy to make the patient see objects in free space — say, out in the middle of the room; and such is the common form of spontaneous hallucination, both of sane and insane persons, where human figures are seen. The eyes are then focussed, not on the real objects from which points de repere would have to be supplied, but on the figure itself; which may be much nearer than the wall behind it, and may thus require a very different adjustment of the eyes. For eyes adjusted to the imaginary object, the real objects behind, though in the line of sight, may be quite outside the range of clear vision; and we can scarcely suppose points de repere to excite a percept whose position is such that, for it to be visible, they themselves must cease to be so. And the difficulty of regarding external points of excitation as a necessary condition becomes even greater when the hallucination is a moving one. I refer not to the cases where the imaginary figure follows the movements of the eye, owing to some morbid affection of that organ which acts as a real moving substratum for it, but to those where the eye follows the figure in its seemingly independent course. Here we should have to assume that the point de repere keeps changing; that is, as the imaginary figure passes along the side of the room, in front of a multitude of different objects — pictures, paper, furniture, &c. — the very various excitations from these several objects act in turn as the basis of the same delusive image. There seem no grounds for such an assumption. What is there to produce or to guide the selection of ever-new points de repere? To what external cause could we ascribe the perpetual substitution of one of them for another? On the view that the figure may be centrally initiated, no less than centrally constructed, none of these difficulties occur. Such a figure may just as well appear in the empty centre of the room as on a piece of card-board, and may just as well move as stand still. Stronger still are cases where the hallucination is not in the line of vision. Dr. Charcot has noted a curious form of unilateral hallucination, which occurs sometimes to hysterical patients with

Archivficr Psychiatrie, Vol. iv., p. 495. His paper is on the production of auditoryhallucinations by the application of an electric current in the neighbourhood of the ear. In one case, he shows good reason for attributing the hallucination, not to a stimulation of the auditory nerve, but to a transference to the auditory centre of the stimulus given to fibres of the -fifth nerve. For the subjective sounds did not, as in all the other cases, correspond in a regular way to the opening and closing of the current, but appeared under all conditions in which pain was produced. See also Kbppe (Op. cit., p. 54) on the same subject.

472 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

normal eyes, on the side on which they are hemiangesthetic — animals passing rapidly in a row from behind forwards, which usually disappear when the eyes are turned directly to them.1 Another type where the hallucination passes out of the range of direct vision is presented by Bayle's case, where a spider used first to appear life-size, and then gradually to expand till it filled the whole room.2 Sir J. F. W. Herschel describes an analogous experience of his own. The same sort of argument applies to hallucinations where a figure appears repeatedly, but only in one place, while still not an illusion due to any real feature in the place — as in the case of a patient of Morel's,3 who always saw a headless man at the bottom of the garden, or of an informant of my own whose phantasmal visitant confined itself to a particular bed; and also where the percipient is haunted by a figure which can be seen only in one direction, as in Baillarger's case of a doctor who could not turn without finding a little black cow at his side.4 The mind may locate its puppet according to its own vagaries; and this last experience is very like a sensory embodiment of the well-known delusion that somebody is always behind one.

We find, however, our clearest examples of the central initiation of hallucinations, when we turn to cases where excitation from the outer world is plainly absent. This class includes phantasms seen in complete darkness,5 and also hallucinations of pain, and probably the large majority of auditory hallucinations, which have so far been

1 Le Progres Medical, 1878, p. 38. It is probable that an attentive regard is a condition for the establishment of points de repere. In the case of M. Binet's " subjects," a certain peculiarity in the fixed regard, which might act in this way, is strongly suggested by the following fact. In some cases, after a screen had been interposed between the patient's eyes and the imaginary object, she continued to see not only that object (say, a mouse), but a real object (say, a hat) on which it had been placed. Thus the hat assumed the property — shared by the imaginary mouse, but unshared by any other real objects — of remaining as a percept in spite of an opaque barrier. Kahlbaum describes a patient who saw the form of his deceased child only when he fixed his eyes steadily on a point. (" Die Sinnesdelirien " in the Allgemeine Zeitschrift filr Psychiatric, Vol. xxiii.,p. 7; and see also below, p. 493, second sentence. ) But in the general run of spontaneous hallucinations, there is no reason for supposing that the regard has any of this exceptional intentness.

2 Revue Medicale, 1825, Vol. i., p. 34.

3 Traite des Maladies Mentales, p. 357.

4 Baillarger, Des Hallucinations, p. 312; Ball, Lecons sur les Maladies Mentales, p. 73.

5 Sir J. F. W. Herschel mentions that some of his own hallucinations could be seen with open eyes only if the darkness was complete. (Op. cit., p. 407.) Some of Nicolai's visions could only be seen when the eyes were shut; and this was also a feature of a very interesting case recorded by Dr. Pick (in the Vienna Jahrbuch filr Psychiatrie for 1880, Vol. ii., p. 50), where nevertheless the figures seen gave an impression of complete externality, and were often addressed by the patient. Schiile records a similar instance. (Handbuch der Geisteskrankheiten, p. 128.) In the Gazette Midicale de Paris for March 21, 1885, Professors Bernheim and Charpentier describe some experiments made in a dark room, where — points de repere being necessarily absent — the visual hallucinations of hypnotic " subjects " proved not to be modifiable by optical instruments in the way above described.

disregarded. Here the alternative is simple. The initiation must either occur in the brain, or be due to some morbid or abnormal condition of the outer sensory apparatus. We have already duly noted the latter mode as a frequent one. But the fact that certain hallucinations have been undoubtedly due to injury of the external organ does not establish, or even strongly suggest, the existence of a similar condition in cases where it defies detection.1 As a rule, where the abnormal condition has been made out, hallucinations have not been its only result. The ulceration of the cornea which initiates visual hallucinations has begun by affecting the vision of real objects. Illusions, or false perceptions of colour, usually precede the appearance of more distinct phantasms.2 So, in cases of more transient abnormality — such as the illusions hypnagogiques mentioned in the last chapter — other signs precede the hallucination. The observer, whose eyes are heavy with sleep, begins by seeing luminous points and streaks, which shift and change in remarkable ways; and it is from these as nuclei that the subsequent pictures develop. Mr. James Britten, of Isleworth, tells me that, as a boy, he often saw in the dark a distant, tiny point of light, which approached and became an eye, then turned into a face, and then, coming nearer, " developed into a mass of very horrible faces," quite unlike any that he had ever seen or imagined. Similarly one of the seers of " Faces in the Dark " (St. James's Gazette, February 10th, 15th, and 20th, 1882) described the frequent vision of a shower of golden spangles, which changed into a flock of sheep. Now, since our physiological knowledge leaves no doubt that the points, streaks and spangles are due to the condition of the retina, it is safe in such cases to conclude that this condition has initiated the hallucination. But it is not equally safe to conclude that the process must be the same for cases where the points, streaks and spangles are absent. I do not forget that even a normal eye is subject to affections which escape attention until a special effort is made to realise them. But wherever the hallucination can be gradually traced in its development from more rudimentary sensations, these last seem to be very distinct and exceptional things, unknown in ordinary experience. Moreover, the vision itself is commonly of a changing kind — the features developing rapidly out of one another;

1 For statements of the opposite view see (as well as M. Binet's papers above referred to) Professor Ball, in VEncephale, 1882, p. 6., and Maladies Mentales, p. Ill, &c.; and the classical paper of Dr. Regis on unilateral hallucinations, L'Encephale, 1881, p. 44.

2 Dr. Max Simon in the Lyon Medical, Vol. xxxv., p. 439; Voisin, Op. cit., p. 70.

474 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

often also of a swarming kind — detailed landscapes, elaborate kaleidoscopic patterns, showers of flowers, lines of writing on a luminous ground, and so on.1 Now, compare such experiences with ordinary cases of " ghost-seeing " in the dark. A man wakes in the night, and sees a luminous figure at the foot of his bed. Here the hallucination comes suddenly, single and complete, to a person whose eyes are open and unfatigued; it is not preceded by any peculiar affection of vision, is not developed out of anything, and does not move, or swarm, or develop fresh features; nor does it fulfil the test of hallucinations due to the state of the external organ, by moving as the eye moves.2

1 G-alton, Inquiries into Human Faculty, pp. 159-63; Maury, Le Sommeil et les Reves, p. 331. Probably the first clear description of these phenomena is that given by Vair, Bishop of Pozzuolo, Be Fascino Libri tres (Venice, 1589), p 112. The following cases — the first from Mrs. Willert, of Headington Hill, Oxford, the second sent to me by the Rev. J. A. Macdonald, of Manchester, in the words of his wife — are as good specimens as could be found. Mrs. Willert wrote on Dec. 20, 1883: —

" The pictures I see generally appear at night before going to sleep, always in complete darkness, and I believe usually when I am rather tired. I can see them with my eyes open, but the colours are much less brilliant than when my eyes are shut. I am quite conscious at the time of the unreality of the scenes — indeed, they seem to be very much like the constantly changing slides of a magic lantern, and I should say of the same size; when they disappear everything is black again. I see all kinds of things, generally in quick succession; never, however, blending into one another. I can never recall the same picture however much I try. I see landscapes, interiors and exteriors of houses, &c, and single objects, such as.flowers, books, boots, feathers, pots, &c, &c, and sometimes figures — of which, however, I can never distinguish the faces. Once or twice I have seen a little scene enacted. I remember one distinctly. I saw a man in the dress of the last century riding down a lane. As he came forward, two men, also on horseback, rushed out on him from behind some trees and knocked him down. I longed to know the end of this little story, but it disappeared. I am never conscious that the things I see have any connection with what I have been thinking of, nor do I ever remember to have recognised a place I know amongst the many landscapes I see."

Mr. Willert tells me that his wife can always narrate these visions as they pass, and is certainly wide awake at the time.

Mrs. Macdonald says: —

" For many years I have been accustomed to see multitudes of faces as I lie awake in bed, generally before falling asleep at night, after waking up in the morning, or if I should wake in the middle of the night. They seem to come up out of the darkness, as a mist, and rapidly develop into sharp delineation, assuming roundness, vividness, and living reality. Then they fade off only to give place to others, which succeed with surprising rapidity and in enormous multitudes. Formerly the faces were wonderfully ugly. They were human, but resembling animals, yet such animals as have no fellows in the creation, diabolical-looking things. So curiously and monstrously frightful were they that I cannot conceive whence they could have come if not from the infernal world. I could not, certainly, at other times, by any voluntary effort of imagination, conjure up anything even remotely approaching their f rightfulness. Latterly the faces have become exquisitely beautiful. Forms and features of faultless perfection now succeed each other in infinite variety and number. "

1 will add one more experience, which would, I think, be specially hard to refer to the Licht-staub of the eye, inasmuch as it had an obvious cause of another sort. A friend wrote to me on Sept. 29, 1885: —

"Between sleeping and waking this morning, I perceived a dog running about in a field (an ideal white-and-tan sporting dog, 'bred out of the Spartan kind,' &c.), and the next moment I heard a dog barking outside the window. Keeping my closed eyes on the vision, I found that it came and went with the barking of the dog outside; getting fainter, however, each time."

2 M. Binet treats all " ghost-seers" as so paralysed with terror that they do not move their eyes from the figure — which leaves it open to him to guess that the figure would move if their eyes moved. Brewster {Natural Magic, p. 130) had the same idea. To Wundt, also, stationary hallucinations that can be looked away from seem unknown as a distinct and fairly common type, and he inclines to regard them as mere illusions.

Such visions are commonly explained — and often, no doubt, with justice — as due to nervousness or expectancy. But nervousness and expectancy act by exciting the mind, not by congesting the retina; they work on the imagination, and their physical seat is not in the eye, but in the brain. We should conclude, then, that the brain initiates the hallucination; and that nocturnal visions, which vary so greatly both in themselves and in the general conditions of their appearance, vary also in their seat of origin.

The auditory cases are even plainer. For here the hypothesis of points cle repere seems quite out of the question. It has never been observed that the hallucinations occur when the attention is being fixed on particular external sounds, or begin or cease synchronously with the beginning or cessation of such sounds: in fact silence seems to be a specially favourable condition for them. The only alternative, therefore, to supposing them to be centrally initiated, is to suppose some abnormality in the external organ itself. Such an abnormality has often been detected; and even when not absolutely detected, it may sometimes be inferred from other symptoms. Thus, an enlarged carotid canal, or a stoppage which produces an unwonted pressure on the vessels, will first make itself felt by hummings and buzzings; hallucination then sets in, and imaginary voices are heard which we should naturally trace to the local irritation that produced the former sounds.1 But the analogy is not obvious between these

Brewster's own case of Mrs. A., and the well-known cases given by Paterson (Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal, January, 1843) would alone suffice, I think, to refute this view. See also Kandinsky's and Schroder van der Kolk's experiences (Archiv fur Psychiatrie, 1881, p. 461, and De Pathologic en Therapie der Krankzinnigheid, p. 27). I have in my possession a good many examples where the imaginary figure has been looked away from and back to again. (See for instance, Mr. Turner's case, quoted below, p. 491.) The Rev. P. H. Newnham tells us of three occasions, during the autumn of 1883, on which he saw and recognised in church the figures of persons who proved not to have been there. In two of the three cases the figure thus seen had peculiarities which made it quite unmistakeable, and was observed in the same place more than once during the service, just as any real member of the congregation might have been. The third case is this: — ■

"I went, as usual, to the school, about a quarter-of-an-hour before service, and either spoke or nodded to all the teachers present. I particularly noticed one in whom I am much interested, sitting with her class, nodded to her, and she smiled back again. Subsequently, in church, I noticed her again, and counted her (I always count my congregations) twice over; once when I counted the entire number present; once when I counted children and adults separately. It turned out, however, that the girl had not been present. I think I was never so surprised in my life. I made several inquiries, but there was no mistake. She had been detained at home, much to her vexation and annoyance, during the whole afternoon on which I had seen her in two different places, and had had my eye upon her, practically, the whole time."

1 The abnormality may be of the most transient kind. Thus on one occasion I myself distinctly traced the illusion of hearing steps accompanying my own to the recurrent variations in the blood-flow of the ear, caused by the very act of stepping. But I may add that hummings are sometimes experienced where no cause whatever can be discovered in the condition of the ear; and thus may possibly themselves be centrally initiated. (See Koppe, Op. cit., p. 50.)

476 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

cases and those where there are no hummings and buzzings, and no grounds for supposing that there is a stoppage or lesion of any sort. Among a numerous, though much neglected, class of phenomena — the casual hallucinations of the sane — the commonest form by very far is for persons to hear their name called when no one is by. The experience is often remarkably distinct, causing the hearer to start and turn round. It is not at all connected with conditions that produce blood-pressure, such as lying with one ear closely pressed on the pillow; it comes in a sudden and detached waj', and apparently at quite accidental moments. Another experience, which I have myself occasionally had when going to sleep, but without any external pressure on the ear, is for sentences which are floating in one's head to take on a slightly externalised form — a central " illusion hypnagogique," in contrast to the visual sort which are due to the Licht-staub of the retina. And when we come to insane cases, we find a more positive refutation of peripheral origin. A wellknown form of hallucination occurs in the form of dialogue; the patient returns answers to the voices that haunt him, and is answered in turn. He can regulate the course of his own delusion. Dr. V. Parant has recently reported the case of an asylum-patient who, when thwarted or annoyed, would go to special spots to consult imaginary advisers; the replies that she received — it need hardly be said — always corresponded with her own desires and prejudices. Another insane woman used to play " odd and even " with an imaginary prefect of police, whose guesses were always wrong.1 We clearly cannot suppose here an intermittent abnormality of the ear, which always sets in by chance at the very moment when the imaginary speaker's replies fall due. It may be added that even where a distinct morbid cause can be traced, it is as often as not a central cause. After a long course of alcohol a man begins to hear voices; but alcohol, while admittedly affecting brain-tissue, has no recognised tendency to affect the ear.

Again, we have to remember the clear relation which often exists between sensory hallucinations and more general ideas and delusions.2 This remark, which is a common-place of alienists, applies far beyond the limits of insanity. One of the commonest

1 Ann. Medico-psych., 6th series, Vol. vii., p. 379; Ball, Maladies Mcntales, p. 98. See also Kahlbaum, Op. cit., p. 10; the cases described by Michea in the Ann. Medicopsych, for 1856, p. 389; and M. Sandras' own experience in the same journal for 1855, p. 542.

2 Lelut, UAmulette de Pascal, p. 101; Krafft-Ebing, Op. cit., p. 19; Griesinger, Op. cit., pp. 97-8; Wundt, Op. cit, Vol. ii., p. 356; Dagonet, Les Maladies Mentalcs, p. 94.

incidents of the witch-cases is the apparition of the supposed witch to the victim. The explanation of this phenomenon must surely be sought in the pre-occupation of feeble and excitable minds with a particular terrifying subject. And these cases present a further feature, the importance of which has, I think, escaped notice, and which points still more decisively to a purely cerebral origin. They comprise the most remarkable examples on record of hallucinations of pain. The verdict of the victims' senses often was that the witch was not only visibly present, but was torturing them.1 The pains were often distinctly localised, and were specifically described — as beating, scratching, pinching, biting; while the parts affected were, of course, not being externally excited more than any other part of the body.

A further argument for the central initiation of many hallucinations of the distinctly morbid sort may be drawn from the course which the morbid process takes. The first stage is often not a sensory hallucination at all; it is a mere delusion; the patient thinks that plots are being concocted against him. After a time his secret enemies begin to reveal themselves, and he hears their abusive and threatening language. We surely cannot ascribe the sensory experience here to a lesion of the ear which happens to occur independently, but regularly, at this particular stage; it follows, on the other hand, in the most natural way, if we regard it as imposed from within, as soon as the disease has gone far enough for the mind to clothe its imaginary fears in a more vivid form. Specially conclusive in this respect are the cases where voices begin to address the patient in the most internal way, without sound, and only after a time take on a distinctly audible character.2 But of all the cases in point the most interesting are those where one type of hallucination assails one side of the body and another the other.3 They confirm what was said above — that the mere fact of a hallucination being unilateral, or peculiar to one side of the body, though suggesting a defect in the external organ, is by no means a

1 Mather, Wonders of the Invisible World (Boston, 1693), p. 105; Magnolia Christi Americana (London, 1702), pp. 68, 69, 72, 75; Deodat Lawson, Further Account of Tryals of the New England Witches (London, 1693), p. 2; Sadducismus Triumphatus (London, 1689), p. 375; Sadducismus Debellatus (London, 1698), p. 3; Boulton, Complete History of Magick (London, 1715), Vol. ii., p. 31; Durbin, A Narrative of Some Extraordinary Tilings (Bristol, 1800), p. 17; Zwei Hexenprocesse in Ballenstedt (Quedlinburg, 1863), p. 56.

2 Griesinger, Op. cit., p. 91. The bearing of this fact on the theory of central origin has been noted by Mr. Sully, Illusions, p. 119.

3 See Dr. Magnan's account in the Archives de Neurologie, Vol. vi., p. 336.

478 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

proof of it.1 The double sensory experience follows with exactness the course of the delusions. The patient first suffers from melancholy and discouragement; this develops into a belief that he is surrounded by enemies: and he then hears insulting voices on the right side. To this unhappy stage succeeds in due course one of exaltation and self-esteem; the patient believes himself to be some royal personage. And now encouraging and eulogistic voices present themselves on the left side. " The good and the evil genii form a sort of Manicheism which governs him." Here the imagination, as its operations become more complex and establish an opposition of character between its creatures, takes advantage (so to speak) of the fact that the body has two opposite sides; it locates friends and foes just as they might be located in a picture or a play which represented an impending contest. It will scarcely be maintained that by accident the left ear began to be locally affected just at the time when the development of the plot necessitated the entrance of the friendly power upon the scene. Another case involves the sense of touch. A man, after praying for a year that his actions might be Divinely guided, heard a voice say, " I will save thy soul "; and from that time forward he felt his left' or his right ear touched by an invisible attendant, according as he was doing right or wrong.2 Did the auditory hallucination coincide by chance with the commencement of local irritation in the pinna? Dr. Magnan adds three examples of alcoholism, where abuse and threats were heard on one side, praise and consolation on the other. In these cases there were crises of fury, in which hallucinations of all the senses took place, involving both sides alike, and masking the more ordinary condition. On the decline of these crises, the opposed auditory hallucinations recommenced. It seems impossible to resist Dr. Magnan's view, that the poison, distributed through the whole brain, provokes at times a general crisis; but that when this subsides, it localises its action at the weakest spot. Should this happen to be the auditory centre on one side, a single

1 Of. Dr. A. Robertson in the Report of the International Medical Congress, 1881, Vol. iii., pp. 632-3. A gentleman who writes to me from the Junior United Service Club, and who describes himself as " a military physician of long foreign service and not of superstitious tendencies," says that as a youth he was once transported with passion during an argument. "There was a large knife lying on the table, and I distinctly heard a voice whisper into my right ear, ' Take up that knife and use it.' I glanced over my shoulder involuntarily for the speaker " — who of course was not visible. There was no question of lesion here, either of the sense-organ or of the brain; for my informant has never had any other hallucination in his life. That a whisper should thus be located in one ear is specially natural; since it corresponds with our usual way of receiving real whispers.

2 Bemonomanie des Sorciers, Paris, 1582, pp. 11-12. For a wonder (see p. 177) Bodin gives the case at first-hand; and there is no reason to doubt its truth.

unilateral hallucination would be the result; but if both centres remain affected the projection may assume the complex two-sided form.

But perhaps the strongest cases of all in favour of a purely central initiation yet remain — the cases of hallucination voluntarily originated.1 Wigan's instance has often been quoted, of the painter who, after carefully studying a sitter's appearance, could project it visibly into space, and paint the portrait not from the original but from the phantasm.2 He ended by confounding the phantasmal figures with real ones, and became insane. Baillarger reports another painter, Martin, as having similarly projected pictures, which so interested him that he requested anyone who took up a position in front of them to move.3 And I may add that in one of the cases of persistent dream-images mentioned in the last chapter, my informant, Lieut.-Colonel Hartley, of Hartley, near Dartford, remarks, " I can always produce this phenomenon, if I know that 1 am dreaming, by opening my eyes, which wakes me, but the dream image persists." I confess that I should have been tempted to regard the voluntary cases as conclusive evidence of central initiation, had I not found so high an authority as Professor Ball explicitly claiming them as hallucinations provoked by an " abnormal sensation."4 He does not tell us what the abnormal sensation is, or what causes it. He contents himself with pointing out that hallucinations are very like dreams; that some dreams are (and, therefore, apparently, all

1 It is odd to find involuntariness not infrequently taken as the distinctive abnormality in hallucinations (Falret, Op. cit., p. 281; Buchez and De Castelnau in the French debates of 1855-6); and the odder, inasmuch as not only may hallucinations be voluntary, but the mental pictures and memories, from which they are to be distinguished, are often of course involuntary.

2 The Duality of the Mind, p. 124.

3 See also Cardan, De Varietate Rerum, (Basle, 1557) p. 314, who says he ha,s always been shy of mentioning the peculiarity — '' Cum volo, video quse volo, oculis, non vi mentis." Kahlbaum (Op. cit., p. 33), and Maisonneuve (Recherches et Observations sur VEpilepsie, Paris, 1803, p. 295), give each an instance; and Sir H. Holland ( Chapters on Mental Physiology, p. 47) says that he has met with several cases. One of the seers of "Faces in the Dark" reported that he could produce the vision of the spangles and sheep at will. His case differs, however, from those given in the text. For, in the first place, his vision was one of old standing; and, in the second place, his retina must have been pretty constantly in the abnormal state. I should thus ascribe the phenomenon to a concentration of attention on actual visual sensations, which fell by habit into the familiar lines. It would be interesting to know whether, after the spangles had appeared, it was possible to check their development into sheep.

4 Op. cit., p. 122. This error (as it seems to me) depends on what has become a very common misreading of the term " psycho-sensorial. " The theory so designated is often described as "theorie mixte " — the " mixture " being of the " imagination " and of some prior " abnormal sensation, " which sets the imagination to work. But hallucinations (as we have seen) are psycho-sensorial in virtue not of their antecedents, but of their content— because they are things actually seen and actually heard. The "sensorial" element in them is not the incentive or the raw material of the abnormal activity, but its product.

480 HALLUCINATIONS: GENERAL SKETCH. [chap.

dreams must be) provoked by external stimulation — say a knock at the door; and that we can sometimes direct the course of a dream at will: ergo, it is easy to see how some people may start a hallucination at will. It would be more to the purpose if he would introduce us to a dreamer who can designedly start a pre-arranged dream by knocking at his own door.

§ 6. There is only one other point, in relation to the question of origin, that needs special attention; and that concerns hallucinations of what may be called the lowest or most rudimentary grade. There is a class of experience which all the writers who describe it x agree to treat as a quite unique type, and of which frequent examples have been observed among religious mystics, and persons who believe themselves to be in direct communication with spiritual guides. They describe a voice which is yet soundless, which utters the " language of the soul " inside them, and which they hear by means of a " sixth sense," and without any apparent participation of the ear. "I should hear the voice just as well if I were stone deaf," such a person will say; " my ear has nothing to do with it." 2 Owing to the absence of a definable sensory quality, Baillarger distinguished this class as "psychic 3 hallucinations, in opposition to psycho-sensorial; and M. Binet himself, who insists on an external or peripheral basis for all other hallucinations, is inclined to treat these as exceptional, and to grant them an origin from within. As one who holds that that is equally the origin of a large number of the undoubted psychosensorial hallucinations, I cannot recognise this exception; and to me the class in question is of interest, not as distinguished from the psycho-sensorial family, but as a true species of that genus, presenting the sensorial element reduced to its very lowest terms. I regard it as the first stage of a graduated series — the embryonic instance of the investiture of an image or representation with a sensory or presentative character. In proportion as the sensorial element in hallucination is attenuated and dim, or full and distinct, will the perception appear internal or external; and these cases are simply the most internal sort, between which and the most

1 I find that I must except Dr. Dagonet {Op. cit., p. 92); who, however, is certainly wrong in regarding the phenomena in question as necessarily indicative of insanity.

2 Koppe, Op. cit., p. 34.

3 The term must, of course, not be confounded with our special sense of the word " psychical," explained on p. 5, note.

external sort there exists various degrees of partial externalisation. This view has surely everything to recommend it. We can but take the perceiver's own account — that he has a distinct impression of words; and that this impression has an actuality which clearly separates it from the mere image or memory of words. How can this separation be conceived, except by recognising the presence of a genuine, though faint, sensorial element I1 The question is of importance to my argument; for to admit a genuine sensory element in the most " internal " species of hallucination — which all agree to be centrally initiated — will practically be to admit a similar initiation for other psycho-sensorial hallucinations.

The Rev. P. H. Newnham, of Maker Vicarage, Devonport, already so often mentioned, has supplied me with some examples which are eminently in point. He has had on several occasions " psychic " hallucinations in the ordinary sense — an impression of words which " seem to be formed and spoken within the chest." But he has also experienced and clearly distinguished another type of hallucination — a soundless voice, which yet seems to speak into his right ear (he is deaf of the left ear), and which thus produces the sense of externality, though not of actual sound. We must surely recognise this as the stage just above that of " psychic " hallucination.2 And we meet with

