" The impression was so vivid that I jumped ofi" the bed to see whether the door could have come open, but I found that it was locked as I had left it. I got up and dressed, and went to tea with Mrs. K.; I told her my dream, saying I was sure I should recognise the man if ever I saw him. Having found a suitable house, I returned to my father-in-law's in Queen Anne Street, and told him my dream, as I had done to Mrs. K. In the middle



Vol. Ii. 2 Q

594 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

of August we moved to Folkestone, and not many weeks afterwards, as I was going down the Military Hill leading from the camp to Sandgate, I met the gentleman whom I had seen in my dream, wearing the same clothes. He stopped, and looked at me, and said, ' I think we must have met before.' I said, ' Yes '; then introduced myself, and told him of my dream. He wore the same pin, but not the ring. I called his attention to it. He said he had not worn the cornelian ring for some years, as he preferred his brother's, but that he had been looking at his old ring. He had dreamt of seeing me lying down in a white gown. The day he met me, I had on a white dress. He also told me he had been at the Cape, and once belonged to the Mounted Rifles when first established.

" M. R. Wedgwood."

" I believe I did not hear of my wife's dream until after she had met with the gentleman she had seen in her dream. Very soon after that meeting I was told the story. u ^ j^ Wedgwood."

Thinking it possible that Major M. had unconsciously noticed Mrs. A. Wedgwood's appearance during the days when she was in Folkestone in June, I asked her how she was dressed during that short stay. She replied: —

" At the time I was down here for the two days, I wore a black silk gown, as I well remember my friend Mrs. K. admiring it when I went and drank tea with her. I told her of my dream at the same time."

Mrs. K. writes: —

"December 28th, 1885.

" I remember quite well the circumstance you allude to. Mrs. Alfred Wedgwood told me about it the same evening, when she was sitting with me at Meadowbank, but I think she said she saw this vision of a man looking at her, not in a dream, but on suddenly awaking from sleep, and that he vanished as she looked at him. She told me that she particularly noticed a stud or breast-pin he was wearing, and that during the short time the figure was visible she saw other figures in the background, like Zulus with their spears passing behind him. This, at the time, made us wonder if the room at the West CliflT Hotel she was then using had been at any time occupied by someone who had died in the Zulu War. Sometime after this, Mrs. Alfred told me she had seen an officer at Shornclifie who resembled the man of her vision, and that he was wearing a pin just like the one she had observed, and she wondered who he was. I do not remember that after this we ever spoke of the matter again; and I never heard that she had afterwards met him to speak to, or that he had told her that he had had a corresponding vision or dream of her.

The following account is from Major F, F. M.: —

"February, 1886.

" As nearly as I can recollect, some time in June, 1884,^ I met Mrs. Wedgwood coming down the Military Road from Shornclifie Camp. I had

1 Mr. Wedgwood says, " It must have been in August or September.

a confused idea that I had met the lady before, and therefore turned to look at her. Mrs. Wedgwood asked me some question, and inti-oduced herself, when, in conversation, I remarked that some time previously I had dreamed I had seen her, and that she was dressed in a white gown.

" Mrs. Wedgwood replied that she also had dreamed she had seen myself, and described the dress I wore, and also a scarf-pin and ring that I possess. The latter she could not possibly have seen, as I had not worn it for some years, and consequently it was locked up in a secret drawer in my chest. The accurate description of the ring and pin seemed to me to be very remarkable. '< p'. jf. ]\/[."

In answer to inquiries. Major M. writes, on Feb. 18, 1886:-^

(1) "I feel sure I had never seen Mrs. Alfred Wedgwood before I met her coming from Shorncliffe Camp, after the dream you refer to, and I had no reason for connecting the dream with her [i.e., at the time that it was dreamt].

(2) " I do not think my dream was sufficiently vivid to enable me to recognise the features of the lady.

(3) " The dream occurred, I believe, in the second week in June, 1884. " I may say that I did not look upon my dream as at all peculiar, and

should have thought no more of the circumstance had not Mrs. Wedgwood informed me of her dream, which I thought very remarkable, inasmuch as she described accurately some articles of jewellery belonging to me, which she could not possibly have previously seen."

He adds that Mrs. A. Wedgwood was correct in saying that he had served for many years in South Africa; but that he had not recently returned from that country.

Mr. Hensleigh Wedg^wood writes on Feb. 2, 1886: —

" Major M. says that when he saw Mrs. A. Wedgwood in her white gown, he instantly recognised her by her figure. The date of her dream was the 13th June, which she fixes by something about a photograph."

[It is iiTQpossible here to be sure that Major M.'s sense of having seen Mrs. A. Wedgwood before he met her was really due to his dream. But if the case is not reciprocal, it is at any rate strongly suggestive of telepathic clairvoyance on Mrs. A. Wedgwood's part.]

The next example may, no doubt, have been an accidental coincidence; but both experiences seem.to have been of an unusual kind, unlike ordinary dreams. If telepathic in character, the case may not improbably have been reciprocal, without — it will be observed — suggesting anything of the nature of clairvoyance. Each percipient has the impression of the other as present in the percipient's own environment.

(644) From Mrs. White, 10, Hope Terrace, Walham Green, S.W.

" 1883. " On one occasion my husband [since deceased — for many years con-

596 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

ductor of the Bcdlymena Observer] complained of a slight indisposition; but being very averse always to the attendance of a doctor, he desired me to see that some cooling drink was left in his bedroom, and that we should all retire as usual. I occupied a room on the floor above him, and after seeing that everything necessary was left on his dressing-table, and everything comfortable and as he wished, I, at his urgent request, went to bed, and being particularly fatigued fell into a deep sleep; in which state I became acutely conscious of the condition I had left my husband in, and mindful of my own secret resolve to visit him during the night and see if he had taken his drink or if he slept, &c., though I had studiously avoided telling him so, lest he should think I was making a fuss. I was quite conscious *of all this in that peculiar way we see and know during sleep. I also seemed to know I was in a deep sleep, and I longed to burst my bonds and carry out my intention. Simultaneously with this wish, I now became aware of my husband's presence at the door of my room, then of his presence filling the chamber and slowly and solemnly crossing to the bed where I lay. In that flash of conscious thought which made me aware of this, I thought he must be very ill and come to reprove me for this torpor of sleep that still so enchained me that I couldn't speak to him, though longing with all my heart and soul to do so. This all, swift as thought, passed while he seemed to bend over me as if' to find did I sleep; then with the same slow, solemn presence filling the room, again he passed away. Then, with one shrill cry, I burst the sufibcating bonds that held me, and my maid, who slept in the next room, was beside me at once. She asked, was I frightened 1 I said not at all, but to follow me to her master's room; that I had intended seeing to him through the night, but had fallen fast asleep and neglected to do so.

"When I cautiously entered his room, the maid behind me, I found him awake and a keen, almost reproachful look on his face. I dismissed the maid, and then explained what a heavy sleep I had just awoke from, which had prevented me coming sooner, &c. ' Will you tell me,' he now inquired, ' what object you have in trying to conceal from me that you were here a few moments ago '? ' I then fell on my knees, and assured him that I had not risen from my bed until this present moment, and that it was owing to a strange, silent, and secret visit from him that so disturbed and alarmed me, that I was there now. ' Ah,' he said, ' something like this happened to me before, but this is the most remarkable experience of all — because happening to each of us at the same time.' He then narrated how, a few minutes before, I had stolen, as it were, up to his side, arranged the clothes, kissed him on brow and cheek, and then glided away; that my visit had a soothing efi'ect, and that he was consequently irritated at my appearing to forget it, when I came the second time."

[In conversation, Mrs. White particularly described to me the sense of entrance and of the movement of the presence. There was light enough for her to have seen any visible figure, but she saw nothing. She also described the effect upon herself, before she reached his room, as very overpowering, depriving her of the power of speech. Her viva voce account agreed in every detail with the above account which had been written about a year previously; and she gave me an impression of accuracy. As an instance of her unwillingness to believe marvels, she told me how incredulous she

had been as to the genuineness of experiments in hypnotism which her husband used sometimes to carry out.]

I will conclude this chapter with two cases which, as reported, seem to have been collective as well as reciprocal.

(645) From Mrs. T., who does not wish her name to be published. The account was written in January, 1879.

" I have myself had an exceedingly interesting experience of the apparition of the living, viz., my own appearance at the supposed deathbed of my sister, when we were 3,000 miles apart. She was attended on this particular night by another sister, who distinctly saw me go into the room, and lean over my darling young sister. The latter was too ill to speak, but she whispered, ' Mary is here; now I am happy.' I ought to mention that my elder sister is not given to vision, and is, indeed, a very practical, matter-of-fact person; but she has always declared that she saw me from my knees up, ^ and that the very dress was plain to her, too.

" At this time I was just recovering from my confinement with my son, who is nearly 17. He was between four and five weeks old, when, one night, I fell asleep thinking how much I should like to see this sister. I knew of her illness, and that she was not likely to recover, and of her intense desire to see me. Between us the most tender attachment had always existed, and it was thought that her illness was much increased through her grief at our separation.

" On the night referred to, I had a most vivid dream of seeing her, in a bed not in her own room, and of seeing my other sister in attendance. I leaned over her and said, as I thought, ' Emma, you will recover.' I told my husband that I had been home when I woke, and my impression that she would recover. This dream comforted me very much, and from this night there was a change for the better in my sister, and she gradually recovered from what was supposed to be an incurable illness. When we came to compare dates, we found that my dream, and my appearance to my two sisters, occurred at as nearly as possible the same time. I was so life-like to my younger sister that she thought I had really arrived on a visit; but, as I said before, to my eldest sister I was shadowy below my knees, but perfectly natural in appearance. She afterwards remembered that I did not notice her as I passed into the inner room, although in my dream I saw her, nor did I seem to see anything but the one object of my love."

Mrs. T. wrote to us, on Oct. 3, 1883:—

" Neither of my sisters wrote me, but a member of the family to whom the occurrence was told on the following morning. Unfortunately I have not kept this letter, and cannot date the time, except from my son's birth, which took place on the 4th March, 1862. I changed my bed, still keeping the same room, when he was a month old, and it was within a night or two of making this change that I had my dream. When the letter came, which was like a repetition of my dream, I went back in my mind to the time (not more than three weeks before), and was myself satisfied that the times were coincident. It was nearly 10 years after,

^ See p. 33, note.

598 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

before I had an opportunity of talking with my sister of the occurrence, which was only one of several very startling things connected with my younger sister's illness, and I found we agreed in all substantial things. I found them both disinclined to talk of what had happened during Emma's illness, and, indeed, their memory of all the circumstances of my manifestation was less clear than mine."

Mrs. T. is unable to communicate with her family respecting this case, as they all have an extreme dislike to the subject. In conversation, she explained that she had left America about nine months at the time of this vision, and that her sister recognised her as wearing a print dress of a very decided blue, which she had left behind her in America.

She has further answered the following questions: —

Did Mrs. T. dream of herself as in the blue dress?

" I cannot now remember. My impression is that I did not recollect my dress on waking."

Had the sisters ever seen the blue dress 1

" Yes. I had worn the dress in the morning during the previous early summer time." ^

Was the invalid sister really in a room not her own.? And if so was its arrangement, " inner room," &c., really represented in the dream?

" My sister was not in her own room, but in a room on the ground floor (an inner room), exactly as I had seen her in my dream." ^

Had Mrs. T. ever seen the room before?

" Yes."

Mr. T. cannot remember any of his wife's experiences in detail; he

" I am unable to recall the particular circumstance to which you refer. This may be due to the fact that for several years previous to, and since, the date referred to, my wife has related to me numerous remarkable incidents in her experiences, together with their subsequent verification.

" W. T."

[It is unfortunate that the evidence here is second-hand from the side on which the more striking experience occurred. If that experience is correctly recorded, the fact that two percipients shared in it is a strong indication that it was telepathically produced. The proof of the reciprocality of the case depends greatly on the detail in the dream as to the changed room, on which it is impossible entirely to rely, in the absence of a written note made before the actual fact was known.]

(646) From Mr. J. Cotter Morison, 30, Fitzjohn's Avenue, JST.W.

"June 18th, 1883.

" My mother and grandmother were together in the dining-room of their house in the Isle of Wight, occupied on some domestic matter which made the exclusion of chance visitors desirable. A sudden knock at the door caused my grandmother to hasten to it with a view to taking the

1 See Vol. i., pp. 540-6, and 569-70. The dress, it will be seen, was one which the sisters in America would be specially likely to associate with Mrs. T. 's aspect, since she had worn it a good deal when she was last with them; while there is no reason to suppose that it had any prominence in her memory.

2 Compare case 465,

viii.] RECIPROCAL CASES. 599

stranger into the drawing-room. The knock was heard by both mother and daughter. On opening the door with the least loss of time possible, my grandmother was surprised to find not only no one there but no one even in the long corridor which led to the dining-room. My mother distinctly remembered the look of astonishment in her mother's face as she returned from the door. Nothing more was said on the subject, but in a short time afterwards a letter was received from London from my grandmother's sister, or rather her family, saying that she (the sister) had been most seriously ill, at death's door indeed, but was now a little better, and wished my grandmother to come and see her. The latter went up to town and found her sister still very ill, but slowly recovering. After the mutual endearments natural to such an occasion, my grandmother said: —

" Do you know, such a strange thing occurred, exactly at the time, it seems, when you were supposed to be dead or dying.'

" ' I know what you are going to say,' said the other. ' When I was in the trance which was mistaken for death, I thought I went to your house in the Isle of "Wight and knocked at your dining-room door. You opened it instantly and looked much affrighted at not seeing me or any one, though I saw you.'

" The singular point in the story is the anticipation by the one sister of what the other sister was going to say.

" No theory or inference was ever deduced by my relations from the circumstance, and it was only mentioned as an odd coincidence by them and their friends, who, as well as my mother, have often told me the story.

" Jas. Cotter Morison."

Mr. Morison writes of his grandmother: —

"She was a person of a strong understanding, as I have often heard from people who knew her personally. She had an aversion to what she called superstition, belief in ghosts, &c.; so the facts of the story were unwelcome to her rather than otherwise."

Though the sound here seems to have corresponded with a distinct impression of the agent's, there is no conclusive jproof of reciprocality, as her sense of visiting her relatives' house may have been purely subjective. At the same time, the idea of knocking at a door and having it opened, yet being oneself invisible to the person who opens it, appears so unlikely a one to occur even to a dreaming mind, that the hypothesis of telepathic clairvoyance on the agent's part seems (as the facts stand) eminently defensible. It must be noted, however, that the description of this side of the occurrence comes to us at third hand.

CHAP.



Chapter IX. Collective Cases.

§ 1. Of the collective cases which remain to be presented, the large majority, like the cases in Chap. XVIII. above, are waking aflFections of sight and hearing. I will begin, however, with three outlying instances, of which the first had no sensory element at all, the second is a dream-case, and the third concerned the sense of touch only. They agree in the fact that the two percipients were not in each other's company at the time of the experience (see Chap. XVIII., § 2).

(647) From Mr. Charles Ede, Wonersh Lodge, Guildford, a medical man, to whom the incident was related by both the percipients. The account was sent to Professor Barrett on Aug. 29, 1877.

" Lady G. and her sister had been spending the evening with their mother, who was in her usual health and spirits when they left her. In the middle of the night the sister awoke in a fright, and said to her husband, ' I must go to my mother at once; do order the carriage. I am sure she is taken ill.' The husband, after trying in vain to convince hia wife that it was only a fancy, ordered the carriage. As she was approaching her mother's house, where two roads meet, she saw Lady G.'s carriage. When they met, each asked the other why she was there. The same reply was made by both. ' I could not sleep, feeling sure my mother was ill, and so I came to see.' As they came in sight of the house, they saw their mother's confidential maid at the door, who told them, when they arrived, that their mother had been taken suddenly ill, and was dying, and had expressed an earnest wish to see her daughters.

" The foregoing incident was told me as a simple narrative of what happened, both by Lady G. and her sister. The mother was a lady of strong will, and always had great influence over her daughters.

" Charles Ede."

Writing on June 25, 1884, Mr. Ede says, "Both Lady G. and her sister are dead, although at the time of my writing the account the former was living." He cannot fix the date of the occurrence. He communicated the names in confidence.

(648) From Mr. R. S. Pengelly, 33, Ingestre Road, Stafi'ord, who first published the narrative in a magazine. On Feb. 26, 1884, he wrote to us to confirm it, and to supply the names of the parties.

Mr. Pengelly narrates that, some time in the years 1863-1866, his father, then unmarried, went on a voyage to Colombo as mate of the ' Adela,' belonging to Messrs. Cobbold and Co., of Ipswich. Some weeks after his departure, his fiancee, Anne Symons, who had been looking out for a letter from him, had a vivid dream of an Eastern seaport. Lying to the left of the picture she was startled to see a vessel, which she instantly recognised as the ' Adela,' of which her father was captain, and which she knew well. There on deck were several Orientals, lightly clad, at work, and by their side was James Pengelly. Suddenly she saw him walk a step forward, and the next moment he was struggling in the waters. She was in agony, but strange to say, the excitement did not at once awake her, and she saw him throw up his hands and sink, and he appeared no more. At this point she awoke, deeply impressed with the realistic nature of her vision. Strange to relate, however, the next night she went through the same series of mental tortures, her lover fell, struggled wildly, but was drowned. When she arose that morning, she confided her dreams, and the anxieties they had aroused in her breast, to her aunt.

" Several days later, Anne received a letter from her lover's mother, who, it happened, was also her aunt, and who, with her husband, lived about 130 miles away, in another part of the country. The letter, to her intense surprise, asked whether any news had been received of the arrival of the ' Adela ' at Colombo, the writer giving as a reason for her solicitude for her son a dream which she had had a few days before (giving the date). She also had dreamed on two consecutive nights that she had seen her son fall overboard and rise no more, and so powerfully had she been affected by the visions that after the repetition she had the next morning written the letter received. The days upon which Mrs. Pengelly had dreamt of her son's death were the very ones upon which Anne herself had been so agitated. They could only wait and pray, and after some weeks their anxiety was relieved, and their prayers rewarded, by the receipt of a letter from James, announcing his arrival at Colombo a few days before the date of the letter, after a long and tempestuous passage. He went on to tell, to Anne's great astonishment, how narrow an escape he had recently had from drowning. 'The day after our arrival,' he wrote, ' I was standing on a plank from the hatchway to the bulwarks, watching the coolies discharging her. While so standing I almost unconsciously stepped forward, and the plank, one end of which was resting on the bulwarks, at once tipped up, and I was in the water. Being unable to swim, my danger was great, and I had sunk once before the boatswain with a boathook caught me, and held me up till they brought the boat around.' Most wonderful to relate, a comparison of dates showed Anne that it was on the very day of her first dream that her lover's life was so nearly lost, and his mother was no less surprised than Anne. However, ' all's well that ends well.' James came home, and he and his cousin were married."

Mrs. Pengelly, the mother of James Pengelly, writes: — "10, Gloucester Place, Littlehampton.

"April 19th, 1886. " I am sorry to say I cannot remember the exact date of the dream only that, as near as I can recollect, it was in or near 1864. My son was

602 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

then mate in the ' Adela,' the ship of his uncle, whose daughter he afterwards married. She dreamt, one night, that her cousin was climbing from a boat into the ship, when he slipped his foot and fell in under the ship; when they took him up, he was nearly dead. She wrote to tell me her dream, and by that I found she had dreamt the same dream the same night as I had. When my son came home, upon questioning him, I found that he had fallen into the water at Colombo, and, as near as he could tell, the same day as I dreamt he did. My daughter-in-law, I am sorry to say, is now dead; if she were living she would be able to tell you more particulars.

"E. Pengelly."

[Mr. Pengelly justly draws attention to the fact that a dream due to apprehensions of danger and disaster would not be very likely to take the form of "drowning in a quiet harbour "; but the amount of detail in his narrative is more than can be safely relied on, in the absence of written notes. It will be seen that Mrs. Pengelly senior's account of her daughterin-law's dream does not exactly agree with Mr. Pengelly's. Mr. Pengelly kindly tried to obtain for us an account of the accident from his father, but found that "he, a plain sea-captain, had little recollection of what happened 20 years ago, during his absence."]

(649) From the papers of the late Psychological Society. The original document is in the handwriting of the late Mr. Serjeant Cox. No names are given, and the MS. bears no date.

" The following remarkable case is taken from the lips of the parties to whom it occurred, and for whose veracity I can vouch.

"J. P., wife of Colonel P., says: 'In July, 1871, I was at Weymouth, sleeping with my daughter. I was wakened in the night by a cold kiss upon my lips. I concluded that my daughter had kissed me, and wondered much why her lips were so corpse-like. I fell asleep again, and on the following morning, on awaking, I asked my daughter why she had kissed me, and what made her lips so cold. She said that she had not done so. Soon after this conversation a messenger arrived to say that my mother, who was in another house in Weymouth, was very ill, and requested my immediate attendance. I had left her on the previous evening in perfect health, so that I had no sense of alarm for her to account for a mental impression. I found her seriously ill, and she died in three weeks.

" ' Two days before her death, I received a letter from my sister, Mrs. C, who was on a voyage to America, written from the ship, then off Halifax, dated the day after the night on which I had felt the cold kiss, in which she said, " I am sure there is something wrong with mother; she is either dead or ill; for last night I felt a cold kiss on my lips, as I lay in my berth." As far as we could afterwards trace, this had occurred to both of us almost at the same moment. My mother and sister had been extremely attached. They were then parted for the first time.'

"This narrative of Mrs. P. was confirmed to me by her daughter, who was sleeping with her on the night in question, to whom she had made the inquiry why she had kissed her, and what had made her lips so cold.

"Edw. W. Cox."

[If this record is accurate, and the coincidence was more than a very curious accident, there still would be a doubt as to the agency. It seems so improbable that hallucinations, originating in a telepathic impulse

from the mother, should independently take the same very rare form in each daughter's experience, that I should certainly prefer to suppose one of these experiences to have been in some measure the source of the other. It is eminently a case where it is difficult to derive the form of the impression from the original agent's (the mother's) mind, as even if she thought of kissing her daughters, she would not think of the kisses as cold or corpse-like. See Vol. I., pp. 539-40.]

§ 2. To pass now to the visual examples — I will first cite cases where there is ground for supposing the hallucination, in its inception, to have been more than subjective, and due to the unusual condition of an absent person. And in accordance with the order adopted before, in Chap. XVIII., I will begin with the few remaining cases where the percipients were not in each other's company at the time of their experience.

(650) From Mrs. Forsyth Hunter, the narrator of cases 553 and 554.

"1882. Mrs. Hunter's husband had had a Scotch wet-nurse of the oldfashioned sort, more devoted to him than even to her own children. Soon after her marriage, Mrs. Hunter made acquaintance with this nurse, Mrs. Macfarlane, who paid her several visits during Mr. Hunter's absence in India. In June, 1857, Mrs. Hunter, who was travelling to a healthresort, confided to Mrs. Macfarlane's keeping a box of valuables. One evening in the following August, Mrs. Hunter was entertaining some friends; but having occasion to return to the dining-room for a moment, she passed the open door of her bedroom, and felt irresistibly impelled to look in; and there on the bed was a large coffin, ^ and sitting at the foot of it was a tall old woman steadfastly regarding it. "Returning to my friends, I announced the vision, which was received with shouts of laughter, in which, after a time, I joined. However, I had seen what I have described, and, moreover, could have told the very dress the old woman wore. "When my friends left, and I had paid my usual last visit to the nursery, my nurse looked odd and distraite, and to my astonishment followed me on to the landing. ' O ma'am,' she began, ' I feel so queer, such a strange thing happened. At 7 o'clock I went to the kitchen for hot water, and when I came out I saw a tall old woman coming downstairs, and I stopped to let her pass, but, ma'am, there was something strange about her, so I turned to look after her. The hall door was wide open, and she was making for it, when in a moment she melted away. I can swear I saw her, and can tell you her very dress, a big, black poke bonnet and a checked black-and-white shawl.' " This description of the dress exactly corresponded with what Mrs. Hunter had herself seen.

Mrs. Hunter laughed the matter off, and did not even think of connecting her own vision with the nurse's. About half an hour afterwards, when in bed, she heard a piercing scream from her little daughter, aged 5, followed by loud, frightened tones, and she then heard the nurse

1 As usual, the form of the hallucination can be paralleled in the purely subjective class; see Vol. i., p. 503.

604 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

soothing the child, " Next morning little E. was full o£ her wrongs. She said that ' a naughty old woman was sitting at the table and staring at her, and that made her scream.' Nurse told me that she found the child wide awake, sitting up in bed, pointing to the table, and crying out, ' Go away, go away, naughty old woman! ' There was no one there. Nurse had been in bed some time, and the door was locked.

" My child's Adsion I treated as I did her nurse's, and dosed both. However, a day or two afterwards, I received a letter from Mrs. Macfarlane's son, announcing her death, and telling me how her last hours were disturbed by anxiety for my husband and his family. My nurse, on being told the news, exclaimed, ' Good Lord, it was her I saw that night, and her very dress! ' I never ascertained the exact hour of her death. My letter of inquiry and condolence was never answered, though my box was duly sent to me."

Mrs. Hunter writes to us that, after reading this account in the Fortnightly Review (where it was first published), the " little E." of the story wrote to her, " I well remember my part of that story." Mrs. Hunter adds, " I can truly say that she had never been spoken to about it all these, years."

We find from the obituary of the Glasgow Herald that Mrs. Macfarlane died on August 31, 1857.

(651) From the late Mr. B. Coleman, who wrote as follows to the Editor of the Spiritual Magazine: —

" 48, Pembridge Villas, Bayswater.

"January 14th, 1861.

"I was recently staying at the Victoria Hotel, Southport, kept by Mr. Salthouse, an old and respectable inhabitant of that town. [I learnt that] Mr. Salthouse was a firm believer in apparitions, founded on an incident which occurred in his own family. I accordingly asked Mr. Salthouse to tell me the particulars, and he related the following story: —

" ' Some years ago my eldest son, Thomas, shipped as a sailor on a voyage to India. After he had been absent a month or two, I was surprised one summer morning to see him standing by my bedside in his sailor's dress. I extended my hand to greet him, and inquired the cause of his unexpected return. The figure remained for an instant mute and immoveable, and vanished from my sight.

" ' Excited and perplexed by this unlooked-for incident, I rose and prepared to make my usual visit to my farm, which is two miles distant from Southport, reasoning myself into the belief that I had been under a delusion. On reaching the farm my servant, William Ball, who still resides there, asked me if Master Tom had returned home. I said, " No; why do you ask? " " Well," he said, " I certainly saw him cross the farmyard early this morning. I ran to open the gate and could not see where he had gone, but I am as sure as I live that I saw him in his sailor's dress." This statement corroborating my own experience of the morning, I made sure that some disaster had befallen my son, and in due time this proved to be the case. He had died that very day and hour, of dysentery, on board ship, before reaching Bombay.'

" Benjamin Coleman."

A son of Mr. Salthouse, to whom we sent the account, writes to us as follows:— « 91^ Railway Street, Southport.

"June 12th, 1884.

" From what I can remember I believe the account is correct. I showed this paper to my brother-in-law, and he told me that my father always said so. ^ I have heard Ball [now deceased] tell the tale many times. "John Salthouse."

Later, Mr. Salthouse writes to us that he finds that Mr. Thomas Salthouse's ship left Liverpool on June 3, 1846, and that he was taken ill between Bombay and Hong Kong, on Nov. 23. We learn from the General Register of Shipping and Seamen that he served as third mate on the ship " Inglewood," of Liverpool, from June 3 to Dec. 13, 1846, on which latter date he died at sea. The words " summer morning " and " before reaching Bombay " in the above account are therefore incorrect.

The following case is a sort of comedy of errors. Only two of the four hallucinations which it includes represented the absent agent; as to the two which did not, I shall hazard no further supposition than that their coincidence with the others was not accidental.

(652) From Mrs. Fagan, Bovey Tracey, Newton Abbot, the narrator of case 617. "1883

" Captain Robert Fagan, late of the Bengal Artillery, while in charge of the bridge of boats at Lahore, was in the district on the river collecting boats. One morning, during his absence from home, his eldest boy, of about 6 years old, seeing his mother just dressed for breakfast in a coloured muslin, begged her to take it off and put on a black dress, saying, ' Because papa is dead.' The mother, after diverting his thoughts for a short time, said, ' Shall I put on a black dress now, Charlie 1 ' ' Oh, no,' he answered, ' papa is not dead now,' and ran away.

" On leaving her room, she was met by the head nurse, a Scotchwoman, with the inquiry if she had heard from the master that morning. When told his usual letter had not come, she said, ' Something very uncanny has happened to him, for looking out of the window just now, I saw Annie, the under-nurse, and the gardener go up to master's favourite rosetree and gather a flower, and before she could have got in from the garden, I found her in the night nursery, which she had never left, finishing bathing the children.'

"Not thinking much of this, Mrs. Fagan passed on to the breakfastroom, where she expected to find her visitors. Captain and Mrs. Reveley. Not doing so, she went to Mrs. R.'s room, whom she found still at her toilet, for which unpunctuality Mrs. R. apologised, saying she had had a dreadful fright, having seen Mrs. Fagan standing in front of the chest of drawers, who, when asked how she had come unobserved into the room, turned round and then deliberately vanished through the chest of drawers and the door behind it.^

1 The form of expression here would convey the idea that Mr. J. Salthouse had not himself heard of the incident from his father. But in conversation I learnt from him that he had heard his father mention it several times, in a manner vs^hich showed him to have been much impressed by it.

2 See Vol. i., p. 432, note. The present case is not one of those there referred to.

606 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

" This third strange remark led Mrs. Fagan to relate all three at the breakfast-table to Captain Reveley. She could not help observing how unlike his usual manner was his brusqueness in cutting short the conversation, as soon as he had heard all particulars. Five days passed without any information — private or ofl&cial — from Captain Fagan; but at the end of that time he arrived home looking ill, and saying that, on the morning of which we have been speaking, he was with difficulty resuscitated from drowning, the boat in which he was having capsized. This was naturally taken as the solution of the mystery. Captain Reveley, turning to Mrs. Fagan, said, ' I must apologise for my brusqueness of manner that morning, but I feared to alarm you by seeming to attach any importance to what had happened, and lest I should be induced to tell you of the greater fright I had myself had than any of you. For, Fagan,' addressing the Captain, ' as I passed from your office, where I had been reading with the Moonshee, and going through the drawing-room, I distinctly saw you sitting in your usual chair.' "

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Fagan adds: —

"As to the story of those who saw my husband and me and had impressions that he was in danger, it is now so long ago that my son could hardly remember it. Captain Reveley, of the Bengal Infantry, who saw him, his wife, who saw me, and the two women, the Scotchwoman, by name Ann Kenny, and the Irishwoman, by name Annie Robertson, both then wives of privates in the Bengal Artillery, I fear, could hardly be traced as witnesses; but I give you their names.

"It occurred at Anarkullie, Lahore, Punjaub, about the year 1850." In conversation v^dth Mrs. Fagan, Professor Sidgwick learnt that Mrs. Reveley did not connect the apparition of Mrs. Fagan with Captain Fagan. Mrs. Reveley, who is now living near Montreal, has been lately applied to for an independent account; but no answer has been received up to the time of going to press.

(653) From Mrs. Heckford, 6, The Crescent, Minories, E.

"1884.

" When I was a child 6 years old, my mother died after a short illness, in Germany, and one of her two unmarried sisters came from Ireland to take charge of my two elder sisters and of me, leaving my other aunt in the country house which had for years been their home. Within a few days of a year from the death of my mother, my eldest sister, a remarkably healthy child, died of scarlatina, also in Germany. When I was a girl in my teens, my surviving sister and I were one day talking about apparitions, in the spirit of absolute disbelief in such appearances which had been carefully fostered by those who educated us, including my aunt; when, somewhat to my astonishment, she recounted to us the following story.

" One night, she said, about the time of my mother's death, she had retired to rest, but was not asleep, when suddenly she saw the figure of my mother, attired in her usual white dressing-gown, sitting at the foot of her bed and gazing steadfastly at her. My aunt said that she was aware that, owing to the fact of my mother being delicate, and no letter having arrived very lately from Germany, she was anxious about her, and

that hence, on seeing the figure, she decided that it was the result of some mental disorder, and resolutely closed her eyes so as to avoid any further delusion. After keeping them shut for some time, she re-opened them, and found that the figure had disappeared. She said that having a horror of encouraging superstitious fancies, she took no note of the day or hour, and having resolved not to tell the sister who then lived with her, so as not to excite or frighten her, had never broken her resolution. She admitted, however, that when she heard of my mother's death a short time after, it struck her that the coincidence was remarkable.

- " Many years after this conversation, when my aunt had passed away, and we two girls were living with her sister, the conversation turned upon ' ghosts.' The company consisted of my Aunt S., her adopted daughter (a cousin of ours), and myself. After remarking that she did not believe in ghosts, my Aunt S. told us she would recount to us a very remarkable experience she had once had. She said that one night, about the time of my mother's death, she had retired to rest, but was not asleep, when suddenly she saw my mother, in her usual white dressing-gown, sitting at the foot of her bed; that she said to the figure, ' Oh, M., how are you 1 ' (or words to that effect) and that the figure replied, ' Quite well, but I shall come back for Jane.'i The figure then disappeared. My Aunt S. said that she resolved not to tell her sister, for fear of exciting her, and that she had taken no note of the day or hour, not wishing to encourage a superstitious feeling; but that on hearing of my mother's death, she had been struck by the strangeness of the coincidence. Even then, she said, the words regarding my sister Jane appeared unmeaning, but were startlingly explained when the child soon followed her mother.

" My Aunt S. never recounted this experience to her sister, who thus passed away in ignorance of the phenomenon of a double apparition. Years passed without any allusion to these singular recitals between my sister, my cousin, and myself; we were thoroughly incredulous of the possibility of ' ghosts ' in general when we heard them, and Spiritualism was to us, for long afterwards, a subject merely for mirth; neither does either my sister or my cousin profess a belief in Spiritualism now; yet they are both ready to attest the truth of my version of a story, the principal witnesses to the veracity of which have passed beyond the reach of inquiry.

" Saeah Heckford.

" A. GoPF [her sister, of 22, Palace Road, Upper Norwood].

" S. C. Eland [her cousin]." Mrs. Goff tells us that the occurrence took place at Christmas, 1845. Her impression had been that the words heard were in answer to a direct question of her aunt about the children.

§ 3. In the following far larger group the percipients were together.

(654) From Professor J. E. Carpenter, Leathes House, Fitzjohn's Avenue, IST.W., an Associate of the S. P.E,. "April 6th 1884.

"I do not know that my story is likely to be very satisfactory to you

1 As to the interchange of remarks, see p. 460, second note.

608 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

because I am unable to give precise dates, and have no means of access to any memorandum made at the time. It is possible that an account which I wrote soon after the occurrence may be preserved [see below], and if you should desire further particulars I may be able to procure them for you.

" The manifestation took place in the early summer of 1868 or 1869, but I cannot now recall which. I lived then in lodgings in Clifton. The mistress of the house was a nervous, highly excitable woman, lame, having one leg shorter than the other. One morning, after breakfast, she appeared much excited, and then informed me that the evening before she had seen a ghost. The circumstances, as far as I recollect, were these. Miss Reed (the landlady) was standing about 7.30 in the kitchen (lighted by a mndow opening into a small area), in front of the kitchen fire. The maidservant was standing at the table with her back to the window, peeling some onions for my fellow-lodger's supper. Suddenly, Miss Reed said to the girl, 'Oh, Eliza, what's that? The girl replied, ' Please'm, I saw a man go round the table and out through the door.' Just then the street-door bell rang. The kitchen door was closed, and had not been opened. The girl's statement expressed exactly what Miss Reed herself had seen. When the bell rang the girl exclaimed, ' Please, miss, I'm so frightened, I daren't go upstairs.' The landlady went up, and on coming down again questioned the girl about the figure. They had both seen only the upper part, above the edge of the table, and it was naked. I asked Miss Reed if it resembled anyone she knew. ' I should have said it was like my uncle,' she answered, ' but he is a very stout man, and this was very thin.' She then detailed to me another curious incident in her own life, of which I have now forgotten the particulars; but I got the impression that she was too excited to give me precise facts about remote events, though her story about the night before was quite coherent and distinct.

"The sequel was curious. Either that day, or very shortly afterwards, she was telegraphed for to go to her uncle, who was dangerously ill and had been repeatedly calling for her. At the time of the manifestation she had no idea that he was in any but his usual health. He lived, I think, at Berkeley, in Gloucestershire. She went immediately, and on her return a few days after told me what a shock she had felt, on going into the sick room, at seeing her uncle reduced to the attenuated form of the man who had presented himself in the kitchen. ^

" I have been sorry since that I did not separately question the servant, but I had reason to think her so little sensible that it did not seem worth while. It was only after Miss Reed's return from her uncle's sick bed that the incident seemed to have any importance.

"J. EsTLiN Carpenter."

In a subsequent letter. Professor Carpenter says: —

" Unfortunately no letter can be found with any account of the actual incident. All that has been discovered I have transcribed on the opposite page. The details I had quite forgotten. The passage does not say that Miss Reed went to her uncle's house, but I feel sure that she was sum-

1 See Vol. i., pp. 554-6.

moned thither; indeed, the particulars here recorded could hardly have been learned by her anywhere else. I fear this is a lame and impotent conclusion.

[Copy.]

" ' Clifton, March 12th, 1869. " ' I send you the sequel of my ghost story — if it is to be considered as a sequel at all. I don't know whether I told you that I asked Miss R. if her ghostly visitor resembled anyone she knew, and she said the only one she could think of whom he was like was her uncle, but he was stout and the appearance was thin. At the end of last week she heard, unexpectedly, that her uncle a few weeks before had been taken seriously ill, that he had been exceedingly reduced, and that he was then lying at death's door. (To-day I hear that he is dead.) Further, some small property that he had he had formerly left to Miss Reed. Some little while ago, however, an aunt of Miss R.'s came to " take care of him," and induced him to alter his will in her favour, at any rate so far as life interest was concerned. When he fell ill, he became much agitated at the injustice he thought he had done Miss R., and expressed himself with strong self-accusation, though, like many weak people, he put off a second alteration from day to day. Whether one of these fits of distress took place at the time of the so-called appearance, and there was really, any connection between them, cannot now be traced, and the story must be left with its possibilities unsolved.'

"P.S. — Miss Reed gave up her house some 10 years ago or more. She was afterwards reduced to considerable distress by sickness, &c. I have certainly heard nothing of her for 8 years, and have quite lost all trace of her."

(655) From Mrs. Mainwaring, of Knowles, Ardingly, Hayward's Heath, (the narrator of case 370,) who sent us a less detailed account in August, 1884. "March 14th, 1885.

" My aunt, Margaret Saulez, and my mother, then Mary Saulez, slept together; and the rules of the house were strict. One most forbidden thing was noise in bedrooms, or talking after going to bed. But the two young girls one night went on chattering and laughing after they were in bed, and suddenly the door opened and my grandmother came in. She just came and looked at them sorrowfully, as if she was vexed, and without speaking left the room. I do not remember, at this moment, whether they spoke to her then; however, they felt so grieved at her look and silence that they both jumped out of bed and followed her quickly to her door, but found it locked, and she would not answer — as they thought — when they begged her to forgive them. My grandfather woke, and found her by his side in a deep swoon.i They sent for the doctor, and he said that he was only just in time to save her life, as she had evidently been in that state some time; and a few hours after a child was born.

" This is the story familiar to me from my mother's lips since my childhood, and I am as sure of its truth as one can be of anything one does not know oneself. The elder sister, my aunt, died soon after.

"E. L. Mainwaring."

1 See Vol. i., pp. 230-1 and 563, note.



Vol. Ii. 2 E

610 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

[Special circumstances, which Mrs. Main waring has explained to us, prevent our applying to her mother for a first-hand account.]

(656) Received through the kindness of the Rev. Prebendary Sadler, Rector of Honiton. The ladies concerned in the case were his great-aunt and her daughter (who died in April, 1885). Writing in 1883, Mr. Sadler

says, " I took the story from Miss F n's own lips, questioning her closely

upon it. She is as clear and fresh in mind as myself. She has a very accurate and retentive memory. I cannot say when I first heard the account — very many years ago." In April, 1884, he added that the account was taken down in writing " several years since."

"In the year 1819, Mrs. S r and [her daughter] MissF n were

going into Leeds, down St. Peter's Hill, when Mrs. S r suddenly

stopped, and pointed out to Miss F n a man on horseback, riding

quickly, a little way before them, up the hill. She exclaimed, ' There is Jonah S.! How strange he looks! He looks like a corpse. Ah, to think of his riding out now, when we heard yesterday that he was dying of fever! ' The man then passed them on horseback without noticing them, though he was well acquainted with them. They stood still, and looked at him as he passed. His eyes looked fixed, as if, though open, they were not looking at anything. He was riding quickly. They followed him with their eyes, till they lost him at the turn of the hill some little way behind them. He had on a light-coloured drab greatcoat, which he

usually wore. Miss F n thinks that he had no hat on, but is not

perfectly sure about that. They did not see him till he was nearly up to them.

" They went into the town to Mr. S r's warehouse. Mr. S r

met them at the door, and before they could say anything to him, said,

' I have just heard that Jonah S. died at 2 o'clock to-day.' Mrs. S r

looked at her watch, and calculated that it was just at that time they saw him pass."

We requested the parish clerk at Leeds to search for the date of the death; he wrote back implying that he had done so, but refused to send the result except in combination with other information, ofiered on terms which, though not unreasonable from his point of view, we could not accept.

[The case is too remote for reliance to be placed on details; but the fact (if correctly remembered) that the ladies were astonished at seeing this particular person out riding, tells against the hypothesis of mistaken identity, in So far as it implies that they gave him more than a hasty glance.]

(657) From Mr. Leonard E. Thomas, Derrie Downs, St. Mary Cray.

"December 17th, 1883.

" A landlady of mine, Mrs. R., with whom I lived for years, and who was one of the kindest of women — a thoroughly God-fearing woman, who, I firmly believe, would scorn to invent or concoct any tale — related to me, among other very peculiar experiences, the following: —

" She was a little girl of about 1 1 years, when her grandfather, who lived a few streets away from them, was taken ill (I believe she said with scarlet fever), and she was not allowed to go near the house. One afternoon her grandfather (who was very fond of the child) wished to see her

very much, and she was taken to him. That night she was lying by her mother's side in bed, and the door stood ajar with a light on the landing. She was lying awake, when she heard the pat, pat, peculiar to a naked foot, ascending the stairs. The form of her grandfather entered the room, advanced to the bed, drew the curtain, and looked at them, and was gone. She was trembling violently, and clung to her mother," who had seen it too, and who said, ' Hush, child! it is only your grandfather.' Her mother then got up and struck a light, and dressed, saying, ' I fear something must have happened to your grandfather; I had better go round and see.' But the child begged her not to, as she would be frightened to death. They waited, and about three-quarters of an hour afterwards a messenger came round to bear the news of her grandfather's death, which had taken place at that precise time."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Thomas adds: —

" I found out the present address of Mrs. R., and wrote to her, asking her to be good enough to write me out an account of what she had once related to me, at the same time stating for what purpose I wished it. I extract from her reply that part of it which refers to the subject, and which runs as follows: —

" ' I do not care in any way to enter into such matters. What I told you, to the best of my knowledge, is true, but undoubtedly the impression then made has been deepened by hearing mother speak of it; and I always think such things that we cannot account for in any way or understand are best let alone.' "

[Details again cannot be relied on, the narrator having been so young at the time. But the fact of the mother's subsequent references to the incident favours the supposition that she herself shared the experience, and that it was not a mere frightened dream of the child's.]

(658) From Mrs. Spenser (mentioned above, p. 575). The account was copied for us by Mrs. Saxby, of Mount Elton, Clevedon, from a private letter. a 97^ Railway Street, Southport.

"September 1st, 1871.

" My sister Elizabeth had a young friend staying with her, who shared the same bed. They had ceased chatting, and were preparing for sleep, when Elizabeth touched Henriette, saying, ' Look at that beautiful light! ' Henriette exclaimed, ' Very beautiful, but what is it? ' Elizabeth replied, ' Oh, it is little Mary Stanger! How exquisitely beautiful. She is floating away,' and the vision passed.

" Early the next morning, she sent to Mr. Stanger's house, and learnt that the dear child had died at the exact time she had seen the vision, about 11 o'clock the previous night.

" The appearance was of the perfect child, enveloped in a soft cloud of the faintest bluish light •} so clear, and emitting or reflecting a light which illuminated the whole exquisitely beautiful little vision; but Elizabeth did not seem to know whether the light originated in the cloud or in the lovely little figure. Henriette saw the light clearly, as well as Elizabeth.

" Lucy Spenser."

1 Compare eases 210, 311, 315, and see Vol. i., p. 526, first note.

612 ■ SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

An inscription on a tombstone at Keswick shows that Mary Stanger died on May 24, 1829, aged 3 years and 8 months.

Mrs. Saxby tells us that the two percipients were the most intimate friends of the child's mother. The child was a cousin of the lady — Mrs. Browne, of Tallantire Hall, near Cockermouth — to whom Mrs. Spenser's letter was written. In conversation with Mrs. Spenser, I learnt that she herself heard of the vision on the morning after its occurrence; also that the child had been playing about the day before, and that its death was due to loss of blood after an incision necessitated by a sudden attack of croup.

[We might suppose Henriette's experience to have been due simply to Elizabeth's suggestion — which may have been the reason why Henriette saw the light and not the figure. But if she really "saw the light clearly," we should thus be crediting verbal suggestion with a larger power of evoking sensory hallucination in non-hypnotised persons than the evidence on the subject seems at all to warrant (see p. 188, and Vol. I., pp. 512-3).]

(659) From the Theory of Pneumatology, by Dr. Johann H. Jung Stilling (translated by S. Jackson, 1851), pp. 271-272. Stilling knew the family of the narrator well, and vouches in strong terms for their truthfulness and probity.

" My brother J. H. C. was placed by a certain reigning prince as doctor of medicine in A., and, on account of his peculiar abilities, the title of Aulic Councillor was conferred on him. He resided there about four years, towards the close of which he resolved, at the request of my late father, to return to H.... We ardently looked for his arrival.... I dreamt one night that I saw my brother on horseback, who said to me that he was on a journey; he would therefore give me several commissions to my parents. I observed that his expression of countenance appeared very strange, and asked him why he looked so blue-black in his face? on which he made answer that it was occasioned by the new cloak he had put on, which was dyed with indigo. On this he reached me his hand, but whilst giving him mine, his horse began to plunge, which terrified me, and I awoke. Not long after awaking, the door of my room opened, someone came to my bedside, and drew aside the curtains, when I perceived the natural figure of my brother in his night-gown. After standing there a few minutes, he went to the table, took up the snuffers, and let them fall, and then shut the room door again. ^ Fear, apprehension, and terror overpowered me to such a degree that I could not stay in bed any longer. I begged my eldest sister, who also witnessed this scene, to accompany me to my parents. On entering the chamber of the latter, my father was astonished, and asked me the reason of my nocturnal coming. I besought him to spare me the answer till the morrow, and only permit me to pass the night in his room, to which he assented.

"As soon as I awoke in the morning, I was called upon by my parents to relate what had happened, which my eldest sister confirmed. The circumstance seemed so remarkable to my father that he noted down the night and the hour. About three weeks afterwards my father received the melancholy intelligence of my brother's decease; when it appeared

1 There is, of course, no reason to suppose the impression that the door and the snuffers were moved to have been anything but part of the hallucination. Cf. cases 659, 670, 676, 696, 698.

that he had died the same night, and the same hour, of an epidemic disorder, in which he had been suffocated, and his face had become quite black. In the last days of his illness he had spoken continually of his family, and had wished for nothing more ardently than to be able to speak once more with me."

[If the singular blue-black appearance of the face was really a feature of the dream, and was not " read back " into it after the truth was known, the details about the dyed cloak well illustrate the subjective and fallacious embodiment which a percipient may supply to a telepathic impression. Another instance of a waking hallucination following at some interval after a dream is case 701.]

(660) From Mr. Alfred W. Hobson, who sent the account from Cambridge, under date March 22, 1864, to the Editor of the Spiritual Magazine. Dr. Parkinson, of St. John's College, Cambridge, told us that he remembered Mr. Hobson, a graduate of that College, as a sensible man. The incident was related, in Mr. Hobson's presence, to the late Dr. Elliotson, by Mr. Joseph C. Robertson, Editor of the Mechanics^ Magazine, who died, we find, in 1852. We have not been able to trace his family.

"The two brothers [i.e., Mr. Robertson and a brother], both very young at the time — I forget their exact ages — were in bed together at their father's house, when they both saw the apparition of a lady to whom their father (a widower) was engaged to be married. She died suddenly that same night. The father was away from home, and not with the boys. In this case it seems as if the dying lady had been desirous of appearing to the father, and had come to his usual dwelling in the expectation of seeing him; but was disappointed, finding only his sons instead.^

"It so happened that Mr. Robertson himself died a few months after the above dialogue, and the brother referred to in it was with me in the same mourning coach at the funeral, and confirmed the story as told by his deceased brother. The elder brother was, I believe, more alarmed at the apparition than the younger."

(661) From a relative of our energetic friend and helper, Miss Frances M. Peard, of Torquay, who procured us the account. She says that the narrator (whose name we are not at liberty to publish) " is a remarkably shrewd, sensible person." " 1883.

"In the decade of 184 —, one of Her Majesty's Regiments was lying in a small town, well up in Upper Canada then, now Ontario. An ofl&cer in that regiment, a captain, had from the first shown a great regard for me, and had always been very devoted in his attentions; but though I liked him much, I could not say that I would accept him. In the spring of 184 —, April, there were steeplechases got up by the garrison. Captain

, who was a splendid horseman in every way, entered his horse. I

must mention that three or four years before, he had met with an accident whilst riding a race, and winning. A man rode across the course.

Captain with his horse ran against him, was thrown, his horse

injured, and his own leg broken, which caused him to have a limp or halt in his walk; but it did not prevent him being a beautiful waltzer, and a perfect rider. He and I rode together continually, and he made me the good horsewoman I was.

1 See p. 268.

614 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

The day before the steeplechases above mentioned, Captain

again spoke to me about my coldness, and told me he put his fate on this race. If he won, would I say ' yes '; and if I decided thus, would I give him a rose I had been nursing for this occasion? I had not answered then; but if I wore my rose, and afterwards gave it to him whether he won the race or not, it would be a reply to him. Well, I wore my rose. The day was lovely. He won his race and rose and my acceptance; for I was one of a large family of daughters and my father not young, and I really liked no one better. Of course he was delighted. My mother gave

a dance that evening to all our world. Captain engaged me for the

first three waltzes, in fact for several dances, and he was to be there early. The dance began, and the dances, but my partner did not appear. I began to feel annoyed; and several of his brother ofiicers looked at each other smiling and began making jokes, &c. I said to mamma, ' How odd it is; he has never done such a thing before,' when I saw him walk into the drawing-room, which was the ball-room, in his shell-jacket. The other officers were in full dress as usual for balls, but he appeared in his usual shell-jacket, mess-dress, with my rose in his buttonhole. He walked across the room. I looking at him, he gave me a serious, earnest, yet devoted and constant regard. He walked across the room in front of me, went towards the window, and turned and went back out of the door, always the limp, and the earnest steady regard. A waltz then began. I waited for him; he never came. Mamma said, ' How strange.' I went to the other rooms. No partner there; he was not to be seen anywhere. One or two others saw. Colonel W., Colonel T.,i and one or two of his brother officers. It spoiled my evening. Somehow I cared not to dance, and felt low and depressed and hurt.

" Next morning, whilst we were at breakfast, papa came rushing in, looking anxious and alarmed. He turned to me and said, ' S., did you not say Captain — ■ — was here last night 1 You saw him.' Mamma and I both said, ' Yes, certainly. He came into the drawing-room, walked across to the window, his usual limp, and gave me such a serious look.' We sprang up and said, ' Why do you ask? ' I knew something had happened. Papa said, ' He has not been in barracks all night. He rode out towards

B bridge to a farm about 5 p.m. His horse came back about 12 p.m.,

saddle soaked, and horse terrified.' Of course the whole garrison turned out, and a general search was made. He was not found until the second day, in the river. The flap of an overcoat showed where the body was. He had put on his shell-jacket before starting, intending to return late for mess. My rose was still in his buttonhole, and it was buried with him. He came home, or intended doing so, by a deep ford, but the river had risen suddenly, as it sometimes did. He was very late, and he tried no doubt to swim the river, but did not succeed. It was supposed the horse became frightened and knocked him on the forehead, as there was a mark. His watch had stopped at about 10.15 p.m. Our parties began always at 9 p.m., and closed at 1.30 a.m. He came, I seriously believe, to keep his engagement to me, and to have his last long look of one he so loved; for he did so far more than I deserved.

^ These gentlemen are now dead. Their names were communicated to us, and we have traced them in the Army List. The former was Deputy- Adjutant General in Canada from 1843 onwards.

" This is, I am glad to say, the only ghostly adventure I have ever had. I am most matter-of-fact, and by no means subject to hallucinations of any kind. On the contrary, I do not easily believe anything. That was the only time in all my life that I ever had such a vision; and nothing on earth will ever make me believe that his spirit ^ did not come to see me that evening and to keep his engagement with me — the peculiar limp, the sad expression he rather had at all times, and the little crimson monthly rose.

" My sister A. remembers it. My mother always said how odd and unaccountable it was. Colonel T., who is dead, never got over it. It gave him a shudder even to speak of it. ' Bedad! I don't like ghosts! ' he often said."

We have obtained from the Chief Librarian of the Toronto Public Library a certified extract from the Toronto Examiner oi May 26, 1841, giving an account of Lieut, (not Capt.)^ W.'s death which differs from the above in stating that his horse and dog returned to a farm-house near the river " about 20 minutes after " 5 o'clock, when he had been last seen, and " were brought into the town next day." He must therefore have been drowned soon after 5. The detail about his watch stopping at 10.15 is thus probably incorrect, and the closeness of the coincidence has been

(662) From an informant who desires that her name may be suppressed, on account of the painful nature of the main incident. She is a very reasonable and respectable woman, who expresses a strong contempt for superstition, and is very sensible of the exaggeration and delusion which enter into the vulgar iDeliefs in " supernatural " occurrences.

" 1883.

" When I was a young girl, I resided with my father, mother, sister (named Ellen), and brother, at Clapham. My sister was in love with a man, but my father and mother disapproved of the attachment, and sent her to a friend in Brighton, to be out of the way. One evening during her absence, between 6 and 7 o'clock, my mother and brother were talking in the garden, at the back of the house. There was a wall at the bottom of the garden, and a gate, leading into a large enclosed space used for drilling, &c.; this enclosure was locked in the evening, and was certainly locked at the time in question. It was dusk, but not dark. My brother John (a very active boy, but who happened to have just sprained his ankle) looked over the wall, and suddenly exclaimed, ' Mother, there's Ellen! ' My mother looked, saw, and recognised the figure of my sister, and said, ' John, go quick, and tell her to come in. Don't say anything to your father.' John replied, ' I can't because of my foot; call Mary.' Mother then called me, and whispered, ' There's Ellen; go and tell her to come in; her father shall not know anything about her coming back.' My mother's idea was to get her quietly into the house, and send her away again next day. I at once went through the garden-gate, and gave her the message. I particularly noticed her dress, a dark blue pelisse, buttoned, and the ribbon on her bonnet. A path led through the enclosure to the outside gate, and she kept receding from me along this path, while

^ See p. 48, note.

2 The Chief Librarian writes (Aug. 26, 1886), " Captain is so common an appellation in the country parts that the officer would most likely be addressed and known as such among the ordinary people."

616 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

I followed more and more quickly, my mother and John watching us. There was a deep dip in the path, and here I overtook her and tried to catch hold of her, but seemed to catch nothing. She still receded, and at last stood by the watch-box, close to the gate; and here I repeated the message to her, but as she made no answer, I went back.^ My mother said, ' Why, where's Ellen 1 ' I said, ' I left her by the gate.' My mother replied, 'But you caught hold of her.' 'Yes,' I said, 'but I did not seem to feel anything in my hand.'

" My mother turned very pale, and went into the house and told my father, and both of them felt a conviction that some calamity had happened. The next day the news came that my sister had thrown herself into the sea and been drowned a little before 7 o'clock on the preceding evening. This is the only occasion on which I have ever seen an apparition."

[This is a case where it is specially important to distinguish the central fact of a coincidence, which may be regarded as probably telepathic, from the details which may have been subsequently imagined or exaggerated. Even if the report is substantially correct, we have no proof that the hallucination was spontaneously collective; in the uncertain light, it may possibly have been produced in the second and third percipients by the suggestion of the first.]

(663) From Mr. C. Colchester, Bushey Heath, Herts.

"1882.

" Forty-two or three years ago, my father was with a detachment of his regiment, the Royal Artillery, stationed at Montreal, Canada. He had left his mother some months before in England, in an indifferent state of health. One evening he was sitting at his desk, writing to her, when my mother, looking up from her work, was startled to see his mother looking over his shoulder, seemingly intent on the letter. My mother gave a cry of alarm, and on my father turning round the apparition vanished.^ On the same evening I and my brother (aged about 6 and 5 years) were in bed, watching the bright moonlight, when suddenly we saw a figure, a lady with her hands folded on her breast — neither looking to right nor left, but with her eyes cast down in meditation, the head slightly bent forward — walking slowly between the bed and the window, backwards and forwards. She wore a cap with a frill tied under her chin, and a dressinggown of the appearance of white flannel, her white hair being neatly arranged. She continued to walk, it seemed to me, fully 5 minutes, and then was gone. We did not cry out, and were not even alarmed, but after her disappearance we said to each other, ' What a nice kind lady! ' and then went to sleep."

The children mentioned what they had seen to their mother next morning, but were told not to talk about it. The news of their grandmother's death on that same evening arrived a few weeks afterwards.

" I may add," Mr. Colchester concludes, " that neither I nor my

^ This long pursuit of the phantasmal figure has occasional parallels in cases of purely subjective hallucination. See, e.g., Vol. i., p. 499, note; and compare the case on p. 630.

2 Seep. 91, second note. Mr. Colchester believes, however, that his father saw the apparition.

brother had ever seen our grandmother until that evening, nor knew of what my mother had seen till years after. The apparition I saw is as palpably before me now as it was 40 years since."

We find from the Register of Deaths that the death occurred on March 31, 1840.

[Mr. Colchester tells us, in answer to the question whether he believes his own remembrance to have been unbroken, that "the occurrence was not wholly or even partially revived by my mother "; and that the vision is unique in his experience. But his extreme youth at the time makes his first-hand recollection extremely doubtful. This objection does not apply to his evidence as to his parents' share in the afiair. If the facts are correctly reported, this case belongs to the former group, of cases where the percipients were apart, as much as to the present one.]

(664) From Mr. E. Butler, 7, Park Square, Leeds.

"October, 1884.

" During my clerkship I resided in lodgings, with a kind-hearted Christian woman of great simplicity of character and reliable veracity. I heard from her this story.

" Her brother was engaged in the wine trade, and spent a great part of his time in Portugal and Spain. His two children were left in Leeds. I am not sure whether their mother was living, but they were frequently, if not altogether, at their aunt's. One day the two children were in the back sitting-room along with their aunt, and one or two besides (I believe their cousins). It is the room I very shortly afterwards lived in. The children simultaneously cried out, ' Oh! there's papa! gone upstairs.' They were laughed at, and chidden, but persisted, and the search had to be made. Nothing was discovered. It was afterwards found by the testimony of the papa himself, that exactly at that time when the children saw him he had fallen into the Douro, and was in that stage of singular experience before death by drowning when ' all the life seems mapped out before the spirit,' and the soul is just on the point of parting from the body. I do not recollect whether he said that he had specially thought of his children in that supreme moment. Insensibility followed; but he was rescued, not too late for restoration. a Edward Butler "

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Butler says: —

" With regard to your inquiry, I fear I should have some difficulty now in getting any corroboration of my communication respecting my old landlady, though my own remembrance of her communication is too vivid to admit of the possibility of mistake. It was told me in the room, my own room, where it occurred, with finger pointing to the passage and staircase. Her name was Mrs. Booth; the house, No. 7, Grove Terrace, Leeds: the absentee in Spain, her own brother, William Wild; of the children, his daughters, every one I believe is dead. The daughters left Leeds many years ago, and I believe I am right that they are neither of them living."

(665) From Mr. Beresford Christmas, Carrara, Italy.

"November 30th, 1885. " My father, George Beresford Christmas, was a cavalry officer in the Danish service; his elder and only brother, John Christmas, an admiral

618 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

in the same service. The latter's only son, Walter Christmas, was, and is still for aught I know to the contrary, one of the gentlemen of the bed-chamber to the King of Denmark. The circumstance I am about to relate took place before my father's marriage, when he was yet a young man and living with my grandfather in Copenhagen — it must have been somewhere about 1825. Admiral C. had sailed for St. Thomas, and my father accompanied him, leaving my grandfather in his usual health in Denmark. The two brothers occupied the same cabin, across wliich, for the sake of coolness on entering the tropics, a couple of cots had been slung parallel to each other. They were within a few days' sail of the island; the sea calm, the sky clear, and, on the night in question, a bright moonlight pouring in through the widely-opened cabin windows, lighting up all within with almost the distinctness of daylight. Both brothers must have been awaked suddenly and simultaneously — by what, they never knew — by some irresistible and unknown power — waked to see standing between their cots the figure of their father. Both gazed in mute amazement: there it stood, motionless for a moment, which seemed a century; then it raised one hand and pointed to its own eyes. They were closed. My father started up in bed, and as he did so the form vanished. So much was my uncle impressed with the fact that he at once entered it, with date and moment of appearance, in the log-book; while naturally the circumstance became the all-absorbing topic of conversation and speculation to all on board.

" When later letters reached them in the West Indies, the hour and minute, allowing of course for difference of time, were found to coincide exactly with those in which my grandfather had died.

" In due time the circumstance was known to all Copenhagen. Neither my uncle nor father ever liked to speak about it. I have had the fact from the lips of both. Both firmly believed in the reality of the vision, and neither of them was the man to give heed or credence to an idle delusion. I remember both, in answer to a question of mine, declaring to having felt no fear, or even awe: sudden wonder and an unaccountable chill, as of an icy atmosphere, ^ was the predominating impression. It was only when the figure pointed to its own closed eyes, that a dumb dread of impending bereavement awoke. My father, as also my uncle, used to affirm that neither on the evening in question nor upon any of the previous days had their father been particularly the subject of either their conversation or thoughts. There was no preparation, so to say, on their part for the apparition; at the same instant both were suddenly awoke from sleep by some mysterious and irresistible will, when both beheld the identical form standing within arm's length of them.

" I have no doubt, if you have among your correspondents or members anyone in Copenhagen willing to take the trouble, you might be able to get at the entry made in the log-book. ^ My uncle was on active service till his death almost, which took place only a few years ago, and there could be no difficulty in tracing back the vessels he commanded.

" Beresford Christmas."

1 See p. 37, note.

2 Unfortunately we have no Danish members. I have mentioned (in Vol. i., p. 161) the great tendency of log-hooks to creep unauthorised into second-hand narratives of this sort; but the essential trustworthiness of the account does not, of course, depend on that detail.

The next case, if telepathically originated, is an interesting instance of the appearance of a phantasm to certain percipients on local, not personal, grounds (p. 268).

(666) From Miss Edith Farquharson, sent to us by her relative, Mrs. Murray Aynsley, of Great Brampton, near Hereford.

"June, 1885.

"In the year 1868, No. 9, Drummond Place, Edinburgh, was in the occupation of Mr. Farquharson, formerly a Judge of the High Court in Jamaica. On the night of Good Friday in that year, two of his daughters. Miss Edith Farquharson, her sister Marianne [now Mrs. Henry Murray], and a little cousin, Agnes Spalding, aged 6 years, were sleeping in a room at the top of the house. About 11.45 p.m., the two sisters were awakened by hearing loud screams from the child, who was sleeping on a mattress placed on the iloor beside their bed. The mattress was against the door leading into a dressing-room; this door was locked and sealed with white tapes and black wax; it had been thus closed by a member of the family to whom the house belonged before Mr. Farquharson entered upon his tenancy. The death of the head of the family, and the delicacy of health of one of the daughters, had caused them to wish to leave Edinburgh, and spend the winter in Torquay.

" On hearing the child's screams of terror, Miss M. F. touched her sister and said, ' Do you hear the child screaming 1 ' Miss E. F. replied that she did, and turned her head round to listen better. When the child was asked what she was screaming about, she said, 'I am wide awake, and I have seen a figure which was leaning over me,' and when further questioned where the figure went to, said, ' Round the side of your bed.'

" Miss E. F., when she turned round, saw a figure slide from near the child's bed and pass along the foot of the bed whereon she and her sister were. (At the first moment she thought it was a thief.) The latter, on hearing her say in French '■ II y a quelqu'un,^ was so terrified that she hid her head under the bedclothes.

"Miss E. F. describes the figure as being dressed in a rough brown shawl held tightly round the bust, a wide brimmed hat, and a veil. Wlien the child was questioned afterwards she gave the same account of the costume.

" Miss E. F. says that after passing along the foot of the bed with a noiseless gliding motion, the figure disappeared into the darkness.

" Except the door which was locked and sealed, the only door of exit to the room was one which was quite close to the bed; at right angles with the door and with the head of the bed was a large hanging cupboard.

" Both the ladies got up instantly. They found the door of their room closed, as they had left it. Their brother's room was next to theirs; they knocked at his door to rouse him, at the same time keeping a sharp lookout on the door of their own room to see that no one escaped. The whole party then made a thorough search in the room and cupboard, found nothing disturbed, and once more retired to rest. The next morning the page-boy said that he had been unable to sleep all night on account of the sounds he heard of someone scratching at his window. He declared that he had shied all his boots and everything he could lay hold of in the direction whence the noise came, but without effect. He could stand it

620 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

no longer, and went to the room where some of the women-servants slept, begging to be let in. They had heard nothing, however, though they, like himself, slept in the basement of the house.

" The whole family were hardly assembled on the Saturday morning, when the son-in-law of the late owner of the house arrived, and asked to see Mr. Farquharson. He wished particularly to know exactly what day this gentleman and his family intended leaving the house, (their term would expire the following week,) for he had just received a telegram informing him that his sister-in-law had died that night, and they were anxious to bring her body there immediately for burial."

(With respect to this last paragraph, the narrator's father writes: —

" The above is a correct statement of the occurrence.

"C. M. Faequhaeson.")

Miss Farquharson continues: —

" The possible solution of what we presume to have been an apparition of this lady is, that the bedroom occupied by the Misses Farquharson being the one she habitually used, in her dying moments she desired to visit it once more, or else that there was something in the dressing-room which she particularly wished for. " Edith A. Faequhaeson."

The following independent account is from Mrs. Murray: —

" Cobo, Guernsey.

"June 24th, 1885.

"Our home was in Perthshire; but in the winter of 1868 my father took a house for four months in Drummond Place, No. 8, p 9] in Edinburgh, in order to give us a change. The house belonged to General Stewart, who had a delicate daughter, and he let it, to take the daughter to Torquay for the winter. We did not know the Stewarts, so our imagination could not have assisted in any way to account for the curious apparition that was seen. I myself did not see it,i but I was in the room with my sister and little cousin, who both did. My belief is that Providence prevented my seeing it, as I am of a very nervous temperament, and it might have had a very bad effect on me if I had. Well, the apparition took place on Good Friday night, at about 12 o'clock. This little cousin, who was only about 6 years old, had come into town from the country, and as our house was very full she had a shake-down beside our bed on my side. I was the first to be awakened by hearing her calling out in a frightened way. So I said, ' What is the matter, Addie 1 ' ' Oh,' she said, ' Cousin Marianne, I am so frightened. A figure has been leaning over me, and whenever I put out my hands to push it off it leant back on your bed! ' At this I was alarmed and awoke my sister, who lifted her head from her pillow and looked up, when she saw a figure gliding across the foot of our bed wrapped in a shawl, with a hat and veil on. She whispered to me in French '■ II y a quelqu'un,'' thinking it was a thief, whereat we both jumped out of bed together and went to the next room to get our brother. Captain Farquharson. His bedroom door had a shaky lock which made a noise, so he had barricaded it with a portmanteau. While he was coming to our help, we kept our eyes fixed on our door in case anyone should have escaped, but we saw nothing, and after our all

1 Compare case 684, and see p. 105, second note.

searching every corner of the bedroom we came to the conclusion that no one had been there, for everything was intact. We then questioned little Addie as to what she had seen and what the figure was like. She described it as that of a lady with a shawl on and a hat, and a veil over her face, and said that as I spoke she had gone across the foot of the bed in the same direction that my sister had seen her go. This child, I must tell you, had been most carefully brought up by her mother, and was not allowed to read even fairy tales for fear of having foolish ideas in her head, which makes the thing more remarkable, for she had certainly never heard of a ghost. I don't know even now whether she knows anything about it, for we had to pretend that it must have been my eldest sister who had come in to play us a trick, for fear of frightening her.

" Then the next morning we were relating our adventures, when a ring came to the door, and the servant said a gentleman wanted to speak to my father. This gentleman was a Mr. Findlay, who had married a Miss Stewart. He came to ask when we were to leave, for he knew it was about the time, as he had received a telegram that morning to say that Miss Stewart had died in Torquay during the night, and they wanted to bring her body to Edinburgh. We heard afterwards from friends of the Stewarts that the bedroom we had had been hers. I forgot to mention that the child's bed lay across the door of a small room which had been locked up by the Stewarts, and they had put tapes across and sealed them with black wax.

" We have none of us ever had any hallucinations either before or after this strange affair. u Marianne Mubray."

We find from the Scotsman and the Edinburgh Courant that Miss Stewart died on April 11, 1868, the day following Good Friday. If the death took place in the course of a few hours after midnight, " during the night " would of course be the natural expression.

Mrs. Brietzcke, of 72, Sterndale Road, W., after reading this account in the Journal of the S.P.R., wrote to us as follows, on Sept. 29, 1885: —

" I was very intimate with two Misses Myers; and within a day or two of their cousins', the Misses Farquharson, having the experience related, they (the Misses Myers) told me the affair, just as related in the Journal; and they also, I understood, had seen Boyd (2, York Place, Edinburgh), the house-agent, and heard that the description of the lady in the large hat and veil was exactly like the lady to whom the house belonged. The Misses Myers were much impressed. The elder is dead; the other married a Mr. Dunlop, and went to India; I have lost sight of lier. " H. K. Brietzcke."

Mrs. Murray confirms the fact that her cousins, the Misses Myers, were informed of the vision very soon after its occurrence, and adds: — " I do not think any of us mentioned it to Mr. Boyd; he may have heard it from someone else, for it caused quite a sensation in Edinburgh. I have no reason to believe that the dress of the figure was in any way characteristic of Miss Stewart." ^

1 A narrative somewhat resembling this was given in Tinsley's Magazine for December, 1873, in connection with a family named Fitzgerald, alleged to have resided at Ballyreina, in Ireland. We have not been able to trace the virriter of this paper, or to discover any place called Ballyreina. There is a village in Ireland called Ballyraine; but we cannot find that any family of the name of Fitzgerald has been connected with it.

622 SUPPLEMENT. [chap.

[The resemblance of the figure seen to the lady who died is entirely problematic. It might almost have been foretold as certain that the resemblance would form a prominent item in any third-hand version of the occurrence.]

(667) From the Methodist Magazine for March, 1819, p. 208, — a letter to the Editor. " Rochester, February 4th, 1818.

"Sir, — At the Sheffield Conference of 1817, when examining the young men in the public congregation, I was greatly surprised by the extraordinary declaration of one of the preachers. The efiect his narrative produced upon the audience induced me to request him to commit to paper what he had so distinctly detailed. As it contains a well-authenticated account of what infidelity has afiected to deny, and many well-informed Christians receive with suspicion and doubt, your insertion of his letter to me will at least afibrd some further eAddence on a question which is of such high interest and importance to the world. " j. Gaulter."

" Sheffield.

" 8th August, 1817.

" Mr. President, — Hon. Sir, — According to your desire I take up my pen, to give you the particulars of a solemn fact, which was the first grand means of leading my mind seriously to think of those solemn realities — death, judgment, and eternity.

I j "A sister being married to a gentleman in the army, we received intelligence that the regiment to which he belonged had orders for one of the Spanish Isles (Minorca). One night (16 years back) about 10 o'clock, as his wife, his child, an elder sister, and myself (a boy of nine years) were sitting in a back room, the shutters were closed, bolted, and barred, the yard-door locked, when suddenly a light shone through the window, the shutters, the bars, illumined the room we sat in.^ We looked — started — and beheld the spirit '^ of a raurdered brother; his eye was fixed on his wife and child alternately; he waved his hand, smiled, continued about half a minute, then vanished from our sight. The moment before the spirit disappeared, my sister cried, ' He's dead; he's dead '; and fainted away. Her little boy ran to his father's spirit, and wept because it would not stay. A short time after this, we received a letter from the colonel of the regiment sealed with black (the dark emblem of mortality), bearing the doleful but expected news, that on such a night (the same on which we saw his spirit) my brother-in-law was found weltering in his blood (in returning from the mess-room); the spark of life was not quite out. The last wish he was heard to breathe was to see his wife and child; it was granted him in a certain sense, for the very hour he died in the Island of Minorca, that same hour (according to the very little difference of clocks) his spirit appeared to his wife, his child, an elder sister, and myself, in Doncaster.... "I am, Sir, yours obediently,

" Thos. Savage."

1 This case should be added to the list given in Vol. i., p. 551, second note, of examples where the phantasm has included a marked appearance of luminosity.

2 See p. 48, note.

" P.S. — My sister, from the night she saw the spirit of her husband, mov/rned him as dead, nor could my father prevent it by any argument. He endeavoured to persuade us we were all deceived, yet he acknowledged the testimony which the child gave staggered him; but when the letter arrived from the colonel of the regiment, with the awful tidings, he was struck dumb. My two sisters are yet living and can testify to the truth of this account, and at least one hundred persons beside our own family can prove our mentioning the hour the spirit appeared, several weeks before we received the melancholy letter, and that the letter mentioned the hour and night he died as the same in which we beheld his spirit. " T. S."

Mr. Savage wrote a precisely concordant account ^ (of which we have a copy) for the Rev. R. Filter, whose daughter writes as follows on the subject to our friend, the Rev. J. A. Macdonald: —

" Doncaster.

"December 17th, 1885.

" Dear Mr. Macdonald, — My father, the Rev. R. Filter, heard Mr. Savage relate a curious fact at the Conference when he was received into ' full connexion.' Mr. Savage said that as a youth he had been sceptically inclined, ^ but that the circumstance related had led to his conversion. My father was so much interested that he requested Mr. Savage to write down the narrative for him. He did so. The paper which you have accurately copied was the result; it was carefully preserved, and fell into my hands at my father's death.

" The Rev. H. Hastling, who lived in Doncaster 50 years ago, remembers the tale very well. His recollection agrees exactly with the narrative you have copied. The sister's husband was supposed to have been murdered in mistake for somebody else, or else by someone who had a grudge against him. Mr. Hastling says the scene was a house in St. George's Gate, pulled down a few years ago.

" Yours very truly, "J. M. Filter."

§ 4, In the following group of cases, it is more doubtful whether the experience recorded should be ascribed to the agency of the person whom the phantasm represented. If not, they are simply examples of transferred hallucinations of subjective origin, and as such their position in this book has been sufficiently explained (pp. 183, 189-92). The first three examples are (except in the fact of being collective) parallel to the " arrival cases " of Chap. XIV., § 7.

(668) From The Journal of Mental Science, for April, 1880, p. 151. The editor writes, on Feb. 12, 1880:—

