in most cases it disappears when the purpose of the census is explained, and careful suppression of names is guaranteed. And against this tendency to swell the noes may be set several reasons why, quite apart from untruth, a census like this is sure to produce an unfair number of yeses. Quite apart from any wish to deceive, the very general impression that yeses were what was specially wanted could not but affect some of the answers given, at any rate to the extent of causing indistinct impressions to be represented as vivid sensory experiences ■} and it has also led some of those who have aided in the collection to put the questions to persons of whom it was known beforehand that their answer would be yes. Moreover, when question-forms to be filled up are distributed on a large scale, it is impossible to bring it home to the minds of many of the persons whose answer would be " No " that there is any use in recording that answer. They probably have a vague idea that they have heard " negative evidence " disparaged, and fail to see that every percentage in the world involves it — that we cannot know that one man in 100 is six feet high without evidence that 99 men in 100 are not six feet high. This difficulty has been encountered again and again; and on the whole I have no doubt that the proportion of yeses is decidedly larger than it ought to be. Fortunately, incorrectness on this side need not trouble us — ■ its only effect being that the telepathic argument, if it prevail, will prevail though based on distinctly unfavourable assumptions.

§ 6. And now to proceed to the actual results of the census, and to the calculations based thereon. I will begin with auditory cases. Of the 5705 persons who have been asked the question, it appears that 96 have, within the last 12 years, when awake,^ experienced an auditory hallucination of a voice. The voice is alleged to have been unrecognised in 48 cases, and recognised in 44, in 13 of which latter cases the person whose voice seemed to be heard was known to have been dead for some time. In the remaining 4 cases it has been

1 For instance, a lady who answers that she has had an auditory hallucination, and is ■written to -with the view of finding out in what it had consisted, then states that "it was not an auditory experience, but merely a feeling that something had happened." Here the answer could be rectified; but even the many hundreds of letters that have been %vritten on the subject have not served to eliminate all doubtful cases.

2 I have not made a separate calculation for "borderland " cases; as the attempt to obtain separate statistics under that head would have complicated the census, and the only chance of carrying it through successfully was to keep it as simple as possible. The question as to hallucinations specially included the condition of being awake; but naturally some of the experiences recorded had taken place when the hallucinated person was in bed (Vol. i., p. 393). I reckon these cases among the yeses; and I include similar experiences in the group of coincidental hallucinations which appears later in the calculation.

impossible to discover whether the voice was recognised or not; the numbers being so even, I shall perhaps be justified in assigning 2 of these to one class, and 2 to the other. The computation will be clearer if we consider only the cases in which the voice was recognised, and the person whom it suggested was living; these, then may be taken as 33. But, out of the 33 persons, 10 ^ profess to have had the experience more than once. Such cases of repetition, or at any rate most of them, might fairly have been disregarded; for since the large majority of the persons who have had one of the coincidental hallucinations, which appear later in the calculation, can recall no other hallucination besides that one, I might in the same proportion confine the present list, which consists wholly of non-coincidental or purely subjective hallucinations, to similarly unique experiences, and leave out of account those occurring to people who seem rather more pre-disposed to such affections. However, in order to make ample allowance for the possibility that the witnesses in the coincidental cases may have had subjective hallucinations which they have forgotten, let us take the repetitions into account; and let us suppose each of the 10 persons just mentioned to have had 4 experiences of the sort within the specified 12 years. The most convenient way of making this allowance will be to add 30 to the former total of 33 — i.e., to take the number of persons who have had the experience under the given conditions as 63. This amounts to 1 in every 90 of the group of 5705 persons named, or (if that group be accepted as fairly representative of the population of this country) 1 in every 90 of the population.

Let us now see what the proportion of the population who have had such an experience ought to be, on the hypothesis that the similar impressions of recognised voices presented in this book as telepathic were really chance-coincidences. As before in the case of dreams (Vol. I., pp. 303-7), I take cases where the coincidence of the hallucination was with death — the reasons for this selection being

(1) that death is the prominent event in our telepathic cases; and

(2) that for the purpose of an accurate numerical estimate it is important to select an event of a very definite and unmistakeable kind, such as only happens once to each individual. Again also, in accordance with the official returns which give jfl^ as the annual death-rate, the proportion of anyone's relatives and acquaintances

^ Some of these cases were quite clearly " after-images " (see Vol. i., p. 502). One informant describes the impressions as very faint, and another experienced them only when over-tired.

U TEE THEORY OF CHANCE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

who die in the course of 12 years is taken as —^; and as we have seen (Vol. I., pp. 305-6), it will make no appreciable difference to the calculation whether a person's circle of relatives and acquaintances, the voice of any one of whom his hallucination may represent, is large or small. The probability, then, that a person hallucinated in the way supposed will, by accident, have his hallucination within 12 hours on either side of the death of the relative or acquaintance whose voice it represents, is 1 in ^'^ ^ ^H^ ^°°°, or fg^^. That is to say, each coincidental hallucination of the sort in question implies 16,590 purely subjective cases of the same type. Now our collection may be reckoned to include 13 first-hand and well-attested coincidental cases of this kind, which have occurred in this country within the specified time.^ On the hypothesis, therefore, that these cases were accidental, the circle of persons from whom they are drawn ought to supply altogether, in the specified 12 years, 215,670 examples.

The next point to decide is the size of the circle from which our coincidental cases are drawn. The number here is not one that it is possible to estimate accurately: what must be done, therefore, is to make sure that our margin is on the side adverse to the telepathic argument, i.e., to take a number clearly in excess of the true one. Our chief means of obtaining information has been by occasional requests in newspapers. A million-and-a-half would probably be an outside estimate of the circulation of the papers which have contained our appeals; but it by no means follows that every paragraph in a paper is studied by every person, or by a tenth of the persons, whom the paper reaches. However, I will make the extreme assumption that as many as a quarter of a million of people have by this means become aware of the kind of evidence that was being sought — an assumption which probably arrogates to us who sought it many times as much fame as we really possess; and I will allow another 50,000 for those who have become aware of the object of our work through private channels. This would raise the number of the circle from whom our evidence is drawn to 300,000, or about sV of the adult population.^ No one, I think,

1 Nos. 33, 158, 184, 190, 197, 272, 273, 278, 298, 300, 310, 340, 702. In one of these cases, No. 197, it is possible, on the facts stated, that the 12 hours' limit was slightly exceeded. I have not included case 613, as, though there were only a very few people by whom the percipient could have been addressed as "Pa," — which was the word he heard — and one of these died at the time at a distance, the father did not identify the voice with the particular son who died.

2 In the "adult population"! mean to include all persons above 15 years of age. In the Supplement to the 45th Annual Report of the Registrar-General, p. xix., the proportion of such persons is given as "64 of the whole; which would make their number about 24,000,000.

will maintain on reflection, that I am taking too low an estimate. Would anyone, for instance, suppose that if he canvassed the first 1000 adults whom he met in the streets of any large town, he would find that 12 or 13 of them had, within the last three years, been aware of what we wanted, and of the address to which information might be sent? and for rural districts such a supposition would be even more violent. But I am further supposing that this area of 300,000 persons has been drained dry — again an extravagant concession; for though it is easily assumed that anyone who has ever had a " psychical " experience is desirous to publish it abroad, as a matter of fact people do not usually take the trouble to write a letter about family and personal matters to perfect strangers, on the ground of a newspaper appeal; and I have already mentioned that we ourselves know of much evidence which the reluctance or indifference of the parties concerned has made unavailable for our collection; we cannot, therefore, doubt that much more remains unelicited even among those whom our appeal has reached. A further strong argument for the existence of these unelicited facts is the very large proportion of our actual cases that has been drawn from a circle of our own, unconnected with "psychical" inquiry — from the friends, or the friends' friends, of a group of some half-dozen persons who have had no such experiences themselves, and who have no reason to suppose their friends or their friends' friends better supplied with them than anybody else's.^ Here, then, is the conclusion to which we shall be driven, if our coincidental cases were really purely subjective hallucinations, and the coincidence was an accident: — that in a circle of 300,000, within 12 years, 215,670 subjective hallucinations of the type in question have taken place; that is that, on an average, 7 persons in every 10 have had such an experience within the time. But the result of the census above described showed the proportion to be 1 person in every 90 only. Thus the theory of chance-coincidence, as applied to this

1 An approximation to an estimate of the actual circle whom we have effectively reached may perhaps be made as follows: — Of the 24 coincidental dreams of death, mentioned in Vol. i., p..307, 4 were derived from a canvassed group of 5360 persons; of the 13 coincidental auditory hallucinations mentioned above, none were derived from the canvassed group of 5705 persons; and of 27 coincidental visual hallucinations (of a definite type to be explained immediately), 1 was derived from a canvassed group of 5705 persons. Thus of 64 coincidental experiences of specified sorts, 5, or about one-thirteenth, were obtained by canvassing a body which (to take a mean) we may call 5535: we may surmise, then, that the circle from whom the whole number were drawn amounts to about 13 times 5535, or 71,955. This is no doubt a very rough calculation; the number of coincidental (or, as we should say, telepathic) experiences yielded by a random group of 5535 persons being too small for us to be confident that it represents the average proportion in other groups of the same size. But the estimate is probably not so inexact but that it may safely be taken as showing the assumption of 300,000, made in the text, to be extravagantly unfair to the telepathic argument.

16 THE THEORY OF CHANGE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

class of cases, would require that the proportion of those who have not had, to those who have had, a subjective hallucination of a recognised voice should be 63 times as large as it has been shown to be; that is, would require either that the subjective hallucinations should be 63 times as numerous as they actually are, or else that the circle from whom our coincidental cases are drawn should amount to 63 times the assumed size — in other words, that our existence and objects should have been prominently before the minds of more than three-fourths of the adult population of the country! Another form of the estimate is as follows. The probability that a person, taken at random, will, in the course of 12 years, have the form of hallucination in question is ^; the probability that any assigned member of the general population, and therefore any particular person whose phantasmal voice is heard, will die within 12 hours of an assigned point of time is iMo ^ sis; hence the probability that, in the course of 12 years, a hallucination of this form and the death of the person whose voice seems to be heard will fall within 12 hours of one another is ^ x iMo ^ shs, or almost exactly 1 in 1,500,000. And the circle from which our coincidental cases are drawn is assumed to be 300,000. From these data it may be calculated that the odds against the occurrence, by accident, of as many coincidences of the t5rpe in question as that circle produced, are more than a trillion to 1.

\ 7. But the reductio ad ahsurdum becomes far more striking when we apply the doctrine of chances to visual cases. Out of the 5705 persons taken at random, of whom the above question was asked, only 21 could recall having, in the conditions named and within the specified 12 years, experienced a visual hallucination representing a living person known to them. But two of the 21 had had 2 experiences of the sort; so let us take the total as 23.-^ That is, the experience has fallen to the lot of one 248th of the group of persons asked, or, if that group be fairly representative, to 1 person in every 248 of the population.^ Now, just as before, each coincidental

1 This is a liberal allowance; for it includes several cases where there was such an amount of anxiety or expectancy on the part of the hallucinated person as would prevent us, if it were present in a coincidental case, from including' such a case in our telepathic evidence. In 7 of the cases, the form seen was an " af ter-imag'e " of what had been, for some time previously, part of the perceiver's daily visual experience.

2 It will be seen that 1 in 248, though a small proportion, is yet quite large enough to make it likely that most of us should casually have heard of a case or two of the kind. For there are probably more than 248 jDersons whom we are each of us sufficiently near to make it natural that an unusual experience — such as a distinct "spectral illusion" — befalling one of them, should directly or indirectly reach our ears. This is worth noting, because one sometimes hears the statement, " Why / heard the other day of a person

hallucination of the sort in question, supposing it to have been purely subjective and the coincidence to have been accidental, should stand for 16,590 purely subjective hallucinations. But our collection includes 31 first-hand^ and well-attested coincidental cases of this type, which have occurred in this country within the specified time;^ and the circle of persons from whom they were drawn — liberally supposed, as before, to number 300,000 — ought, therefore, to supply altogether, in the specified 12 years, 514,290 examples. That is to say, it ought to have happened on an average to everybody once, and to most people twice, within the given time, distinctly to see an absent relation or acquaintance in a part of space that was actually vacant. But the census has shown that, within the given time, only about 1 in every 248 persons has had such an experience even once. Thus the group of visual coincidental cases now in question, if ascribed to accident, would require either that the subjective hallucinations should be more than 396 times as numerous as they actually are; or else that the circle from whom our coincidental cases are drawn should amount to more than 396 times the assumed size — in other words, that our existence and objects should have been prominently before the minds of every adult member of a population 5 times as large as the existing one.

The second form of estimate in the last section, applied to visual cases, will give as the probability that the hallucination and the death will fall within 12 hours of one another, „^g x ^^ x ^^ or 1 in 4,114,545. And the circle from which our coincidental cases are drawn is assumed to be 300,000. From these data it may be calculated that the odds against the occurrence, by accident, of as many coincidences of the type in question as the 31 which that circle produced, are about a thousand billion trillion trillion trillions to 1. Or, to put it in yet another way — the theory of chances, which gives 1 as the most probable number of coincidences of the type in question for every 4,114,545 of the population to yield, will give 6 as the most

who had been disturbed by seeing an apparition of a friend, and nothing came of it," made as though it amounted to a proof that such experiences were common enough to afford scope for any number of marked coincidences.

1 In 3 of the cases the evidence is not first-hand from the percipient, but is of the nature described in Vol. i., p. 148.

2 Nos. 26, 27, 28, 29, 170, 172, 173, 174, 175, 182, 184, 195, 197, 199, 201, 202, 214, 231, 236, 237, 238, 240, 249, 298, 300, 350, 355, 695, 697, 702, and the case described in Vol. i.,p. 130, note. As regards recognition, Nos. 170 and 355 do not stand on quite the same ground as the other cases. I am not reckoning case 241, where the recognition, such as it was, was retrospective; nor case 500, where it seems at any rate as likely as not that the 12 hours' limit was somewhat exceeded. In 3 cases, Nos. 197, 201, 231, it is possible, on the facts stated, that the limit was exceeded; but in the two latter cases this is very improbable, and the coincidence may have been exact.



Vol. Ii. C

18 THE THEORY OF CHANCE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

probable number for the whole adult population to yield, within the given period. Yet we draw more than 5 times that number from a fraction of the adult population which can only by an extravagantly liberal estimate be assumed to amount to an 80th part of the whole, and which has been very inadequately canvassed.

§ 8. In the above estimates, I have allowed to the so-called coincidence the rather wide limit of 12 hours. But in most of the actual cases it has been much closer than this; and it will be worth while to show how a single case of very close coincidence may legitimately strengthen the argument. First, it must be unreservedly admitted that a single case, if it stood alone and no similar one had ever been heard of, would have no cogency whatever as evidence of the operation of anything beyond chance. The most extraordinary coincidence, as above remarked, may yet be totally insignificant. The a priori improbability that the tallest man of the century will be born during a transit of Venus is enormous; but such a conjunction of events, if it happened, might be at once and with moral certainty ascribed to accident; and wdth equal certainty might it be predicted that such a conjunction would never recur. And without resorting to imaginary examples, we often encounter conjunctions and coincidences which would have appeared, before they happened, to be extremely improbable, but the happening of which is none the less clearly accidental. The odds are very great against two of the foremost men in a century being born on the same day; yet this happened in the case of Darwin and Lincoln, and no one imagines that one birth depended on the other. " Extraordinary coincidences " are, in fact, quite ordinary things; and only when previous experience has given us ground for suspecting (however faintly) that the conjunction in time or special combination is due to some positive causal link, can we connect the a priori improbability of a new case with an a posteriori argument that cases of that type are not due to chance.^ Now the result of § 7 may be

1 In a general way, coincidences where previous experience affords some ground for suspecting (however faintly) a cause other than chance are distinguished from coincidences where no such ground exists by this fact — that the latter sort of cases, if A priori highly improbable, are not mentioned or described until after they have happened. From the mere fact that they do not belong to any known or surmised type, they do not enter into anyone's head: no one suggests, without any sort of grounds, that a particular thing will happen to some one at a particular time, or predicts any particular highly improbable coincidence, and then afterwards finds this thing or this coincidence actually occurring. Now it will scarcely be contended that the coincidence of an apparition with the death of the person seen is a combination of events which has never entered anyone's head; for it has entered the heads even of those who deny that it has ever occurred, or who ascribe its occurrence to accident. But the idea lias of course had much more than this negative sort of existence; there has been a

summarised as follows. The census leads us to infer that, during the years 1874-85, out of 300,000 inhabitants of this country taken at random, ^^ ^05°'°°° *^^ ^'^0^ have had a recognised visual hallucination, representing a living person, which did not coincide with the death of that person. And during the same period, out of the same number of persons (supposing our inquiries really to have extended to so wide a circle,) at least 31 have had a recognised visual hallucination which did coincide — in the sense of falling withing 12 hours of — the death of the person seen. That is, out of 1209-1-31 or 1240 hallucinations, 31, or 1 in 40, have fallen within 12 hours of the death of the person seen. Now let us apply this conclusion to case 28 (Vol. I., p. 210). When Mr. S. had his visual hallucination representing his friend, he would have been justified in regarding the probability that his friend would prove to have died within 12 hours of the vision as 1 in 40; whereas, if there was no ground at all for surmising that a causal connection may exist between deaths and apparitions, he would only have been justified in regarding the probability of his friend's dying on that day as about 1 in 20,440 — estimated from the death-rate which tables of mortality give for men of his friend's age (48 years). But it will be observed that the death and the apparition, for aught we know, were absolutely simultaneous, and at any rate were within a quarter of an hour of one another. Since, however, the death may have occurred 12 minutes before or 12 minutes after the apparition, we must take into account the double period; or, to allow for difference of clocks, let us say half-an-hour. Now, on the supposition that telepathy is a reality in the world, closeness of coincidence rather increases than otherwise the probability that the death and the apparition in any particular case are causally connected; whereas the probability of a death accidentally falling in a particular half-hour is, of course, 48 times less than that of its falling on a particular day. Thus the a priori probability that the death, if unconnected with the apparition, would fall in the particular half-hour in which the apparition fell, was 1 in 981,120; and in considering the question of connection, it is this extremely small degree of probability which has to be contrasted with the 1 in 40 which we have taken as

good deal of positive belief that such combinations occur, and that their occurrence implies a causal connection between the death and the apparition. And though this belief may have been rash and premature before the necessary statistics had been obtained, I have tried in the last two sections to show that it may now be justified by precise calculation.

VOL. II. c 2

20 THE THEORY OF CHANCE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

about the true a iDriori probability that this particular half-hour would prove to be that of the death.

But the significance of extreme closeness of coincidence may be yet more strikingly suggested, if we consider the probability of the joint event before either part of it has occurred. My census gives ^\s as the probability that a particular individual would within 12 years have a visual hallucination of a friend not known to be dead. Mr. S. has, say, x friends, of whom about a fourth would naturally die in this period; and the period comprises 210,240 half-hours. Thus the probability of Mr. S.'s hitting off by chance such a coincidence as he did hit off was aia X i X | X ^t^wIq' o^ about 1 in 208 millions.^ It might, I think, be safely said that, in the world's history, no one has ever contemplated the possible participation of himself, or of any other specified person, in an event of this degree of unlikelihood, and has afterwards found his idea realised. But apart from this, the points to be specially weighed are (1) that Mr. S.'s case was drawn from a very inconsiderable fraction of the population — a fraction liberally estimated at sV; and (2) that this fraction of the population has supplied many other parallel instances of great closeness of coincidence. Taking only the "borderland" and waking phantasms recorded on first-hand testimony in the main body of this work, I find that 66 of them are represented as having occurred within an hour of the event on the agent's side — which event in 41 of the 66 cases was death; 15 more, according to the facts stated, were within two hours of the event, which in 10 of the 15 cases was death; and in nearly all these cases, as well as in several others, it is quite possible that the coincidence was absolutely exact. I do not forget, what I have expressly pointed out in Chapter IV., that exaggeration of the closeness of the coincidence is a likely form for exaggeration in such matters to take f but in a considerable

1 The denominator of the third of the four fractions which are multiplied together will diminish or increase according as the period considered is longer or shorter than 12 years. Otherwise the length of the period is not material; since the first fraction maybe assumed to vary inversely with the last.

The death, it will be observed, might happen in any half -hour; and therefore the total of half -hours must be reckoned, without deduction of those in which a waking hallucination would be impossible —as in sleep; or of those in which it would be specially improbable — as during conversation or active exercise. The case is like that of drawing two tickets simultaneously from two bags, one of which contains the numbers frjm_ 1 to 100, and the other the niimbers from 1 to 1000. The probability that the two tickets drawn will bear the same number is not x^^ but xinju- I neglect the remote chance that several friends might die in one half -hour — which, however, can be shown not to affect the result.

- Thus it would be quite unjustifiable to add to the list a number of cases in the Supplement where the coincidence is stated to have been exact. Still the Supplement contains several accounts— c.r/., Nos. 508, 510, 569, 584, 599— which may fairly be assumed to be correct in this particular.

number of the cases mentioned, good reason is shown for believing it to have been as close as is stated.

But the huge total of improbability is nothing like complete. Nothing has been said of the aggregate strength of the cases where the phantasm was unrecognised. Nothing has been said of the large array of cases where the coincident event was not death, but some other form of crisis — a class which does not lend itself easily to a precise numerical estimate, but whose collective force, even if it stood alone, would be very great. Once more, each of the two classes of cases — the " reciprocal " and the " collective " — which still await discussion, includes specimens of visual and auditory phantasms; and some of these afford an immensely higher probability for a cause other than chance, than the more ordinary cases where only one person is impressed. For the improbability of one sort of coincidence, that between B's unusual hallucination and A's condition — has now to be multiplied by the improbability of another sort of coincidence, that between B's hallucination and a second unusual impression (whether a hallucination or of some other form) on the part of A or C. Nor even so will the argument for telepathic phantasms be nearly exhausted. For it will have been observed that throughout I have been taking into account nothing beyond the bare facts of the death and the hallucination, and altogether neglecting the correspondences of detail which in some cases add indefinitely, and almost infinitely, to the improbability of the chance occurrence.

It would be very easy to amplify this reasoning, and to extend and vary the computations themselves; but the specimens given are perhaps sufficient. They cannot possibly be made interesting; but they are indispensable if the question is ever to be set at rest, and the appeal to the doctrine of chances to be anything better than empty words. Figures, one is sometimes told, can be made to prove anything; but I confess that I should be curious to see the figures by which the theory of chance-coincidence could here be proved adequate to the facts. Whatever group of phenomena be selected, and whatever method of reckoning be adopted, the estimates founded on that theory are hopelessly and even ludicrously overpassed. With so enormous a margin to draw on, there is no particular temptation to exaggerate the extent to which the evidence for the phenomena is to be relied on. In some cases it is possibly erroneous; in many it is undoubtedly incomplete; narratives may have been admitted which a more sagacious criticism would have excluded. But after

22 THE THEORY OF CHANCE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

all allowances and deductions, the conclusion that our collection comprises a large number of coincidences which have had some other cause than chance will still, I believe, be amj)ly justified.-^

I 9. But I have not yet done. There are considerations of a quite different kind which still further strengthen the argument for telepathy as against chance. At the close of the last chapter, I briefly referred to certain points of contrast between the telepathic and the purely subjective class of hallucinations. I have now to take up this thread and to show that, though the hallucinations which may be regarded as telepathic or veridical include many cases which may differ from purely subjective hallucinations of the sane only in the fact of being veridical, yet the group, as a whole, presents some well-marked peculiarities.

The first of these peculiarities is the great 'preponderance of visual cases. Among hallucinations of the insane, the proportion of auditory to visual cases is often given as about 3 to 1; this estimate, however, seems to have been merely copied by one writer from another since the days of Esquirol; and I am not aware that any statistics, on a large scale, have been obtained or published. Dr. Savage, however, tells me that he thinks that this is about the usual proportion at Bethlem Hospital; and Dr. Lockhart Robertson writes to me, " Esquirol has put the proportion lower than I should do, I should say 5 to 1 at least; auditory hallucinations are very frequent, visual rare." With respect to the transient hallucinations of the sane, so far as the results of my census are accepted, there is no doubt on the matter. We have seen that, out of 5705 persons taken at random, 46 proved to have had, within the last 12 years, an auditory hallucination of the " recognised " type, of whom 10 had had the experience more than once; and only 21 a visual one, of whom 2 had had the experience more than once. It becomes, then, at once a very remarkable fact that of the hallucinations which, within the same period, have coincided with real events, 31 should be visual, and only 13 auditory — or 26 and 8, if we omit 5 which affected both senses; while the whole collection of numbered cases in this work includes 271 phantasms which were visual without any auditory element, and 85 only which were auditory without any visual element. This

1 I have given no separate estimate of the coincidental cases which happened before •Jan. 1, 1874; as to do so would have been simply to reproduce the reasonings of §§ 6 and 7 with rather less striking results. Nor have I taken account of the experiences^ of foreigners, as these could not be brought into relation to statistics on subjective hallucinations belonging to this one country. But these further cases have a true force of their own, in indicating the general diffusion of the phenomena.

difference would alone be a serious objection to explaining the coincidences as accidental. Nor could the advocates of the chance-theory fairly evade the objection by attributing the inversion of the ordinary proportion to faults of evidence. For why should evidence be faulty in this partial and one-sided way? Why should people's memories deceive them more as to the fact of having seen something on a particular day than as to the fact of having heard something? On the telepathic theory, on the other hand, the peculiarity seems to admit of explanation. The majority of the auditory cases, in transient hallucinations of the sane, are of hearing the name called, or of hearing some short familiar phrase; and of such cases, as we saw above (Vol. I., pp. 489-90), the most natural physiological explanation is that they are not produced by a downward stimulation from the higher tracts of the brain, but are due to a sudden reverberation at the sensory centre itself, which is readily excited to vibrations of a familiar type. The telepathic hallucinations, on the other hand, were traced (as far as their development in the percipient is concerned) to a stimulation passing downwards to the sensory centres from the higher or ideational tracts of the brain. There is, then, no difficulty in supposing that the auditory centre is more prone than the visual to spontaneous recrudescence of vibrations; but that the downward excitation, which hurries ideas and images on into delusive sensory percepts, finds a readier passage to the visual centre than to the auditory — or at any rate that, where the idea of a particular individual is to be abnormally embodied in a sensory form, it is more natural and direct to visualise it, in a shape that conveys his permanent personal attributes, than to verbalise it in some imagined or remembered phrase.

A subordinate point, but one which is still worth noting, is that the proportion of cases where more senses than one have been concerned is considerably larger in the telepathic than in the purely subjective class of hallucinations — which seems to imply what may be called a higher average intensity in the former class. Out of 590 subjective cases, I find that 49, that is, a trifle over 8 per cent, of the whole number, are alleged to have concerned more senses than one; of which 24 were visual and auditory, 8 visual and tactile, 13 auditory and tactile, and 4 concerned all three senses. Taking the telepathic evidence, I find that, out of 423 cases where a sensory hallucination seems to have been distinctly externalised, 80, or 19 per cent, of the whole number, are alleged to have concerned more senses than one;

24 THE THEORY OF CHANCE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

of which 53 were visual and auditory, 13 visual and tactile, 6 auditory and tactile, and 8 concerned all three senses. I may add that the proportion of 19 per cent, remains exactly the same if only the first-hand cases included in the body of the work be taken into account, and cannot therefore be attributed to exaggeration of the facts in those narratives in the Supplement which are given at second-hand.^

The next distinguishing mark of the class of phantasms which have coincided with real events is the enormous proportion of them in which the figure or the voice was recognised. In the purely subjective class of transient hallucinations of the sane, the recognised and unrecognised phantasms seem to be about equal in number. Thus, if we confine ourselves to cases where a human presence was suggested, of the canvassed group of 5705 persons, 17 had seen unrecognised figures, to 21 who had seen recognised ones; and 50 had heard unrecognised voices, to 46 who had heard recognised ones. Of the visible phantasms described in this work as probably telepathic, which represented human forms or faces without any sound of a voice, 237 have been recognised, and only 13 unrecognised. Of the phantasms described in this work as probably telepathic, which consisted simply of voices uttering words, 36 have been of a recognised and 21 of an unrecognised voice; but among these 211 include 6 cases where the words heard were as closely associated with the agent as if the tone had been his, since they actually named him; and a seventh where a place specially connected with him was named. Out of 38 cases which included both a form and a voice, the phantasm was unrecognised in only 2. It may be said that the fact of recognition is the very fact which has led us to refer the phantasm to the telepathic class, and that therefore it is no wonder if the recognised phantasms preponderate in our evidence. But this is not what has happened. Important as the recognition is, and greatly as the lack of it detracts from the evidential force of a case, it is the coincidence, not the recognition, that we have throughout regarded as the main point; and cases have never been suppressed for lack of recognition alone, provided the coincidence was close — non-recognition being easily explicable on the view of telepathic hallucinations above propounded

1 If only the subjective cases received from the canvassed group of 5705 persons be considered, those which concerned more than one sense amount to less than 4 per cent.; while of the 40 special coincidental cases enumerated in p. 14, first note, and p. 17, second note, 8, that is 20 percent., concerned more than one sense — or 17-J per cent, if we exclude one case. No. 199, where it is not quite certain that what was heard was not a real sound.

(Vol. I., pp. 539-40). The fact is simply that we have received comparatively few cases of unrecognised phantasms of human figures or voices which have closely coincided, and afterwards been associated, with some marked event closely affecting the percipient; and those which we have received, on trustworthy authority, have been included in our collection. And if it be further suggested that the persons concerned are themselves little likely to remark the coincidence, if the phantasmal form or voice was not recognised, my reply is (1) that this seems a very sweeping assumption; and (2) that so far as it is valid as an argument, it implies the existence of a large number of unnoted cases, over and above those which it is possible to collect, of those very coincidences whose perpetual repetition is already such a mountainous obstacle to the theory that they occur by chance.^

Further knowledge may possibly bring to light other points in which the hallucinations that have corresponded with real events — taken in their immediate aspect as phenomena and quite apart from this correspondence — may be distinguished from the general body of transient hallucinations of the sane. And while the resemblances, brought out in the two preceding chapters, between the coincidental and the non-coincidental or purely subjective experiences, were sufficient, I think, to show that the coincidental cases are truly hallucinations of the percipient's senses, clearly every feature which can be named as distinguishing these hallucinations, — every feature which tends to separate them off as a restricted group — thereby increases the difficulty of attributing the correspondences to chance.

The last point to which I must call attention, as conflicting with

^ It may still be thought that the visual and the recognised phantasms are at any rate more interesting than the auditory and the unrecognised, and that that is a reason for their preponderating among the telepathic cases that we have received. I would admit this to some extent. That some difference in the record is made by the superior interest of visual and of recognised phantasms, may be argued from the numbers in my total collection of hallucinations, putting aside those presented as telepathic evidence. Thus, in spite of the visual hallucinations being shown, by the canvassing of a limited group of persons, to be the rarer phenomena, I have a total of 311 visual cases to only 187 auditory — a fact, by the way, which may suggest how Krafft-Ebing (Die Sinnesdelirien, p. 32), Griesinger (Die Pathologie und Therapie der PsycMschen Krankkeiten. p. 100) and Wundt (Grundziige der Physiologischen Psychologie, Vol. ii., p. 353) have been led into asserting that the visual class is the more numerous. Again, among cases where a human presence was suggested, in spite of the recognised and unrecognised classes being shown, by the canvassmg of a limited group of persons, to be about equal, I have 172 visual examples of the recognised sort to only 116 of the unrecognised, and 82 auditory examples of the recognised sort to only 64 of the unrecognised. Still, remembering that the vitally interesting' point in the coincidental cases is, after all, the coincidence, and not the mere form of the phantasm, the allowance which may thus be fairly made cannot, I think, suffice to explain the proportions given in the text.

26 THE THEORY OF CHANGE-GOINGIDEFCE. [chap.

the theory of chance-coincidence, is a characteristic not of the telepathic phantasms themselves, but of the distant events with which they and other telepathic impressions coincide; but it none the less serves to distinguish these coincidences as due to a definite and peculiar cause. It is the very large proportion of cases in which the distant event is death} It is in this profoundest shock which human life encounters that these phenomena seem to be oftenest engendered; and, where not in death itself, at least in one of those special moments, whether of strong mental excitement or of bodily collapse, which of all living experiences come nearest to the great crisis of dissolution. Thus among the 668 cases of spontaneous telepathy in this book, 399, (or among 423 examples of the sensory externalised class, 303,) are death-cases, in the sense that the percipient's experience either coincided with or very shortly followed the agent's death; while in 25 more cases the agent's condition, at the time of the percipient's experience, was one of serious illness which in a few hours or a few days terminated in death. Nor, in this connection, can I avoid once more referring to the large number of cases in which the event that befell the agent has been death (or a very near approach to it) by drowning or suffocation. Out of the 399 death-cases just mentioned, there are 35, or nearly 9 per cent., where the death was by drowning, — clearly a very much higher proportion than deaths of this particular form bear to all deaths, for even of accidental deaths among the male population, only 5 per cent, are due to drowning — and in 6 other cases the agent's escape

1 The point is one to which I have adverted in connection with dreains( Vol. i., pp. 308-10), But there we saw a certain force in the objection that the coincident dreamof death might get remembered just by virtue of the coincidence, while other equally vivid dreams of death might be forgotten. Let us see what would be implied if a similar supposition were made in the case of the waking-hallucinations. Taking the number of adults in the country as 24 millions, then, even on the extravagant assumption which I made as to the size of the area from which our cases are drawn, the probable number of coincidental phantasms for the United Kingdom, during the last 12 years, amounts to as many as 32 x 80, or 2560. Now the census gives -i^iyV^^—; or 96,744, as the number of persons in the United Kingdom who, on being asked, would remember having had a purely subjective visual hallucination of this type. Therefore, if these were all the hallucinations that had occurred, 1 in every 38 of 'them would correspond with the death of the person whose figure appeared; that is to say, for each hallucination, the probability that it would coincide with the death would be 1 in 38. Now for each of the remembered hallucinations we found the probability of the accidental occurrence of the coincidence to be ^^_. We thus arrive at the total which the purely subjective hallucinations, remembered and unremembered, will have to reach in order to bring the probability of an accidental coincidence up to u\: they will have to be altogether ^i^ or 436 times as numerous as the remembered cases. But as 1 person in 248 remembers a case, this will mean either that nearly every sane and healthy adult in the country, while awake, has seen a phantasm representing a living acquaintance twice within the last 12 years, or that a very large proportion of them have seen such a phantasm more than twice; and that 435 'out of every 436 of these startling experiences have been totally forgotten by the persons affected.

from such a death was a narrow one.^ And if we do not insist on the form of death, but only on its suddenness, the above proportion still remains a very striking fact; since deaths by accident, even among males, are only a little over 4 per cent, of the total of deaths.

We do not know why the conditions of death generally, or of sudden death, or of any particular form of death,^ or of excitement or collapse, should be effective; but we at all events know that the conditions are themselves unusual. Similarly in most cases of experimental thought-transference, the agent's mind is unusually occupied by its concentrated fixation on a single object; and whether it be in the curiosities of an afternoon or in the crises of a lifetime that telepathy finds its occasion, the peculiarity of the agent's state has at any rate that degree of explanatory power which succeeds in connecting the rare effect with the rare cause. In neither case can we trace out the actual process whereby the percipient is influenced; but we have the same sort of ground for refusing to attribute to chance the oft-repeated apparitions at the time of death, as the oft-repeated successes in guessing cards and reproducing diagrams.

The only way of meeting this argument would be to show that similar coincidences have been frequently met with in connection with definite events which produced no unusual physical or mental state in the person to whom they occurred. For instance, if B at a distance has a vision of A on the day that A scratches his finger or orders a new pair of boots, it would seem wholly irrational to connect the two facts. Accordingly, if many, or even several, such coincidences were on record, I should have to admit that the operations of chance altogether overpass my estimate, and that the data on which the previous argument rested must, therefore, be somehow defective. Or, to take a case where some emotional disturbance is, as a rule, involved, if it proved to be not extremely uncommon to have a vision of an absent friend on the morning of his marriage, I should feel * that my argument was so far weakened; for it would be difficult to suppose that the emotions connected with that one

1 Tvfos. 48, 59, 60, 105, 138, 159, 165, 188, 236, 281, 282, 297, 341, 349, 416, 487, 513, 525, 528, 529, 535, 536, 537, 540, 541, 559, 570, 581, 582, 583, 596, 600, 603, 608, 636, 648, 659, 662, 664, 674, 675. I have explained (Vol. i., pp. 335-6) that cases are not admitted as evidence where the percipient's experience might be attributed to his own state of apprehension as to the agent's fate.

2 At the same time, with respect to drowning, one cannot but recall the peculiar vividness and concentration of psychical life which (from the accounts of many persons who have been ultimately rescued) seem to characterise the earlier stages of that form of death.

28 THE THEORY OF CHANCE-COINCIDENCE. [chap.

morning stood distinctly apart from those of other seasons dedicated to happiness and the affections.^ But in point of fact we do not find that coincidences of these types prevail. The coincidental phantasms seem limited to seasons of exceptional crisis or excitement on the agent's part; and this limitation, in once more marking out these phantasms as a distinct group of natural phenomena, strongly confirms the substantial accuracy of the statistical results.

I am not forgetting, in these final remarks, what I have expressly stated before (Vol. I., p. 97), that the action of telepathy must not be dogmatically confined to those examples of striking coincidence which are suitable to be quoted in demonstration of it; and even in respect of such extreme affections as hallucinations of the senses, I should hesitate to assert that they cannot be due to an absent agent whose condition is not markedly abnormal.^ I regard it, however, as so unlikely that this is often their source — I regard the probability as so enormous that a phantasm seen or heard by A only, and representing B who is at the time living a piece of ordinary life, is of purely subjective origin — that the above argument remains in my view a fair one; and it is at any rate fairly addressed to those (whom of course I have had chiefly in view throughout the present chapter) who have not hitherto admitted or considered the case for telepathy even as based on the markedly coincidental examples.

1 In accordance with this view, and in the absence of very special details, we should feel bound to exclude from our evidence, as an "ambiguous case," any stray coincidence of the sort that we encountered. The following is an instance:

Miss Keith Breinner, daughter of Captain Bremner, the chief constable of Tif eshire, was sitting at the window of the dining-room in the forenoon (precise hour forgotten) of the 18th June, 1884, when looking out of the window she saw, in a flowor-bed about 20 feet distant, what seemed to her the face of Mary D., growing_ out of, a yellow pansy. The face was quite distinct and life-like, and seemed to be laughing as it looked at her. Miss Bremner is quite certain that what she saw was not merely a fancied resemblance in one of the flowers to Miss D.'s face. The face was too clearly and distinctly seen for that. Moreover, it seemed to be of the size of life. There could have been no mistake about it. Miss Bremner did not look long. She turned away, and the face was gone when she looked again. Later in the day she told her mother what she had seen, and Mrs. Bremner remarked, "I wonder when Mary D. will be married; it should be about this time." They heard afterwards that Miss D. had actually been married on that day, and at about the time when Miss Bremner saw the apparition of her. Miss Bremner has never had any other hallucination of the senses.

This account was written down by Mr. Podinore after an interview with Miss Bremner, and submitted to her. She writes: —

" The above account correctly describes what I saw. — Keith Bremner." Mrs. Bremner wrote from Sandilands, Cupar, Fife, on September 22nd, 1884: — "Mrs. Bremner begs to inform Mr. Podmore that her daughter told her immediately she saw the face in the pansy. Mr. Podmore's written statement is quite correct. The wedding took place on Wednesday, the 18th of June."

"' See, for example, the cases in Chap, xiv., § 7.



Chapter XIV. Further Visual Cases Occurring to a Single Percipient.

§ 1. In Chapter XII., a good many specimens of telepathic phantasms were quoted, in illustration of certain special points; and particularly as showing what part in the phenomena we may attribute to the obscure action of the agent's and of the percipient's mind respectively, and how the original impulse may become modified in transitu. A still larger number of cases remain, of which only a few present specially noticeable characteristics of dress, or development, or phantasmal imagery; but which have their share with the others in the cumulative proof of telepathy, and include moreover several fresh features and types. The present chapter will be devoted to visual examples. In the " General Sketch of Hallucinations " (Vol. I., pp. 480-3 and 488), I mentioned the various degrees of externalisation that the phenomena may present; beginning with the ideal picture which is not a sensory hallucination at all — which is realised as a purely internal impression, as seen by the " mind's eye "; and ending with the actual percept, which, though equally the product of the percipient's mind, seems to take its place in the external world on a par with all the other objects within his range of vision. Now between these first and last stages there seems a wide gap; and if our review of telepathic incidents had to pass at one step from the vivid pictures flashed from mind to mind, to the phantasmal figure " out in the room," there might be a certain difficulty in conceiving two such diffierent-seeming phenomena as having a similar origin. It is satisfactory, then, to be able to point to several intermediate stages. That such stages are found in the telepathic, as well as in the purely subjective or pathological, class of phantasms, is only a fresh indication that telepathic phantasms, in spite of their peculiar origin, are worked (so to speak) by the ordinary mechanism of hallucination.

30 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

I may first quote a case which shows how the percipient may himself be doubtful as to the degree of externality that the phantasmal appearance had. In the summer of 1884, Mr. Henry H. Howorth, M.P., of Eccles, Manchester, filled up a question-form with the information that one morning, in 1857, he had a visual hallucination representing a great-uncle; and added: —

(218) " My great uncle died at the very time; and someone came to bring me home from school, where I then was. I don't think I was at all excitable or impressionable. My uncle was a very unlikely person for me to have thought about. He had been for years troubled with gout of a chronic type, but was otherwise hearty and well, and to a boy had the appearance of robust health. He was much attached to my mother and her children.

" Henry H. Howorth."

Recounting the same incident on December 2nd, 1885, Mr. Howorth wrote: — -

" I was a young boy about 12 years old, and at school at Whalley, when I felt an overpowering sense that something very serious had happened to my great-uncle, who had been a foster-father to my mother, and was much attached to me. The same day someone came to fetch me home, as he had died. When you look across a gap of 30 years, memory is blunted as to details, and I cannot pretend to fill in the story. I never remember having a similar visitation."

On my pointing out that the second account difiered from the first in making no mention of any visual experience, Mr. Howorth wrote: —

" I could not say at this distance of time whether the experience I had was visual or mental merely, for the distinction in the case of a boy would perhaps not be marked in the memory, I can only say the impression was a very vivid and sharp one."

I should regard this indistinctness of memory as a tolerably sure sign that the impression was not of the truly sensory (that is, of the most unique and startling) sort, but rather a vivid mental picture of the type noticed in Vol. I., p. 209, and further exemplified in the 6th chapter. In the stage next above this, the observer may still find it hard to say whether what impresses him is purely ideal, or whether his sense-organs are partly concerned — there being a sense of externality, but not exactly a projection into the surrounding world. Case 66 (Vol I., p. 267) was really an example in point — the scene having apparently been something more than a vivid mental picture but not confounded with the objective world, or located in the actual place where the percipient was at the time. Very similar is an experience which befell a master at a large public school, in the

summer of 1874 or 1875. Having been detained at home while a party of boys, accompanied by some masters and ladies, made a steamer excursion, he was, he says,

(219) " Standing vacantly at the door of his house, doubtless thinking of the absentees and conjecturing how they were then employed. Suddenly he seemed to see a boy slip, when crossing the landing stage from the quay to the vessel, and fall into the water, wounding his mouth as he fell. There the vision ended. Mr. A. [the narrator] returned to his work, in which he was absorbed, until the return of Mrs. A.; but so vivid was the impression on his mind of the reality of the occurrence that he had looked at his watch and noted the time exactly.

" On his wife's return Mr. A. at once said to her, ' Did you get that boy out of the water? '

" ' Oh, yes; there was no harm done beyond the fright. But how should you know anything about it? I am the first to arrive; tliey are walking. / di'ove.'

" ' Well, how about his lip '? Was it badly cut 1 ' " ' It was not hurt at all; you know X. has a harelip.' " Mr. A. has no explanation to offer: these are the facts." [Mr. A. was under the impression that the coincidence was precise. But the time of the vision was about 7 p.m.; and we learn from the wife of the head-master, who was present, that the accident occurred before luncheon; therefore, if telepathic, the case was one of the deferred class. This lady remembers that some of the party were afraid that the boy had cut his face, till the fact of the harelip was recalled. If we suppose the agent to have been Mrs. A., then the impression of the scene (as in the somewhat similar dream-case, No. 101) would seem to have been transferred, so to speak, ready-made — and to have received no development from the percipient.]

The following case, though undoubtedly sensory, seems still to belong to a somewhat indescribable stage of visualisation. If interpreted as telepathic, it is further of interest as illustrating that rarer type where the phantasm is not merely representative of the agent, but visibly reproduces some actual percept or idea which is prominently present at the time to the agent's consciousness (see Chap. XII., beginning of § 5). The account is from Mr. F. Gottschalk, of 20, Adamson Eoad, Belsize Park, N.W., and is dated Feb. 12, 1886.

(220) Mr. Gottschalk begins by describing a friendship which he formed with Mr. Courtenay Thorpe, at the rooms of Dr. Sylvain Mayer, on the evening of February 20th, 1885. On February 24th, being anxious to hear a particular recitation which Mr. Thorpe was shortly going to give, Mr. Gottschalk wrote to him, at the Prince's Theatre, to ask what the hour of the recitation was to be. " In the evening I was going out to see some friends, when on the road there seemed suddenly to develop itself before me a disc of light, which appeared to be on a different plane to everything else in view. It was not possible for me to fix the distance at

32 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

which it seemed to be from me.^ Examining the illumined space, I found that two hands were visible. They were engaged in drawing a letter from an envelope which I instinctively felt to be mine and, in consequence, thought immediately that the hands were those of Mr. Thorpe. I had not previously been thinking of him, but at the moment the conviction came to me with such intensity that it was irresistible. Not being in any way awe-struck by the extraordinary nature and novelty of this incident, but in a perfectly calm frame of mind, I examined the picture, and found that the hands were very white, and bared up to some distance above the wrist. Each forearm terminated in a ruffle; beyond that nothing was to be seen. The vision lasted about a minute. After its disappearance I determined to find out what connection it may have had with Mr. Thorpe's actual pursuit at the moment, and went to the nearest lamp-post and noted the time.

" By the first post the next morning, I received an answer from Mr. Thorpe, which began in the following way: ' Tell me, pray tell me, why did I, when I saw your letter in the rack at the Prince's Theatre, know that it was from you? ' [We have seen this letter, which is dated " Tuesday night "; and February 24th, 1885, fell on a Tuesday.] Mr. Thorpe had no expectation of receiving a letter from me, nor had he ever seen my writing. Even had he seen it, his knowledge of it would not affect the issue of the question, as he assured me that the impression arrived the moment he saw there was a letter under the 'T clip,' before any writing was visible. [Mr. Gottschalk explains that from the construction of the rack, which he has examined, the address on the envelope would be invisible.]

" On the evening of February 27th, by arrangement, I again met him at the rooms of Dr. Mayer, and there put questions to him with a view to eliciting some explanation. As near as possible, I give them as they were put at the time, and add the answers. It is necessary for me here to state that he and the Doctor were in complete ignorance of what had happened to me. Having first impressed upon him the necessity of answering in a categorical manner and with the greatest possible accuracy, I commenced: —

"'When did you get my Tuesday's letter?' 'At 7 in the evening, when I arrived at the theatre.' ' Then what happened? ' ' I read it, but, being very late, in such a hurry that when I had finished I was as ignorant of its contents as if I had never seen it.' ' Then? ' 'I dressed, went on the stage, played my part, and came off.' ' What was the time then? ' ' About 20 minutes past 8.' ' What happened then? ' 'I talked for a time with some of the company in my dressing-room.' ' For how long? ' ' Twenty minutes.' ' What did you then do? ' ' They having left me, my first thought was to find your letter. I looked everywhere for it, in vain. I turned out the pockets of my ordinary clothes, and searched among the many things that encumbered my dressing-table. I was annoyed at not finding it immediately, especially as I was anxious to know what it was

^ (7f. a remark in M. Marillier's account of his interesting subjective experiences, referred to in Vol. i., p..521: — " Je ne pourrais indiquer ni la place de I'image que j'ai objectivee, ni la distance k laquelle elle se trouve." The indescribableness of a certain sort of extemalisation is well brought out in the same writer's description of his vision of parts of his body which could never actually be seen by him — e.g., the back of his head.

about. Strangely enough I discovered it eventually in the coat which I had just worn in the piece " School for Scandal." I immediately read it again, was delighted to receive it, and decided to answer at once.' ' Now be very exact. What was the time when you read it on the second occasion? ' ' As neai'ly as I can say 10 minutes to 9.'

" Thereupon I drew from my pocket a little pocket-diary in which I had noted the time of my vision, and asked Dr. Mayer to read what was written under the date 24th February.

" ' Eight minutes to 9.'

[Mr. Gottschalk has kindly allowed us to inspect his diary, which confirms all the dates given.]

" Having established in this way, without any assistance, the coincidence of time between his actually opening the envelope and my seeing him do so, I was satisfied as to the principal part, and proceeded to analyse the incident in detail. The whiteness of the hands was accounted for by the fact that actors invariably whiten their hands when playing a part like the one Mr. Thorpe was engaged in — ' Snake ' in the ' School for Scandal.' The ruffles also formed part of the dress in this piece. They were attached to the short sleeves of the shirt which Mr. Thorpe was actually wearing when he opened my letter.

" This is the first hallucination I ever had. I have had one since of a similar nature, which I will recount separately.

" Ferdinand Gottschalk."

Dr. Mayer, of 42, Somerset Street, Portman Square, W., corroborates as follows: —

" March 1, 1886.

" I well remember having read something [i.e., in Mr. Gottschalk's diary] — the exact words memory will not allow me to give — which tallied almost exactly with the story told by Courtenay Thorpe; and can bear positive testimony of the above conversation having taken place.

" Sylvain Mayer."

[We cannot lay any stress on Mr. Thorpe's impression as to the letter and its writer, since that may easily have been accidental. But it is a point to be noticed that he read the letter with very decided pleasure, after a considerable hunt for it — in other words, that the reading of the letter stood out rather distinctly from the general run of such experiences. Though the incident is trivial, the close correspondence of time and detail is strongly suggestive of telepathic clairvoyance. In the second case mentioned, an illuminated disc was again seen, which " seemed not to belong to the surroundings "; but the details were not quite as distinctive as in the above instance.]

The fragmentary nature of the hallucination in this case has parallels, as we have seen, in the purely subjective class.^ The " disc of light " is also to be noticed. (See Chap. XII., § 7, and compare the

1 Vol. i. p. 504. The case in the Phrenological Journal, referred to below (p. 38, note), included visions of parts of figures, faces, half -faces, and limbs. There are many degrees of incompleteness. Thus, one of my correspondents, when out of doors, was startled by the sight of a man whose bearded face was clearly distinguished, but whose form stopped short at the knees; another, on waking, saw " a shadow " bending over her, but with a face that was distinct. A very interesting case is that of the quarter-length Mr.



Vol. Ii. D

34 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

" bright oval" in Vol. I., p. 503, the "large flickering oval," p. 176, and the face " in the centre of a bright, opaque, white mass," in case 184. The exact description — a " disc of light " — recurs in the dream-case No. 464.)

In the next stage of visualisation the percipient sees a face or figure projected or depicted, as it were, on some convenient surface — the image being thus truly externalised, but in an unreal and unsubstantial fashion, and in a bizarre relation to the real objects among which it appears. In this respect it might be compared to the " after-image " of the sun, or of some object that has been intentlyscrutinised through a microscope, which we involuntarily import into our views of the surrounding scene. The following example is taken from the Memoirs of Georgiana, Lady Chatterton, by E. H. Dering (1878), pp. 100-102. It exemplifies again the peculiarity observed in the last case — the blood being a feature in the vision which we maj^ confidently refer to the agent's mind. Lady Chatterton narrates: —

(221) "My mother [thewife of the Rev. Tremonger Lascelles, Prebendary of Winchester,] had not been very well, but there was nothing alarming in her state. I was suffering from a bad cold, and went early to bed one night, after leaving her in the drawing-room in excellent spirits, and tolerably well. I slept unusually well, and when I awoke, the moon was shining through the old casement brightly into the room. The white curtains of my bed were drawn to protect me from the draught that came through the large window; and on this curtain, as if depicted there, I saw the figure of my mother, the face deadly pale, with blood ^ flowing on the bed-clothes. For a moment I lay horror-stricken and unable to move or cry out, till, thinking it might be a dream or a delusion, I raised myself up in bed, and touched the curtain. Still the appearance remained (although the curtain on which it was depicted moved to and fro when I touched it) as if reflected by a magic-lantern. In great terror I got up, and throwing on a cloak, 1 rushed off through some rooms and a long passage to my mother's room. To my surprise, I saw from the further end of the passage that her door was open, and a strong light coming from it across the passage. As she invariably locked her door when she went to bed, my fears were increased by the sight, and 1 ran on more quickly still, and entered her room. There she lay, just as I had seen her on the curtain, pale as death, and the sheet covered with blood, and two doctors standing by the bedside. She saw me at once and seemed delighted to see me, though too weak to speak or hold out her hand. ' She has been very ill,' said the doctor, ' but she would not allow you to be called, lest your cold should be made worse. But I trust all danger is over now.... The sight of you has decidedly done her

Gabbage, cited by M. Ribot, Maladies de la PersonnaliU, p. Ill; with which compare case 301 below. For further telepathic examples, see cases 161, 240, 350 (in "Additions and Corrections "), 553, 572.

1 Compare the dream-cases Nos. 432, 463 466, 467.

much good.' So she had been in danger, and would not disturb me! Oh! how thankful I felt to the vision or fancy, or whatever it may have been."

Mrs. Ferrers, of Baddesley Clinton, Knowle, a niece of Lady Chatterton's, wrote to us on October 24th, 1883, " This account is taken from a diary of my aunt's." She adds later: —

" I have often and often heard my aunt relate that vision, but it was not, so far as I know, recorded in any contemporary diary.

" Lady C. related the story to Lockhart and his daughter about 1843, and then wrote it down in her diary. The entry is not dated; the date before it is May, 1843, that which follows, 1842, but it was evidently written down between 1839 and 1848. The book is very badly arranged as to chronology. I can't fix the date of Lady C.'s mother's death from it except that it was prior to 1836. " R. H. Ferrers."

Here the picture, though not producing the impression of a solid and independent object, was clearly no mere illusion, no mere momentary translation of the folds or pattern of the drapery into a human face; it was accurate and persistent enough to resist a touch which shook the curtain on which it was shown. It is a point of interest that (besides a second veridical case given in Chap. XII. § 7,) Lady Chatterton mentions having experienced another hallucination which, like the one just quoted, appeared on a flat surface} On the theory of telepathic phantasms explained in Chap. XII., § 5, it is of course quite natural that a veridical and a non-veridical vision, or that several veridical visions, occurring to the same person, should present this amount of likeness, as, e.g., in Mr. Gottschalk's experience. But the point is one that we can rarely observe, as few of our telepathic percipients have had any second hallucination of the senses at all.

But yet further stages remain, on the path to the final one of natural solid-looking externality. In the following case the image appeared with somewhat more of apparent relief than in Lady Chatterton's, but certainly not yet as co-ordinate in any natural fashion with the real objects in view. The account is from Mr. Richard Searle, barrister, of Home Lodge, Heme Hill, who tells us that he has had

no other experience of a hallucination.

"November 2nd, 1883. (222) "One afternoon, a few years ago, I was sitting in my chambers in the Temple, working at some papers. My desk is between the fireplace and one of the windows, the window being two or three yards on the left side of my chair, and looking out into the Temple. Suddenly I became aware that I was looking at the bottom window-pane, which was about on a level

1 She records — apparently in her journal — that, when sleeping as a child in a "haunted room," she woke in the middle of the night, and saw a brilliant light on the wall, and figures of men passing over it, as in a panorama, fighting. She inferred from the words and gestures of her nurse, who was apparently sitting up in her sleep with fixed and open eyes, that she saw the same scene; and the nurse may possibly have been the "agent " of the child's impression (see Chap, xviii. § 5).

36 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

with my eyes, and thei'e I saw the figure of the head and face of my wife, in a reclining position, with the eyes closed and the face quite white and bloodless, as if she were dead.

" I pulled myself together, and got up and looked out of the window, where I saw nothing but the houses opposite, and I came to the conclusion that I had been drowsy and had fallen asleep, and, after taking a few turns about the room to rouse myself, I sat down again to my work and thought no more of the matter.

" I went home at my usual time that evening, and whilst my wife and I were at dinner, she told me that she had lunched with a friend who lived in Gloucester Gardens, and that she had taken with her a little child, one of her nieces, who was staying with us; but during lunch, or just after it, the child had a fall and slightly cut her face so that the blood came. After telling the story, my wife added that she was so alarmed when she saw the blood on the child's face that she had fainted. What I had seen in the window then occurred to my mind, and I asked her what time it was when this happened. She said, as far as she remembered, it must have been a few minutes after 2 o'clock. This was the time, as nearly as I could calculate, not having looked at my watch, when I saw the figure in the window-pane.

" I have only to add that this is the only occasion on which I have known my wife to have had a fainting-fit. She was in bad health at the time, and I did not mention to her what I had seen until a few days afterwards, when she had become stronger. I mentioned the occurrence to several of my friends at the time. a t> g "

Mr. Paul Pierrard, of 27, Gloucester Gardens, W., writes as follows: —

" 4th December, 1883.

" It may be interesting for special observers to have a record of an extraordinary occurrence which happened about four years ago at my residence, 27, Gloucester Gardens, W.

" At an afternoon party of ladies and children, among whom were Mrs. Searle, of Home Lodge, Heme Hill, and her little niece, Louise, there was a rather noisy, bustling, and amusing game round a table, when little Louise fell from her chair and hurt herself slightly. The fear of a grave accident caused Mrs. Searle to be very excited, and she fainted.

" The day after, we met Mr. Searle, who stated that in the afternoon of the preceding day he had been reading important cases in his chambers, No. 6, Pump Court, Temple, when a peculiar feeling overcame him, and he distinctly saw, as it wei-e in a looking-glass, the very image of his wife leaning back in a swoon, which seemed very strange at the moment.

" By coinparing the time, it was found that this extraordinary vision was produced at the very same instant as the related incident.

" We often spoke of the case together, and could not find any explanation to completely satisfy our minds; but we registered this rare fact for which a name is wanted. ' u Paul Pierrard.'

Here there was more than the mere representation of the agent; she was represented apparently in the aspect which she actually wore, but in which the percipient had never seen her, and in which

she would hardly be consciously picturing herself. We are scarcely driven, however, in this case, to the difficult conception of " telepathic clairvoyance " set forth in Chapter XII., § 8; for it is possible to suppose that the idea of fainting, impressed on Mr. Searle's mind, worked itself out into perception in an appropriate fashion.

The stage of visualisation in the next case is particularly interesting. The narrator is Mrs. Taunton, of Brook Vale, Witton, Birmingham.

"January 15th, 1884.

(223) " On Thursday evening, 14th November, 1867, I was sitting in the Birmingham Town Hall with my husband at a concert, when there came over me the icy chill which usually accompanies these occurrences.! Almost immediately, I saw with perfect distinctness, between myself and the orchestra, my uncle, Mr. W., lying in bed with an appealing look on his face, like one dying. I had not heard anything of him for several months, and had no reason to think he was ill. The appearance was not transparent or filmy, but perfectly solidlooking; and yet I could somehow see the orchestra, not through, hut behind it. I did not try turning my eyes to see whether the figure moved with them, but looked at it with a fascinated expression that made my husband ask if I was ill. I asked him not to speak to me for a minute or two; the vision gradually disappeared, and I told my husband, after the concert was over, what I had seen. A letter came shortly after telling of my uncle's death. He died at exactly the time when I saw the vision. " E. P. Taunton."

The signature of Mrs. Taunton's husband is also appended.

"Rich. H. Taunton."

We find from an obituary notice in the Belfast News-Letter that Mr. W. died on November 14th, 1867.

The phantasm here was perfectly external, and is described as " perfectly solid-looking "; yet it certainly did not hold to the real objects around the same relation as a figure of flesh and blood would have held; it was in a peculiar way transparent. This feature is noticeable, as it is one which occasionally occurs also in hallucinations of the purely subjective class.^ It may thus be taken as one of the numerous minor indications of the hallucinatory character of telepathic phantasms (see Chapter XII., § 10).

1 This refers to a few other experiences of a dififerent character, one of which, however, involved a hallucination of sight. The cold sensation described was a feature in cases 28 and 149; and appears again in case 286, where the percipient describes a sensation as of "cold water poured on the nape of the neck"; in case 302, where what is described is a sense of physical chill, mthout any flutter of the nerves; and in cases 313 and 352. Compare also cases 211 and 263, where however, (as perhaps in some of the other instances) the feelings may not have been due to anything more specific than momentary shock or alarm.

2 Of many subjective hallucinations, it has been specially noticed that they hid what-

38 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

I 2. In the remaining cases the illusion seems to have been practically complete. They constitute what may be called the normal type of these abnormal phenomena. The hallucination goes through no gradual process of formation, and is externalised as fully and naturally as a real object; the agent contributes to it little, if any, of the actual detail of his condition; the percipient contributes to it no special imagery or setting of his own.

The following narrative is from M. Gaston Foumier, of 21, Rue de Berlin, Paris, an intimate friend of our esteemed collaborator, M. Ch. Richet. He has antedated the occurrence by about 18 months.

" 16, Octobre, 1885.

(224) " Le 21 fevrier, 1879, j'etaisin-\dte a diner chez mes amis, M. et

Mme. B. En arrivant dans le salon, je constate I'absence d'un

commensal ordinaire de la maison, M. d'E, que je recontrais presque

toujours a leur table. J'en fais la remarque, et Mme. B me repond

que d'E, employe dans une importante maison de banque, etait sans

doute fort occupe en ce moment, car on ne I'avait pas vu depuis deux

jours. A partir de ce moment, il nefut plus plus question de d'E. Le

repas s'acheve fort gaiement, et sans que Mme. B donne la moindre

marque visible de preoccupation. Pendant le diner, nous avions forme le

projet d'aller achever notre soiree au theatre. Au dessert Mme. B

se leve pour aller s'habiller dans sa chambre, dont la porte, restee

entr'ouverte, donne dans la salle-a-manger. B et moi etions restee a

table, fumant notre cigare, quand, apres quelques minutes a peine, nous entendons un cri terrible. Croyant a un accident, nous nous precipitons

dans la chambre, et nous trouvons Mme. B assise, prete a se trouver

mal. Nous nous empressons autour d'elle; elle se remet peu a peu, et nous fait alors le recit suivant.

" ' Apres vous avoir quittes, je m' habillais pour sortir, et j'etais en train

ever was behind the place which they appeared to occupy; and the rule seems to bethat when the percept is completely externalised, it is solid-looking. But exceptions are not infrequent. Whitish transparent figures were a feature in a pathological case first published in the Phrenological Journal and Miscellany (Edinburgh), No vi., p. 290, &c., and described in the well-known article on " Spectral Illusions " in Chambers^ Miscellany. Wundt fO/j. cit.. Vol. ii., p. 357,) records the experience of an overseer of forests, who saw heaps of wood all round him in his house, but also saw the furniture and carpet just as usual. {Cf. case 193.) Miss Morse, of Vermont, a careful observer, who has had hallucinations at rare intervals during a good many years, tells me, that at first "they seemed to be pictured just W2'i/i.m instead of before my eyes." Lately, however, "they have iisually been proj ected into space; but however real the apparitions at first appear, a close inspection reveals that they have no solidity — that objects can be seen through them." Another of my informants, who on waking had a hallucination of a tall female figure, noticed that he could see a towel through her; and similarly in one of my cases of persistent dream-images. Professor Goodwin reports that with him they ' ' retain an appearance of solidity for some seconds after waking, the furniture of the room being distinctly recognised through these figures, like a dissolving view." Another correspondent describes such images as seen " as it were with one eye asleep, the other awake." In one oiV&tevson'H cases {Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal for Jan., 1843), the phantasm appeared as though seen through gauze. I may also refer to the telepathic phantasms which gave the impression of being formed from mist (Chaja xii., § 3, cases 315, 518, and Mrs. Deane's experience, p. 237). I have mentioned that the disaippearance is occasionally through a stage of increased tenuity and transl^arency.

de nouer les brides demon chapeau devant ma glace, quand tout-a-coup j'ai

vu dans cette glace d'E entrer par la porte.^ II avait son chapeau sur

la tete; il etait pale et triste; sans me retourner je lui adresse la parole,

" Tiens, d'E, vous voila; asseyez-vous done "; et comme il ne repondait

pas, je me suis alors retourne et je n'ai plus rien vu; prise alors de peur, j'ai pousse le cri que vous avez entendu.'

" B, pour rassurer sa femme, se met a la plaisanter, traitant

I'apparition d'hallucination nerveuse, et lui disant que d'E— — serait trfes flatty d'apprendre a quel point il occupait sa pensee; puis, comme Mme.

B restait toute tremblante, pour couper court a son emotion, nous lui

proposons de partir tout de suite, alldguant que nous alliens manquer le

lever du rideau. ' Je n'ai pas pense un seul instant a d'E,' nous dit

Mme. B, ' depuis que M. F— — m'a demande la cause de son absence.

Je ne suis pas nerveuse, et je n'ai jamais eu d'hallucination; je vous assure qu'il y la quelque chose d'extraordinaire, et quant a moi, je ne

sortirai pas avant d'avoir des nouvelles de d' E. Je vous supplie

d'aller chez lui, c'est le seul moyen de me rassurer.' Je conseille a B

de c^der au ddsir de sa femme, et nous partons tous les deux chez d'E,

qui demeurait a tres peu de distance. Tout en marchant nous plaisantions beaucoup sur les frayeurs de Mme. B.

" En arrivant chez d' E, nous demandons au concierge, ' D' E-

est-il chez lui'? ' Oui, messieurs, il n'est pas descendu de la journee.'

D' E habitait un petit appartement de gargon; il n'avait pas de

domestiques. Nous montons chez lui, et nous sonnons a plusieurs reprises sans avoir de reponse. Nous sonnons plus fort, puis nous frappons a tour

de bras, sans plus de succes. B, emotionne malgr^ lui, me dit, ' C'est

absurde, le concierge se sera trompe; il est sorti; descendons.' Mais le

concierge nous affirme que d'E n'est pas sorti, qu'il en est absolument

sur. Veritablement efFray^s, nous remontons avec lui, et nous tentons de nouveau de nous faire ouvrir; puis n' entendant rien bouger dans I'appartement, nous envoyons chercher un serrurier. On force la porte, et

nous trouvons le corps de d'E, encore chaud, couche sur son lit, et

troue de deux coups de revolver.

" Le medecin, que nous faisons venir aussitot, constate que d'E

avait d'abord tente de se suicider en avalant un flacon de laudanum, et qu' ensuite, trouvant sans doute que le poison n' agissait pas assez vite, il s'etait tire deux coups de revolver a la place du cceur. D'apres la constation medicale, la mort remontait a une heure environ. Sans que je puisse preciser I'heure exacte, c'etait cependant une coincidence

presqu' absolue avec la soi-disant hallucination de Mme. B. Sur la

cheminee il y avait une lettre de d'E, annongant a M. et Mme. B

sa resolution, lettre particulierement affectueuse pour Mme. B.

" Gaston Fournier."

In conversation with Mr. Myers, M. Fournier expressed himself uncertain as to the correctness of his date. We have procured a copy of

the Act de Deces, which records that the date of d'E 's death was

October 7, 1880; also that it took place at 10 a.m. If this was so, it

1 The vision in the glass is, of course, itself the hallucination in this case (c/. Vol. i., p. 444, note), and does not imply either actual reflection, or even a corresponding phantasm to be seen in the room, had Mme. B. turned her head. That such a phantasm might have appeared is, however, shown by the case in Vol. i., p. 469, note.

40 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

would still be quite possible that the body, which was clothed, should be found warm in the evening. Probably the hour could not be stated with anything like precision; and it is as likely that the official record fixed it too early as that M. Fournier's medical authority (supposing him to be correctly quoted) fixed it too late. But we clearly cannot assume the coincidence to have been nearly as exact as M. Fournier imagined.

Mme. B. is dead. M. B. is unfortunately in South America; and though we hope to obtain his account of the occurrence, it has not arrived in time for insertion.

Mrs. Leonard Thrupp, of 67, Kensington Gardens Square, W., narrates:— "November, 1883.

(225) " In the month of October, 1850, I was staying in the house of Mr. D., an East Indian merchant, No. 1, South wick Crescent, Hyde Park.

" One evening, a Mr. B., with three daughters, came to dine — the youngest a blooming rosy girl of 17. Mr. B. had lately bought a house in Devonshire, which was being added to and furnished. He made our host promise to go down to the house-warming at Christmas.

" A few weeks afterwards, that gentleman was out one night, and his sister, Mrs. R., and I sat by the fire in a large double drawing-room. She was knitting, and from her position could see into the smaller room which was not lighted. I had my back to that room, and was reading aloud one of Charles Dickens' serial stories. All of a sudden she dropped her work, exclaiming faintly, ' Good God! ' ' What is the matter? ' I cried. She pointed into the semi-darkness, and whispered (as if awe-struck), ' There's Louisa B.' I rose, looked, but saw nothing. She said, ' Are you afraid to go in? ' ' Not at all,' I replied, and went, and passed my arm round to prove it was mere fancy on her part. However, the result showed that was youthful presumption on my part.

" The next morning, Mr. D. heard the story from his sister in her own apartment, where she breakfasted. He said to me in the breakfast-room, ' Did not you see anything last night. Miss Hill 1 ' ' Nothing whatever,' I replied. ' Well,' said he, ' I suppose you think us Scotch very superstitious, but an aunt of ours and two of my sisters have the gift of second -sight.'

" That day passed, but the following day at noon, Mr. D. met me at the bottom of the stairs with an open letter and said, ' That was no fancy of Mrs. R.'s; poor Louisa B. died at 9 o'clock that evening, of brain fever, after measles.' " Anne Elizabeth Theupp."

Since giving this account, Mrs. Thrupp has referred to old letters, and has come to the opinion that the date must have been towards the end of 1847. We find, however, from the obituary in the Gentleman's Magazine that a death, which is almost certainly that of the Miss Louisa B. of the narrative, took place on July 8, 1847. This suggests that the detail of sitting hy the fire is inaccurate — the temperature at 9 p.m. on that day, as we learn from the Greenwich Observatory, having been 60°; but Mrs. Thrupp is quite certain that her memory is right on this point. She further tells us that there were reasons why Miss B. should have wished to see Mr. D., who was an old friend of the family, but that she knew little of Mrs. R. Mrs R. has been dead some years; and Mrs. Durward, a lady who was her companion at the

time, and who — as Mrs. Thrupp recollects — assisted Mrs. R. to bed, remembers no more of the matter than that Mrs. R. was excited. She mentions, however, that Mrs. R. was " subject to a kind of seizure," in which she would become quite rigid, and point with her finger to where she imagined her husband to be, exclaiming, " There he is." These fits occurred perhaps half a dozen times in a year, and were brought on by any news of him that distressed her. Mrs. Durward never knew her to have apparitions of anyone except her husband.

This case is an example of an appearance to a person only slightly connected with the agent; and it cannot but suggest the question, would Mr. D. have seen the figure had he been present? I shall recur to the point in connection with "collective " hallucinations (Chap. XVIII., § 7). As to Mrs. R.'s pathological visions, I may point out that the extent to which they weaken the evidence for telepathy afforded by the present incident may easily be exaggerated. People seem sometimes to regard any real or supposed tendency to subjective hallucination on the part of the percipient as at once fatal to an alleged telepathic case. Now let us grant for the moment that Mrs. E.'s visions of her husband prove a tendency to similar subjective visions of other persons known to her; and let us make the extreme supposition that, unknown to her intimate attendant who never knew her to have any such experience, she actually had 50 in the course of her adult life — or on an average one in every 292 days, if we reckon her adult life as 40 years. Then the probability of her having a vision of the sort on the particular day on which Miss B. died would be 2¥2. But the probability that that particular vision would represent Miss B., with whom she had only a slight acquaintance, would clearly be very small; let us be liberal, and call it to. Thus the probability of her hitting off the above coincidence by accident would be at most nho, even if we took only the identity of day into account; and very much less if we relied on the alleged identity of hour. It would surely be irrational to exclude from the cumulative telepathic evidence a case where the probability of accidental occurrence remains as minute as this.

The next case is from General H., who, unfortunately, will not permit the publication of his name. The account was procured through the kindness of Miss A. A. Leith, of 8, Dorset Square, N.W.

"November 11th, 1884.

(226) "In 1856 I was engaged on duty at a place called Roha, some 40 miles south of Bombay, and moving about in the districts (as it is termed in India). My only shelter was a tent, in which I lived for several months in the year. My parents, and only sister, about 22 years

42 FURTHER VISUAL CASES [chap.

of age, were living at K., from which place letters used to take a week reaching me. My sister and I were regular correspondents, and the post generally arrived about 6 a.m., as I was starting to my work. It was on the 18th April of that year (a day never to be forgotten) that I received a letter from my mother, stating that my sister was not feeling well, but hoped to write to me the next day. There was nothing in the letter to make me feel particularly anxious. After my usual out-door work, I returned to my tent, and in due course set to my ordinary daily work. At 2 o'clock my clerk was with me, reading some native documents that required my attention, and I was in no way thinking of my sister, when all of a sudden I was startled by seeing my sister (as it appeared) walk in front of me from one door of the tent to the other, dressed in her nightdress. ^ The apparition had such an effect upon me that I felt persuaded that my sister had died at that time. I wrote at once to my father, stating what I had seen, and in due time I also heard from him that my sister had died at that time. ct j q jj "

An obituary notice in AllerHs Indian Mail shows that General H.'s sister died on April 18th, 1856.

In answer to inquiries. General H. writes:

" By the context of the narrative you will see it was 2 p.m., broad daylight. My vision corresponded with the exact time of death.

" I have never seen any other apparition.

" You must excuse my sanctioning my name being appended to the account, though I am as certain of it as I am of my own existence."

[General H. further informs us that his parents are dead, and that there is no friend living who may have seen his letter.]

