In reply to inquiries, Mr. Albree writes, on Oct. 20, 1884: — " In reply to your favour of the 7th inst., I can only say that my experience was such that no person could aid me, and I probably did not mention it to any one but my wife. While she fully recalls what I told her after my return from the hotel, she does not remember that I spoke to her before I saw the lieutenant. And yet I can scarcely think it probable that I did not, in the morning, speak of my troubled feelings, of my arising, turning up the gas, and going into the children's room. I have never seen or heard of the lieutenant since. The circumstances of our acquaintance were so peculiar and touching, and our relations so intimate for three weeks, that failing to hear from him I long since concluded that he fell in the active service to which he had been ordered.

" You ask if I have ever had an experience that was not similarly confirmed. Only once. I very seldom dream, but when I do the dreams are vivid. Once I dreamed that a lady friend had been murdered. The time, place, circumstances, and persons concerned were strongly marked. But the lady had been in no danger, and is still living."

The next example — from Mrs. Montgomery, of Beaulieu, Co. Louth

— is remarkable in several ways.

"February, 1884. (101) " Nearly 30 years ago I lost a sister. The place where she died being at some distance, my husband went to the funeral without me. I went to bed early, and had a frightful dream of the funeral ceremony. I saw my brother faint away at the service, and fall into the grave. I awoke with the horror of the dream, just as my husband entered the room on his return from the funeral, which had taken place at least eight hours before. I asked him to tell me if anything unusual had happened, as I had had a

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 329

terrible dream, and I related it. He said, ' "Who in the world told you that1? I never intended telling you.' I said, ' I only dreamt it. Just as you were coming in I awoke.' "

[In this narrative a few words are taken from an account received from the Hon. Mrs. Montgomery Moore, as the letter received from Mrs. Montgomery herself, giving the greater part of the details, took this previous account for granted. The account, as it stands, was sent to Mrs. Montgomery, who then replied, " The paper is quite accurate " — making one trifling correction. Mr. Montgomery gave Mrs. Montgomery Moore a verbal confirmation of the occurrence, which had greatly impressed both him and his wife.]

Here the picture transferred to the percipient's dream was a precise and detailed one. It was of a sort which might at first sight seem more fitly to belong to a later class, where something of the nature of clairvoyance is suggested. Nor would the eight hours' interval between the event and the dream be an objection to this view, for I have already mentioned that the deferment or latency of telepathic impressions is specially frequent in dream and " borderland " cases; as though the idea or image had been unable to compete with, the vivid sensations* which external realities force on the mind, and only got its chance of emerging into consciousness when the senses were closed to these contending influences.1 But seeing that at the moment of Mrs. Montgomery's dream her husband was just about to enter her room, with the shock of the burial-scene probably still fresh in his mind, it is at any rate conceivable that he then, and not the brother at the earlier time, transmitted the impression.

§ 4. We come now to the larger family of cases, in which the agent's personality, and not merely his particular thought, is reflected, and the dream conveys a true impression of his state, or of some event connected with him. I will first give a few examples where the fact which is a reality is presented or suggested without the agent's visible appearance in the dream, and without any distinct sense on the percipient's part of being present at the scene. The following narrative, from Mrs. Lincoln, now residing at 91, South Circular Road, Dublin, was sent to Professor Barrett in 1875.

(102) "On the morning of February 7th, 1855, at Mount Pleasant Square, Dublin, where I lived, I awakened from a troubled sleep and dream, exclaiming, 'John is dead.' My husband said, 'Go to sleep, you

1 Telepathic dreams of the "clairvoyant " order seem capable of this deferment, just like any others: see for instance case 134 below.

330 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

are dreaming.' I did sleep, and again awoke repeating the same words, and asking him to look at the watch and tell me what o'clock it was then; he did so and said it was 2 o'clock. I was much impressed by this dream, and next day went to the city to inquire at the house of business; Mr. John C. being at Dundrum for the previous month. [He was not a relative, but a very intimate friend.] When I got to the house I saw the place closed up, and the man who answered the door told me the reason. ' Oh! ma'am, Mr. John C. is dead.' ' When did he die? ' I said. ' At 2 this morning,' he said. I was so much shocked, he had to assist me to the waiting-room to give me water. I had not heard of Mr. C.'s illness, and was speaking to him a fortnight previously, when he was complaining of a slight cold, and expected the change of Dundrum would benefit him, so that he should return to town immediately. I never saw nor heard of him after, until I dreamt the foregoing.

"Emily Lincoln." Mr. Lincoln says: —

" I certify to the correctness of the facts of my wife's awakening meat the date stated, asking me the time, &c, and to the further fact of the unexpected death of Mr. C. at the time.

"Henry Lincoln."

We find from the obituary of the Freeman's Journal that Mr. C. died on Feb. 7th, 1855.

[In conversation, Mr. Podmore learnt from Mr. Lincoln that his wife never talked in her sleep; and she, when asked whether her ordinary dreams were as vivid as this, replied in the negative. It appeared, however, that she had had several dreams which she regarded as premonitory, and as having been fulfilled.]

The next account was first given in England, April 1st, 1882, by its then editor, under the nom de plume " Coriolanus." He tells us that the publication of his name would deprive him of an actual benefit; but he allows us to say of him what is said above in connection with case 73 (p. 275). The experience here described is again his own.

(103) "In connection with the awfully sudden death of my friend, Mr. E. C. Barnes, the artist, I can vouch for the truth of the following extraordinary coincidence. At 6 o'clock last Sunday morning [i.e., March 26th, 1882], the exact time of his decease, an intimate friend of the late artist, who was unaware of the fact that Barnes was ill, suddenly alarmed an entire household by sitting up in bed whilst fast asleep and shouting loudly twice, as if in intense agony. Three members of his family ran to his bedside to inquire if he were ill, when slowly awaking and rubbing his eyes, he said lie was perfectly well, but supposed it was the storm which had affected him. At breakfast he was playfully rallied upon the occurrence, and more than once expressed the hope that nothing was amiss with his old friend Barnes. At dinner time a messenger arrived with the dreadful news. I have set this down for the

viil] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 331

benefit of thinkers. I know the facts to be as I have stated them. Was there a mysterious cord of sympathy suddenly snapped when the artist breathed his last, and his friend was at that very moment so mysteriously convulsed? Who knows? "

Writing to us on December 11th, 1884, the narrator adds: —

"The occurrence made the more impression on my family, as, on account of the great attachment they knew to exist between Mr. Barnes and me, they dreaded to tell the sad news, and in fact only gently broke it at breakfast time on the Monday morning. They were much struck by my frequent references to Barnes during Sunday, after they had received the intelligence from his eldest son, who called at my house about 1 o'clock. The deceased and I had known one another for many years."

Mr. Podmore called at the witness's house on September 1st, 1885, but found only his son and daughter at home. Writing on the day of his call, he says: " I questioned the daughter on the Barnes incident. She could at first remember no details at all; but after reading through the extract from England, she told me that she had a distinct recollection of going to her father's room, when roused by his cry, to ascertain whether he or her brother were ill. She did not remember his mentioning the name of Barnes at breakfast, or that the news of the death had been withheld from her father until the Monday morning. But she told me that she remembered reading, a few days afterwards, the paragraph in England describing the occurrence; and that, had any of the details been incorrect, the fact that her father had made a mistake would certainly have dwelt in her memory. The son had been absent from home at the time."

It is worthy of note that such sudden startings from sleep, with the strong impression of a definite event, but without the memory of any dream leading up to the impression, seem by no means common occurrences, outside the cases which have coincided with some weighty reality. For every fresh point (beyond the fact of coinciding with reality) that distinguishes the dreams that we are considering from ordinary dreams, goes, of course, to strengthen the argument against chance as the source of the coincidences, and to establish these cases as a distinct natural class.

The next case, in its absurdity and precision, is a great contrast to the last. We received it from the Rev. A. B. McDougall, now of Hemel Hempsted, and at that time a scholar of Lincoln College,

Oxford.

"November, 1882. (104) " On the night of January 10th, 1882, I was sleeping in one of the suburbs of Manchester in the house of a friend, into which house several rats had been driven by the excessive cold. I knew nothing about these rats, but during the night I was waked by feeling an unpleasantly cold something slithering down my right leg. I immediately struck a light and

332 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

flung off the bed-clothes, and saw a rat run out of my bed under the fireplace. I told my friend the next morning, but he tried to persuade me I had been dreaming. However, a few days afterwards1 a rat was caught in my room. On the morning of January 11th, a cousin of mine [Miss E. J. M. McDougall, since married], who happened to be staying in my own home on the south coast, and to be occupying my room, came down to breakfast, and recounted a marvellous dream, in which a rat appeared to be eating off the extremities of my unfortunate self. My family laughed the matter off. However, on the 13th, a letter was received from me giving an account of my unpleasant meeting with the rat and its subsequent capture. Then everyone present remembered the dream my cousin had told certainly 58 hours before, as having occurred on the night of January 1 Oth. My mother wrote me an account of the dream, ending up with the remark, ' We always said E. was a witch: she always knew about everything almost before it took place.' u A^. B. McDougall."

Here the point, of course, is that an exceedingly improbable incident is associated in the dream with the right person. It is worth noting that we have no exact parallel to such an incident as this among our waking cases. Thus, if the dream was telepathic, its very triviality may illustrate in a new way the favourable effect of sleep on the percipient faculty.

Dreams happening at times when the person dreamt of is known to be in peril are, as a rule, inadmissible as evidence. Thus we have a case where the mother of a lieutenant in the army dreamt, on the night of the storming of the Redan, that her son was wounded in the left arm. The subsequent newspaper account described him as having been severely injured in the right arm; but his mother persisted in her view that the dream was correct, and it proved to have been so. But a dream concerning a wound is a very likely one for a mother to have under the circumstances; and the detail is quite insufficient. In the same class we must include mothers' dreams of accidents to children, even apart from any special grounds of anxiety — the form of dream being not uncommon, and real accidents (if we include trivial ones) being frequent enough to make it certain that striking coincidences will every now and then occur by chance. Thus the wife of a rector in the West of England tells us how she once dreamt that one of her little girls, who was on a visit, had fallen down in the street and cut her forehead over the left eye, and how the morning's post

1 There is a slight apparent discrepancy between these words and the date of the letter in which the capture is afterwards said to have been mentioned. The letters are destroyed; and Mr. McDougall rightly prefers to leave the words as they stand. They, of course, in no way affect the central incident.

viil] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 333

brought the news of that precise accident. The rector (who is sceptical on these matters) testifies to the fact that his wife mentioned to him her dream " that the child had fallen down and cut her forehead; " and also to the fact that " the next post brought the news." He says nothing about the street or the left eye — details which may have been read back into the dream afterwards. But in any case the accident is of a common type; the amount of correct detail is small; and moreover it came out in conversation with the lady that she dreams a good deal, and pays attention to her dreams. However completely telepathy were established, it might still be doubted whether such a coincidence as this ought to be referred to it. As an interesting contrast, I may quote the following case, which is from Mrs. Hobbs, (wife of the Rev. W. A. Hobbs, formerly a missionary at Beerbhoom, Bengal,) now resident at Tenbury, in Worcestershire. The narrative was first written out for a friend, probably in 1877.

(105) " During our residence in India as missionaries, our children remained at home, either residing with my sister or at school, and about the years 1864 or 1865 our eldest boy was at school at Shireland Hall near to Birmingham. The principal was the Rev. T. H. Morgan, now Baptist minister at Harrow-on-the-Hill.

" One night, during the summer of one of the years I have mentioned, I was awakened from my sleep by my husband asking, ' What is the matter, J. 1 Why are you weeping so 1 I could let you sleep no longer, you were crying so much.' I replied that I was dreaming, but could not tell the dream for some minutes. It had seemed so like a reality that I was still weeping bitterly.

" I dreamed that the sister (who acted as guardian to our boys in our absence) was reading to me a letter giving a detailed account of how our Harry died of choking, while eating his dinner one day at school.

" When sufficiently composed I again went to sleep; but when I awoke in the morning, the effect of my dream was still upon me. My husband tried to rally me, saying, ' It is only a dream, think no more about it.' But my heart was sad, and I could not shake it off.

"In the course of the day I called on a friend, the only other European lady in the station. I told her why I felt troubled, and she advised me to make a note of the date, and then I should know how to understand my dream when a letter of that date came to hand. Our letters at that time came to us via Southampton, and nearly six weeks must elapse before I could hear if anything had transpired on that particular date, even if a letter could have been dispatched at once; but it might not have been the ' mail day,' and that would give some additional days for me to wait. They were weary weeks, but at length the lookedfor letter arrived, and it contained no reference to what I had anticipated. I felt truly ashamed that I had permitted a dream to influence me, and thought no more about it.

334 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

" A fortnight later another letter from my sister came in, bearing an apology for not having told me in her last what a narrow escape from death our Harry had experienced, and then went on to detail what I had dreamed, with the additional piece of intelligence that just as his head had dropped on the person supporting him, and he was supposed to be dead, the piece of meat passed down his throat, and he shortly after revived, and was quite well at the time of her writing.

" That boy is now a minister of the Gospel, and about a year ago I was talking with him about my strange dream, when a friend who was present said to him, ' Do you remember what you thought about when you were choking? ' He replied, ' Yes, I distinctly remember thinking, I wonder what my mother will do when she hears I am dead.' "

In answer to our inquiries, Mrs. Hobbs says: —

"July 24th, 1884.

" I have not had any other dream of a like kind. I am not able to say how near in time the dream was to the event; but that it was very near to the event is clear from the fact that I reckoned up the earliest time when I could get any information from England, supposing that the dream really pointed to anything; and though no news came to the time expected, yet the next letter that came apologised for not having mentioned it in the former letter. So that the space between the event and the dream would be, at most, the space between the dream and the next mail leaving England for India."

Mr. Hobbs says: —

" So far as I am concerned in the above account, written by my wife, Jane Ann Hobbs, I declare it to be quite correct.

" William Ayees Hobbs."

The following account is from the son, who is a Baptist minister at

Tenbury.

"July 29th, 1884.

" I remember that I had a sharp, short struggle for breath, accompanied by a bursting sensation in the head and singing in the ears; then I rolled over; the pain in the head was succeeded by a drowsy, dreamy feeling; a mist gathered before my eyes, and I was just on the point of losing consciousness, when the persistent thumps, which were being administered to my back by the anxious spectators, jerked the beef out of my throat, and I revived. I had no direct thought of my mother, as I imagine, for this reason: I was left in the care of an aunt, when my parents went to India; and as the whole of my training since I was four years old had been undertaken by this aunt, prior to my going to Birmingham, it was to her that my thoughts reverted when I was choking; and I distinctly remember that the thought flashed through my mind, ' How ever will Aunt Maria write to India about this.' I quite believed I was dying.

" H. V. Hobbs."

[In conversation, Mr. Podmore ascertained that the family are in no way given to real or supposed " psychical " experiences.]

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 335

Here the unusualncss of the accident, and the uniqueness and emotional vividness of the dream may, we think, be safely accepted. The slight amount of discrepancy between the final sentences of the mother's and the son's account can hardly be held to affect the general trustworthiness of Mrs. Hobbs' narrative; and it will be noticed that the agent's account of his own thoughts harmonises specially well with the actual nature of the percipient's impression, which was that the news was conveyed to her by her sister — the very person on whom her son imagined that sad duty as devolving.

The following case, though the dream was of an accident to a son, is strong of its kind — the form of the accident being uncommon, and the idea of it particularly strongly impressed. It is from Mrs. A. G. Sparrow, of Derwent Square, Liverpool.

"November, 1882.

(106) " Three or four years ago, I dreamt that my eldest son had broken his hand at football. Next day came a letter saying he had sprained his left hand. I was so impressed by my dream that I telegraphed to the head master, asking if the boy's hand was broken. I received a reassuring reply saying, 'Only a bad sprain, and doing well.' When he returned home at the holidays we at once saw that the hand had been broken and had joined without being properly set, and he will carry the ridge, caused by the join, to his grave."

[Mrs. Sparrow tells us that she has had no other dreams which impressed her similarly. The incident of the telegram is not likely to have been unconsciously invented.]

Perils by sea are another very common subject of dreams; and where a large number of people are living a life of more than average risk, and a large number of relatives on land are living under a more or less constant sense of this risk, accidental coincidences between dreams and casualties are, of course, certain to occur. Especially will this be the case where the relatives live by the seaside, and where the very storm that destroys life on one element may disturb slumber on the other. We have quite a little collection of cases where wives or mothers of seafaring men have dreamt of fatal accidents which then proved to have actually occurred.1 Such incidents have not usually

1 To give one example— my friend, the Rev. R. B. F. Ellington, Vicar of Lower Brixham (who has met with several such cases), vouches for the fact that the following occurrence in his parish was described hours before the arrival of the news confirming the fears which it occasioned; and lie certifies to the good character of the witnesses.

"In the early spring of 1881, Mrs. Barnes, of Brixham, Devonshire, whose husband was at sea, dreamt that his fishing-vessel was run into by a steamer. Their boy was with him, and she called out in her dream, ' Save the boy! ' At this moment another son sleeping in the next room rushed into hers, crying out, 'Where's father?' She asked

336 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

any claim to be considered as even prima facie evidence for telepathy.

Every now and then, however, " sea-dreams " present an amount of

correct detail that prevents us from rejecting them. Such a case is

the following, from Mr. A. Ashby, of 34, Windmill Road, Croydon,

Surrey.

" October 17th, 1882.

(107) "The following incident happened in about 1870. I awoke in the morning and said to my wife, ' I have been with our son Alexander '(he was chief mate of a ship on a voyage to Port Natal, South Africa). With great interest she listened to my dream. ' Well,' I said, ' he is in anything but a comfortable position. The captain is confined to his cabin, not able to come on deck; the men, with the exception of one and a boy, likewise ill; he has the whole duty of the ship to attend to, cook, navigator, and, in fact, everything to attend to; nursing requires a considerable part of his time.' The ship, if my memory is correct, was four or five hundred tons burden. Well, sir, I dream but very little; and on more than one occasion my dreams have been verified by coming events.

" We got a letter from my son in due course, and if I had been on board and seen, I could not have more accurately described the position of affairs on board; fortunately, weather and wind were (as my dream indicated) favourable, or the result of this complication of adverse circumstances might have had a disastrous termination.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Ashby says: —

"November 29th, 1882.

" I have nothing to add to the narrative of my dream. I did not, as I should now do, make a minute of such a dream. At the time, I thought, as of other dreams, it is only a dream. Only on receipt of my son's letter, dated from Port Natal, South Africa, did the coincidence and singularity of the phenomena bring to my mind the dream, and how it exactly corresponded with the actual state of affairs on board the ship at the time it occurred. I may mention my wife and daughter have reviewed the time and circumstance, and their memory is clear as to my relating the dream in the morning. The scene is as fresh on mind and memory as if it had occurred yesterday."

In an interview with Mr. Podmore on October 8th, 1883, Mr. Ashby mentioned that he dreams very little. At this interview his wife and daughter both stated that they recollected hearing of the dream

what he meant, when he said he had distinctly heard his father come upstairs and kick with his heavy boots against the door, as he was in the habit of doing when he returned from sea. The boy's statement and her own dream so alarmed the woman that early next morning she told Mrs. Strong and other neighbours of her fears. News afterwards came that her husband's vessel had been run into by a steamer, and that he and the boy were drowned."

This might seem at first sight, a favourable specimen, owing to the alleged double percipienee. But it is impossible to rely on a report from uneducated witnesses, of a confused scene in the middle of the night. If the boy heard the sound which his father "was in the habit " of making, why should he have taken fright? We cannot be sure that he did not imagine he had heard the sound after he had been infected with his mother's alarm; for if this were so, the story might still easily have become just what it

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 337

immediately after its occurrence and before its verification, but they could add nothing to the above narrative.

§ 5. This case forms a natural transition to the group where the reality is not only presented in a pictorial way, but the dream-scene corresponds (in whole or in part) with what the eyes of the supposed agent are actually beholding. The majority, perhaps, of the alleged dream-cases are of this pictorial sort; but most of them have to be set aside, on the ground either of inaccuracy of detail, or of the connection of the dream with matters that have been recently occupying the waking mind. Thus a widow whose husband was killed by an accident at sea gives us a circumstantial account of her coincident dream — " a vessel, like her husband's, wholly dismasted — the bare hull merely — being lowered by ropes down a beach, and all the crew assisting "; and declares that the scene of her dream was exactly what was described in the letter which afterwards brought her the news. It appears, however, that the narrator had never seen the actual ship; and inspection of the letter shows that, except the dismasting, the details of the dream had no counterpart whatever in reality. Thus all that remains is the simple coincidence of the dream and the death; and such coincidences, in the case of casualties at sea, must, as we have seen, be generally excluded. We apply this rule even where the date of the dream has been immediately noted in a diary, and where we have every assurance that it was unique in the dreamer's experience. Again, Mrs. Barter, of Careystown, Whitegate, Co. Cork, has kindly given us an account of a dream which she had at the time of the Indian Mutiny. She seemed to see her husband, then adjutant in the 7 5th Foot, wounded, and in the act of binding up his leg with his puggeree, when four men of his regiment lifted him up and took him into a battery. " I at once wrote it to him and, in reply to my letter, heard that such an event had actually taken place." The coincidence was extremely close, and Colonel Barter, C.B., has confirmed the account. He was carried into a battery by four sergeants; and he is nearly sure that his wife mentioned sergeants in her first account of her dream. But, on being specially asked as to the puggeree, he stated that he bound up his leg not with a puggeree, but with a black silk necktie. This defect, combined with the fact that Mrs. Barter was in a nervous state, and had another disturbing and quite unveridical dream about her husband during the same campaign,

338 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

prevents us from allowing weight to the correspondence. So, again, Mrs. Powles, of Wadhurst, West Dulwich, has given us an account of a dream which her late husband narrated to her at the time, in which he saw his brother, Dr. Ralph Holden, who was exploring in the interior of Africa, lying under a large tree, supported by a man, and either dead or dying. They learnt from another explorer, Mr. Green, that Dr. Holden had died at just about that time, under a large tree, in the arms of his native servant; and Mr. Holden recognised the scene of his dream in a sketch of the spot which Mr. Green had taken. But — to say nothing of the indefmiteness of the time-coincidence — the entourage is such as the idea of the death of an African traveller might readily enough suggest, quite apart from telepathy; and the sight of the sketch would be precisely calculated to give spurious retrospective definiteness to the dream-scene. And once more, a most vivid dream (with a remarkable amount of correct detail, as well as several important discrepancies,) in which a coachman, sleeping at a distance from his stables, saw a pony taken out, harnessed, and then after a time brought back, on the one single night on which this ever actually happened, has been dismissed, as too much connected with the dreamer's normal train of ideas; though his master (Mr. J. S. Dismorr, of Thelcrest Lodge, Gravesend) and another witness both testify to the fact that the dream was described before the reality was known.

The following cases seem free from these objections, there having been no cause for anxiety on the percipient's part, and nothing to suggest the scene. The first is from the Rev. Canon Warburton.

'' The Close, Winchester.

"July 16th, 1883. (108) " Somewhere about the year 1848,1 went up from Oxford to stay a day or two with my brother, Acton Warburton, then a barrister, living at 10, Fish Street, Lincoln's Inn. When I got to his chambers, I found a note on the table apologising for his absence, and saying that he had gone to a dance somewhere in the West End, and intended to be home soon after 1 o'clock. Instead of going to bed, I dozed in an arm-chair, but started up wide awake exactly at 1, ejaculating, ' By Jove! he's down!' and seeing him coming out of a drawing-room into a brightly illuminated landing, catching his foot in the edge of the top stair, and falling headlong, just saving himself by his elbows and hands. (The house was one which I had never seen, nor did I know where it was.) Thinking very little of the matter, I fell a-doze again for half-an-hour, and was awakened by my brother suddenly coming in and saying, ' Oh, there you are! I have just had as narrow an escape of breaking my neck as I ever had in my life.

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 339

Coming out of the ballroom, I caught my foot, and tumbled full length down the stairs.'

" That is all. It may have been ' only a dream,' but I always thought it must have been something more. a w. Warburton."

In a second letter Canon Warburton adds: —

"July 20th, 1883.

" My brother was hurrying home from his dance, with some little selfreproach in his mind for not having been at his chambers to receive his guest, so the chances are that he was thinking of me. The whole scene was vividly present to me at the moment, but I did not note particulars any more than one would in real life. The general impression was of a narrow landing brilliantly illuminated, and I remember verifying the correctness of this by questions at the time."

In conversation, however, Canon Warburton told me that the scene which he saw included a clock, and tables set round for refreshment, and that his brother confirmed the accuracy of these details.

Asked whether he had had similar vivid visions which had not corresponded with any real event, Canon Warburton replied, "This is my sole experience of the kind."

For the next case we are indebted to Mrs. Swithinbank, of

Ormleigh, Mowbray Road, Upper Norwood, who is well acquainted

with Mrs. Fleming, the narrator.

"October 17th, 1882.

(109) " Three years ago when staying at Ems for my health, one morning after having my bath, I was resting on the sofa reading. A slight drowsiness came over me and I distinctly saw the following: —

" My husband, who was then in England, appeared to me riding down the lane leading to my father's house. Suddenly the horse grew restive, then plunged and kickeds and finally unseated his rider, throwing him violently to the ground. I jumped up hastily, thinking I had been asleep; and on my going down to luncheon I related to a lady who was seated next to me what I had seen, and made the remark, ' I hope all is well at home.' My friend, seeing I was anxious, laughed and told me not to be superstitious, and so I forgot the incident, until 2 days afterwards I received a letter from home saying my husband had been thrown from his horse and had dislocated his shoulder. The time and place of the accident exactly agreed with my vision. "Laura Fleming."

[Asked whether she can recall other dreams of a similarly vivid and realistic kind, Mrs. Fleming answers in the negative.]

The next account is from Mrs. Chambers Leete, of 28, Aberdeen

Park Road, Highbury, N. It may be compared with Mrs. Bettany's

waking case (p. 194).

"September, 1884. (110) "On the night of about the 12th of August, 1878, I had a dream which greatly troubled me, and caused me to feel quite ill, it seemed so real. I distinctly saw my mother lying on a couch in a deathlike appearance, my father and brother by her side. She looked at me, but could

Y 2

340 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

not speak; the vividness awoke me. Falling asleep I dreamt the second time that she was dead.

" After writing home, I learned that on the night of my dream my mother had been seized with a prolonged fainting tit. I was in perfect health when I went to bed, but awoke with a terrible headache.

" Alice E. Lebte."

In another communication, Mrs. Leete adds: —

"At the time of my dream I was companion to a lady in Dorsetshire. We had driven from a house called the Priory, Wareham, to the Grange, about 4 miles distant. It was on the night of our arrival this very vivid dream occurred to me. I mentioned it to her (and also to her housekeeper, who left soon after), she remarking first how ill I looked, and she told me not to let it worry me but write a letter to inquire if anything was the matter at home, which I did, but of course could not get an answer for two days, when I received a reply saying my mother had had, on the night I named, a dreadful fainting fit from which they thought she would not x'ecover. I am afraid, if I wrote to her ladyship, she would not remember the circumstance, having so many things to occupy her mind, and as she thought so little about it at the time I feel sure it would not be any use troubling her.

" I can safely say that neither before nor since have I experienced a similar dream to the one of which I have sent you particulars."

In answer to an inquiry whether the details of the scene corresponded with her dream, Mrs. Leete says: —

" In reply to your inquiry I am unable to speak positively at this distance of time, but am under the impression that the scene did correspond."

Such incidents as these really belong to the class which may be described as clairvoyant, and which I am reserving for the end of the chapter; but I have brought forward these few examples for the sake of a special observation. In all the earlier dream-cases of this chapter, the rSle of the percipient was purely passive; the impression received by him was apparently a direct and literal reproduction in whole or in part, of what was, or had been, consciously in the agent's mind. But these last narratives have introduced the same difference as appeared in the concluding cases of Chapter VI.: though the scene which the dreamer pictured was the very one in which the agent was, the agent's own figure, with which his own attention was certainly not occupied, appeared in the dream. If, therefore, this part of the percept was transferred ready-made (so to speak) from the agent's mind, it must have been from a sub-conscious part of his mind. Such a view would present no serious difficulty; for probably every one, after early childhood, retains at the background of his mind a dim realisation of his own personality in connection with

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 341

his outer aspect; and we have had proofs that a person may transmit an idea of which he is at the moment quite unaware.1 At the same time, the cases where the agent's figure appears are equally suggestive of another explanation, and one which will prove of the highest importance in the sequel. They bring us to the point where we may suppose that the percipient is often Jdmself the source of a great part of what he seems to perceive; that he is no longer passively receptive of the impression which comes to him from without, but actively modifies and elaborates it. Thus, granted an idea of the agent to be transmitted, the appearance of the agent's figure in the telepathic picture will be no more remarkable than that, on reading a friend's name in a letter, I should be able instantly to project his image on my mental camera. It is only, however, in the next group of cases that this new role of the percipient becomes obvious.

§ 6. It will be useful at this juncture to recall the more familiar ways in which dreams are shaped. We all know that physical disturbances— whether of sound, or light, or cold, or touch — will excite dreams, in which the disturbance appears as an element, sometimes without undergoing any change, sometimes in some transfigured but still quite recognisable form. Now in such cases we of course trace the dream to the externally-produced impression; but the impression is a mere nucleus, which the dreaming mind embodies, it may be, in a long and complicated series of self-spun fancies, and which twenty dreaming minds would embody in twenty different ways. So with mental disturbances; a recent sorrow, or exciting work overnight, is as effective a nucleus as a knock at the door or an uncomfortable posture. The established idea works on, amid the floating crowd of images which are the potential material of dreams, and attracts a certain number of them into a more or less grotesque connection with itself.

There will thus be little difficulty in supposing that a percipient whom a strong " transferred impression " invades in his sleep may similarly combine it with his own dream-imagery. We have no reason to imagine his own activity to be suspended, or his mind made a tabula rasa for foreign images. We should not, therefore, demand of telepathic dreams any sober and literal transcription of actual events. We should rather expect to find the ordinary dream

1 See pp. 78-9, 84, 103-9, 554-6.

342 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

elements, the medley of images, the impossibilities and incongruities, no less prominent here than elsewhere. The root idea being given by the " transferred impression," it may then become the sport of irresponsible fancy, which develops it either in some haphazard way, or in accordance with the dreamer's habitual lines of thought or emotion; so that the real event is announced either in a manner typically dream-like and fantastic, or oftener, perhaps, in a manner which is to some extent symbolic.

I will begin with cases where the element thus supplied is of the slightest possible amount. In the following three examples the dreamer may be supposed simply to give the most obvious auditory form to the impression received; though in the second and third it is, no doubt, equally possible to suppose a direct auditory transfer, as in some of the experimental cases.

The first case is from Miss Barr, of Apsley Town, East Grinstead,

who has been mentioned above (p. 94, note).

" 1884.

(111) " In the early part of 1882, I had been working a good deal amongst the navvies employed on the new railroad, near East Grinstead, and had been particularly interested in the case of one man, ' Darkey,' as he was called by his fellow-workmen. I had become very intimate with the man, and he had told me all his previous history, and I had used my best endeavours to keep him from drink. On the night of Easter Tuesday, 1882, I dreamed that I heard the voice of the man calling me from the bottom of a well. I told my sister of it in the morning, and, during the course of the day, a messenger came to tell me that the man had actually fallen down a well overnight, from which, though in no danger, he had been extricated with some difficulty. " L. Barr."

Miss Barr's sister, Miss Harriett A. L. Barr, has added her signature to this account, in attestation of having heard the dream narrated on the following morning.

[The idea of "the bottom of a well " is one that can be easily conceived to have been read back into the dream, after the reality was known. But the case does not depend on that detail.]

Here we may be practically certain that the man did not actually call on Miss Barr by name, as there could have been no chance of her hearing him.

The next case is from the late Mr. George Gouldrick, of 16, Union Street, Hereford.

"1883.

(112) " In the month of April, 1876, I dreamt that an invalid, named Mary Scaffull, widow, an inmate of Johnson's Hospitals, Commercial Road, Hereford, (and whose husband had been an officer in the gaol of which I

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC 343

was governor,) was crying out for water; it appeared to have been a long dream, and the cry seemed to be kept up for some time. When I was sitting at breakfast with my family next morning, I asked my wife when she had seen Mrs Scafi'ull last; she replied, ' Some 9 days ago. I took her a rice pudding; I could not get into the house, the door being locked. I therefore had to leave it at her sister's, who was living in the neighbourhood, with a request that when she went to see her, she would take it to her; the dish has been returned, therefore I conclude she had the contents. Why, what is the matter, you seem troubled about her? ' I then told her my dream, and said, ' I have determined to go after breakfast and see what state she is in.' She answered, ' I am glad to hear you say so.'

" As I approached the house, I could hear a cry of distress proceeding from some one of the inmates of the hospitals. I put my finger on the latch of the door occupied by Mrs. Scaffull, when I heard the following supplication proceed from her in the most distressing tone: ' Will some kind Christian friend give me some water 1 ' I took a jug from her lower room, went to the pump and filled it, and then took it with all haste to her bedside. When she saw me there with the water she said, ' Oh, Mr. Gouldrick, the Lord has sent you here, God Almighty bless you for bringing me this water.' She then drank copiously of it, and said, ' It's the sweetest water I ever tasted all my life long.' She died the same week, at the age of 77 years. " Geo. Gouldrick."

Mr. Gouldrick's daughter corroborates as follows: —

"December 11th, 1883.

" I was present at the breakfast- table when my father related his dream. I remember all that happened, and can therefore corroborate all he has written. My mother has since died. She was present also, and we expressed our astonishment when he returned home and told us what had happened. The only reason I am aware of that the neighbours (who heard all) did not attend to her cry, was that she was in receipt of 7s. per week more than they were, and that caused an ill-feeling towards her.

" Hannah Gouldrick."

The next account is from Mrs. Morris Griffith, of 6, Menai View

Terrace, Bangor.

" 1884. (113) " On the night of Saturday, the 11th of March, 1871, 1 awoke in much alarm, having seen my eldest son, then at St. Paul de Loanda on the south-west coast of Africa, looking dreadfully ill and emaciated, and I heard his voice distinctly calling to me. I was so disturbed I could not sleep again, but every time I closed my eyes the appearance recurred, and his voice sounded distinctly, calling me " Mamma.' I felt greatly depressed all through the next day, which was Sunday, but I did not mention it to my husband, as he was an invalid, and I feared to disturb him. We were in the habit of receiving weekly letters every Sunday from our youngest son, then in Ireland, and as none came that day, I attributed my great depression to that reason, glad to have some cause to assign to Mr. Griffith rather than the real one. Strange to say, he also suffered from intense low spirits all day, and we were both unable to take dinner, he rising from the table saying, ' I don't care what it costs, I must have the boy back,' alluding to his eldest son. I mentioned my dream and the bad night I had

344 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

had to two or three friends, but begged that they would say nothing of it to Mr. Griffith. The next day a letter arrived containing some photos of my son, saying he had had fever, but was better, and hoped immediately to leave for a much more healthy station, and written in good spirits. We heard no more till the 9th of May, when a letter arrived with the news of our son's death from a fresh attack of fever, on the night of the 11th of March, and adding that just before his death he kept calling repeatedly for me. I did not at first connect the date of my son's death with that of | my dream until reminded of it by the friends, and also an old servant, to whom I had told it at the time. I append my signature in attestation of the report being a true and correct one, and also the signature of Kate Dew, who perfectly remembers the date and circumstances, and attests the truth of the above. " Mary G. Griffith.

"Kate Dew." In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Griffith says: —

" The experience came to me as a dream, but upon waking my distress was so great at the extreme reality of the impression of seeing my son looking so very ill and suffering, and the anguish of his voice in calling me by name, that although I tried for hours afterwards to sleep again, I was unable to do so from the haunting return of the scene and voice, whenever I closed my eyes. My husband had no dream, but all the next day he, like myself, became deeply depressed about our son, although I had said nothing to him on the subject. Towards evening some friends came in, and the impression faded, and the following morning on receiving my son's letter with photographs, I lost all feeling of anxiety about him."

In answer to further inquiries, Mrs. Griffith says: —

(1) "I have never in all my life, before or since, had any such distressing dream, nor am I ever discomposed in any way by uncomfortable dreams.

(2) " I never remember at any time having any dream from which I have had any difficulty in knowing at once, whilst awakening, that I had been dreaming, and never confuse the dream with reality.

(3) "I also unhesitatingly assure you that I have never had any hallucination of the senses as to sound or sight."

The following is part of a letter to Mr. Richard M. Griffith — dated Loanda, March 26th, 1871 — which I have been allowed to copy.

" Dear Sir, — It is my sorrowful duty to inform you that your son, Mr. R. M. Griffith, died in my house on the 11th inst. He was staying with me awaiting the arrival of machinery from England, but fell sick about the beginning of the month, and gradually sank, notwithstanding all our efforts to save him. — Yours very truly, Alexander Smith."

[It is to be regretted that no written note was made of the date of the dream; but Mrs. Griffith is certain that the Saturday on which it occurred was afterwards rightly identified as March 11th by herself and her friends. Her reason for remembering the day of the week appears in the account.]

And now we come to the large and important group where the

percipient forms a very distinct picture of the agent, whose figure and

aspect (sometimes with the addition of speech) is not a mere element

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 345

in a scene, but the one thing prominently represented. I will still

keep for a time to simple cases, where the mental image that is

conjured up corresponds pretty closely to the reality.

The following account is from the Rev. W. D. Wood Rees,

Vicar of Barmby Moor, York.

"May, 1885.

(114) " In 1874, when reading for college, I frequently visited a man named William Edwards (of Llanrhidian, near Swansea), who was then seriously ill; he often professed pleasure at, and benefit from, my ministrations. He at length recovered so far as to resume work. I left the neighbourhood, and amid new scenes and hard work, I cannot say that I ever thought of him.

"I had been at college some 12 months, when one night, or rather early morning between 1 2 at midnight and 3 in the morning, I had a most vivid dream. I seemed to hear the voice of the above-named William Edwards calling me in earnest tones. In my dream I seemed to go to him, and saw him quite distinctly. I prayed with him and saw him die. When I awoke the dream seemed intensely real, so much that I remarked the time, 3 a.m. in the morning. I could not forget it and told some college friends all particulars. The next day I received a letter from my mother, with this P.S.: ' The bell is tolling; I fear poor William Edwards is dead.' On inquiry I found that he did die between 12 and 3; that he frequently expressed the wish that I were with him. I had no idea that he was ill. " W. D. Wood Rees."

We find from the Register of Deaths that William Edwards died at Llanrhidian, on Oct. 14, 1875.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Rees says: —

" My dream took place between midnight and 3 in the morning. William Edwards died within that time. My mother wrote her letter just after breakfast, when the death-bell was tolling for him — just at the time I mentioned my dream to some friends. I received the letter either the next night or the morning after. It was generally a two days' post. I was particular to inquire if the death took place the night of my dream; it did. I have not the date of the occurrence, but can get it, no doubt, from inquiring the date of the man's death. I had no object in making any note of them. The friends, I believe, were Rev. G. L. Rees, Howden, Rev. J. W. Roberts (dead), and I think, the Rev. T. S. Cunningham; I will ask him. I have on other occasions dreamt of deaths, but have not taken any trouble to investigate them. I have sometimes dreamt I saw a person dying, and then heard they were ill. The vividness and reality of the case I mention caused me to take such notice of it."

The Rev. G. L. M. Rees corroborates as follows: —

" Howden, East Yorkshire.

"June 11th, 1885.

" The statement made by my brother, the Rev. W. D. W. Rees, relative to the death of William Edwards, is quite correct. I perfectly remember his relating to me a dream respecting his death, previous to the intelligence reaching us at college. " G. L. INI. Rees."

346 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

In conversation the Rev. W. D. Wood Rees informed me, without being asked, that he has never had any other dream that the least impressed him, or left any effect after waking. The man had got " quite well," and Mr. Rees had last seen him breaking stones on the road.

It would be tedious here to multiply cases where the mere fact of death has been vividly dreamt of, without more detail than this. Yet it is in their multiplication that the whole force of such cases consists, and a single coincidence of the sort might always be explained as accidental. Other examples, belonging to the important group which was used in my numerical calculation (pp. 304-7), will be found in the Supplement.

The next case is from Mrs. Fielding, of Yarlington Rectory, Bath,

who was also the narrator of case 90, above.

"January, 1884.

(115) "I some time ago had rather a remarkable vision, but it was of the living. I have an only son, about 20, always in robust health, then in lodgings in London. Never were mother and son more to one another than we are. One night I awoke heartbroken by seeing him in bed very ill. I stood weeping by his bed, lifting his white face in my two hands, and saying he must be dying. On my husband waking I told him it all, and those at breakfast next morning, and said, ' Let us see if it's only a dream.' A week passed, and my usual letter did not come from my son. After a time one came saying he had been ill in bed a week, too ill to let me know, and the landlady had nursed him through it.

" Jane E. Fielding."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Fielding adds: —

" I found my son's letter telling of the illness I spoke of, and find it was written on the 15th July, 1882, a Saturday, and my vision-dream — for it was too distinct for a common dream; yet I was not wide awake, and could not vouch I had seen the picture consciously, yet it was most real — took place either on the night of 12th or 13th July, and I find both my husband and son-in-law remember my speaking of it, though the dates escape them. I now quote from my son's letter: ' I go back to the City on Monday, but I thought it was no use telling you, to make you anxious, of my attack of quinsey till I was better; and the doctor and my landlady nursed me most carefully, and now I can swallow.' It has much pain, this complaint, and it was that look of pain I saw on his face in my vision that gave me such pain. I can swear to the vision having been before the letter came. Were I in the least dubious, I should be the first to say so, having a glimpse of the meaning of the word science. I can't recall any other such ' clear-seeing.' I never had a dream like this before."

I have seen Mrs. Fielding's letter to her son, dated Monday, July 24th, in which she says, "On Thursday morning [i.e., July 13th] when I came down to breakfast, I said to Tom and Arthur [her son-in-law with whom she now lives], ' I hope Charlie is well; for I had such a queer dream of finding him lying in bed on his face, and when I turned it round, it was ghastly pale and ill-looking — and I was so sighing all day after, and expected to hear, as I did, you were ill.' Now that's funny! Shows how

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 347

our souls are closely united. Arthur is just saying to me lie ' quite remembers my telling him my dream.' "

[This practically proves that Mrs. Fielding is accurate in saying that her dream was described before the news was known. But the force of the coincidence is of course weakened by the fact that the illness extended over several days.]

In the next case the form of a vision — a figure at the bedside —

suggests not so much a genuine dream as the sort of semi-waking

hallucination which will be considered in the next chapter (compare

also Mr. Wingfield's case, p. 199). The narrator is Mrs. L. H.

Saunders, of St. Helen's, near Ryde, who was concerned in case 44.

"March 18th, 1885. (116) "Towards morning of the 10th January, 1885, I was conscious of a young woman standing by my bedside clad in a grey dressing gown, holding in her arms, towards me, a child. The woman was weeping bitterly, and said, ' Oh! Mrs. Saunders, I am in such trouble.' I instantly recognised her as Mrs. C. R. Seymour, and was about to interrogate her as to her trouble, when I was awakened by my husband asking me what was the matter, as I seemed so distressed. I told him I had had such a sad dream about poor Fanny Goodall (maiden name of Mrs. C. R. S.), but it really was to me more than a dream — so much so, that after rising I communicated it to the governess, Miss Monkman, also to the nurse and servant. I decided to send to her mother, Mrs. Goodall, to inquire if she had received any tidings of her daughter, who was resident in New Zealand with her husband and two children, but as on after consideration I felt I might cause her alarm, I altered my intention. This dream or vision made so deep and lasting an impression that I constantly alluded to it to members of our household, until circumstances occasioned my calling on Mrs. Goodall about the beginning of this month, March, 1885, when I made particular inquiries for her daughter; and on being assured that she was well, according to letters by the most recent mail, I ventured to express my gratification, giving, as my reason for such, a narration of the ' vision ' that had not even then ceased to haunt me; which elicited from Mrs. Goodall and both of her daughters, who were present, fervent hopes that all was well with Mrs. Seymour.1

" On March 1 2th I again called on Mrs. Goodall, who on receiving me, with much emotion said, 'Oh, have you heard the bad news of Fanny? I have thought so much of what you told me; her dear little Dottie has gone. I will read you her letters,' both of which, although coming by different mails, had only been received within the past 24 hours. I should mention that, although I have felt very interested in and thought much of Mrs. C. R. S. before and since her departure from this country, yet I have never corresponded with her; but I now learn that she invariably mentioned me in her home correspondence, and felt much indebted to me for some trifling kindness I had been able to show her in the past. I am able to fix the date of my vision from circumstances which I need not here relate.

" Bessie Saunders."

1 This has been completely confirmed by letters from Mrs. Goodall and her two daughters.

348 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

The force of the coincidence seems not much affected one way or the other by the following addition: —

" In reply to your question, I have had distressing dreams relating to death at intervals, which have not corresponded with reality; but those you are already cognisant of [viz., this one and another which corresponded with reality 1] are the only ones which impressed themselves sufficiently to induce me to take steps to discover if they did correspond with the reality, although I may have mentioned their purport casually at the time."

Mr. Latimer H. Saunders writes: —

"March 18th, 1885.

" I clearly remember on or about the 10th of January, 1885, early morning, suddenly awaking, and finding my wife leaning forward in bed. I asked her, ' What was the matter 1 ' She seemed agitated, and replied to the following effect: ' Oh, I have had such a horrid dream! Fanny Goodall was standing here at my side, quite close, holding out the child in such distress, but I could not tell what she wanted; it was so real, I could have touched her, but you awoke me.' Before rising, my wife repeated the incident in detail. Late on March 1 2th, she told me the sequel.

" Fortunately, I can safely fix the date as being the morning of either the 9th, 10th, or 11th of January, as during that month these were, owing to circumstances, the only possible occasions on which the incident, as related, could have occurred, while my mental impression, independently arrived at, strongly points to the 10th as the day.

" Latimer H. Saunders."

Miss E. A. Monkman, in a letter to Mrs. Saunders (dated 16, Castledine Road, Anerley, 16th March, 1885), of which I have seen a copy, gives exactly similar testimony as to Mrs. Saunders's description of her dream at the time, and adds that it must have been on the 9th or 10th of the month. And on March 20th, a servant in the house, unprompted (as Mrs. Saunders assures us), dictated the following statement: —

"I remember Saturday morning, the 10th of January last. The mistress came into the kitchen to speak about the flue. After doing so she told me of such a bad dream she had had of Mrs. Seymour, of New Zealand, coming to her bedside with her little child in her arms. Mrs. Seymour was crying so bitterly, and imploring her for help. — E. Dawson."

The following is an extract from a letter received from Mrs. Seymour by Mrs. Goodall, dated January 15th, 1885.

" I do not know how to write it, mother. Dottie is dead; a week ago this very Thursday evening she was taken ill, and on Saturday at 10 minutes to 10 in the evening she died."

[Allowing for longitude, the dream must have preceded the death by a few hours.]

1 In this second case (as to which we again have Mr. Saunders's testimony to the fact that the dream was described before the reality was known) the dream was that a friend alighted from a hearse, and entered clad in deep mourning; and it fell on the night on which that friend's mother, whom she was attending, unexpectedly died.

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 349

Very similar is the form of impression described in the next case, obtained (through the kindness of Mr. J. B. Johnston, of 1 7, Pilrig Street, Edinburgh) from Herr Heinrich von Struve, whose German account is here translated.

" 25, Pilrig Street, Edinburgh.

"July 10th, 1885.

(117) " In 1838, I was on terms of friendship with a captain of the 2nd Hussars, Herr von R., his company being quartered in a little town in Silesia, in the neighbourhood of which I was residing on my property. Early one morning I had ridden into the town, and visited Yon R., whom I found taking coffee with his wife. While we were sitting chatting together, Yon R. said to his wife, ' Lina, our friend Pogerell died last night.' ' What a thing to say, Albert! ' his wife replied; ' Pogerell was here only the day before yesterday, well and happy.' ' Very likely,' said Von R.; ' but the fact is as I have said. Last night he stood by my bed, and said, " Farewell, R.; I am departing to the great army. Greet my cousin G. from me, and ask him not to be angry that I have not mentioned him in my will, as he is well off, and my other relatives are poor and need support." ' Some minutes after Von R. had told us this, a messenger was announced, who entered, bringing from the commanding officer of both of them in W., where the company of Captain von Pogerell was stationed, the announcement that ' Captain von Pogerell had a paralytic stroke last night, and died.' The town of W., where Von Pogerell was, was 4 German miles [about 12 English miles] distant from the place where we were; the road was bad, and there was no ordinary means of communication. It was, therefore, inconceivable that any earlier news than that which this messenger brought could have reached Von R. He was a sober man, completely honest and truthful, who, except among very intimate friends, never spoke of his gift of seeing apparitions — a gift which he took no pride in. He would mention such experiences casually to his wife in the morning, or when his friends pressed him on the subject.

" Von R. related to me some other highly interesting cases of the sort; but I do not add them, not having been myself a party to them, as I was to the one which I have narrated. " H. von Struve."

In an English account which Herr von Struve has signed as correct, it appears that Pogerell was not an intimate friend, and that there had been no special reason for thinking of him.

[The case is one where the evidence of a person who was not the percipient is stronger than that of the percipient himself would have been (see p. 148). After an interval of 47 years, the mere memory of a coincident dream — for we must not assume that it was a waking vision1 — would have very little force. But Herr von Struve himself would of course be awake, when sitting talking to his friends; and the scene in its various stages — the statement of Von R., the conversation that ensued, and the arrival of the messenger — if really only imagined afterwards, would constitute an oddly distinct and detailed piece of retrospective hallucination.]

1 In conversation Herr von Struve told me that Von R. certainly represented the vision as a waking experience. But on such a point second-hand evidence of a remote date can command but little confidence.

350 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

The next case, from a daughter of an officer of high position in the Austrian service, was procured through the kindness of Mr. W. E. H. Lecky, who is a friend of the narrator.

"Newbury, January, 1884.

(118) " One night, a few years ago, I had a very vivid dream about some one I had known as a boy in the Bedford Grammar School, but of whom I had not heard anything for a long time. I dreamt that he came to me draped in a long white garment, and that he said to me, ' I am so glad it is all over,' and putting his head on my shoulder, he sighed deeply, and said, ' I am so tired.' I woke from the fancied touch and did not go to sleep again for some time. It made such an impression on me that I told my sisters the next morning. A few days after, one of my sisters brought me a paper with the announcement of my friend's death in it, and, strange to say, he died the very night I dreamt about him.

In answer to inquiries Miss L. K. D. says: —

"February 29th, 1884.

" I have been trying to ascertain the exact date of my dream about my friend's death, but cannot remember anything nearer than that it was some time in the spring of 1878. I had not seen him for nearly four years, and certainly had not talked or even thought about him for some time, I might say years. I don't remember ever having such a vivid dream before or after."

The following corroboration is from Miss L. K. D.'s sister: —

"January 10th, 1884.

" With regard to my sister's dream about the person she knew as a boy in Bedford, I can remember distinctly that she told her dream to us all at breakfast, before we heard of the death.

Here the long white garment might be taken as representing the actual dress which the supposed agent was wearing; for if a person's sub-conscious idea of his own aspect may be the source of a telepathic impression, that impression might very naturally include his garb at the time. But I should prefer to regard this particular investiture as supplied by the percipient's mind to its own dreamimage.

In the following cases the dream contained the additional feature of conversation between the dreamer and the agent. This is, of course, a clear instance of something superadded by the dreamer's own creative activity.

Miss K. Gibson, of 3, Huntley Gardens, Glasgow, says: —

"November, 1883. (119) " In August, 1867, my sister and I went to spend a few days with

a friend in the country. We were a very merry and youthful party; and I do not think one grave or solemn thought crossed any of our minds. The brother of our hostess having been married the week previously, had scut a box of wedding cake, and according to the old custom we all determined 'to sleep on the wedding cake, and to tell our dreams in the morning.' " Early on the morning of Thursday, I awoke, and when I fell asleep again, I dreamt I found myself in a very bare, cheerless room, in the corner of which stood a bed; on it was lying a young man. I at once recognised him as a friend of my brother's, whom I had last seen (for only the second time in my life) the previous Christmas, a tall, strong, handsome young fellow, in apparently high health and spirits. I saw him now, a shadow of his former self, his face drawn and colourless, his eyes unnaturally large and bright; his hand, which was lying outside the bedclothes, was thin and wasted, the great blue veins standing up like cords, and his fingers plucked restlessly at the coverlet. His hollow cough sounded incessantly through the room. I went up to him. ' Why,

Mr.,' I said, ' how very ill you look; what is the matter 1 ' 'I am

dying,' he said, ' I caught cold a month ago, and neglected it; it has settled on my chest, and the doctors say I am dying of rapid consumption.'

" When I rose in the morning, I could hardly bear to tell my dream, but it had all been so painfully vivid, and haunted me so, that I told my sister before we went down to breakfast. I was much teased by my kind hostess, but I would not speak of the dream to any one. On the following Saturday evening we went home. I did not see my brother until the Sunday morning. When at breakfast he said, ' Did you hear, girls, of poor M.'s death? ' ' No,' we said, ' when did it take place 1 ' ' Early on Thursday morning; he caught cold a month ago, neglected it, it settled on his chest, and he died of rapid consumption.'

" I may add that not only did I hardly know Mr., having only

seen him twice, but I do not think I had even heard his name mentioned from the time I saw him at Christmas, till the morning I dreamt of his death. I was only a child at the time. " K. Gibson."

Miss Gibson's sister corroborates as follows: —

"November 17th, 1883.

" I quite remember my sister dreaming as she relates above. It made

quite an impression on both of us when my brother mentioned Mr. 's

death. " M. H. Murray."

In answer to inquiries, Miss Gibson says: —

(1) "I have at various times had vivid dreams of deaths which have not come true, and whose origin I could trace." [This final clause prevents this statement from weakening the case as much as it would otherwise do.]

(2) " I do not know if Mr. M.'s room was 'bare and cheerless.' I do know that he died in lodgings.

(3) "The words in my dream and those of my brother exactly corresponded."

She believes that the death took place in Glasgow, where the young man certainly lived; but no entry of it can be discovered in the Register for that place, and it is possible tl at he died away from home.

352 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

Professor Sidgwick, after an interview with Miss Gibson, April 20th, 1884, says: —

" She informed me that she did not take much interest in the subject of my inquiries. She was quite sure of the exact correspondence of the statements in her dream — ' caught cold ' — ' month ago ' — ' neglected it ' — ' settled on chest ' — ' rapid consumption ' — with the statements of her brother; and her sister also noted the correspondence. She knew the young man was poor, so that the ' bare cheerless ' room would be naturally suggested; but she had never heard of him as consumptive: she could have had no other image of him from memory except that of a strong, healthy man. She was not interested in the young man, and believes that she had not thought of him between the Christmas when she saw him and the time of the dream and death. It was not remarkable that she told the dream, as she had rather a habit of dreaming and of telling curious dreams — not from any belief, but merely as curious. What was unusual was that she was reluctant to tell it, and only told it to her sister."

Supposing this dream to have been telepathically originated, it is difficult to know how much of its content was supplied to, and how much by, the dreamer. Given the idea of consumption, the development is, perhaps, not too detailed to have been independently imagined.

The following very similar case is from Mrs. Jarratt, of 96,

Dalberg Road, S.W. I need hardly say that the mere recollection of

a childish dream of a good many years back would not have been

admitted as evidence: the evidence is the mother's attestation that

the dream was described before the news of the death arrived.

"December 10th, 1883.

(120) " While I was a little girl, about 10 years old, an old friend of ours, particularly dear to me, a Danish gentleman (formerly tutor to the young Princes of Denmark, and afterwards teacher of languages in the High School, San Francisco), sought to improve his position by going to the city of Mexico. Some months after he left, I dreamed that I saw him sitting in my father's office, and immediately ran up to him, exclaiming, ' I'm so glad you've come back.' He put his hand up, as if to repulse me gently, and said gravely, ' You must not come near me. I am dying in Mexico of the sore throat, and I have come to tell your father.' I drew back, grieved and shocked, and woke. The next day I told everyone of my dream, and was well laughed at; but my father had not heard for some time past of our friend, nor did he till, three weeks after, I overheard a gentleman say to him, ' Well, doctor, have you heard about your friend

H V My father having replied in the negative, the gentleman

continued, ' I was told he died at Mexico, three weeks ago, of sore throat.' "Lit a Jarratt."

In answer to some questions, Mrs. Jarratt adds: —

(1) "My old friend's name was George J. Hansen. I remember my father remarking that my dream must have occurred at the same time as the death, or at any rate close upon it.

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 353

(2) " As the occurrence took place some 20 years ago, as well as I can remember, it would be a little difficult to find the people to whom I told my dream before its fulfilment, but I told it to everyone who would listen, which they were not all inclined to do, or if they did, they ridiculed me heartily."

Mrs. Jarratt's mother, Mrs. Farrar, corroborates as follows: —

" I beg to state that I perfectly remember my daughter telling me all about her dream within a few hours of its having occurred. It afterwards struck us all (her father as well as myself and several friends, most of whom unfortunately are since dead or have disappeared) as being very remarkable on account of its having occurred almost simultaneously, as far as we could learn, with Mr. Hansen's actual decease."

Miss H. Franconi wrote to us as follows from 1237, Stockton Street, San Francisco: —

"July 13th, 1884.

" In regard to the dream that my friend Mrs. Jarratt had, I only remember, as it is many years ago, that she dreamt of Mr. Hansen and told me all about it the following morning — but what the dream was about I cannot remember."

[In conversation, Mrs. Jarratt, who is a very clear-headed and sensible witness, gave me the additional detail that even in her dream " sore throat " struck her as an odd thing to die of. This is not a point as to which memory can at all be relied on; but the mere fact that it seems to be remembered is some slight confirmation of the evidence that the actual disease was mentioned in the dream. The degree of exactitude in the coincidence does not, however, seem to have been established with certainty even at the time.]

The next case is uncorroborated; but the style of the narrator

does not suggest exaggeration. If the description is accurate, the

dream was remarkably vivid, and included a minute point of

correct detail. It is from Mr. E. J. Hector, of Valencia, Port Pirie,

South Australia.

"July 5th, 1884.

(121) " On the night of my father's death, the 31st July, 1863, 1 went to bed as usual, about 11 p.m., in my usual good health, with a candle and matches on a chair at the side of my bed. I usually read for half-anhour in bed, and did so on this occasion. I remember distinctly my last ponderings were on the very unsatisfactory scheme of life. Man learns gradually from childhood to mature age; and just when he has acquired by experience and observation the knowledge how to make the best of life, he dies; and his successor has to start at the same point as he started from. Whether I thought of my father in connection with this, I do not remember. In the night or morning I had a very vivid dream. I saw my father in bed at the Savings' Bank, in the room he usually occupied; there was a sperm candle burning on a chair close to his bed. I was sitting in a chair close to his bed, and saw that he was dying and felt very distressed; he was lying on his back and turned round and looked at me, saying, with

354 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

a smile, ' Never mind, my dear boy, I feel that I am going,' and seemed to be dying. The next thing was total darkness. I must have waked up, for I found the matches, and to reassure myself lighted the candle, glad to find it was a dream. It struck me as the most vivid I had ever had, but I confidently banished it at once, and slept soundly again till morning. I looked at my watch and noted the time; it was 4 a.m.

" The dream never troubled me again, until I saw a man coming to me in the vineyard, at about 10 a.m., with the fatal telegram from a friend, that my father was dead; but as soon as I saw a strange man hurrying down to me, a presentiment occurred to me that my dream had been true. I may say that I never believed in dreams, and do not since that event, which I think was only a most extraordinary coincidence, and was just the continuation of my train of thought, commenced during my waking moments and continued throughout my sleep, or perhaps, rather renewed, as it is not likely I should continue dreaming from, say 11.30 p.m. until 4 a.m. Strange to say, the same smile was on my father's face when I (at 6 p.m., or eight hours after he was found dead in his bed) saw him, and he lay in the room I dreamt he was in, and the wick of the sperm candle at his side was bent towards the door, precisely as I saw it in my dream, on the chair. The servant told us he went to bed as usual at 10 to 11 p.m., and not getting up as usual, she knocked at his door, but no answer being given, opened the door at 8 a.m., and found him dead.

" I had no cause of anxiety. My father was in excellent health. This was the first vivid dream I ever had, and I do not remember dreaming of others dying, or doing anything extraordinary. I am not much of a dreamer.

" Since then, however, I had a vivid dream of the death of my mother - — not so clear or impressive as the other — but nothing happened, and I remember tracing this also to some kindred train of thought, just before dropping off to sleep. I am not a believer in any premonitory spiritual communication. u j] j Hector."

The South Australian Register for August 1, 1863, says that Mr. John Hector, manager of the Savings' Bank of S. Australia, having retired to rest in his usual good health on the night of July 30, was found dead in his bed next morning, and that the doctor pronounced death to have occurred from apoplexy about three hours previously.

[It is clearly by a slip that Mr. E. J. Hector has spoken of the night of the 31st of July instead of the 30th.]

The coincidence in this case, as in any other, may have been accidental, as the narrator supposes; but he does not tell us what part of his previous train of thought found its " continuation " in the wick of the sperm candle — which, if rightly remembered, looks like a fragment of telepathic clairvoyance.

The next two cases are from Mrs. Freese, of Granite Lodge, Chislehurst. The occurrence of several such experiences to the same person is in itself a point of interest, provided that that person's

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 355

recollection as to their having been of an exceptionally vivid and

disturbing character can be relied on.

" March, 1884.

(122) "In July, 1871, my aunt Mary staying with me, and my husband not feeling at all well, it was decided he should go to H. to spend a fortnight at the Yicarage with my married sister, Mrs. B. This place was specially chosen because he enjoyed so much riding with my brotherin-law or alone, as the case might be, and horse-exercise was so good for him.

" A few days after, I had a vivid dream about him, which I told to my aunt at breakfast time. I dreamed I was walking along the road to H., about midway between the N. station and the Vicarage, when I saw my husband sitting on a gate by the roadside. I was struck by his sad expression of countenance, and went up to him asking him if he was enjoying himself. ' Not at all,' said he, and added, ' I have just been thinking I will go on to the station and take the train home, and will you believe it, they wont let me ride either of the horses.' While expressing my astonishment I woke.

" I remarked to my aunt upon the absurdity of the part about the horses, as they were the chief inducement for him to p> y this visit, and were always before at his disposal. I heard from my husband every day, but he wrote always cheerfully, and made no reference to the horses at all. A few days later he returned earlier than he was expected, and in the evening, when walking with him in the garden, he began to describe to me his visit, telling me he had not enjoyed it at all. He had been very wretched and lonely (for my sister had been unusually busy, also her husband), and that one day in a lonely walk towards N. he sat on a gate by the roadside to rest, and almost made up his mind to go on to N. and take the first train back to town, telegraphing to my sister some excuse, but, fearing to hurt their feelings, he desisted; and, ' worse than that,' said he, ' what will you say when I tell you I have not been once on horseback. For some reason or another they would not let me ride either horse. One went clown the other day, and in future, I believe, no one is to ride them.' I kept calling out, ' My dream! my dream! ' as he went on, and when I related it to my husband he could scarcely believe it. He would not write either about his depression or disappointment, as he did not wish to cloud me.

" Octavia Free.se."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Freese adds: —

" I do not think I am given to vivid dreams. That about my husband was exceptionally vivid. I call exceptionally vivid a dream that takes hold of me, and that I cannot forget all the next day. The aunt to whom I told it has since died. I have no idea whether my husband sat on the gate before or after my dream, nor did I try to ascertain that at the time."

(123) "In September, 1881, I had another curious dream, so vivid that I seemed to see it.

" My two boys of 18 and 16 were staying in the Black Forest, under the care of a Dr. Fresenius. I must say here that I always supposed the boys would go everywhere together, and I never should have supposed that in that lonely country, so new to them, they would be out after dark.

z 2

356 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

My husband and I were staying at St Leonards, and on Saturday night I woke at about 12 o'clock (rather before, as I heard it strike), having just seen vividly a dark night on a mountain, and my eldest boy lying, on his back at the bottom of some steep place, his eyes wide open and saying, ' Good-bye, mother and father, I shall never see you again.' I woke with a feeling of anxiety, and the next morning when I told it to my husband, though we both agreed it was absurd to be anxious, yet we would write and tell the boys we hoped they would never go out alone after dark. To my surprise my eldest boy, to whom I wrote the dream, wrote back expressing his great astonishment, for on that Saturday night he was coming home over the mountains, past 1 1 o'clock; it was pitch dark, and he slipped and fell down some 12 feet or so, and landed on his back, looking up to the sky. However, he was not much hurt and soon picked himself up and got home all right. He did not say what thoughts passed through his mind as he fell. « Octavia Freese."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Freese adds: —

" Before my son wrote about his fall in the Black Forest, I related my dream to my husband, and as he seemed a little moved by it, I wrote an account of it to my boy, saying his father did not wish them to be out after dark alone. I had not told my boy when it was, deeming that immaterial, but when in his letter, received days after, he said, ' Was it Saturday night 1 because then so-and-so,' I remembered what I should not otherwise have noted, that it was Saturday night; for on the Sunday morning my husband, being much worried about some business matter, elected to spend the morning with me in the fields instead of going to church, and as much to divert his mind as anything I related to him my dream of the night before."

Mrs. Freese sent us the letter from her son, which contained the following passage: —

" With regard to your dream: did you dream it on September 3rd? if so it was on that night, coming home rather late, that I fell down a precipice of 8 feet, or perhaps more, in the dark, and might have broken my neck, but didn't. However, I don't think you will find me walking about after dark more than I can help, as the roads are very dark, and the fogs in the village awful. "Fred. E. Freese."

[September 3rd, 1881, was a Saturday.]

Mr. Freese writes: —

"March 17th, 1884.

" Mrs. Freese has read to me the paper she has sent you, and I feel bound to say that both the dreams she refers to concerning myself and our eldest son I well remember, and noted them at the time she described them, together with the circumstances that strangely accompanied them.

"J. W. Freese."

In answer to the question whether he noted them in writing, Mr. Freese replies that he did not. " It struck me at the time as very remarkable, but life was then with me too busy to leave time to dwell upon the subject."

viii.] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 357

§ 7. In the foregoing examples the elements with which the dreamer may be supposed to have invested the telepathic impression have been few and simple. We now come to cases where definitely new elements have been introduced, and the impression which corresponds with reality acts as the germ of a quite imaginary dream-picture.

The following narrative was taken down in writing by Mrs. Saxby, of Mount Elton, Clevedon, at Tranent Lawn, Clevedon, on November 17th, 1883, and was read over to the narrator, Miss C. A., who certified that it was correct. Miss C. A. thinks that the occurrence took place in 1855.

(124) " When we were living at Leamington, I had a remarkable vision. I was sleeping with my sister Maria. Suddenly the curtains of our bed, at the side I slept, were undrawn, and Mr. L. appeared standing there. He said, addressing me by name, ' My mother is dead.' I tried to persuade myself I had been dreaming, and Maria said I had dreamt it; but after a short time the same thing was done again, and the same announcement made. I was rather chaffed at breakfast because of the story I told. After breakfast I went into the drawing-room to practise. Presently I heard myself called, and I went out on the balcony to listen. It was the daughter of the man whom I had seen twice at night, and the granddaughter of the old lady whose death had been announced. She was riding on horseback. She said, ' Have you heard 1 My father is sent for, and my grandmother is dead! ' "

The following corroboration is from the percipient's sister: —

"November 24th, 1883.

" I quite recollect my sister Charlotte telling me of the apparition or vision she saw of our friend appearing at her bedside and saying ' his mother was dead,' and its being corroborated the next morning by his daughter riding up to our house, and telling us her " grannie was dead.' She was taken seriously ill the night before, her [i.e., the narrator's] father was sent for, and she died soon after his arrival. « j^ ^ j^ »

It seems safer to regard this experience as a dream than as that very much rarer phenomenon, a waking hallucination; but we must not overlook the importance of the fact that the dream was almost immediately repeated. This feature has occurred before, and will occur again j1 and it is one which seems to be decidedly commoner in cases of coincident or (as we should say) veridical dreams than in dreams generally. Inquiries which have recently been made of more than 2000 persons, taken at random, have shown that less than 10 per cent, of them could recall having even on a single occasion dreamt the

1 See, for instance, cases 102, 110, 113, 130, 141, 451, 457. Examples of recurrence not on the same night are No. 484 and Dr. Gibert's case, Vol. ii., p. 701.

358 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

same dream more than once on the same night — though it is of course by no means uncommon to have a fixed familiar dream which recurs again and again during long tracts of life.1 No doubt memory cannot be entirely trusted on such a matter; but it may be said with tolerable confidence that recurrences on the same night are decidedly rare; and it is therefore most unlikely that this particular feature should by accident occur with noticeable frequency in the comparatively small group of dreams which have corresponded with a real external event.

In the next case, the details and images supplied are of a medical sort and have distinct reference to the dreamer's own profession. The first part of the account is from Mr. C Burges, of 4, Lincoln's Inn Fields, and is given here by the kind permission of the Phasmatological Society of Oxford. Mr. Burges has revised it for publication.

"1879.

(125) " Although I am now a solicitor, I was for the first 8 years of my career a sailor, and on one of my voyages, I, being the second officer of an Indiaman, had a cabin common with the doctor of the ship. The doctor was named John Woolcott. As second officer, I, of course, had the middle watch, which meant my being on deck between 12 midnight and 4 a.m. every night. I went down to the cabin at the end of the watch, at about 4.30 one morning, and turned in as usual. Some time before I had to get up to relieve the deck at 8, the doctor called me up, and said that he had had a terrible dream. He thought that he saw his mother dying, and whilst she was lying in that state a cousin, a medical man, who was a surgeon in the Artillery, and whom he believed to be at that moment in China (it was the time of the Chinese war, in 1845), had suddenly appeared in the room, and when he saw his aunt, said, ' You are entirely wrong in supposing what is the matter with her; she is not dying from what you say, but from such and such a complaint,' which he named. I do not at the present moment recollect what the diseases were, but the distinction was a well-defined one. He also said that another surgeon, who is still living, and whose name I do not like to give, was present, and insisted that the patient was dying of the complaint first named.

" From that time to the end of the voyage the doctor was so much impressed with this dream that he was quite a dispirited man, sufficiently so to occasion remark. When our ship arrived in the East India Docks, he came back to me, as he was just going ashore, I not being able to leave so soon, and said, ' It is all right, old fellow, the dream is all wrong;

1 Two cases have been reported to me of a dream of death occurring to the same person on three consecutive nights, without any correspondence whatever with any simultaneous reality. Another informant (the Rev. 0. S. Taylor, of 1, Guinea Street, Redcliff, Bristol) reports a similar baseless experience on two consecutive nights; and a fourth (Mrs. Bacon, of Much Hadham), on either two or three consecutive nights, the person dreamt of singularly enough dying suddenly a week afterwards. But I do not happen to have heard of any similar case where the recurrence was on the same night.

viil] REGARDED AS TELEPATHIC. 359

there is my brother Edward on shore, waiting for me, and he is not in mourning.'

" The fact, however, unfortunately proved to be that his mother had died, and that his cousin, the surgeon, had returned from China in charge of invalids, and was present at the death-bed, as dreamed. The brother, on coming down to meet the ship, had put on coloured clothes, so as not to give my friend a sudden shock. << q. jj »

Mr. Woolcott, F.R.C.S., consulting surgeon of the Kent County Ophthalmic Hospital, to whom the above was sent, says: —

" 4, Elms Park Terrace, The Elms, Ramsgate.

"December 20th, 1883.

" The statement about my mother's death and the dream at sea is correct. The dream and the death occurred at the same time, or within a few days of each other. I was on board the ' Plantagenet,' East Indiaman, and we had just left the Cape of Good Hope, on our homeward bound voyage, at which place I had received letters from home stating ' All well.' There was more in the dream, concerning a post-mortem examination, but it is of too painful a nature to mention, relating to the difference of opinion concerning the nature of the complaint my mother died of, and the medical men were of different opinions about it. I think a very remarkable point about my dream at sea, in 1845, was that I thought a cousin of mine, a surgeon in the Royal Artillery, was present at my mother's death. This proved to be the case. I had thought he was away in China, and had no idea of when he would return to England; but he had unexpectedly come back, and had been summoned to her bedside in consultation, as stated in the narrative. My cousin was James E. T. Parrett, late surgeon Royal Artillery, now deceased. This dream haunted me frequently during the rest of the voyage home, and on several occasions awoke me in the night thinking about it. I could not shake it off."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Woolcott says: —

" I have had startling dreams at other times, but they have not been concerning the death of any person. « j0HN Woolcott."

[Here the time-coincidence cannot be brought with certainty closer than a few days. On the other hand, the detail of the cousin's presence is a strong evidential point.]

In the next case, a definite scene is depicted, suggestive of death and appropriate to the person who had actually died; but everything beyond the true impression of the death is supplied by the dreamer. The narrator is Mrs. Herbert Bolland (nee Cary, granddaughter of the translator of Dante), of 7, Cranbury Terrace, Southampton. The experience was quite unique in her life, and exemplifies — what will be suggested by other cases — a possible effect of illness in heightening the percipient faculty.1

1 See the list of cases in the Index under the heading Illness.

360 DREAMS WHICH MAY BE REASONABLY [chap.

"July, 1884.

(126) "In September, 1879, I was in B s, and laid up with a rather

sharp attack of fever, kept to my room, and seeing no one. In the middle of one night I was awoke, as was my husband also, by a most piercing shriek; he knew it was I who had cried aloud, whilst I had then no idea of it. But I began to tell him that I had been dreaming his sister was teasing me, and I looked up and saw (and as I came to that point I was again seized with horror) a tall man, dead, being carried, with his hair, which was very thick, falling back from his face. The figure impressed me with the idea of being upheld by four men, but I did not see any of them. I knew the figure at once, and kept saying, ' The Colonel's dead, the Colonel's dead,' and it was an hour or two before my husband could calm me, and I could go to sleep again. At last I did so, however, and the next sound we heard was the servant knocking at our door, and calling out, ' Get up, sir, the Colonel's dead; you're wanted.'

