(1) During steady levitation above the floor with no apparatus below the table, the weight of the table is practically added to that of the medium (Experiments 2, 3, 4).

This agrees with the cantilever theory. The beam being free at the end, it is obvious that the weight added to it is in effect added to the medium.

(2) The medium is under stress. The muscles of her arms from wrist to shoulder are stiff and often iron-like in their rigidity, and other parts of her body are affected similarly, though to a less degree (Experiment 62).

At the root of the cantilever there is a shearing force W and a bending moment Wl; hence we would expect to see some signs of distress on the part of the medium. The bending moment, although somewhat variable, is seldom less than 250 lb. -in., if we take the psychic cantilever as fixed to the trunk of the medium.

(3) There is no reaction on the floor under the table (Experiments 38, 51, 52, 61).

This agrees with the cantilever theory. The free end being up in the air, the weight W depresses it a little, but does not affect the floor in any way. For a long time I was under the impression that some kind of psychic equilibrium was established, and that there was a reaction upon the floor; that, in fact, the readings on the compression balances represented the reaction upon the floor. This, however, was not so. Close to the floor, and on the floor, in normal levitation, there is no reaction.

Likewise there is no reaction or pressure on the floor between the table and the medium; for I have often moved my arms, hands, and experimental apparatus freely in this space, and so long as I kept them on or near the floor the phenomenon was not in the least affected.

(4) Besides the reaction on the medium practically equal to the weight of the table, there is a slight reaction upon other members of the circle. It would appear that about 95 per cent, of the weight of the table is on the medium and the remaining 5 per cent, on the sitters (Experiments 5 and 6). This involves slight modification of the cantilever theory. The free end is actually not quite free, but is supported very slightly by weak cantilevers from other members of the circle. However, the amount of support is so small that it may be neglected.

(5) I have sometimes noticed, during powerful levitation, that if muscular force is applied to the table somewhere in a line towards the

medium a solid resistance is encountered, whereas if the table is depressed vertically an elastic resistance is felt (Experiments 18, 19, 20).

This agrees with the cantilever theory. The beam would be more or less rigid to forces along its length and elastic to forces applied perpendicular to its length.

(6) The cantilever itself, though invisible, may have weight (Experiment 63).

The material of the psychic cantilever, if taken from the medium, would not affect the weight of the medium, as it projects from her and is not supported anywhere over its length. This would agree with all experiments, indicating as they do that during levitation no diminution of the weight of the medium is ever noted.

(7) There is a critical distance of the medium from table required for levitation (Experiment 10, and p. 56). This may have to do with the structure of the cantilever. It is possibly not a simple rod as shown in fig. 24, but may be compounded of several arms, and the coalescing of these arms may require that the medium be not too far from nor too near the table.

(8) 1 will now go into the puzzling results described in Chapter VII. (Experiments 50 and 53); they are as follows: —

(a) While the seance-table, weight 10½ lb., was steadily levitated, there was, upon a compression balance placed centrally on the floor beneath

it, a vertical downward force of 30 lb., or 2*89 times the weight of the table; there was also a horizontal pushing force of 5½ lb. from the medium; and the vertical and horizontal forces were not separate and distinct, but were components of a single force.

(b) While a stool, of weight 2 lb. 12 oz., was steadily levitated over a drawing-board placed

*Fig. 25.*

on top of a compression balance, there was a vertical downward force upon the balance of 18f lb., or 6*8 times the weight of the stool.

How are these experimental values, of whose practical correctness there can be no doubt, to be explained on the cantilever theory?

Fig. 25 indicates the cantilever A projecting from the medium M. It is shown in its unstrained normal position. The free end B is probably, on its under side, within 6 in. of the floor.

Fig. 26 shows the cantilever when in a

A CANTILEVER THEORY

strained unnatural position owing to the end B hadng to be raised to the level of the pan of the compression balance. As the beam is elastic, it will in this latter position press downwards and outwards on the top of the balance, as indicated by the direction line of the force P. It is obvious that the force P can be resolved into vertical and horizontal

*Fig. 26.*

components, and I think there can be little doubt that the &0 lb. and 5\ lb. of Experiment 50 are these components.

On this theory, then, the stiffness of the structure of the cantilever accounts for the mystifying readings on the compression balances. The reader can form a very fair idea of what is occurring by a simple experiment. Let him take a long flat wooden or steel rule, firmly hold one end, and press the other end against some small article placed above the level of the end which he is holding. When the rule

bends, as shown on fig. 26, he will be able to appreciate that he is applying a downward and outward force as mentioned above.

In both experiments {a) and (b) the height of the platform from which levitation was effected was about the same, viz. 13½ in. and 14 in. respectively. In case (a) the downward force was 30 lb., and in (b) 18f lb.; why, if the heights are about the same, are the downward forces not the same? The cantilever end would have to be bent upwards practically the same amount in each case. The answer to this, of course, is that the cantilever is not so stiff in case (b) as in {a). The weight of the levitated body in {a) is 10½ lb., and in (b) 2f lb. Hence the operators would not require to devise such a stiff cantilever in (b) as in (a), and therefore such a cantilever would be more easily bent upwards from its normal position, and would not exert such a large downward force on the balance.

The following paragraph was written before Experijne7its 51 and 52 were devised and carried out: —

" The question arises as to how the vertical downward force on the compression balance varies quantitatively with the height of the pan of the balance. If the cantilever proposition be true, I would expect that (1) on the floor there would be no force — which seems from experiment to be the case; (2) as the pan of the balance is gradually raised in height there would

be a position for it when the bottom of the end of the cantilever would be reached, at which point downward force would begin to be registered on the balance; and (3) as the pan is further raised the vertical force would become greater and greater as the end of the cantilever was continually bent upwards."

It is satisfactory to find that when Experiments 51 and 52 were carried out, the three suppositions above mentioned were found to be actually and literally true. The only thing I found at variance with expectations was that the vertical downward force did not increase in any regular fashion, but there was gradual and then quick and then again a gradual period of increase with varying height. Furthermore, the three tests did not give identical readings for the same size of platform and the same height, yet they gave the same kind of general conclusion. It is not to be expected that the results would be identical, for it is reasonable to suppose that the length of the cantilever would vary somewhat on different evenings, and even at different times on the same evening, and its general shape might be subject to some slight alteration also.

It is seen from fig. 26 that the horizontal component of the outward reaction force on the end of the cantilever is only present when its end is bent upwards. There would be no horizontal component with normal levitation over the floor when the free end is unconstrained. I have not

had an opportunity of carrying out experiments for the purpose of discovering the quantitative relation between the horizontal component and the height of the platform, but I expect it would be a gradually increasing one, commencing at zero where the height of the platform was such as to register no vertical reaction, and increasing more or less proportionally with the vertical reaction. I intend, if I have the chance, to carry out this experiment some time in the future.

Experiments 59 and 60 show clearly that in the space between the medium and the levitated table there are one or more lines or tubes of stress (I think it is better to call them tubes), for the table instantly dropped when the electric contactmaker got in the way, and simultaneously the bell rang, indicating mechanical pressure (although it may be of very small magnitude) from the medium. The tube of stress did not seem to be of very large cross-section, perhaps not more than a few square inches; for I had to move the apparatus here and there in front of the medium before I struck it, and I did not strike it at once. Close to the medium the stress tube was about two feet above the floor (in the neighbourhood of her knees). On the other hand. Experiments 51 and 52 show that under the table mechanical pressure is first apparent on the pan of a compression balance when the pan is about 3 inches above floor level. These two sets of results, therefore, point to a cantilever theory of levitation. They indicate that a cantilever begins somewhere

in the body of the medium and projects in a downward direction until it is below the table and a few inches above the floor. All experiments show that on the floor itself, under the table, and between table and medium there is absolutely no pressure, and that the structure is a true cantilever and is not supported anywhere over its length.

The question then arises as to whether the cantilever is straight or curved. Does it resemble a simple straight rod inclining downwards from the medium, or is its shape more complex? On this point I have not such definite evidence as I have on the points already discussed. Reviewing all the experiments and deducing the most likely results, I think the shape of the levitating structure beneath the table is not far off that shown in the accompanying fig. 27, which indicates the cantilever diagrammatically. It consists of two main portions, A and B. A is a slightly curved arm springing from and firmly fixed to the medium M, while B is a vertical column rising from and continuous with its extremity C. The levitated table is supported at the summit T of the column. The reason for the slightly arched shape of the arm is to give additional rigidity to the structure. When the pan of a compression balance is under the table at a height greater than three inches from the floor, the end C presses downwards on it and causes forces to be registered such as those given in

the tabulation to Experiments 51 and 52. In Experiments 59 and 60 the electric contactmaker when the bell rang was cutting across the arm A.

I say nothing here as to how a structure possessing the characteristics of a cantilever such as that sketched, and which can support at its extremity for five minutes or more a body

*Fig. 27.*

weighing 10 lb., can be produced from apparently nothing. I will have something to say about that later on.

The cantilever above sketched is in my opinion only a particular case of the method by which the operators produce nearly all their phenomena. Levitation of the table is a delicate piece of work, inasmuch as a very nice balance has to be obtained; it is not simply a question of shoving the table here and there

without consideration of such things as equi-Ubrium and balance.

Accordingly we find, as might have been expected, that the preliminary operations before levitation occurs at all occupy some little time. A line or physical means of communication seems to be put down from medium to table (see Experiment 64); and when this is "well and truly laid," psychic force is exerted along it {i.e. it is stiffened into a rigid cantilever).

The whole arm A C T in fig. 27 takes the shape shown in order that the particular phenomenon in hand (levitation) may be most accurately accomplished, but that is not the only shape it may have. It is only the best shape for levitation purposes.

Let us suppose that the operators desired to grip the table in the strongest possible manner — that is to say, to move it about the room in the most powerful way in order to impress a visitor who has hold of it by the top and who is endeavouring to prevent motion. What do we find? Turn to Experiment 26.

The diagram in that experiment is reproduced in fig. 28. We find that the operators under such conditions, when delicate balancing work is not required, but when magnitude of psychic force is the all-important thing, tilt the edge of the table some 40 degrees with the horizontal in the direction of the medium. I think there can be absolutely no doubt they do this in order that they may take the strongest possible

grip with the cantilever arm. No pre-Hminary operations are needed; the table simply tilts, and a short, almost straight arm projects from medium on to the under surface of table.

Many other experiments and observations also suggest that the shape of the cantilever arm required for levitation is only one particular shape of the arm, and that certain other shapes are possible. A very rough analogy is the trunk of an elephant. For delicate levitation work the trunk is made into the shape shown in fig. 27, while for rough powerful work it is made straight, short, and thick. The extremity of the arm projecting from the medium seems able to grip by some adhesive power the wood of the table or certain other articles with which it comes into contact; i.e. there is reason to believe that a levitated table is not simply resting upon the suinmit of the cantilever column, but that it is firmly fixed to it, as though glued. The following experiments on psychic pull and push will make this matter and other matters dealt with in this chapter clearer; for it often happens that observations of the most elementary nature give us information of the highest importance where so little has been done and so much remains to be accomplished.

Experiment 68: To make some investigations on the psychic pull.

When the seance table stands on the floor within the circle the operators can pull it along the floor right up to the body of the medium.

How is this done?

Fig. 29 gives the position of the table with reference to the medium. MN represents its long edge. Round the legs of the top runs the framework, about 2½ in. deep (not shown). The table was placed within the circle on the floor so that its length MN was parallel to the front of the medium's body, with its nearest edge about 2 ft. distant from her. I stood behind the table directly opposite her. 1 said to the operators, " Please pull table in towards medium." I slightly held the edge nearest me. The table

,jyg.

was immediately pulled in towards the medium, but it did not go in with the edge MN parallel to her body. As it began to move, the corner N got ahead, and consequently the motion was a more or less cornerwise one. I said to the members of the circle, " It looks as though the leg (at N) has something to do with the movement. Let us see if the table can be pulled in from the other corner M." No sooner had I spoken than the operators pulled it in towards

*Fig. 29.*

the medium with the corner M projecting and the table tending to turn about that corner. I said to the operators, " Have you a rod projecting round one of the legs, and do you pull the table in in that fashion? " Answer, vehemently, " No." Question: " Can you pull the table in to the medium so that the edge MN remains parallel to her body, and so that the table does not go in cornerwise with one leg in advance of the other? " This was no sooner asked than the table was pulled in as I desired, with the edge MN parallel to her body during the whole movement. It was done

half a dozen times, so that I might make quite certain of it. The table could be pulled right up to her body until it was in contact with her, or the forward motion could be stopped at any instant or at any desired place. There could, therefore, be no doubt that the table could be drawn in straight to the medium in such a way that it was difficult to imagine anything in the nature of a slightly flexible rod getting round a leg. I (and the members of the circle, including the medium) began to ask questions of the operators and comment on how it was done. We asked if a grip was taken behind the framework. They answered, " No." We exhausted all the methods we could think of for applying a direct pull round any projection. The uniform reply was, "No." They said the grip was taken on the under surface of the table. At last 1 asked, "Is the table brought in by a suction effect? " There were immediately three loud and almost joyous raps in the affirmative. Further inquiries and tests make me almost certain that it is even as the operators say. What happens is, in my estimation, as follows (see fig. 27): — The cantilever arm gets under the table — probably a more or less straight arm in this case, as there is little stress. Whatever the physical composition of the substratum of the end of the arm may be, it has the power to take an adhesive grip on certain subseances, such as wood, with which it comes into contact. The broad columnar end of the arm grips

adhesively the under surface of the table, and the operators simply pull the whole psychic arm into the body of the medium. In other words, the psychic arm or cantilever can be moved straight into and out from the body of the medium — can be absorbed in her or projected from her.

Let me now state the motions which are possible to the table standing on the floor within the circle — motions which I have experimentally verified in every case. The table may be moved by psychic force: —

(1) Directly inwards towards medium until it is in contact with her body; (2) directly outwards from medium; (3) in a sideways direction either to right or left (this is a very common movement, for if, during levitation experiments, I place the table on the floor not exactly in the position desired by the operators, they promptly move it a little to one side — see p. 56); (4) practically any direction within the circle, as is evidently possible from combinations of the three principal movements enumerated in (1), (2), and (3).

Returning now to the psychic pull. In Experiment 68 the table was pulled directly inwards towards medium, against friction.

Experiment 69: To investigate the pyschic pull when the table is lifted.

I lifted the table into the air and asked the operators to pull in as before, which they did

A CANTILEVER THEORY

immediately. The pull was very perceptible, and, contrary to my expectations, its place of application seemed somewhat low down under the table, perhaps about a foot above the floor. Several tests gave the same kind of result. Moreover, the pulling body (if I may so express it) seemed to my sense of feeling as though it were pretty solid and not at all soft and elastic. The table, in fact, was well and solidly gripped. Now, the cantilever theory shows a psychic arm like this —

Table here

K --,.=««™«-_ Column

M

*Fig. 30.*

Can the psychic pull be explained on this theory? I think so. The column gets under the table and grips by adhesion its under surface; the operators then absorb the arm bit by bit into the body of the medium.

the whole cantilever being thus continually shortened, and finally disappearing into the body of the medium; the place of application of the pulling force is C, at the foot of the column, and this accounts for the direction of pull appearing to be from well beneath the surface of the table. The psychic push is the opposite process, the cantilever being pushed out from the body of the medium. The arm can also move to and fro sideways. It is thus obvious that the arm has a range of action practically over the whole region within the circle, as well as over a considerable space outside the circle in the vicinity of the medium.

Let us now apply the cantilever theory to some more of the experimental results with regard to levitation and see how it fits in.

Take the case of the four tables levitated over the platform of the weighing-machine (Chapter VI.). Two of these tables were levitated with the surface practically level, and two with the surface at angles of about 30 degrees with the horizonal. It is to be noted it was with the smaller-sized tables (tables 3 and 4) that the inclination occurred. Does it not seem likely that the operators experienced difficulty in getting their levitating structure properly beneath these tables, owing to the relatively small area of surface and to the fact that the tables were resting on the top of the platform of the machine, a height of about 7 in.? And that in conse-A CANTILEVER THEORY

quence the cantilever, instead of being* what I may call the standard shape of fig. 27, was for convenience more like fig. 31?

The reader should bear in mind that the thickness of the arm shown in figs. 27-31 has no significance. The real thickness of the arms is probably very much greater than that

Levitated

Table.

*Fig. 31.*

sketched, perhaps being in the vicinity of that shown in fig. 32.

The part A is probably narrow, and the arm broadens and deepens out below the table at B; the part A may even consist of two or three arms springing from various parts of the body of the medium and coalescing into one large portion in the neighbourhood of the table.

The cantilever theory throws some light on the anomalous results of Chapter VI. In the case of the levitation of the stool over the platform of the weighing-machine, it will be remembered that the steelyard was quite stiff during the levitation, and immediately regained

*Fig. 32.*

its sensitiveness when the levitation was over (Experiment 43). Probably what was happening was that the levitating structure was inclined at some such angle as is shown in fig. 31, with the consequence that there was a rather heavy horizontal component of the reaction which pushed the platform over on its bearings and caused friction; for it must be

remembered that to suit special cases and conditions the levitating cantilever is likely to assume various shapes and forms in conformity to the principle of least work, and that thereby the magnitude and direction of reaction under it are liable to vary.

In Experiment 55 it was shown that while a compression balance on the floor under the table was registering vertical reaction during levitation, the medium herself was heavier than she normally is. Unfortunately, I did not find the actual increase of her weight for this levitation, which increase was probably due to the strained condition of the cantilever.

In Experiment 57 a thud was heard on the under surface of the table just before levitation. Is this not likely to have been the top of the broad column beneath the table being applied rather more vigorously than usual to the undersurface? When I remarked on the thud it was immediately repeated for my edification. I take it that it was audible demonstration of the preliminary preparation required for the phenomenon.

In Experiment 24 I have shown that the table may be turned upside down on the floor, and that the experimenter may seize hold of the legs and try to lift it and be unable to do so. Fig. 33 shows what probably happens in that case. The psychic arm emanating from medium broadens out on to the under surface of table and presses directly upon it, for it must be re-

sssimmi,

membered that experiment shows the arm may (1) push directly outwards from medium, (2) pull directly inwards, (3) move about with medium as fulcrum within the circle. For levitation and similar phenomena the arm is locked (fixed) within the body of the medium.

*Fig. 33.*

In Experiment 29 I held a small metal trumpet out into the air, and in a short time it was given a strong forward pull that almost snatched it from my grip. What happened then was, on the present theory, that a psychic arm was projected from the medium, and the end of this, after a little manoeuvring, gripped by adhesion the end of the trumpet; the arm was then pulled quickly into the body of the medium; and so strong was the pull that the adhesion gave way

and the experimenter only felt a sudden snatch. It is to be noted that some twenty seconds elapsed from the commencement of this experiment until the jerk occurred, indicating that a period of preparation was needed, much in the way that a period of preparation is required for levitation.

I have sometimes observed another experiment with the trumpet which has interesting features in connection with it.

Experiment 70: The trumpet waving to and fro in the air and endeavouring to place itself on the surface of the table.

The trumpet is at the commencement of the seance placed on the floor under the table. After a while it rises and the thin end projects well from below the table (fig. 34) on the side remote from the medium and waves to and fro in the air horizontally, beating time to a tune for five minutes or more. This has happened many times. But the next process is not so common — I have only seen it some three times. After waving about in the air for some time, the small end of the trumpet — that projecting beyond the table — rises until it touches the edge of the table, then the trumpet slides bodily up the ledge, by short sharp jerks, at the same time bending over to the top surface, while the thick end comes out from below the table.

Three successive positions are shown on fig. 35 which will make the description clearer. When it gets into the position (3), the whole

trumpet can be clearly seen apparently in contact with nothing. Further strong shoves are then given it in an endeavour to slide it up the ledge and jerk it on to the surface of the table. I myself have observed the trumpet one stage farther advanced on its journey than (3), but I have not

*Fig. 34.*

seen the actual completion of the experiment. On the occasions I have witnessed the phenomenon the operators were unable to succeed with the final necessary jerk. However, the sitters inform me that it has been completely successful on one occasion.

I take it that the psychic arm had hold of the trumpet by adhesion at its thick end, and that the various motions given to it were more or less those I have dealt with already.

This experiment of the movement of the trumpet, the waving to and fro in the air keeping

A CANTILEVER THEORY

time to a tune, and the motions described above about the ledge of the table may be interesting to those who at " dark " seances have heard the " voices " through a trumpet which was presumably moving about the room.

In Experiment 22 it was stated that when the table stands on the floor within the circle it can

Fig. 35,

be made on request almost as light as a feather or so heavy that it cannot be lifted.

Now, it has been shown (Chapter VII, Experiments 45, 47, etc.) that when a compression balance is on the floor below the table, if, say, 30 lb. is the normal vertical reaction for steady levitation, this reaction is not applied suddenly, but, in other words, grows steadily for about five to six seconds, and that the table seems to spring into the air when the growth

1%

178 REAJLITY OF PSYCHIC PHENOMENA

of psychic force is complete. According to the cantilever theory this growth of the reaction is synonymous with the making of the cantilever rigid enough to withstand the weight of the levitated table. Suppose, now, that the growth of this psychic force is stopped at a value which does not make the cantilever sufficiently rigid to lift the table, but which nevertheless makes it sufficiently strong to exert a considerable upward force on the table — but less than its weight, — then we have the apparent decrease of the weight of the table explained. The operators can as a matter of fact stop the growth of the psychic force at any magnitude they wish, as abundant experimental results amply testify.

The increasing of the weight of the table may be explained thus: the cantilever end grips the under surface of the table by adhesion, and is then pressed downwards towards the floor.

A point I have already remarked on several times IS the fact that when the psychic pressure becomes sufficiently great, the table seems actually to spring into the air. It does not rise gradually, as might have been supposed. The experimenter almost feels, when he watches it, that some restraining force had been suddenly removed which was keeping it from levitating. Perhaps the following idea, which seems to me at least feasible, may partly explain it: —

During the preparation for levitation the line of communication (whatever it may consist of) is loose and soft; a flexible connection A is made

M

Fig. 36,

"Fig. 37.

with the under surface of the table (fig. 36). Psychic force is extended along the line and a stiff cantilever is gradually formed. At a certain instant, depending upon the rigidity attained by the end A, the end A suddenly opens out (fig. 37) and becomes straight and vertical. As it is attached to the table, the latter of course rises with it and appears to levitate with a jerk or spring.

Chapter X — Raps

At my experimental circles all kinds and degrees of rapping occurred, varying in sound from the slightest audible ticks to blows such as might have been produced (judging by the noise) by a sledge-hammer; dances and tunes were rapped out on the floor or table, sounds as of a bouncing ball were heard in the room, the leg of the table was apparently sawn, the floor was rubbed as though with sand-paper, a man was heard walking and a horse trotting over the floor, and so on (see Chapter I.).

1 intend now to describe the experimental work I have carried out in connection with this matter, and to evolve a theory to account for it.

Experiment 71: The medium sitting quietly on the weighing-machine, to observe how her weight was affected when rapping was occurring.

The small, accurate weighing - machine described in Chapter III., lent by Messrs

W. & T. Avery, Ltd., was used. The drawing-board (see Chapter III.) was tied to the platform and a piece of dark carpet was tacked to it, as there was reason to beheve that white light rays from its surface were interfering with the intensity of the phenomena. The circle sat throughout the experiments with hands on knees, so that each member was physically isolated from the rest. The medium's hands were flat on her knees, and at my request she sat perfectly still.

Initial weight of medium -f chair + drawingboard.... = 9 St. 4 lb. 0 oz.

Having balanced accurately, I asked the operators to rap on the floor, as I wished to discover if a rap synchronised with increase or decrease of weight as registered on the weighing-machine. One or two raps were given, but of an intensity only just audible. Thereafter there were raps at intervals of a few seconds. As they became gradually louder I noticed a peculiar effect. Sometimes coinciding with each rap or blow on the floor the steelyard would rise against the top stop, and would sometimes fall against the bottom stop. 1 did not understand what was going on until I noticed that the weight of the medium as balanced between the raps was diminishing. With the increasing loudness of raps the weight of the medium continued to decrease.

this process going on until the loudest sledgehammer blows were being given, when the weight became stationary and did not decrease further, and thereafter, until the end of the experiment, remained steady. The time occupied in the process was about a minute.

Final weight of medium + chair + drawingboard.... = 8 St. 10 lb. 0 oz.

Therefore final steady decrease in weight.. = 8 lb.

When conditions became steady I informed the operators that I was going to watch the process again. T accordingly turned on white light rays into the circle, which process always effectively prevents phenomena. Then I weighed medium, chair and drawing-board again. The new weight was 9 st. 4 lb. I then asked the operators to " set conditions " and to rap at intervals. Again the weight began gradually to decrease and the loudness of the raps to increase, the loudness, so far as could be judged, being directly proportional to decrease of weight. When sledge-hammer intensity was reached, the weight became steady again at 8 st. 10 lb. It seems therefore necessary to conclude that (1) raps, blows, etc., cannot be produced unless the medium's weight is reduced; (2) the intensity of the rap depends upon the decrease of weight and is apparently directly proportional to it; (3) the loss of weight

is merely temporary, as on each occasion of reweighing after tlie experiment the initial dead weight of 9 st. 4 lb. was obtained; (4) the loss of weight is not effected suddenly, but on the contrary quite gradually; (5) after a time the loss of weight reaches a final amount and thereafter does not vary.

It seems to me that the loss represents actual matter temporarily detached from the medium and used in some manner in the production of raps, blows, etc.

Expeiiment 72: The effect of raps, blows, etc., given on the floor, upon the weight of the medium.

Initial weight of medium

+ chair + board.. = 9 st. 4 lb. 0 oz.

When the reduction in weight, as mentioned in Experiment 71, had reached a maximum, and the steelyard balanced at 8 st. 10 lb., I asked the operators to produce raps of various intensities on the floor. The results were as follows: Raps of all degrees of loudness cause corresponding and synchronous increase of weight of medium, indicated by steelyard pressing for a second against the top stop, the pressure roughly proportional to loudness of rap, varying from the slightest upward movement of steelyard to a force (as judged by the sense of touch) of many pounds. Impacts on the floor, such as the bouncing-ball imitation, sand-paper noise on floor, and so on (Chapter I.), all cause synchronous and

temporary additional weight, the lever again balancing after each blow.

How are we to reconcile the results of Experiment 71 and the experiments dealing with levitation, where in the one case the medium loses weight and in the other gains it? The only reasonable conclusion is that the process during levitation is different from that during the production of raps and impacts generally. During the process of levitation I have never observed any initial or other decrease in the weight of the medium, but, on the contrary, always an increase> Again, in Experiment 71 the operators knew that raps and blows only were expected, and no levitation was attempted; hence it is to be presumed that the reduction in weight then noted was that necessary for the work in hand alone. Also I would add that during levitation raps are very seldom given, and then only of the feeblest type.

Experiment 73: What happened to the medium's weight at the commencement of a seance, and the effect of rapping, etc.

In this experiment (which was carried out at a later date than Experiments 71 and 72) I am going to describe what occurred near the commencement of a seance in which for some reason or other — perhaps partly owing to the extremely wet weather — phenomena were slower than usual in getting under way. Probably the processes noted in this case occur during all seances, but on ordinary occasions they are soon finished and

psychical equilibrium is quickly established. On the present occasion, after the circle had held hands in the chain formation for some little time and a few levitations had been obtained, I seated the medium on the chair on the weighingmachine. I then altered the chain order and asked each member of the circle to place hands on knees. Owing to the somewhat unfavourable conditions prevailing, this seemed to break up what psychic balance had existed, with the consequence that, to all intents and purposes, the seance had to commence over again. The initial weight of medium -I- chair + drawingboard was 9 st. 10 lb. 12 oz. I carefully watched the balan ce of the weighing-machine. During the first five minutes or so there was no decrease or increase of weight registered, and no replies by raps in answer to repeated requests. Then the weight began very slowly to diminish, and light raps began to be heard. I wish to emphasise the fact that until this first slight diminution in weight occurred, absolutely no raps were given. Soon after the process had commenced the weight began to decrease in successive fluxes of from 2 lb. to 5 lb. or slightly more, and at the termination of each decrease to come back somewhat. It would seem that as soon as a little weight is removed the drawing action upon the medium becomes easier; in other words, that the establishing of even a weak psychic field facilitates greatly the preliminary operations. The process once started, I asked the operators to rap at

RAPS

intervals. The fluxes of decreasing weight continued, becoming gradually greater and greater. I noticed that when a loud blow was given on the floor the weight would greatly diminish — as much as 20 lb. or even more — and would then usually come back, or nearly come back, to what

9st. lOlb. 12oz

About 6st.

it was before the blow was struck. The weight did not flow back instantly after the blow, but if it did come back it did so slowly, taking perhaps six or seven seconds. Now and then it did not come back for about half a minute, and on those occasions it did not return so far as the original amount registered before the blow. The weight, generally speaking, decreased in waves, irregularly (see fig. 38).

The final fairly steady value — which lasted for a few minutes — was about 6 st., although there were fluxes somewhat below this.

It seems to me that in this experiment we witness two processes in combination: —

(1) The process of getting the medium into condition — the loosening of the psychic stuff by strong fluxes of upward force upon her body; and (2) the removal of sufficient material from her body for the production of raps.

When the processes outlined above had been going on for about a quarter of an hour, and the total weight had been fairly steady at about 6 st. for a minute or so, the medium began to regain her lost weight. I watched the process with great interest, because it was quite unexpected so far as I was concerned. The regaining process was very slow, occupying I should say about two minutes, and it was quite regular, in sharp contradistinction to the decreasing process. I quite easily kept the lever balanced by the rider as the weight grew, and I followed it up until exactly the original value of 9 st. 10 lb. 12 oz. was reached.

I expect that in ordinary seances, with conditions normal, the initial drawing process is finished very quickly. The final action, that in which the medium gradually regained her weight, was probably the conclusion of the preliminary operations, for phenomena soon started, and proceeded with much their usual vigour. The results of this experiment seem to me to give us some

positive notions as to the meaning of the fluxes of nervous and muscular stress so many people experience at the opening of a seance.

There is just the possibility that the operators were acting directly upon the lever of the weighing-machine. The chances against this are, however, very great. The operators knew that to do so would be to render the results valueless; they were as keen on the experiments as myself, and if at any time they were unable to carry out any test they always told me. Moreover, during much of the time I had fairly strong light upon the lever of the machine. Then the correspondence between the loudness of the raps and the decrease of weight, the synchronism between the raps and the fluxes of decreased weight, and so on, all show quite plainly that the forces registered were due to actions upon the medium alone.

It is fairly evident that the main processes included in levitation of the table and in rapping are somewhat diflerent; indeed, an actual temporary loss of the medium's weight seems essential for rapping (Experiments 71 and 73), and furthermore the intensity of the rap seems directly proportional to the amount of the loss of weight. I have on several occasions noted the distinction between the two processes, and at one seance in my own house I made some particular observations on it

Experiment 74: Distinction between the levitation and rapping processes.

Levitation phenomena had been in progress for some time. Just after a levitation was over I asked a question of the operators. There was no answer for half a minute or so. Then a reply was given by gentle raps. In a few seconds the raps increased in intensity, and before long were sharp and distinct — that is to say, the change from the processes involved in levitation to those made use of in rapping required time. I watched this change on several occasions on this particular evening, and I had observed it often before. I am now quite certain that it takes appreciable and measurable time to effect. As further corroboration, I have noted that sometimes, instead of going to the trouble of " changing over," the operators would prefer to answer questions by tilting the end of the table, which is a much more cumbersome method of holding a conversation than the method of raps.

Experiment 75: " Bombardment " of the medium during rapping.

This experiment was conducted in my own house. The medium was sitting at the head of the circle, and I placed myself almost directly opposite her. The light was good, and I could observe her thoroughly. The operators were producing heavy thuds on the floor in front of her at intervals of a few seconds. At each

thud the medium was pushed backwards on her chair — even violently pushed backwards, for the movement was quite obvious. She seemed to be struck in the region of the chest, and the motion given to her was very similar to that given to any large body which, being free to move, is struck by a small one travelling with considerable velocity. In other words, a back force seemed to react on her for each rap. I watched the process for quite a long time, and the result was never in doubt. When the raps became lighter and quicker, she still received pushes which caused lier to swing backwards — motions which were quite visible, evidently one for each rap; and at one time she was under a veritable bombardment from the reactions. When the raps were produced in her immediate neighbourhood, instead of out in the circle, I noticed that she seemed to be hit in more nearly a vertical direction than was the case for the latter position — that is, the reaction for the rap seems to be transmitted from the floor in a straight line to somewhere near the chest of the medium. If the rap is produced far out in the circle, this straight line is not so much inclined to the Hoor as when it is produced near the medium; all of which is very natural and in agreement with the laws of mechanics if we suppose something in the nature of a semi-rigid body or rod projects itself from the medium to the point on the Hoor where the rapping is to occur.

In addition to observing the bombardment of

the medium, I went over to her while it was in progress and felt the various motions of her body. She experiences no inconvenience from the rap reactions, and nothing of the stress she undergoes when a table levitates.

Experiment 76: To endeavour to discover the " shape " of a rap.

In order to test the result of a rap on paper, I procured a couple of brass rings about six inches in diameter, placed a piece of brown paper between them, and fixed the rings together by a couple of bolts through projecting lugs. The paper was then taut, somewhat like the end of drum. The rap was duly delivered upon the paper, which on examination was found to be indented heavily, and slightly torn downwards in a curved line about an inch long, as though it had received a slanting blow from something of an oval shape about two square inches in area and moving comparatively slowly.

Chapter XI — The Rod Theory for Raps

The theory to account for the phenomenon of raps which I am now going to discuss is as follows: —

From various parts of the body of the medium psychic semi-flexible rods are projected, the end portions of which, being struck sharply on the floor, table, chair, or other body, cause the sharp sounds known generally as raps.

These rods have apparently all the characteristics of solid bodies; they are more or less flexible, and can be varied in length and diameter. Several of the smaller rods, or one of the largest size, may project from the medium at any one time. Each one, especially near its extremity, is more or less rigid, and the rigidity can be varied within limits depending upon conditions of light, the psychic energy available, and so forth. The rigidity is probably ultimately brought about by some kind of molecular action concerning which we are as yet perfectly ignorant— the kind of action that produces the same effect on the cantilever.

193 13

I have heard of various "explosion" theories for raps. I disagree completely with all such. If what occurs at my circle is typical — and I expect it is — there is not the vestige of any evidence for explosions, but, on the other hand, an overwhelming testimony for direct impacts by a body resembling a solid one. Let me go over some of this evidence in detail.

(1) The raps (by which term I include little light raps, knocks, sledge-hammer blows, and all intermediate varieties) cause vibration of the floor or other body upon which they are produced. The heavier blows cause such pronounced vibration that the boards of the floor sensibly shake. All visitors to the seance room notice this.

(2) The Psychic Touch. — Touches are sometimes experienced at the circle. I have carefully ' analysed their impression on the sense of feeling. A psychic touch feels exactly as though the rounded end of a material rod was pushed on one's arm, or foot, or other part of the body. The "solidity" of the touching body is what impresses the experimenter; for no matter how carefully or softly the operators apply the touch, one feels as though the blunted end of a hard something — a something even made of metal — were being used. On my theory this touching apparatus is, in fact, the end of a " rapping " rod projecting from the medium, the end of a rod which in some unknown manner is made half rigid. When the experimenter has felt this

unexpectedly solid touch he begins to understand a little about the process of the rap in general.

(3) The rigidity of the rapping rod varies with the amount of light to which it is subjected. This statement may appear curious. Perhaps I had better illustrate by an example. Sometimes we have formed an impromptu circle in the dining-room or other room where a fire was burning and where light was coming in through the blinds from street lamps outside. On such occasions the operators either rap on the medium's chair or on the floor between her chair and that of Mr Morrison — that is to say, in either case in close proximity to the medium. When at such times the light is too strong or is badly regulated (as usually happens), the raps resemble soft, dull thuds, and cannot seemingly be made sharp and distinct. I cannot overcome the conviction that the rapping rod in such cases is not so rigid as usual; that in fact it becomes soft, or even, as it were, partially melted on its periphery, where it is exposed to the light, and that its core is the only part of it remaining solid. Hence the dull, softish sound of its free end when it strikes the floor.

(4) The rapping rods issue from various parts of the body of the medium. When the amount of psychic energy is low, or when the quantity available is small, such as near the commencement of a seance, the rods are naturally of the shortest length possible consistent with the production of the phenomenon. Accordingly, at

the beginning of operations in the seance room the raps are first heard quite close to the medium's feet, for the rods in that case issue, as I have reason to beheve, from her ankles or from some part in close proximity. My reason for thus locating the starting-place of such rods is due to the mechanical reactions of the raps (Experiments 72, 73). These particular mechanical reactions cause her to make slight involuntary motions with her feet, motions which a careless observer would set down to imposture. After a little time, when further stores of psychic energy become available, the raps are produced further out in the circle — on the chairs of the sitters, or on the under surface of the table within the circle. The starting-point of the rod then seems to be much higher up her body, for the reactionary movements are then visible on the trunk.

(5) Raps vary in intensity from the slightest audible sounds to blows such as could be struck — judging by the sound — by a sledge-hammer. (Of course, the intensity of the latter blows is not that which would be obtained from an actual sledge-hammer, or the floor boards would be split. I expect the end of the rod in such cases " gives," i.e. is slightly elastic, with the result that only violent vibration of the floor occurs, and that there is in reality more noise than actual force.)

The beating of a carpet by a flexible cane seems to be somewhat analogous to the actual process.

I have noted often that the heaviest blows

are not usually delivered quickly. Two such blows are seldom struck in series — that is, one following the other immediately, in the manner of what is called the double knock. There is an interval of a second or two between them, and while the blows are in progress no other phenomena can be produced. On my theory, what is here happening is that one large rod is projecting from the medium, a rod of such large dimensions that all the psychic energy available is used in its construction. In other words, it is a sledge-hammer and not a tackhammer. When the raps required are light, two or more thin rods may be projecting from the medium simultaneously. Take the case of a jig or other complicated tune being rapped out on floor or table. The raps follow each other so quickly that it is reasonable to suppose that the operator has at his command a series of projecting rods, and uses these as we would use the keys of a piano. Some of the rods used must be very thin. At a rough guess 1 should say they vary from a diameter of about  in. to one of 2 in. or 3 in.

(6) I have carefully watched the phenomenon of raps while the medium has been seated on the weighing-machine. If the reader will refer to Experiments 71, 72, and 73, he will find some relative data. The conclusions from those experiments were as follows: —

{a) Raps, blows, etc., cannot be produced unless the medium's weight is reduced.

(b) The intensity of the rap depends upon the medium's decrease of weight, and is apparently directly proportional to it.

In Experiment 73 I state: "I wish to emphasise the fact that until this first slight diminution in weight occurred, absolutely no raps were given." Also, " I noticed that when a loud blow was given on the floor the weight would greatly diminish — as much as 20 lb. or more — and would then usually come back, or nearly come back, to what it was before the blow was struck." Hence it will be seen that in this experiment a state of equilibrium had evidently not been arrived at, as was seemingly the case in Experiment 71, where a maximum steady diminution of weight of about 8 lb. was maintained during the loudest blows, and where there did not appear to be fluxes of weight diminution accompanying the blows.

Let us see how the matter works out on the rod theory.

The Dimimdion of Weight. — The rigidity of the psychic rod is due in some way to material particles temporarily projected from the medium. So soon as a rod is formed, its free end rests on the floor, i.e. part of the body of the medium is supported on the floor beyond the weighing-machine on which she is seated; she thus apparently loses weight. The thicker the rod the more of the matter of her body is thus externally supported, and, as the thickness of the rod used determines the intensity of the rap, her apparent loss of weight is thus proportional to the intensity of the blow.

In Experiment 71, with perfect psychic equilibrium, it was found that, during the period of experimenting for the loudest blows, the medium's weight remained practically steady at a diminution of 8 lb. With the steelyard of the weighingmachine balanced at this diminution, it was found that raps caused corresponding and synchronous increase of weight of the medium, indicated by steelyard pressing for a second against the top stop, the pressure being roughly proportional to loudness of rap, varying from slightest upward movement of steelyard to a force — as judged by the sense of touch — of many pounds. In my opinion this temporary increase of weight was caused (1) by one or more of the rods being lifted from the floor, and (2) by the mechanical reaction on the medium when the rod was impacted on the floor to cause the rap.

This reaction is a very real matter, and affords further evidence that something mechanical, most likely in the nature of a more or less flexible rod, is in reality used.

(7) Besides the usual raps, blows, etc., there are various peculiar modifications. For instance, there is the imitation of the bouncing ball, which is so lifelike that the listener would be prepared to declare that a material ball is really present. How is this imitation accounted for on the rod theory? Probably there is some modification of the terminal of the rod. It is made softer than usual, and its shape is perhaps altered somewhat also.

The imitation of sand-paper rubbing the floor is not hard to understand. The end of a rod is rubbed along the floor instead of impacting on it.

The imitation of the table leg being sawn is more difficult. Perhaps this is caused by the rod being moved lengthwise across the leg of the table, i.e. the end of the rod is not used, but the axial surface of it.

(8) The movements of small objects "without contact " is generally understandable on the rod theory. When the little hand-bell is lifted, as often happens, a couple of rods may be supposed to seize it on either side like a pair of tongs, or a single rod may grip it by adhesion. That such rods have more or less the characteristics of solid bodies may be seen in an experiment with the bell. Sometimes when the bell is lifted it does not ring clearly, but has the dulled sound one would obtain if it were gripped by the metal instead of by the handle. The rod, or rods, are in that case pressing against the metal, and, as they have the properties of solid bodies, they damp the sound vibrations. But the bell can evidently be also seized by the handle, when it rings clearly in the ordinary manner. Sometimes the operators ring the bell and rap on the floor simultaneously.

I will now describe a couple of curious experiments in connection with raps, which illustrate some of the points discussed above.

Experiment 77: The typewriter experiment.

I wished to see what the operators could do with a typewriter placed within the circle; whether the keys could be struck with the precision necessary to imprint letters upon the paper; whether the mass of metal of which the machine was composed would have a deleterious effect; whether a rational message could be typed out; and so on. Accordingly, a Barlock typewriter having been kindly placed at my disposal by Mr T. Edens Osborne, I fixed a sheet of paper in it in the ordinary way, and placed it on the floor near the centre of the circle. No sooner had I done so and turned on the red light, than the keys were struck lightly and rapidly as though a pair of hands were playing over them. This having continued for some little time, I examined the mechanism, but I found that the type levers had become jammed, evidently from several keys having been struck simultaneously, and these had to be disengaged before the experiment could be proceeded with. (The typewriter was rather an old-fashioned one and somewhat complex.) It was apparent that the operators did not know how to use the machine. I therefore explained to them that they must strike each key separately with a sharp blow and allow time for it to come back to its normal position before striking another. They followed this advice carefully on the next occasion — with an exactness that

was even surprising — and succeeded in typing the following: —

mbx: gcsq'

There is nothing in the nature of a message in the foregoing, and the experiment is chiefly interesting as showing that the keys can be struck with just the force necessary to produce such a result. The mass of metal composing the typewriter seems to have no injurious effects on the transmission and application of the force. I will add that the letters on the keys were in some cases much worn; perhaps the operators found some difficulty in reading them.

Expe7iment 78: I smoothed out a lump of rather soft putty into a saucer and placed the saucer on the floor near the middle of the circle. I asked the operators to " rap " on the putty. Three impressions were made on it. They were similar in form, each consisting of an oblong cavity about f in. long and  in. wide at its widest part, sloping down gradually from the periphery to a maximum depth of \ in. or so. The near edges of the two outside impressions impinged upon the middle one. The floor of each cavity was not smooth, but was lined by two series of grooves or waves (although I call them " waves," I do so for convenience of description only; the reader should understand that I have no intention of asserting that the pulse is transmitted in wave form): {a) long, comparatively deep waves, and (b) waves crossing the crests of the former

THE ROD THEORY FOR RAPS

at right angles. The long waves were all practically parallel to one another and straight for the greater portion of their length, though they showed a tendency to curl round near the long ends of the cavity.

Fig. 39 represents diagrammatically three of the long waves A, B, C, near the middle of the cavity. The dark lines represent the crests, and the white spaces the troughs of the waves, which are nearly equally spaced. Three cross waves are shown by the lines 1, 2, 3. Careful measurement shows that there are about thirteen of the long waves per inch of width, and about thirtytwo cross waves per inch. The latter cut through the crests of the long waves at right angles, and reach a depth of about onethird the height of the long wave as measured from trough to crest. The measurements were difficult owing to the curvature of the holes, but are correct approximately.

These waves were evidently not made by a sliding motion parallel to their length, but seem to have been impressed by a force acting approximately perpendicularly to the putty, for the putty is not heaped up or abraded anywhere, as would result if the former were the case.

On thinking the matter over, I remembered

ABC

*Fig. 39.*

that the markings were very similar to those on the human finger and thumb. Accordingly I examined my own fingers and thumb through a magnifying glass. A magnification of three or four diameters indicated a great degree of correspondence. Assuming that the markings were impressions of part of a finger or thumb, it has to be remembered that crests on the finger correspond to troughs in the cavity and vice versa; but even so, there are indications that the cross notches or waves in the cavity are produced by similar notches faintly showing at the base of the troughs of the long waves on the finger. If, then, as seems most likely to me, these "raps" on the putty are really produced by invisible fingers, the following deductions would seem to be implied: —

(a) The impressing fingers are not of a normal size, but are at least three times as large as normal ones. This is evident from a comparison of the pitch and depth of the grooves.

(b) The impressed grooves are so cleanly and regularly cut that we must suppose the impressing fingers are " new " ones — i.e. they are in this respect unlike the marks on the human finger, which are more or less worn, as is evident from examination through the magnifying glass.

(c) The impressions are only a small part of the finger or thumb.

(d) The impressions may be due to something resembling the large toe on the human foot; but if so, the deductions (a), (6), and (c) still hold.

Now, what are we to make of this? Does it invahdate the rod theory? Not so far as I can see. The only point of difference would seem to be that the end of the rapping rod in this case was specially prepared with something resembling a finger-print, just as for the bouncing-ball test and the saw test it would also have to be specially modified. I should have thought that the end of the rod for simple rapping would have been plain and unencumbered with design, following out the principle of least work. Accordingly, I interrogated the operators on the matter. They said decisively and repeatedly that the impressions on the putty were finger-prints, but that in ordinary rapping finger-prints were 7iot used; that, in fact, a simple blunt projection was employed. They produced the finger prints on this occasion to show what they could do and because the putty, being soft, was able to reproduce them.

While on this subject it may interest my readers to hear that when 1 had worked out the cantilever theory for levitation, I put it to the operators bit by bit in as plain and untechnical language as possible. They say the whole thing is practically accurate. They say they understand what I mean when 1 describe the arched rod issuing from the medium, going below the table, and a column rising from its end, and so forth. They also say the rod theory for raps is substantially accurate. Of course, I do not ask anybody to place any scientific value upon this, but only mention it as a matter of interest.

Once I asked how the cantilever arms, rapping rods, etc., are made rigid. They said they did not know. I asked them if there were any entities who did know. They answered in the affirmative. Asked if they could bring these entities to the circle to impart the information to me, they said they were doubtful if they could do so. Up to now I have heard no more of the matter. I now describe some experiments with the

Fio. 40.

electroscope on psychic " touching," which in my opinion is only a variation of rapping.

The electroscope used was of a simple type sufficiently illustrated by fig. 40.

A is a thin brass disc, B the brass stem, and C C the gold leaves. The whole is enclosed from a little way below the disc in a protecting box with glass front and back and metal sides. Proper insulation, of course, is provided. For the experiments described below I charged the electroscope on each occasion at a small table in

the corner of the room, and then took it to whatever part of the circle I desired. I found that throughout the tests I could never charge the instrument fully, i.e. so that the gold leaves would widely diverge; but that nevertheless I could charge it so that the leaves would open about two-thirds their full amount and remain for an indefinite time at that distance apart.

Expeiiment 79: Electroscope placed under table where psychic energy was supposed to be concentrated.

I charged the electroscope, and then asked the operators to take their attention from the table (they had been levitating it) and to remove as much weight as they could from the body of the medium, and to indicate to me that they had accomplished this by giving a sledge-hammer blow on the floor. The matter removed (used in the production of raps) I asked should be concentrated under the table standing on the floor. In about one minute a terriflc blow was given upon the floor as a sign to me that the operation was complete. I then placed the charged electroscope under the table and kept it there for half a minute or so.

Result. — The electroscope was unaffected.

Experiment 80: Psychic touching of disc of the electroscope.

I took the electroscope to the table in the corner, discharged and recharged it. I then

placed it within the circle near the centre. I asked the operators to " touch " the disc of the instrument very gently. They did this almost at once, the " touching " consisting of a metallic scraping upon the brass disc, quite audible, similar in type to the imitation of the floor being rubbed with sand-paper, a phenomenon I have often observed.

Result. — On examination the electroscope was found to be completely discharged.

Experiment 81: Further test on " touching " of electroscope.

I took the electroscope to the table in the corner of the room and tried to recharge it, but I found I was unable to do so even after repeated trials. Accordingly I asked the operators to put back into the body of the medium the matter they had taken out at my request in Experiment 79 (for the production of sledge-hammer blows), and to give a few raps when they had done so. In a minute or so some very light raps were given, and when I asked if the process was complete I received no raps in reply at all, which seemed to indicate to me that all the matter used for rapping had been returned to the medium. At any rate, I found that I could now charge the electroscope; which done, I placed it on the floor as before within the circle, and asked that the disc should be " touched " lightly. After a little time there was the metallic scraping as before, and on

examination the electroscope was found to be completely discharged.

Experiment 82: Further experiment on " touching " of electroscope.

I repeated Experiment 80 most carefully. I found the same difficulty in recharging the electroscope, and the same process had to be gone over again before it could be recharged. When " touched " it was discharged as before.

As a working hypothesis to account for some of the results of Experiments 79-82, it occurs to me that the psychic "touching" of the disc of the electroscope is equivalent to putting the body of the medium in contact with the instrument by means of matter abstracted from her for the production of raps and similar effects. No doubt the scraping action referred to belongs to the rapping category of phenomena; probably the rapping rod is drawn over the surface of the disc instead of impacting it.

Chapter XII — Miscellaneous Experiments

Experinient 83: Electric shock test.

I placed a small induction coil on the floor within the circle, connected it to a dry cell, and gave the medium one of the terminals to hold in her right hand (the members of the circle were sitting with hands on knees). The other terminal (each of the terminals consisted of a small tube of metal about two inches long) I placed on the floor. I asked the operators to apply psychic force to the terminal on the floor, to "touch" it, and to move it about. They appeared to do all these things.

Result. — The medium said that on one occasion she felt what she afterwards recognised as a weak electric shock in her right arm, and that her wrist gave a jerk. She was most positive that she felt the shock, though it is evident there is much room for self-suggestion in the experiment. It is true I took care not to let her see the apparatus before the experiment, but, of course, the test is inconclusive, and I only give it as a matter of interest.

Eocperivient 84: Phosphorescence.

I brought to the seance room a small piece of cardboard which had been covered on one surface with powered calcium sulphide, a substance which has the property of phosphorescing for several hours after it has been exposed to sunlight. Previous to the experiment I had kept the cardboard in an envelope in my pocket for twenty-four hours. The gaslight having been turned off in the seance room, we were left in total darkness. I placed the cardboard on the floor within the circle, prepared surface uppermost, and asked the operators to apply psychic force to it, to " touch " it, and to " rap " on it. This they apparently did, judging by the sounds. I then held it in my fingers and asked that it should be pushed. This was done, and I felt the pushes.

Result. — Absolutely no sign of phosphorescence.

Experiment 85: Fluorescence.

I also brought an X-ray fluorescent screen (platino-cyanide of barium) to the seance room, and asked the operators to treat it as they had done the prepared cardboard of Experiment 84. They apparently did so.

Result. — No sign of fluorescence.

The room being pitch dark at this time — the only occasion in all my experiments, — the operators, at the conclusion of the tests, desired

to show us what they could do under such conditions. The result was that a small earthquake seemed to be playing about the room. I need not go into details, but will only say that the table could not be held by any muscular force exerted; it turned upside down and levitated in that fashion (see Experiment 23), and it performed every possible kind of contortion. The blows on the floor were terrific, and such, in fact, was the din that I was glad to light the gas.

Eivperiment 86: Delicacy of force actions upon the medium.

In Experiment 73 will be found an account of what occurred to the weight of the medium near the commencement of a seance in which phenomena were slow in starting — a rare occurrence with the circle. Some time after the processes outlined in that experiment had terminated and the medium had regained her weight, I carried out an experiment the results of which are to my mind significant and interesting.

The medium being seated on the weighingmachine, her weight + chair -f- drawing-board balanced at 9 st. 10 lb. 12 oz. I said to the operators, " Please take 2 lb. or thereabouts off" the weight of the medium, keep her balanced at that, and rap as loudly as you can." In a very short time after my request her weight was reduced, as evidenced by the steelyard falling against the bottom stop, but I found when I moved the rider back that more than the 2 lb.

desired had been removed. I therefore told the operators to add a little to her weight, which they immediately did, but they slightly overstepped the mark, and I had to ask for a trifle to be taken off again. This slight adding and subtracting of weight was done at my request three or four times until the machine just about balanced at the required reduction. It was interesting to see how steadily the operators could hold the reduced weight when once told they had obtained it. Then they rapped. With 2 lb. off (or within a trifle of 2 lb.) the raps were quite soft; and on inquiry if that was the loudest they could do, they answered in the affirmative. Then I asked for more weight to be taken off the medium, about 4 lb. total. Approximate balance was obtained as before. The operators overstepped the mark, and I told them, as before, to add on a little weight, when they went a little too far in the other direction. I had to tell them nearly a dozen times to add or subtract a small amount of weight in order to get the rider just to balance at the 4-lb. reduction required. But finally they were successful. Then they rapped, and this time the raps were louder. I asked for a 7-lb. reduction in weight, when the whole process had to be gone over again. When final balance was obtained the raps were very loud. Then again, with 10 lb. off, the loudest raps, really blows in this case, were heard. The medium's weight could still be greatly diminished, but I noticed that further reduction seemed to

add little or nothing to the intensity of the raps. The extraordinary part of the experiment was the way the operators could, at my request, take off or add on minute amounts of weight, as small as a quarter of a pound or less, in order to make the medium balance at the amount desired, and how they could hold the reduced weight steady once it was obtained.

Experime?it 87: A photograph.

I am going to describe now a psychic photograph. It was taken by a friend of mine, under my supervision, on Saturday evening, 23rd Oct. 1915, in my own house. I do not place it in the same category as my other experiments, because I personally am not an expert in photography, and because others had a hand in taking and developing it. Nevertheless, although not up to the standard of test photography, it is an absolutely genuine production. In my articles to Light I left the description of this psychic photograph till near the end of the series, because 1 had hoped to be able to take others and thus corroborate the result obtained. But though I and the circle have gone to great trouble over the matter, we have never been able to duplicate it. Many of my other experiments have been gone over again and again, some as often as a dozen times, and I am prepared at the present moment to carry out any of them with the certainty of success — so long, of course, as the operators and members of the circle are willing.

But with this photograph it is different. However, as I have already said, it is a perfectly genuine production, as those concerned in it are willing to testify on oath if necessary; and as it has excited so much interest amongst those of my scientific friends who have examined it, I do not consider myself justified in withholding it, more especially as it is in all likelihood the only one of its kind in existence.

Although the print shows the structure to be described below quite clearly, I do not think it would reproduce well, and I will use a diagram for descriptive purposes.

The circle had assembled with the object of obtaining flashlight photographs of the levitated table. During the whole of the day Miss Kathleen Goligher, the principal medium, had been suffering from a cold and a sore throat, and I thought of postponing the seance; but feeling a little better in the evening, she desired that it should be held. The circle sat in its usual order, with the medium at the top end of the room. The camera was placed in position near the bottom end and focussed upon the table. I decided to wait for the photograph until the latter half of the seance. In the meantime we had a display of rapping, levitation, etc. After half an hour or so of this, phenomena ceased, and I told the operators to rap when they were ready for the photograph. During the period of waiting the operators asked us various questions about the height we desired the table to be

levitated, the method of procedure with the flashHght, and so on. Then after a time they levitated the table steadily and kept it in the air for several minutes, giving us the impression that they were practising. A further lull followed, and after a time a request from them that, although the table was not levitated, we should try the flashlight, with the object, as it seemed to me, of discovering what would happen to their psychic system of equilibrium when the powerful light should suddenly burst forth. We decided that it would be well to expose a plate during the flash, although we did not expect any result. The circle was widened a little at the bottom end, Master Goligher and Miss Lily Goligher moving a little apart, though keeping their hands joined in the usual way. The flashlight exposure was made (the reader is to remember that the table was not levitated). Then after a little the operators told us they could do no more that evening owing to the condition of the medium. I did not think there was the least likelihood of anything being on the exposed plate, but a surprise was in store when it was developed, The matter is, in my opinion, worthy of being described in detail.

It is obvious this kind of experiment has not the same degree of certainty about it as ordinary tests with weighing apparatus, etc. Further photographs may yet reveal discrepancies in some of my conclusions, and the reader must bear this in mind. Fig. 41 will enable the explanation to be the more easily understood. The following are my analysis and interpretation: —

From about the centre of the left forearm

Floor

*Fig. 41.*

(A) of Master S. Goligher, who is in trance, is seen issuing a vertical column of whitish translucent material, about 4 in. in diameter. It comes from his arm at right angles to it, rises about a foot into the air, gradually bending over in the form of an arch (B), and proceeding to

(K), which is just on the camera side of the table (standing on the floor in front of the medium), and about a foot above the floor. From (K) a column of about the same or a little greater diameter, and of the same whitish translucent colour, rises vertically into the air, and terminates at (D), at a height of about 5 ft. from the floor. Up to the point (E) the column is of uniform density throughout, and, though thin, has its boundaries well defined. The pattern of the wall-paper is quite easily seen through it. From (E) upwards the column becomes denser and whiter, and at the summit (D) it becomes opaque, so that the wall-paper can no longer be seen through it.

At the top it can be seen to be bending over and backwards, and it descends behind the upward column to the point (E). The opacity at the summit is perhaps due to the eye looking through a double thickness of column, the ascending and descending portions, and to the fact that the psychic stuff has exhausted its velocity at the top. In its descent its boundaries are no longer uniform, but sinuous, and its density not uniform, but patchy. The descending column is easily made out behind the ascending one owing to this patchy appearance and wavy outline. At (E) the descending column branches off horizontally to the left, and enters the top of the chest of the medium (F, Miss Kathleen Goligher).

In the diagram I have drawn a dotted arch

(G) from the medium's arm to the point (K) at the bottom of the column. This is not visible owing to the position of the sitters and to the table intervening, but I am assuming it is there. The very bottom part of the column (K) is also not visible owing to an arm of one of the sitters being in the way; but the chances are, from the formation of the arch entering it, that it terminates well above the floor. Also, from the point (E) of the column a very faint outline of about the column's diameter can be made out proceeding in the opposite direction to that of the medium, and presumably entering the chest of Miss Anna Goligher.

It seems to me that we are possibly witnessing in this photograph something of the mechanism of levitation. The most important matter that it hints at is the circulation of the psychic fluid. This fluid appears to be sent along the arch to the base of the column, and to be projected vertically upwards to the top, where its kinetic energy becomes exhausted, and then to fall downwards behind the uprising column till on a level with the medium's chest, whence it is drawn, in a horizontal stream, into her body. I have for some time suspected that something like this was the case. If the reader will refer to Experiment <o he will find in a tabulation there given that after a seance of an hour and a half the medium at the most had only lost two ounces in weight. The whole photograph suggests that the medium is in

reality a psychic pump, with a complete pressure system. Perhaps, during levitation, the vertical column is under the table, in which case the pressure range would be much greater than is here shown. For in the present example the psychic fluid seems to be losing its energy owing to being projected upwards against its own weight only, much in the way a vertical jet of water does.

On Sunday, 31st October 1915, I interrogated the operators with reference to the photograph. They informed me positively and emphatically, by means of raps, that they had purposely set up the whole picture as a means of explaining to me the mechanism of levitation; that the psychic fluid circulates as I have described; and that my description of the processes involved is accurate. In addition, they declared that an arch proceeds from each person forming the circle, the one from the medium being by far the strongest and most powerful, and that from the part (E) of the column the return psychic stream does not only proceed to the medium, but that other branches go to each sitter, though, as in the case of the arches, the medium is principally involved. They declared that during levitation the column is under the table, but that the processes I have sketched are still in operation, though on a more intensive scale.

Chapter XIII — General Conclusions

I HAVE come to the general conclusion from the results of my experimental work, and from observation of the circle extending over two and a half years, that all the phenomena produced are caused by flexible rod-like projections from the body of the medium; that these rods are the prime cause of the phenomena, whether they consist of levitations, movements of the table about the floor, rappings, touchings, or other variations. The principal characteristics of a rod are as follows: —

(1) It is capable of being pushed straight out from the body of the medium and being pulled straight into the body of the medium. It has not an indefinite limit of extension, but its end can reach, under favourable conditions, to a distance of about 5 feet from her body, and can there act on the table and move it about. Whether the rod gets thinner as it is pushed out from her body I am not able to say, although I should think it likely. The medium's end of the rod, as it is pulled back into her body, is absorbed in

her; perhaps the rod is ultimately made up of great bundles of thread-like projections and the whole rod is anchored to her like the roots of a tree.

(2) The rod is capable of to-and-fro motion horizontally over a considerable arc, and can thus move bodies about within the circle formed by the sitters; it has also a limited motion in a vertical plane.

(3) The rod, while capable of in - and - out movement from the medium's body, can be fixed or locked at any required position within its limits of extension, so that in such position it becomes a cantilever.

(4) The rod can transmit pulling and pushing forces.

(5) The free end of the rod is capable (at least sometimes) of gripping bodies by adhesion.

(6) All the motions of the rod are worked from within the body of the medium.

(7) The dimensions of the rod can vary greatly; its cross-section may have different values, and various modifications can be made of the shape and condition of its free end. For ordinary rapping a certain amount of matter seems to be concentrated near the end; and for other forms of rapping, such as the imitation of the bouncing ball, sawing, scraping, etc., it seems as though other modifications and dispositions were made. For levitation a special form of the rod is used, its free end being bent up and gripping the table by adhesion underneath. Nevertheless, whether for levitation, rapping, or other phenomena, a rod-like projection is always used, though this projection may assume special forms and shapes, and have special terminal modifications, and have different degrees of flexibility and stiffness to suit the production of different phenomena.

In the light of this theory a large amount of the physical phenomena of the seance room become somewhat more intelligible. Take as an example " direct voice " phenomena, where a metal trumpet some 3 or 4 ft. long is carried round the room in the air for many minutes at a time, while voices purport to speak through it to the sitters. It is possible, and even probable, that the trumpet is gripped adhesively by the free end of a rod-projection from the medium, and is carried about on the end of this rod, all kinds of motion being possible, as explained above.

Having arrived at the rod -projection theory, it becomes necessary to endeavour to find out a little about the composition of the rod, in what manner it possesses the characteristics of a solid body, and so on; and I wish to state here that I have no satisfactory theory to offer. In the few remarks I am going to make I will endeavour to summarise some of the facts I have observed, and state a few of the deductions from such facts, so that at a later date they may be co-ordinated with the results of further experimental work, and help, I hope, in the final solution of the problem.

The first thing I wish to mention in this connection is that occasionally during levitation I have felt immediately below the under surface of the table (not near the floor) something that appears to be matter. It has a cold, clammy, reptilian feeling, impossible adequately to describe in words, but which, once felt, the experimenter always recognises again. I was struck, when reading over some of Dr Schrenck-Notzing's experiments on materialisation, to notice that in the first stages of materialisation the matter issuing from the medium gave the same or a very similar sensation to the hand; the feeling being described as cold and clammy, one of the assistants even remarking that it felt as though a small reptile were lying on his hand. There is therefore little doubt in my mind that the stuff issuing from the medium in the first stages of materialisation and the stuff under the top of the levitated table are essentially one and the same. The stuff coming from Dr Schrenck-Notzing's medium was observed issuing sometimes from her mouth, and was perfectly visible, while any such matter under the table is not visible. It must therefore, if essentially the same, be of a more rudimentary quality, a stage further back than that made use of for materialisation. The matter under the table felt quite still and at rest, and, in fact, when I moved my hand to and fro amongst it, the table soon dropped, showing that it was essential to levitation. Indeed, the operators were always very chary about letting

me work in amongst it, the only thing in that connection they did not object to greatly being the moving of a thin rod across the space occupied by it.

In addition to the under surface of the levitated table, I have often felt this same quality of matter, with its same cold, clammy, reptile-like feel, near the ankles of the medium when rapping was taking place close to her feet at the commencement of a seance. For an important seance I have never placed my hand near the place from which this stuff was issuing; for I soon found by experience in early trials that if I did so the rapping was stopped for quite a long time, and could seemingly only be restarted with difficulty. During impromptu circles, however, or because of ignorance at the commencement of my experiments, I have often interrupted the flow of this matter, with the inevitable result of temporarily stopping phenomena. The main point, however, is that near the medium, indeed quite close to her body, the same quality of matter is present during rapping phenomena as is present under the levitated table; and not only so, but in the former case it is in motion in the direction from body of medium outwards, as can easily be observed by the spore-like sensation as of soft particles moving gently against the hand. During levitation of the table I have never actually interrupted the line of stress from medium to table with my hand,

but I have placed a delicate pressure-recording apparatus in that line (see Experiments 59 and 60), with the result that it was shown there was mechanical pressure close to the body of the medium (although the conditions of the experiment allow of its being a pressure of verysmall magnitude) acting outwards from her to the levitated table; and furthermore, the placing of the apparatus in the stress-line caused the table to drop. Also, the place of origin of this stress-line in the body of the medium appeared to be near the lower part of the trunk. It seems likely, therefore, that the pressure against the testing apparatus was due to a flow of particles of the same kind of matter as can be felt under the levitated table and such as issues from the ankles of the medium during rapping near her feet. It remains to be added that the operators were annoyed at my interference with the line medium to table, and told me so by vigorous raps. There can be little doubt this is the vital part of the mechanism of levitation, and it is the part that cannot be interfered with if we desire phenomena.

My proposition, then, is this: — An essential part of the levitating cantilever (or modified rodprojection) consists of particles of cold, clammy, disagreeable matter which in the end of the cantilever near the medium (the fixed end) are in motion outwards from her, and which under the table are at rest. Also, for the construction of the rapping rods the same kind of

matter is necessary; and it likewise, in the end attached to the medium, is moving outwards from her.

I next wish to call attention to what happens at levitation. I have shown during the course of my experiments that it seems as though the preliminary process to actual levitation is the laying of some kind of a loose link from medium to table, or, if a compression balance is under the table, from medium to pan of the balance. Let us suppose that this loose link consists of some fine threads of matter similar to the organic matter that issues from the mouth of Dr Schrenck-Notzing's medium, only much finer and beyond the reach of visibility. Dr Schrenck-Notzing has shown that the thready stuff from his medium can twist and squirm and move about and make purposeful motions as though it were alive and conscious. The levitating threads may also be supposed to find their way by similar movements from the body of the medium to the under surface of the table, and thus to form a foundation for the levitating structure to be immediately erected. For what happens from half a minute to a minute after the preliminary arrangements are complete? The levitating force is then applied, and grows at a fairly uniform rate until levitation actually occurs, the growth of the force taking from five to six seconds. It seems as though the essential threads, or bundle of threads, being in position, a force is exerted

along their axis which stiffens them and makes the bundle into a solid rod.

There are other observations which show that the levitating cantilever consists of a very fine (possibly organic) thread-like structure which is stiffened and made rigid by some kind of force being applied along it, rather than of a system of rays or anything of that nature. One of these is that the structure can transmit both pushing and pulling forces of large magnitude. I cannot imagine any system of stresses, unless they had a physical basis, being able to do this with conditions such as they are in the seance room. Then again, the change of direction of the free end of the cantilever as it rises in columnar form beneath the table would seem also to presuppose some kind of interconnected physical structure, perhaps of a cobwebby form, which is filled out and made stiff by its interstices being under some kind of pressure. The fact that the levitating force grows from the instant of application at a fairly slow and uniform rate, and is not applied instantly, would indicate that the force exerted along the structure, whatever its nature, has the function of stiffening it. So that, taking everything into consideration, my basic idea of the rod-projection is this: — It consists fundamentally of a bundle of very fine threads thrust out from the body of the medium, which are practically transparent and hence invisible; the threads being intimately connected and touching and adhering to one another.

These threads, in the manner of those observed during Dr Schrenck-Notzing's experiments on materialisation, can move and twist about byforces applied to them from within the body of the medium (possibly they are directly connected to the nervous system of the medium by nerve filaments or in some other way); the threads are gradually projected to the space beneath the table, and their free ends are attached to its under surface. When this has been attained, a force is applied along their axis, gradually and uniformly, with the result that the system of threads (or cable, it would perhaps be well to call it) is gradually stiffened and becomes a rigid girder projecting from the medium and able to levitate the table. That a preliminary threadlike structure, which is afterwards stiffened, is first sent out from the medium is also likely from the following experimental result: — When the seance table had the two light cross-bars near the bottom of the legs removed (see Experiment 52), the operators seemed to have some small difficulty for a little time afterwards in levitating the table as completely and easily as before. They seemed to have to make new adjustments, as it were, and to get used to making these adjustments. I think the preliminary thread-like structure from the medium took hold of these cross-bars in the process of shaping the cantilever — i.e. they were used as vantage-points from which to erect the structure. However, it wasn't long before levitation without them was as strong and powerful as ever; some new arrangement having undoubtedly been devised by the operators.

The question then arises: What sort of force is it that is applied along the axis of the threads or fibres? Is it some mysterious, totally unknown force of which we have not the faintest conception, or is it a force with whose laws we are acquainted? The only answer I can give is that I do not know. It may turn out eventually to be a very simple matter.

